                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            MACROECONOMICS AFTER A DECADE OF RATIONAL
               EXPECTATIONS: SOME CRITICAL ISSUES




                       Bennett T. McCalium




                      Working Paper No. 1050



               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138



                          December 1982




This paper was presented on October 25, 1982, as the Henry Thornton
Lecture at The City University, London, England. The author is
indebted to Marvin Goodfriend and John Taylor for helpful comments
and to the National Science Foundation (SES 82—08151) for financial
support. The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those
of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper #1050
                                                    December 1982


         Macroeconomics After a Decade of Rational Expectations:
                           Some Critical Issues


                                 Abstract


     The main section of this paper discusses competing theories of aggregate

supply that are currently being utilized in macroeconomic models with

rational expectations. The distinction between flexible-price equilibrium

models and models with nominal contracts is emphasized and three models of

the latter type are described and contrasted, it is argued that rejection

of flexible-price equilibrium theories, as the evidence seems to warrant,

does not require abandonment of the equilibrium approach. Also included

are remarks on the present status of the rational expectations version of the

natural-rate hypothesis. The second section of the paper briefly discusses

a few issues concerning the equilibrium approach and aggregate demand, with

attention devoted to the overlapping-generations framework. The third

section considers a recent attempt, involving the use of "vector autoregression"

models, to denigrate the importance of the Lucas critique of traditional

poli.cy-evaluation procedures.




                                     Bennett T. McCallum
                                      Graduate School of Industrial Administration
                                      Carnegie—Mellon University
                                      Pittsburgh, PA 15213

                                      (412) 578—2347
I. Introduction

     It has now been just over a decade since the start of the rational

expectations revolution in macroeconomics. In saying that, I am accepting

the conventional view that the first papers to be widely influential were
                                           1/
those published in 1972 by Robert Lucas.        As is well known, these were

soon followed by landmark pieces by Thomas Sargent (1973) (1976a), Sargent

and Neil Wallace (1975), and Robert Barro (1976) (l977a), as well as others
                        2/
by Lucas (1976) (1977).    And, as is also well known, the revolution has

been highly controversial because of the criticism of prevailing views that

was implicit in the above-mentioned papers and explicit in others (e.g.,

Barro (1979), Lucas and Sargent (1978)).

     Today the disputation seems to be less heated than it was a few years

ago, with members of the leading schools of thought openly recognizing

weaknesses in their own theories and strengths in those of others. Of course,

major differences continue to exist, as consideration of recent papers by

Taylor (1982), Kydland and Prescott (1982),     and Sargent and Wallace (1982)
will emphasize. But the terms of disagreement are no longer about the
hypothesis of rational expectations--some version of the latter is utilized
in almost all current research--but about the nature of the economy within
which agents operate and form expectations.

     In this regard, the portion of a macroeconomic model that most strongly

affects its policy-relevant characteristics is that pertaining to aggregate

supply behavior. Accordingly, I will begin this presentation by discussing

some competing theories of aggregate supply currently being utilized in

rational expectations (RE) models, with emphasis on the distinction between

"equilibrium't and "sticky-price" assumptions. This section will also include

a brief description of a model that I find attractive arid some discussion of
                                      2


the RE version of the natural-rate hypothesis. In the next section I will

more briefly mention a few issues involving specification of the aggregate

demand portion of macroeconomic models, with attention devoted to the role

of the overlapping-generations framework. Finally, I want to consider a

recent attempt to denigrate the importance of Lucas's critique (1976) of

traditional policy-evaluation techniques, an attempt that makes use of

"vector autoregression" models. Throughout I will take it for granted

that there is no need to spend time justifying the rational expectations

assumption itself.
                                        3

 II. Flexible and Sticky Price Models

      It is of course widely understood that properties of RE models with

 multiperiod nominal contracts (e.g., Fischer (1977), Taylor (l979a)) are

 very different from those in which prices adjust fully within each period.

 Let us begin by considering which type is more useful for analysis of

 actual present-day economies.

      In my opinion there is at least one reason for believing that some type

 of sticky-price model is needed to provide an empirically satisfactory

description of quarter-to-quarter or even year-to-year fluctuations in prices,

 output, and other macroeconomic variables. In saying that, I have in mind
                                                                               3/
 several empirical regularities or "stylized facts" including the following:

 (i) Output and employment magnitudes exhibit significant "persistence,"

      i.e., positive serial correlation.

 (ii) Output and employment magnitudes are strongly, positively related
                                                4'
      to contemporaneous money stock surprises.

(iii) Output and employment magnitudes are not strongly, positively related

      to contemporaneous price level surprises.

(iv) Real wages do not exhibit countercyclical tendencies; indeed

     they appear to be mildly procyclical.

     Furthermore, I have in mind a fact of a different kind, namely, that

information concerning nominal aggregate variables--including money stock

measures and various price indices--is available on a relatively prompt

basis. The relevant point, then, is that this availability is hard to

reconcile with fact (ii) in a flexible-price equilibrium model, for the

existence of real effects of monetary shocks depends, in these models,
                                  4


                                                                      5/
upon agents' ignorance of contemporaneous values of nominal aggregates. It

was suggested by Lucas (1977) that this difficulty might be overcome if the

"true" relevant monetary aggregate were unobservable and thus measured

with   error. King (1981) has shown, however, that if observations are
available   on a "proxy" variable that differs randomly from the true un-

observable aggregate, output and employment should be unrelated to the

proxy. Thus, according to these models, output and employment should be

unrelated to movements in measured monetary aggregates, in contrast with

fact (ii). King's analysis has been further developed and implemented by

Boschen and Grossman (1983).

       A second reason for doubting the adequacy of flexible-price equili-

brium models is provided by econometric studies which suggest that output

fluctuations are induced by anticipated monetary movements, as well as

surprises.      These studies have some weaknesses   and there is not a strict

one-to-one relationship between flexible-price equilibrium models and the

absence of real effects from anticipated money movements.      The relation-

ship is close enough and the quality of the cited studies high enough,

however, that the findings are troublesome for the flexible-price hypothesis.

       In this regard I would like to emphasizethatacteWtanceofthe-idea,

that some kind of price-level stickiness is necessary for explaining

observed time series data, does not require abandonment of the equilibrium

approach to macroeconomic analysis. To see this, imagine a model in which

nominal multiperiod contracts are endogenously explained as the response

of rational agents to adjustment, bargaining, or other "transactions"
       9/
costs.    As Lucas (1980, p.712) has recognized, such a model could be an

equilibrium model--one in which all agents optimize relative to correctly-

perceived constraints and in which the resulting supplies and demands are
                                 5



equated--though one without perfectly flexible prices. As such, it would

 incorporate the virtues of equilibrium analysis, including the intellectual

discipline that it entails, a specification expressed in terms of policy-

invariant relationships, and the possibility of basing policy choices on

the utility of individual agents.

     Indeed, such a model would seem to be precisely what is needed for

the analysis of stabilization policy. As Fischer (1977, p.204) acknowledged,

 it is likely that the format and length of nominal contracts agreed to

by rational agents would change in response to major shifts in policy. So,

even if existing contract models were capable of providing a good

explanation of macroeconomic fluctuations within a single policy regime,

they would tend to be unreliable if used to predict the comparative effects
                          10/
of alternative regimes.

     From the foregoing perspective, existing nominal contract models are

best seen as incomplete models--ones that treat as fixed important paraaeters

that would tend to be constant within regimes but to change across regimes.

Even in their present state these models are of interest, however, so I

would like to devote a few paragraphs to a comparison and discussion of

the two most influential, those of Fischer (1977) and Taylor (1979.a) (1980).

For simplicity, I shall refer to two-period versions of each.

     In both the Fischer and Taylor papers, a rudimentary aggregate demand

function--one that makes the quantity demanded a fixed stochastic function

of real money balances alone--is utilized, so no difference arises from

that component. The wage-price or aggregate supply components are very

different, however, despite the common feature of two-period, staggered,

nominal wage contracts. Specifically, in each model nominal wages are
                                    6


set at the start of period t to apply to half of the workforce in periods

t and t+l, but the values at which these wages are set are chosen according

to different principles. In Fischer's model, the wages set for t and t+l

will usually differ from each other and each is chosen, in light of current

price-level expectations, so that the real wage is expected to clear the

labor market in the relevant period. In Taylor's model, by contrast, the

same value is set for periods t and t+l and is chosen to equal the average

of the nominal wage rates expected to prevail for the other half of the

workforce in t and t+l, with an adjustment added to take account of

(expected) excess demand.

     Prices, moreover, are assumed to move in unison with the average wage

in Taylor's model, so that there is no systematic (or unsystematic) cyclical

variation in the real wage. Fischer, on the other hand, assumes that firms

select employment (hence, output) magnitudes in each period so as to equate

the marginal product of labor to the observed real wage. Consequently, there

is a tendency for the real wage to be high when employment is low.

     Of these two models, Taylor's has attracted more attention and has been

the mare influential. One reason, undoubtedly, is that Taylor himself has

produced a number of technically sophisticated and economically interesting

applications involving actual data and policy issues of current concern.

I suspect that there isan additional reason, however, which is the existence

of a widespread belief that Taylor's model is substantially more consistent

with crucial facts. In particular, it is believed that Taylor's model is

more plausible than Fischer's because it generates more persistence (for

a given contract length) and does not yield the counterfactual implication

that real wages move countercyclically. Consequently, I think that it is
                                     7


important to understand that neither of these observations is entirely

compelling and that Taylor's model has some implications of its own that

are theoretically unattractive.

     With respect to the persistence issue, it should be kept in mind that

there are several plausible ways of rationalizing persistence in any RE

model. Among these are the existence of employment adjustment costs, the

presence of finished-goods inventories, and the inability of agents to
                                                    11/
distinguish between permanent and transitory shocks.       Any of these

features could be included in a variant of Fischer's model without altering

the properties that his paper focussed upon. Furthermore, the relevant

theoretical concepts involve output or employment measured relative to

capacity (natural rate) values. But of course we do not possess direct

observations on these relative magnitudes; the stylized fact (i) refers

to raw measures of output and employment or to measures adjusted by the

removal of a deterministic trend. And recent work by Nelson and

Plosser (1982), which relies upon stochastic trend removal, suggests that

there is much less persistence in the relevant adjusted series than the

raw or deterministically-detrended measures have indicated.

     Next, the countercyclical real wage in Fischer's model does not come

from its wage-setting specification, but from an independent assumption

regarding employment determination--i.e., that firms equate the marginal

product of labor to the real wage. Now the counterpart of that relation in

Taylor's model is the condition that the (detrended) real wage is constant.

But that condition implies that product prices behave in the same way as
                                                          12 /
average nominal wages, which also seems counterfactual.
                                          8


       These arguments suggest that the above-mentioned reasons for preferring

Taylor's model to Fischer's are not compelling. A point of equal or greater

importance is that Taylor's model possesses a questionable feature, namely,

a presumption that labor supply-demand behavior is fundamentally concerned

'with relative, rather than own, wages. As a result of this feature,

together with contract staggering, the model does not possess the natural-
                                                13 /
rate   property as defined by Lucas (1972b).           That is, the model is one in

which a suitably-designed monetary policy is capable of yielding a

permanent increase in output relative to its natural-rate value: monetary
                                                 14/
policy can keep unemployment "low" forever.

       Having mentioned various shortcomings of the Fischer and Taylor models,

let me now discuss an alternative that I find attractive, one which conforms

to the natural rate hypothesis and also to all of the stylized facts
                   15 /
mentioned above.          For the sake of simplicity, and ease of comparison, the

discussion will presume a rudimentary aggregate demand schedule. This can

be expressed formally as



(1)         =
                b + bi(m     -
                                   +v                       b1 > 0


where y, m, and Pt are logs of output, the money stock, and the price level

while v is a white-noise disturbance. Also for simplicity, the log of the

"natural rate" level of output, y, is assumed to deviate from its previous

value only by virtue of a 'white-noise disturbance, u:


(2)         =
                t_l + Ut.
In addition--and again only for the sake of simplicity--I assume that output

is perishable, so that no inventories are held.
                                                 9



        The crucial aspect of the model is the way in which prices are determined.

 It is assumed that
                      Pt is set, at the end of period t-l, at a level that is

 expected to make the quantity demanded in t equal to a weighted average of

  t     and y. Two basic ideas are involved in this assumption. The first
                                                                                      16/
 is that firms find it optimal to meet all demands at the quoted price.

 Second, firms experience adjustment costs whenever y differs from                      but
 also suffer opportunity costs whenever there is any discrepancy between y and y.


 Then if both of these cost functions
                                                are quadratic, producers will aim at
 some value between          and        which we denote as    Xy1 + .-X) Y1 with
 the parameter X (0 < X < 1) reflecting the relative costliness of output

 changes. Consequently, the price level is set at a value that satisfies

 (1) expectationally, with               +                   inserted in place of
                                             (l_x.).Et_i


 (3)          + (1-X) Et_i         =
                                       b0 + b1(E1rn

Here, of course, Ei(.) denotes the mathematical expectation of the

 indicated variable, conditional upon realizations of all variables in

period t-l and earlier. The price-setting relation (3) can be expressed

in various ways. One version that I have emphasized elsewhere takes the

form of a modified expectational
                                         Phillips-Curve relationship, namely

(31) Pt -    -i t-l
                  =          -           +   Ei(                     = (l-)/b1   > 0,


in which the relevant expected inflation rate is that pertaining to
                                                                                 p,
the value of p that equates y to                in (1).

       The other main component of the model incorporates Fischer's scheme

of nominal wage determination. Let w be the log of the average nominal

wage in period t and let z denote the log of the real wage, z =                  -
                                                                             w       Pt.
                                         10


Also let       be the natural-rate value of z, which evolves over time as

a random walk related to that generating Yt:


(4) z = z_1 +                                                   E(u) > 0.

Then with half of the wage contracts prevailing in t having been set at the

end of t-l, and the other half at the end of t-2, we have


(5)        =   (1/2) E i(z +        + (1/2) E 2(z +



      Finally, to complete the system we suppose that the monetary authority
sets m according to some policy feedback rule, utilizing data from periods

t-1 and before. Without specifying the form of the systematic component,

we can write


(6)    n' =    Eti m   + e,

thereby defining et as the (white noise) random component of policy behavior.

In principle, equations (l)-(6) govern the evolution of the six variables

j, j, Ft       u1t            W          5J.V&L    LL.LLJLLa.L.I.J
                                                                     -.
                                                                     W ——

      It   is easy to see from equations (l),(2),(3), and (6) that, in this

model, output conforms to the process


                 =
(7)
           -
                     -i t-1 + b1e + v -            u.
Thus we can verify by inspection that stylized facts (i), (ii), and (iii)

are mimicked by our model: output is positively related to monetary

surprises but not to one.period pric level surprises (as Pt = EtiP),

and both y and         -      are positively autocorrelated. Furthermore, it can
be shown that, for a wide class of specifications for the systematic component
                                        •11




of monetary policy, zt and y are positively correlated. Thus the model

also conforms to the stylized fact (iv). And from (7) it is obvious.that

the natural-rate property obtains.

       Indeed, it is clear from (7) that the famous policy-ineffectiveness

proposition obtains in the model at hand. But while that result is useful

as a counterexample to some mistaken notions about necessary conditions for

validity of the ineffectiveness proposition, I do not think that very much

should be made of it. The reason is that the result is not highly robust:

while it holds if the aggregate demand specification (1) is changed to


(1')        =    +    (m -   p)   + 2Et1( t+l -     +

it does not hold if instead we have
(1")        =   +    (m -         +   2E(p1 -     + v.

Nor, more importantly, does it hold if the information set used in

computing the expectation of t+l includes the current interest rate, as

well as past values of all variables. This last specification would seem

to be empirically relevant, given the existence of daily reports on

interest rates in nation-wide markets.

       But while I do not want to argue for the general validity of the

ineffectiveness proposition, even as a matter of theory, I do want to

mention parenthetically that many of the alleged theoretical demonstrations

of its invalidity rely on a misinterpretation. The point is that the

proposition asserts that the systematic components of monetary and fiscal

policies have no influence on the evolution of output or employment relative

to their natural rate (capacity, full-information) values--not to the raw
                                    12



values themselves. The proposition is designed to pertain to issues about

countercyclical stabilization policy, which has always been conceived of as

a device for keeping output and employment close to their natural-rate

values, not for altering the paths of the latter variables. A more extended

discussion of this issue, including some examples of published mis-

interpretations, is presented in NcCallum (1980, pp.726—729).

     The model outlined above can be extended in many ways--by including

fiscal variables and/or inventory holdings, by positing more realistic

processes for    and z, etc. --without altering its main properties.

Thus it provides, in my opinion, an attractive and useful framework for

thinking about macroeconomic fluctuations and stabilization policy. It

has some weaknesses, however, that should be acknowledged. First, the

implicit assumption that price changes are prohibitively costly within

each period, but costless between periods, is extreme and difficult to

justify except by definition of the "period." And with that justification

there is no guarantee that the periods so defined will correspond to the

quarter-year periods in which most actual data is reported. Also, the

length of a theoretical period could be affected by extreme conditions,

such as those experienced during hyperinflations. Consequently, the period

definition may not be ul1y policy-invariant.
     Perhaps the most basic weakness of the model is the absence of any
                                                       17/
conipelling explanation for the absence of indexing.         Why is it, in other

words, that posted prices do not come with a proviso that automatically

adjusts them in response to monetary surprises? The usual answer is that

such arrangements are costly, but the validity of that answer is by no

means self-apparent. The difficulty is, however, one that is not specific
                                     13


to this model. It merely reflects economists' incomplete understanding of

why contracts are often made in nominal terms. More generally, the above-

mentioned flaws are a reflection of the fact that this model is incomplete,

in the sense described above. An equilibrium rationalization of its price-

setting arrangements has not been developed.

      To conclude my discussion of issues involving aggregate supply, I

would like to return to the subject of the natural rate hypothesis (NRH)

and comment upon its present status. In particular, I want to emphasize
                                                                        18/
that a number of influential researchers in the Keynesian tradition


have in recent years expressed agreement with the NRH, yet have continued
                                                                        19 /
to   conduct analysis in models that do not possess the NRH property.

A prominent example of a specification of this type is provided by models

that incorporate the concept of a "nonaccelerating-inflation rate of

unemployment" (NAIRU). Clearly, if there exists a stable negative relation-

ship between unemployment and the acceleration magnitude (i.e., change in

the inflation rate), then the unemployment rate can be permanently lowered

by permanently accepting a higher rate of change of inflation-- in contra-

diction to the NRH. Another example is provided by models that include

demand and supply functions expressed in real terms together with a partial

adjustment relation for a nominal price variable and the assumption that

the transaction quantity is the smaller of supply and demand (or that
                       20/
demand is determining).    In such a formulation, there is an implied

permanent tradeoff between the rate of change of the price variable and

real excess demand.

      Proponents of such specifications would no doubt admit that their

implications regarding unemployment magnitudes under conditions of sustained

accelerating inflation are implausible, but would presumably contend that
                                    14



the models are not intended to be applicable to extreme policies of that

type. For predicting the consequences of less extreme policies, they would

claim, the models are appropriate. It is not clear, however, that such a

claim is justifiable. What is needed for the modelts predictions to be

plausible is that the policy followed be essentially the same as that of

the sample period used in estimating the relationship. But to agree to that

limitation is to admit that the model cannot be used for most interesting

questions. In terms of Tobin's (1980, pp.66-68) exercise, for example,

I would say that a gradual but reliable and sustained decrease in the rate

of growth of nominal GNP--or the money stock or any other nominal aggregate--

is very unlike the policies of the past two decades. Thus the simulation

predictions are not persuasive.

     More generally, I would argue that the non-conformity of any model

to the NRB property provides prima facie evidence of some implied form of

irrationality and an associated vulnerability of the model to the famous

Lucas (1976) "critique." In other words, non-conformity of any model to

the NRH indicates that it will be systematically unreliable in predicting
                                                  ,.'l   /
the consequences of alternative policy choices.              Other points concerning

the Lucas critique will be discussed in the sectioas that follow..
                                     15


III. Aggregate Demand

      To this point we have been concerned with issues involving aggregate

supply behavior. Let us then more briefly consider some developments having
                               22/
to do with aggregate demand.

     As our previous discussion hinted, Lucas, Sargent, and other leaders in

the RE area have advocated the use of aggregative general equilibrium models

for macroeconomic policy analysis. The object of this strategy is to avoid

the weaknesses of traditional macroeconomic models, weaknesses that were

emphasized in Lucass critique (1976). The hope is that it may be possible

to develop models that are genuinely structural--i.e., policy invariant--by

working "at the level of objective functions, constraint sets, and market-

clearing conditions" (Sargent, 1982, p.383). Since this equilibrium approach

does not limit the user to flexible price models, it is almost impossible not

to sympathize with it, at least at the level of principle. Adherence to the

approach is not a guarantee of success, however: if a model is based on a

poorly-specified objective function it will be a poor model, explicit maxi-

mization analysis notwithstanding.

     Since this last qualification is obvious to the point of triviality, an

example of how the approach can go astray may be of some interest. The

example that I have in mind involves the application of a class of overlapping-

generations (OG) models to problems in monetary economics. The class of OG

models in question is that in which, although there is an inherently useless

entity called "fiat money," the specification excludes any cash-in-advance

or money-in-the-utility-function feature that would represent a transactions-

facilitating property for that entity. Accordingly, the entity does not serve,

in these models, as a medium of exchange; its only function is as a store of
       23/
value.     Consequently, several striking and unusual conclusions are obtained
                                   16



when the entity is interpreted as money. For exatnvle, if the government

causes the stock of money to grow at a rate even slightly in excess of the

rate of output growth, the price level will be infinite (i.e., money

will be valueless). Second, equilibria in which the price level is finite

will be Pareto optimal if and only if the growth rate of the money stock is

non-positive. Third, "open-market" increases in the stock of money have no

effect on the price level. I have argued at length, however, that these

unusual conclusions obtain because of the model's neglect of the medium-of-

exchange role (McCallum, 1983). If the model is modified so as to reflect

this role for the entity called money, its unusual conclusions vanish.

Consequently, the unmodified class of OG models evidently provides a misleading

vehicle for the analysis of economies in which there is a medium of exchange.

     It remains to be explained what this OG example has to do with the

equilibrium approach. To understand the connection let us recall that an

essential aspect of the approach is the development of policy-invariant

relations. Now in dynamic settings, as Sargent (1982) has stressed, standard

asset demand functions may not be policy-invariant; one must look "beyond

decision rules to the objective functions that agents are maximizing and the

constraints that they are facing" (p.383). But the influence on agents'

constraints of the store-of-value function of money is clear and simple to

express analytically, while the influence of the medium-of-exchange function

is just the opposite. Indeed, it is extremely difficult to devise a general

equilibrium setting in which the medium-of-exchange role is both rigorously

and convincingly depicted. The traditional method has of course been to include

real money balances as an argument of agents' utility functions, but that is

an unsatisfying practice which clearly must be proxying for something more

fundamental. Together these considerations encourage analysts to shun the
                                   17


traditional approach and adopt ones that focus attention on money as a store

of value. And because they are well-suited in important ways for the

analysis of store-of-value issues, OG models provide an attractive vehicle.

Thus it is not very surprising that an OG model without medium-of-exchange

features would be adopted by researchers striving to overcome the Lucas

critique. But that attempt will nevertheless be unsuccessful if the model

is used for certain monetary issues, for neglect of the medium-of-exchange

function constitutes a potentially serious specification error. The Lucas

critique itself amounts to a reminder (of an especially important type)

that specification errors will keep a model from being policy invariant.

     Turning to a substantive matter, it is interesting to note that an OG

model of the type discussed above has recently been used by Sargent and

Wallace (1982) in an attempted rehabilitation of the infamous "real bills"

doctrine. Since one of Henry Thornton's important contributions to monetary

economics was his criticism of that doctrine, a few brief remarks should

be in order. In their recent paper, Sargent and Wallace argue that (among

other things) the price level is determinate under a real-bills policy

regime that pegs the interest rate at zero, a finding that contrasts

sharply with the price-level indeterminacy result of their famous (1975)

paper. Examination of the recent argument indicates, however, that

determinacy is not actually established. What the paper shows is that each

agent faces the same real budget constraint under the real-bills regime as

under a "laissez-faire" regime in which the stock of fiat money is held

fixed. But this implies only that the real aspects of the model's

equilibria are the same under the two regimes; nothing is implied about

nominal magnitudes. Furthermore, the interest rate in the Sargent-Wallace

(1982) model does not, because of this model's neglect of the medium-of-

exchange role of money, correspond to interest rates in actual economies.
                                   18


Thus pegging its real value at zero does not require a negative real return

on money (i.e., positive inflation) as is the case in settings in which non-

monetary assets command higher rates of return than money because of the

latter's transaction-facilitating properties. Consequently, the recent

Sargent-wallace paper does not provide a convincing reason for believing

Thornton's analysis to be incorrect.
                                 19


IV. The VAR Challenge to- the Lucas Critique

     The final topic to be discussed also concerns the Lucas critique.

Previously I have claimed that its basic message--i.e., that traditional

econometric models are poorly designed for policy evaluations because their

basic relationships are unlikely to be policy invariant--has been very

widely accepted, even by economists who dispute other notions associated

with the RE revolution (McCalluxn 1979, 1980). That situation still prevails,

I believe, but within the past few months a notable challenge has arisen.

More specifically, a number of prominent economists, who are certainly well

aware of the critique, have authored papers in which so-called vector auto-
                                                      24/
regression (VAR) models are used for policy analysis.     These VAR models

are, as is well-known, constructed in a manner that involves no attempt to

represent structural relationships; they consist of a set of reduced—form

equations in which lagged values of the system's variables are used to

explain current values, with all variables treated as endogenous.

Consequently, VAR systems would seem to be even more vulnerable to the

critique than the traditional econometric models that Lucas considered.

One is naturally led, then, to ask: what is the justification given by those

who have used VARs for policy analysis? In fact most users have provided -

no justification themselves, but have referred to a recent paper by

Christopher Sims, the originator of VAR techniques. Let us then consider

the argument put forth in that paper (Sims, 1982).

     One important theme of Sims's discussion is that equilibrium-approach

econometric techniques (exemplified by Hansen and Sargent (1980)) are

unlikely to lead to accurate predictions of the effects of real-time changes
                                    20

in   policy rules, as opposed to cross-regime steady-state comparisons. As

it happens, that suggestion seems to me to be correct. But it also seems

rather beside the point, since Lucas, Sargent, and other equilibrium-

approach leaders have not claimed to be able to use their models in that

way. Instead, they have expressed the aim of being able to make valid

comparisons of the properties of stochastic steady states generated by

alternative maintained policy regimes.

       Another theme of Sims's paper is that genuine policy-rule or regime

changes are extremely rare in actuality. Most policy actions involve

instead the resetting of policy instruments in response to recent

developments in the economy, a type of activity that Sims calls "normal

policymaking." Again I wculd agree with the observation--but point out

that   it is in no way inconsistent with the Lucas critique.
        In addition, however, Sims claims that VAR methods can be useful in
the    context of normal policymaking. Since this claim appears to be

inconsistent with the message of the critique, let us briefly examine the

argument.      Under a given policy regime, a policymaker's objectives are

by definition unchanging through time. So if the structure of the economy

were known and also unchanging, policy feedback rules would be unchanging

and there would be no purpose for policy exercises using any kind of model.

But of course the true structure of any actual economy is imperfectly known

and probably changing, so there could often be some potential gain from re-

estimation of models used to design policy. And with objectives constant,

autoregressive representations of expectational variables may be changing

only slowly and gently, so VAR models may not go badly astray in the way

described by Lucas. Thus there could be some benefits from period-by-

period re-estimation of VAR systems and their utilization in the selection
                                     21


of current instrument settings.

     In this case, the argument seems plausible but not extremely

consequential. What it suggests is that VARs can be helpful to policy-

makers, but only if the latter continue to behave in approximately the

same way as in the past. There is no claim that VARs could be useful in

evaluating the effects of substantially different sustained policies.

Furthermore, the argument provides no compelling reason for believing

that VAR methods would be superior, even in the context of normal policy-

making, to Hansen-Sargent techniques.


     Now let me turn to my outright disagreements with Sims's paper, of

which there are two. The first involves an application of VAR methods in

the context of an analysis of announced policy plans of the Reagan

administration, I think it is fair to say that these plans, as announced,

represent a substantial break with past policies. How, then, does Sims

justify use of the VAR models? Apparently, his presumption is that the

public does not believe that a genuine regime change will actually take

place: 'Preciseiy because those vying for control of policy will propose

to make permanent changes in the rule much more often than they will succeed

in doing so, the public is likely to discount their rhetoric and react to

the actual course they set for policy as if it were a disturbance to the

existing probabilistic structure" (1982, p.139). Given this assumption

that the public disbelieves in a regime change, there are two possibilities

either the public is correct in its disbelief or it is incorrect. But note

that if Sims is assuming the former--that the "proposed paths of policy

variables are ..,   not attainable"--then he is evaluating the effects of

a hypothetical change in policy under the assumption that there is no change

in policy. This, clearly, involves a logical contradiction that negates
                                     22


any conclusion. The other possibility is that the public is incorrect in

believing that there is no change in regime. In this case there is no

logical contradiction, but the analysis presumes systematically incorrect

expectations. To the extent that the public (correctly) believes in the

policy change, Sims's predictions will be incorrect. And Sims shows no

inclination to assume systematically incorrect expectations, as a general
                                                                               25 /
matter.   Thus his arguments concerning the Reagan plans are unsatisfactory.

    My other objection is that the general tone of Sims's discussion seems

likely to encourage economists to conceive of policy in terms of isolated

actions rather than sustained rules. Such encouragement is, of course, in

direct opposition to the advice of Lucas, Sargent, and other RE advocates.

Lucas (1976) (1978) has argued eloquently that economists should focus their

attention on sustained rules, in part because that is the most that there

is any chance of doing well. This position seems to me correct. The

profession hardly knows enough about deterministic steady states to

evaluate their relative merits--consider the difficulties in conceptualizing

the costs of anticipated inflation--much less, those of stochastic

steady states or alternative sequences of arbitrary policy actions.

Furthermore, actual policy makers are strongly inclined to focus attention

on today's situation, to the neglect of both future and past. To me it

seems undesirable for the economics profession to encourage them in this

inclination, as it did during the period of time between the Keynesian and

rational expectations revolutions.
                                 References


Barro, Robert J., "Rational Expectations and the Role of Monetary Policy,"

     Journal of Monetary Economics, 2 (January 1976), 1-32.

_______________   "Unanticipated   Money Growth and Unemployment in the

     United States," American Economic Review, 67 (March 1977), 101-115. (a)

______________    "Long Term Contracting, Sticky Prices, and Monetary

     Policy," Journal of Monetary Economics 3 (July 1977), 305-316. (b)

______________    "Second Thoughts on Keynesian Economics," American

     Economic Review, 69 (May 1979), 54-59.

_______________   "The Equilibrium Approach to Business Cycles," in

     Money, Expectations, and Business Cycles. New York: Academic Press,

     1981.

Blinder, Alan S., and Stanley Fischer, "Inventories, Rational Expectations,

     and the Business Cycle," Journal of Monetary Economics 8 (November 1981),

     453-465.

Boschen, John, and Herschel I. Grossman, "Tests of Equilibrium Macroeconomics

     Using Contemporaneous Monetary Data," Journal of Monetary Economics, 11

     (1983), forthcoming.

Brunner, Karl, Alex Cukierman, and Allan H. Neltzer, "Stagflation,

     Persistent Unemployment, and the Permanence of Economic Shocks,"

     Journal of Monetary Economics 6 (October 1980), 467-492.

Bryant, John, and Neil Wallace, "The Inefficiency of Interest-Bearing

     National Debt," Journal of Political Economy, 87 (April 1979), 365-381.

Fischer, Stanley, "Long-Term Contracts, Rational Expectations, and the

     Optimal Money Supply Rule," Journal of Political Economy, 85

     (February 1977), 191-205.
Friedman, Benjamin M., "Using a Credit Aggregate Target to Implement
    Monetary Policy in the Financial Environment of the Future,"
    Monetary    Policy Issues in the 1980s, A Symposium Sponsored by the

     Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, August 1982.

Gordon, Robert J., "Price Inertia and Policy Ineffectiveness in the

     United States, 1890-1980," Journal of Political Economy, 90

     (December 1982), 1087-1117.

Gordon, Robert J.,, and Stephen King," The Output Costs of Disinflation

     in Traditional and Vector-Autoregressive Models," BrookirLgs Papers

     on Economic Activity (1982, No. 1), 205-242.

Grossman, Herschel I., "The Natural-Rate Hypothesis, The Rational-

     Expectations Hypothesis, and the Remarkable Survival of Non-Market-

     Clearing Assumptions, Brown University, Working Paper No. 82-20,

     October 1982.

Hansen, Lars P.,, and Thomas J. Sargent, "Formulating and Estimating

     Dynamic    Linear Rational Expectations Models," Journal   of Economic

     Dynamics   and Control, 2 (February 1980), 7-46.
Kennan, John, and P.T. Geary, "Some International Evidence on Cyclical
     Fluctuations in Product and Labor Markets," University of Iowa

     Working Paper No. 82-2, January 1982.

King, Robert G., "Monetary Information and Monetary Neutrality,"

     Journal of Monetary Economics, 7 (March 1981), 195-206.

King, Robert G., and Charles I. Plosser, "The Behavior of Money, Credit,

     and Prices in a Real Business Cycle," NBER Working Paper No. 853,

     February 1982.

Kydland, Finn E., and Edward C. Prescott, "Time to Build and Aggregate

     Fluctuations," Econometrica, 50 (November 1982), 1345-1370.
Litterman, Robert B., "Optimal Control of the Money Supply," NBER Working

     Paper No. 912, June 1982.


Lucas, Robert E., Jr., "Expectations and the Neutrality of Morley," Journal of

     Economic Theory, 4 (April 1972), 103-124. (a)

____________________       "Econometric Testing of the Natural Rate Hypothesis,"

     in The Econometrics of Price Determination, ed. by 0. Eckstein.

     Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 1972. (b)

_____________________     "Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique," in

     Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series in Public Policy, Vol. 1, ed. by

     K. Brunner and A. H. Meltzer. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1976.


                          "Understanding Business Cycles," in Carnegie-Rochester

     Conference Series in Public Policy, Vol. 5, ed. by K. Brunner and

     A. H. Meltzer. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1977.


__________________      "Rules,   Discretion, and the Role of the Economic Advisor,"

     in Rational Expectations and Economic Policy, ed. by S. Fischer.

     Chicago: University of Chicago Press for N.B,E.R., 1978.
       -



                   , "Methods and Problems in Business Cycle Theory," Journal of

     Money, Credit, and Banking, 12 (November 1980, Part 2), 696-715.


________________    "Some International Evidence on Output-Inflation

     Tradeoffs," American Economic Revies 63 (June 1973), 326-334.



Lucas, Robert E., Jr., and Thomas J. Sargent, "After Keynesian Macroeconomics,"

     in After the Phillips Curve: Persistence of High Inflation and High

     Unemployment. Conference Series No. 19, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston,

     1978.
 McCallum, Bennett T., "Topics Concerning the Formulation, Estimation, and

       Use of Macroeconometric Models with Rational Expectations,"

       1979 Proceedings of the Business and Economics Statistics Section,

       American Statistical Association.


_____________________    "Rational   Expectations and Macroeconomic Stabilization

     Policy: An Overview," Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 12

     (November 1980, Part 2), 716-746.


____________________     "The Role of overlapping-Generations Models in Monetary

     Economics," in Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy,

     Vol. 18, ed. by K. Brunner and A. H. Meltzer. Amsterdam: North-

     Holland, (1983), forthcoming.

Mishkin, Frederic S., "Does Anticipated Monetary Policy Matter? An Econometric

     Investigation," Journal of Political Economy, 90 (February 1982), 22-51.

Modigliani, Franco, "The Monetarist Controversy or, Should We Forsake

     Stabilization Policies?" American Economic Review, 67 (March 1977), 1-19.


Modigliani, Franco, and Lucas Papademos, "Targets for Monetary Policy in the

     Coming Year," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (No. 1, 1975), 141-163.

Nelson, Charles R., and Charles I. Plosser, "Trends and Random Walks in

     Macroeconomic Time Series: Some Evidence and Implications," Journal of

     Monetary Economics, 10 (1982), forthcoming.


Sargent, Thomas J., "Rational Expectations, the Real Rate of Interest, and

      the Natural Rate of Unemployment," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity

      (No. 2, 1973), 429-472.


_________________       "A Classical Macroeconometric Model for the United States,'t

      Journal of Political Economy, 84 (April 1976), 207-237. (a)
_________________     "The Observational Equivalence of Natural and Unnatural

      Rate Theories of Macroeconomics," Journal of Political Economy, 84

      (June 1976), 631-640. (b)

_________________     "Beyond Demand and Supply Curves in Macroeconomics,"

     American Economic Review, 72 (May 1982), 382-389.



 Sargent, Thomas J., and Neil Wallace, "    'Rational'   Expectations, the Optimal

     Monetary Instrument, and the Optimal Money Supply Rule," Journal of

      Political Economy, 83 (April 1975), 241-254.


_________________ and ___________, "The Real Bills Doctrine vs. the Quantity

     Theory: A Reconsideration," Journal of Political Economy, 90

      (December 1982), 1212-1236.

Smyth, David, "The British Labor Market in Disequilibrium: Did the Dole

     Reduce Employment in Interwar Britain?" Wayne Economic Papers No. 165,

     July 1982.


Sims, Christopher A., "Macroeconomics and Reality," Econometrica 48 (January 1980),
      _/. 0
     .L9()
     1




___________________ "Policy       Analysis with Econometric Models," Brookings

     Papers on Economic Activity (No. 1, 1982), 107-152.


Taylor, John B., "Staggered Wage Setting in a Macro Model," American

     Economic Review, 69 (May 1979), 108-113. (a)

________________   "Estimation   and Control of a Macroeconomic Model with

     Rational Expectations," Econometrica 47 (September 1979),

     1267-1286. (b)

______________     "Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts,"
     Journal of Political Economy, 88 (February 1980), 1-23.
_______________   "Union Wage Settlements During a Diainflation," NBER

     Working Paper No. 985, September 1982.

Tobin, James, "Stabilization Policy Ten Years After," Brookings Papers

     in Economic Activity (No. 1, 1980), 19-71.

Wallace, Neil, "The Overlapping Generations Model of Fiat Money,"

     in Models of Monetary Economies, ed. by J.H. Kareken and N. Wallace.

     Minneapolis: Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, 1980.
                                    Footnotes


1.   Specifically, Lucas (1972a) (1972b). Of course a few papers had

     previously been published using rational expectations in macro-

     economic settings, but these did not have a great deal of impact.


2. Important items were also produced by Fischer (1977), Taylor (1979a)

     (1979b), and others.


3. Evidence supporting these facts appears in a large number of studies,

     including Sargent (1976),.Barro ( 1977a), Nishkin (1982), Sims (1980),

     Kerinan and Geary (1982), and Gordon (1982).


4.   Here and below I use   the term "surprise" to refer to a one-period

     expectational   error of the   form m -
                                               Eim,   in notation discussed
     below.

5. This ignorance is required, to be more precise, in the three leading
     flexible-price equilibrium models, namely, those of Lucas (1972a),
     Lucas (1973), and Barro (1981, pp. 42-50). It is possible that other
     such models do not have this property.



6. The relevant point was mentioned by Barro (1981) and was very recently

     emphasized by Grossman (1982). Grossman recognizes, but does not

     accept, the possibility that money-output correlations are due to

     "reserve causation," i.e., monetary responses to output movements

     generated by shocks to technology or preferences, as suggested by

     King and Plosser (1982).


7. See, for example, Gordon (198 ) and Nishkin (1982).
 8. Movements in "natural ratelt values of output or employment are

      assumed to be representable by trends, in contrast to the evidence

      given by Nelson and Plosser (1982). Also, the methods of over-

      coming the "observational equivalence" difficulty (Sargent, 1976b)

      are riot entirely satisfying.



 9. The difficulty with this exercise comes in understanding why

      contracts are set in nominal terms without indexation.


10. The problem is of course compounded in attempts to predict

      the effects of real-time changes in regimes because expectations

      are unlikely to adjust immediately to the new policy rule.


11. The last two features have been analyzed by Blinder and Fischer

      (1981) and Brunner, Cukierman, arid Meltzer (1980), respectively,

      while the first has been emphasized most notably by Sargent.

12. My argument is riot that real wage movements induce business

      cycles, but that some systematic movements in real wages are observed.


13. With staggering, relative wages pertain to values set in different

      periods. If the relationship between such values depends upon

      output (relative to capacity), as Taylor's model assumes, then the

      latter variable will be affected by the trajectory of nominal wage

      settlements. I am indebted to Taylor for explaining to me that it

      is not an assumed concern for relative nominal wages, as opposed to

      relative real wages, that is responsible for this feature.


14.   Fischer's   model, by contrast, does possess the natural-rate policy.
15. This specification is mentioned, but not investigated, in McCallum

     (1980, P. 735).


16. The analogous requirement vould not seem extreme or unusual in

     a version of the model in which inventories are held.


17. This issue was introduced by Barro (1977b).


18. Including Tobin (1980), Modigliani (1977), and Gordon (1982).

19. See Tobin (1980, pp. 66-68), Modigliani and Papedemos (1975), and

     Gordon and King (1982).

20. This sort of formulation mars, for example, an interesting and

     otherwise attractive study by Smyth (1982).

21. This is, I would suggest, the true message of Lucas (1972b) and

     one of the most basic messages of the RE revolution.


22. of course the distinction is not a clean one in equilibrium models,

     since agents in such models make factor supply and commodity demand

     choices simultaneously and in response to the same wealth and price

    variables. What is here meant by an "aggregate demand" topic is one

     that focuses attention on saving and/or asset-demand relationships.

23. Notable items in the literature in question are Bryant and Wallace

     (1979), Sargent and Wallace (1982), and Wallace (1980).

24. Examples are provided by Friedman (1982), Gordon and King (1982). and

     Litterman (1982). Friedman does not carry out policy simulations

     but his "two-target" proposal for monetary policy is based in part on an

     assumption that VAR relationships are policy invariant.


25. This is not, of course, an endorsement of these plans.
