                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                       PREDICTION MARKETS

                                              Justin Wolfers
                                              Eric Zitzewitz

                                          Working Paper 10504
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10504


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2004




Prepared for the Journal of Economic Perspectives. The authors would like to thank David Pennock, Emile
Servan-Schreiber of NewsFutures, David Dempsey and John Delaney of Tradesports, Alison Fealey and
Oliver Frankel of Goldman Sachs, and George Neumann of IEM for help with data. Thanks to Kay-Yut Chen,
Robin Hanson, Jim Hines, Andrew Leigh, Betsey Stevenson, Timothy Taylor, Hal Varian, Michael Waldman,
Craig Yee and William Ziemba for stimulating discussions, and to seminar audiences at Stanford, Kansas and
Wharton. Doug Geyser, Chris Lion, Mike Goelzer, Paul Reist, Eric Snowberg, and Ravi Pillai provided
outstanding research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Justin Wolfers and Eric Zitzewitz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Prediction Markets
Justin Wolfers and Eric Zitzewitz
NBER Working Paper No. 10504
May 2004
JEL No. D7, D8, E3, E6, G1, H8, Q4
                                           ABSTRACT

We analyze the extent to which simple markets can be used to aggregate disperse information into

efficient forecasts of uncertain future events. Drawing together data from a range of prediction

contexts, we show that market-generated forecasts are typically fairly accurate, and that they

outperform most moderately sophisticated benchmarks. Carefully designed contracts can yield

insight into the market's expectations about probabilities, means and medians, and also uncertainty

about these parameters. Moreover, conditional markets can effectively reveal the market's beliefs

about regression coefficients, although we still have the usual problem of disentangling correlation

from causation. We discuss a number of market design issues and highlight domains in which

prediction markets are most likely to be useful.

Justin Wolfers
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
518 Memorial Way
Stanford, CA 94305
as of July 2004:
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
and NBER
jwolfers@nber.org

Eric Zitzewitz
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
518 Memorial Way
Stanford, CA 94305
ericz@stanford.edu
1. Introduction


        In July 2003, press reports began to surface of a project within the Defense
Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), a research think tank within the
Department of Defense, to establish a Policy Analysis Market that would allow trading in
various forms of geopolitical risk. Proposed contracts were based on indices of economic
health, civil stability, military disposition, conflict indicators and potentially even specific
events. For example, contracts might have been based on questions like: “How fast will
the non-oil output of Egypt grow next year?” or “Will the U.S. military withdraw from
country A in two years or less?” Moreover, the exchange would have offered
combinations of contracts, perhaps combining an economic event and a political event.
The concept was to discover whether trading in such contracts could help to predict
future events, and how connections between events were perceived. However, a political
uproar followed. Critics savaged DARPA for proposing “terrorism futures,” and rather
than spend political capital defending a tiny program, the agency dropped the proposal.1
        Ironically, the aftermath of the DARPA controversy provided a vivid illustration
of the power of markets to provide information about probabilities of future events. An
offshore betting exchange, Tradesports.com, listed a new security that would pay $100 if
the head of DARPA, Admiral John Poindexter, was ousted by the end of August 2003.
Early trading suggested a likelihood of resignation by the end of August of 40 percent,
and price fluctuations reflected ongoing news developments. Around lunchtime on July
31, reports started citing credible Pentagon insiders who claimed knowledge of an
impending resignation. Within minutes of this news first surfacing (and hours before it
became widely known), the price spiked to around 80. These reports left the date of
Poindexter’s proposed departure uncertain, which explains the remaining risk. As
August dragged on, the price slowly fell back toward 50. On August 12, Poindexter then
issued a letter of resignation suggesting that he would resign on August 29. On the 12th,
the market rose sharply, closing at a price of 96.



1
 Looney (2003) provides a useful summary of both the relevant proposal and its aftermath. Further, Robin
Hanson has maintained a useful archive of related news stories and government documents at:
http://hanson.gmu.edu/policyanalysismarket.html.


                                                 1
         This anecdote describes a new—and emerging—form of financial market, often
known as a prediction market, but also going by the name “information market” or “event
futures.” Analytically, these are markets where participants trade in contracts whose
payoff depends on unknown future events. Much of the enthusiasm for prediction
markets derives from the efficient markets hypothesis. In a truly efficient prediction
market, the market price will be the best predictor of the event and no combination of
available polls or other information can be used to improve on the market-generated
forecasts. This statement does not require that all individuals in a market be rational,
only that the marginal trade in the market is motivated by rational traders. Of course, it is
unlikely that prediction markets are literally efficient, but a number of successes in these
markets, both within firms and with regard to public events like presidential elections,
have generated substantial interest among both political and financial economists.
         Although markets designed specifically for information aggregation and
revelation are our focus in this article, the line between these kinds of prediction markets
and the full range of contingent commodities -- from stock in your company to betting on
the Super Bowl -- can become blurry. However, we will generally lean away from
discussing markets where the primary focus is holding or trading risk that may be
intrinsically enjoyable, as in sports betting and other gambling markets. We will also
lean away from focusing on markets that are substantial enough in size to allow a
significant extent of risk-sharing and pooling by matching risky assets with risk-acceptant
investors, as the major financial markets do.2 However, most contingent commodity
markets involve some mix of risk-sharing, fun and information transmission, so these
distinctions are not impermeable.
         We begin by describing the types of contracts that might be traded in prediction
markets, before proceeding to survey several applications. We then draw together a
rough and fairly optimistic description of what we have learned from early experiments,
raise some market design issues, and conclude with some evidence on the limitations of
prediction markets.


2
  For a vision of how prediction markets, if they develop sufficient liquidity, may also prove useful for
those wishing to hedge against specific risks, see the discussions in Athanasoulis, Shiller, and van Wincoop
(1999) and Shiller (2003).



                                                   2
2. Types of Prediction Markets

         In a prediction market, payoffs are tied to unknown future events. The design of
how the payoff is linked to the future event can elicit the market’s expectations of a range
of different parameters. We will speak as though the market is itself a representative
“person” with a set of expectations. However, the reader should be warned that there are
important but subtle differences between, say, the market’s median expectation and the
median expectation of market participants.
         Table 1 summarizes the three main types of contracts.
Table 1: Contract Types—Estimating Uncertain Quantities or Probabilities
Contract Example                 Details                Reveals market
                                                        expectation of…
Winner-    Event y: Al Gore      Contract costs $p      Probability that
takes-all  wins the popular vote Pays $1 if and only if event y occurs, p(y)
                                 event y occurs
                                 Bid according to
                                 value of $p

Index          Contract pays $1 for         Contract pays $y.             Mean value of
               every percentage                                           outcome y: E[y]
               point of the popular
               vote won by Al Gore

Spread         Contract pays even           Contract costs $1             Median value of y.
               money if Gore wins           Pays $2 if y>y*
               more than y*% of the         Pays $0 otherwise.
               popular vote.                Bid according to the
                                            value of y*.

         First, in a “winner-takes-all” contract, the contract costs some amount $p and pays
off, say, $1 if and only if a specific event occurs, like a particular candidate winning an
election. The price on a winner-take-all market represents the market’s expectation of the
probability that an event will occur (assuming risk neutrality).3

3
  The price of a winner-takes-all security is essentially a state price, which will equal an estimate of the
event’s probability under the assumption of risk neutrality. The sums wagered in prediction markets are
typically small enough that assuming that investors are not averse to the idiosyncratic risk involved seems
reasonable. But if the event in question is correlated with investors’ marginal utility of wealth, then
probabilities and state prices can differ. In what follows, we leave this issue aside and use the term
probability to refer to risk-neutral probability.


                                                   3
        Second, in an “index” contract, the amount that the contract pays varies in a
continuous way based on a number that rises or falls, like the percentage of the vote
received by a candidate. The price for such a contract represents the mean value that the
market assigns to the outcome.
        Finally, in “spread” betting traders differentiate themselves by bidding on the
cutoff that determines whether an event occurs, like whether a candidate receives more
than a certain percentage of the popular vote. (Another example of spread betting is
point-spread betting in football, where the bet is either that one team will win by at least a
certain number of points, or will not.) In spread betting, the price of the bet is fixed, but
the size of the spread can adjust. When spread betting is combined with an even-money
bet (that is, winners double their money while losers receive zero), the outcome can yield
the market’s expectation of the median outcome because this is only a fair bet if a payoff
is as likely to occur as not.
        The basic forms of these relevant contracts will reveal the market’s expectation of
a specific parameter: a probability, mean, or median, respectively. But in addition,
prediction markets can also be used to evaluate uncertainty about these expectations. For
instance, consider a family of winner-takes-all contracts that pay off if and only if the
candidate earns 48 percent of the vote, 49 percent, 50 percent and so on. This family of
winner-takes-all contracts will then reveal almost the entire probability distribution of the
market’s expectations. A family of spread betting contracts can yield similar insights. An
even-money bet in a spread contract will define the median, as explained above. But for
similar reasons, a contract that costs $4 and pays $5 if y>y* will elicit a value of y* that
the market believes to be a four-fifths probability, thus identifying the 80th percentile of
the distribution. As a final alternative, non-linear index contracts can also reveal more
information about the underlying distribution. For instance, consider a market with two
index contracts, one which pays in a standard linear form, and another that pays
according to the square of the index, y2. Market prices will reveal the market’s
expectation of E[y2] and E[y], which can be used to make an inference about the market’s
beliefs regarding the standard deviation of E[y], more commonly known as the standard
error. (Recall that the standard deviation can be expressed as √(E[y2]-E[y]2), or the
square root of the mean of the squares less the square of the means.) By the same logic,



                                             4
adding even more complicated index contracts can yield insight into higher order
moments of the distribution.


        Applications and Evidence
        Perhaps the best-known prediction market among economists is the Iowa
Electronic Market, run by the University of Iowa. The original Iowa experiment, run in
1988, allowed trade in a contract that would pay 2 ½ cents for each percentage point of
the popular vote in the presidential election won by Bush, Dukakis, or others. More
recently, it has run markets based on the 2003 California gubernatorial election, the 2004
presidential election, the 2004 Democratic presidential nomination, and how the Federal
Reserve will alter the federal funds interest rate. Universities in other countries have also
started running event markets about their own elections, like the Austrian Electronic
Market run by the Vienna University of Technology or the University of British
Columbia Election Stock Market that focuses on Canadian elections.
        There are a growing number of web-based event markets, often run by companies
that provide a range of trading and gambling services. Some prominent examples include
Tradesports.com and Betfair.com, as well as pseudo-markets (in which participants trade
virtual currency) such as Newsfutures.com and Ideosphere.com. These websites often
take the lead on defining a contract (as in the example of Poindexter’s departure from
DARPA described earlier), but then allow individuals to post their offers and to accept
the offers of others.
        More recently, Goldman Sachs and Deutsche Bank have launched markets on the
likely outcome of future readings of economic statistics, including employment, retail
sales, industrial production, and business confidence. The Chicago Mercantile Exchange
is planning to open a market in inflation futures. Some event markets also forecast
private-sector returns. The Hollywood Stock Exchange allows people to use virtual
currency to speculate on movie-related questions like opening-weekend performance,
total box office returns, and who will win Oscars. In several cases, private firms have
found innovative ways to use prediction markets as a business forecasting tool.
        Table 2 lists some of these prediction markets. Drawing on these and other
experiences with event markets, it is possible to start suggesting some generalizations



                                            5
about how prediction markets work, both in terms of their accuracy and whether arbitrage
or market manipulation is possible.


Table 2: Prediction Markets
Market                             Focus                                   Typical turnover on
                                                                           an event ($US)
Iowa Electronic Markets            Small-scale election markets.           Tens of thousands of
<www.biz.iowa.edu/iem>             Similar markets are run by: UBC         dollars
Run by University of Iowa          (Canada) <www.esm.buc.ca> and
                                                                           (Traders limited to
                                   TUW (Austria)
                                                                           $500 positions)
                                   <http://ebweb.tuwien.ac.at/apsm/>

TradeSports                        Trade in a rich set of political        Hundreds of
<www.tradesports.com>              futures, financial contracts, current   thousands of dollars
For profit company                 events, sports and entertainment

Economic Derivatives               Large-scale financial market trading    Hundreds of millions
<www.economicderivatives.com>      in the likely outcome of future         of dollars
Run by Goldman Sachs and           economic data releases
Deutsche Bank
Newsfutures                        Political, finance, current events      Virtual currency
<www.newsfutures.com>              and sports markets. Also                redeemable for
For profit company                 technology and pharmaceutical           monthly prizes (such
                                   futures for specific clients.           as a TV)

Foresight Exchange                 Political, finance, current events,     Virtual currency
<www.ideosphere.com>               science and technology events
Non-profit research group          suggested by clients.

Hollywood Stock Exchange           Success of movies, movie stars,         Virtual currency.
<www.hsx.com>                      awards, including a related set of
Owned by Cantor Fitzgerald         complex derivatives and futures.
                                   Data used for market research.


         Accuracy of Prediction Markets
         Arguably the most important issue with these markets is their performance as
predictive tools. In the political domain, Berg, Forsythe, Nelson, and Reitz (2001)
summarize the evidence from the Iowa Electronic Markets, documenting that the market
has both yielded very accurate predictions, and also outperformed large-scale polling
organizations.




                                           6
                 Figure 1 shows data from the past four U.S. presidential elections. The horizontal
axis shows the number of days before the election. The vertical axis measures the average
absolute deviation between the prices of index contracts linked to the two-party shares of
the popular vote for each party, and actual vote shares earned in the election. In the week
leading up to the election, these markets have predicted vote shares for the Democratic
and Republican candidates with an average absolute error of around 1½ percentage
points. By comparison, over the same four elections, the final Gallup poll yielded
forecasts that erred by 2.1 percentage points. The graph also shows how the accuracy of
the market prediction improves as information is revealed and absorbed as the election
draws closer.
                                                          Figure 1: Information Revelation Through Time

                                            Iowa Electronic Markets: Predictive Accuracy Through Time
                                                  Average absolute error in predicting two-party vote shares, 1988-2000
                                        6
      Average absolute forecast error




                                        4
             (Vote Share %)




                                        2




                                        0
                                            150               120                  90               60                     30   0
                                                                                   Days Until Election
                                            Source: Author's calculations based on data available at: www.biz.uiowa.edu/iem/



                 Perhaps more surprising in terms of how well prediction markets can aggregate
information is the performance of markets at the level of the individual district.
Typically districts are sufficiently small that there is little interest (or funding) for local
polling, yet when Australian bookmakers started betting on district-level races, Wolfers
and Leigh (2002) report that they were extremely accurate.



                                                                                      7
       That said, comparing the performance of markets with a mechanistic application
of poll-based forecasting may not provide a particularly compelling comparison. A more
relevant starting point might be to compare the predictions of markets with those of
independent analysts. For an example along these lines, consider the “Saddam Security”,
which was a contract offered on TradeSports paying $100 if Saddam Hussein were
ousted from power by the end of June 2003.
       Figure 2 shows that the price of this contract moved in lockstep with two other
measures: expert opinion as shown by an expert journalist’s estimate of the probability of
the United States going to war with Iraq; and oil prices, an obvious barometer of political
strife in the Middle East.
                                                                                             Figure 2: The Saddam Security


                                                                                      Risk of War in Iraq
                                                                       Prediction markets, Expert opinion and Oil markets
                                                            100                                                                                                                                  40
           Probability of war / Probability Saddam ousted




                                                            80                                                                                                                                   35




                                                                                                                                                                                                       Oil Prices; $ US per barrel
                                                            60                                                                                                                                   30



                                                            40                                                                                                                                   25
                                                                                  Saddam Security: Price of contract paying $100 if Saddam is ousted by end June 2003
                                                                                  Saddameter: Expert assessment of the odds of war
                                                                                  Oil prices (WTI), right hand scale
                                                            20                                                                                                                                   20
                                                                   Oct 1,2002           Nov 1,2002          Dec 1,2002           Jan 1,2003           Feb 1,2003        Mar 1,2003
                                                                  Sources: Trade-by-trade Saddam Security data provided by Tradesports.com; Saddameter from Will Saletan's daily column in Slate.com




       In a corporate context, the Hollywood Stock Exchange predicts opening weekend
box office success, and Figure 3 shows that these predictions have been quite accurate.
Further, this market has been about as accurate at forecasting Oscar winners as an expert
panel (Pennock, Lawrence, Giles and Nielsen, 2003).




                                                                                                                 8
                                                                Figure 3: Predicting Movie Success

                                                                         Hollywood Stock Exchange
                                                             Market Forecasts of Opening Weekend Box Office Take

                                            100
                                             80
                                             60
          Actual Opening Take ($ million)



                                            40


                                            20


                                            10


                                             5
                                                                                                              Line of Best Fit
                                                                                                              Actual=Forecast
                                             2
                                                  2                 5            10           20           40      60   80 100
                                                                 HSX Market Price = Forecast Opening Take ($ million)
                                                  Data from 489 movies, 2000-2003. (www.hsx.com)



       Some firms have also begun to experiment with internal prediction markets. An
internal market at Hewlett-Packard produced more accurate forecasts of printer sales than
did the firm’s internal processes (Chen and Plott, 2002). Ortner (1998) described an
experiment at Siemens in which an internal market predicted that the firm would
definitely fail to deliver on a software project on time, even when traditional planning
tools suggested that the deadline could be met. While the Hollywood markets have
drawn many participants simply on the basis of their entertainment value, the HP and
Siemens experiences suggested that motivating employees to trade was a major
challenge. In each case, the firms ran real money exchanges, with only a relatively small
trading population (20-60 people), and subsidized participation in the market, by either
endowing traders with a portfolio or matching initial deposits. The predictive
performance of even these very thin markets was quite striking.
       In another recent prediction market, traders in “Economic Derivatives” predict the
likelihood that economic data released later in the week will take on specific values. The
traditional approach to aggregating forecasts is to simply take an average or a “consensus



                                                                                9
estimate” from a survey of 50 or so professional forecasters. We now have data from the
first year of operation of these markets.
        Table 3 analyzes these early outcomes, comparing average market and consensus
forecasts of three variables: total nonfarm payrolls data released by the Bureau of Labor
Statistics; retail trade data (excluding autos) released by the Bureau of the Census; and
business confidence as measured by the Institute for Supply Management’s survey of
manufacturing purchasing managers. The market-based predictions of these economic
indicators are always extremely close to the corresponding “consensus” forecast, and
hence the two estimates are highly correlated. There are no statistically (or
economically) meaningful differences in forecast performance – measured as either the
correlation with actual outcomes, or in terms of average absolute forecast errors. That
said, this early sample is sufficiently small that precise conclusions are difficult to draw.


Table 3: Predicting Economic Outcomes
Comparing Market-Aggregated Forecasts with Consensus Surveys
                                  Non-Farm          Retail Trade             ISM
                                    Payrolls         (ex Autos)       Manufacturing
                                                                        Purchasing
                                   (Monthly           (Monthly           Managers’
                                change, ‘000s)      change, %)              Index
Panel A: Correlations
Corr(Market, Consensus)               0.91              0.94                 0.95
Corr(Consensus, Actual)               0.26              0.70                 0.83
Corr(Market, Actual)                  0.22              0.73                 0.91
Panel B: Mean absolute error
Consensus                             71.1              0.45                 1.10
Market (empirical)                    72.2              0.46                 1.07
Market (implied expectation)          65.7              0.34                 1.58
Panel C: Standard deviation of forecast errors (Standard error of forecast)
Consensus                             99.2              0.55                 1.12
Market (empirical)                    97.3              0.58                 1.20
Market (implied expectation)          81.1              0.42                 1.96
Sample size                            16                12                   11
Notes: “Market” = market-implied mean forecast from <http://www.economicderivatives.com>
       “Consenus” = average of around 50 forecasters from <http://www.briefing.com>
       “Actual” = Preliminary estimates from original press releases (BLS, Census, ISM).


        Interestingly, these markets yield not just a point estimate for each economic
indicator, but involve a menu of ten to twenty winner-takes-all contracts as to whether the


                                             10
indicator will take on specific values. This family of contracts reveals an approximation
to the full probability distribution of market expectations. Consequently we can calculate
the level of uncertainty surrounding specific point estimates. That is, because the market
prices give weight to a range of outcomes beyond the central estimate, the weight given
to outcomes further from the central estimate yields estimates of uncertainty. One
measure of uncertainty is the expected absolute forecast error (although calculations
using standard deviation provide the same qualitative results). The market-based
assessments of uncertainty are shown in the last line of panel B. Comparing these
implied expectations with outcomes in the first two rows of panel B suggests that the
market-based assessments of uncertainty are of about the right magnitude. Finally, one
can compare the implied standard errors of the forecasts with the reported standard errors
of the statistics that the market is attempting to forecast. For instance, the Census Bureau
reports that the change in retail trade is estimated with a standard error of around 0.5
percent, while the standard error implied by the prediction market is 0.42 percent. Taken
literally, this suggests that the market believes that it is less uncertain about the Census
Bureau estimate than the Census Bureau is.4 Such results suggest either that the statistical
agencies’ errors are predictable, that their standard error estimates are (slightly) upwardly
biased, or that traders are overconfident.


         Possibilities for Arbitrage
         Prediction markets appear to present few opportunities for arbitrage. There are
several ways of looking for arbitrage opportunities: whether prices for similar contracts
can be arbitraged across different exchanges or different securities; whether predictable
patterns in the movement of the prices allow for arbitrage; and whether arbitrageurs
might be able to exploit predictable deviations from rationality.


4
  A similar comparison can be made for non-farm payrolls, although the inference is less direct. The BLS
estimates that their final estimate of the change in non-farm payrolls has a standard error of around 64,000,
while the preliminary estimate is more uncertain. The BLS has yet to estimate a standard error for their
preliminary estimates, but the root mean squared error of the preliminary estimate relative to the final
estimate is around 50,000. If the revision to the preliminary estimate and the subsequent error in the
revised estimate were uncorrelated, this would imply a standard error for the preliminary estimate of about
81,500. Comparing these numbers with the average standard error of the market forecast of 81,100 suggests
that the market is about as sure of the advance estimate as the BLS.



                                                  11
       Figure 4 shows the bid and ask prices on a contract that paid $100 if
Schwarzenegger was elected California’s governor in 2003, sampling data on bid and ask
prices from two online exchanges every four hours. While both sets of data show
substantial variation, they co-move very closely, and opportunities for arbitrage (when
the bid price on one exchange is higher than the ask on another), are virtually absent.
                                                        Figure 4: 2003 California Gubernatorial Election

                                                             Schwarzenegger to Become California Governor
                                                                                         2003 Recall Election

                                               80                  Tradesports
                                                                   World Sports Exchange
          Contract pays $100 if Arnold wins




                                               70
                 Bid and Ask Prices




                                               60


                                               50


                                               40


                                               30
                                              September 16                   September 23                    September 30       October 7
                                                    Source: Prices collected electronically every four hours by David Pennock



       The pricing of families of related securities tends to be internally consistent. For
example, Figure 5 shows the prices of several securities launched by Tradesports that
paid off if weapons of mass destruction were found in Iraq by May, June, July, or
September 2003. Their prices moved closely together in a way that suggests that the
prices of each contract digested similar information at close to the same time.




                                                                                       12
             Figure 5: Will Weapons of Mass Destruction be Discovered in Iraq?




       In most cases, the time series of prices in these markets does not appear to follow
a predictable path and simple betting strategies based on past prices appear to yield no
profit opportunities; for example, Leigh, Wolfers and Zitzewitz (2003) demonstrate this
point for the aforementioned Tradesports “Saddam Security”. However, there is also
some evidence that this small-scale market responded to news about Iraq with a slight lag
relative to deeper financial markets. Tetlock (2004) surveys a wide range of data from
Tradesports, finding that their financial contracts are largely priced efficiently.
       Prediction markets do seem to display some of the deviations from perfect
rationality that appear in other financial markets. There is substantial evidence from
psychology and economics suggesting that people tend to overvalue small probabilities
and undervalue near certainties. For example, there is a well-known “favorite-longshot
bias” in horse races (for example, discussed in this journal by Thaler and Ziemba, 1988),
in which bettors tend to overvalue extreme longshots and thus receive much lower returns



                                            13
for such bets, an effect which is offset by somewhat higher (albeit still negative) returns
for betting on favorites. The “volatility smile” in options refers to a related pattern in
financial markets (Bates, 1991; Rubenstein, 1994), which involves over-pricing of
strongly out-of-the-money options, and under-pricing of strongly in-the-money options
(relative to their future values or their ex-ante values from the Black-Scholes option
pricing formula).5 These experiences suggest that it is likely that prediction markets will
also perform poorly at predicting small probability events.
         A somewhat vivid example of this kind of miscalibration comes from financial
variables that trade on Tradesports. Table 4 reports the bid and ask prices in the
prediction market for a contract that will pay $100 if the Standard and Poor’s 500 index
finishes 2003 in a certain range. For comparison, one can look at the actual prices of
December S&P options traded on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange. We used the
method discussed in Leigh, Wolfers, and Zitzewitz (2003) to translate the financial
market prices into prices for a security comparable to the Tradesports contract.
Comparing Tradesports prices with the actual option prices in Chicago suggests that the
extremely unlikely (high and low) outcomes for the S&P 500 are relatively over-priced
on Tradesports. In fact, the price differences implied a (small) arbitrage opportunity that
persisted for most of summer 2003 and has reappeared in 2004. Similar patterns existed
for Tradesports securities on other financial variables like crude oil, gold prices, and
exchange rates. This finding is consistent with the longshot bias being more pronounced
on smaller-scale exchanges.




5
  Aït-Sahalia, Wang, and Yared (2001) argue that the conclusion of miscalibration is less clear cut in this
context because these prices may be driven by small likelihoods of extreme price changes.




                                                  14
Table 4: Price of Standard and Poor’s Future Price Securities
Tradesports vs. Actual Prices from the Chicago Mercantile Exchange
                                      Price on Tradesports
                                                                 Estimated price
                                                                   from actual
S&P level at end of 2003              Bid             Ask        December S&P
                                                                     options
1200 and over                          2                6              2.5
1100 to 1199                          11               16             13.2
1000 to 1099                          28               33             33.3
900 to 999                            25               30             30.5
800 to 899                            14               19              13
700 to 799                             3               8                5
600 to 699                             4               7                2
Under 600                              5                8               1
S&P level on July 23, 2003                             985
Notes: Prices are market close, July 23, 2003. Prices given in first two columns are for a security that
pays $100 if S&P finishes 2003 in given range. Prices in third column are estimated from actual option
settlement prices using the method in Leigh, Wolfers, and Zitzewitz (2003), adjusting for the 13 day
difference in expiry date.


         Another behavioral bias reflects the tendency of market participants to trade
according to their desires, rather than their objective probability assessments. Strumpf
(2004) provides evidence that certain New York gamblers are more likely to bet on the
Yankees, while Forsythe, Reitz and Ross (1999) provide evidence that individual traders
buy and sell in political markets in a manner correlated with their party identification.
Even so, as long as marginal trades are motivated by profits rather than partisanship,
prices will reflect the assessments of (unbiased) profit motive. Thus far there is little
evidence that these factors yield systematic unexploited profits. (For instance,
systematically betting either for or against the New York Yankees during the 1990s
would have yielded losses in either case.)
         A further possible limitation of prediction market pricing arises if speculative
bubbles drive prices away from their likely outcomes. Traditional markets may be
subject to bubbles because of constraints on short selling and because investors will be
reluctant to commit a large share of their wealth to an arbitrage opportunity, since if the
mispricing does exist, it may get worse before it gets better (Shleifer and Vishny, 1997).
Since prediction markets typically impose no restrictions on short selling, and the
markets are sufficiently small-scale that it is unlikely that informed investors will be


                                                  15
capital-constrained, the scope for bubbles might be more limited. It is almost impossible
to make any serious attempt at describing the frequency of bubbles in the data we have so
far. However, through September 2003 we suspected a bubble in the Tradesports
security on whether Hillary Clinton would win the Democratic nomination. Our
suspicions were based on her public statements that she was not a candidate, and the
tenor of discussion among traders, which seemed to indicate that trading was being
driven by expectations of future price movements rather than by fundamentals. Equally,
these high prices may have reflected betting from those with access to campaign insiders
who knew more about her state of mind than we did.
        Empirically, the best that we can say is that the performance of past markets at
predicting the future has been, on average, pretty good, whether or not specific markets
were in some cases distorted by biases or bubbles. Laboratory experiments hold out the
possibility of learning more about bubbles, as it is possible for the experimenter to know
the “true price,” and hence to observe deviations. Plott and Sunder (1982 and 1988) have
set up extremely stylized examples in which bubble-like behavior occurs in simple
prediction markets. At the same time, bubbles in experimental markets often burst and
give way to more rational pricing.


        Can Event Markets Be Easily Manipulated?
        The profit motive has usually proven sufficient to ensure that attempts at
manipulating these markets were unsuccessful. There have been several known attempts
at manipulation of these markets, but none of them had much of a discernible effect on
prices, except during a short transition phase.6 For example, Wolfers and Leigh (2002)
report candidates betting on themselves at long odds to create a “buzz”, while
Strumpf (2004) placed random $500 bets on the Iowa Electronic Markets to trace their
effect. In a similar vein, Camerer (1998) attempted with little effect to manipulate betting
on horse races by canceling large wagers at the last moment. Clearly the extent to which
markets are manipulable depends – at least in part – on how thin the markets are.



6
 Rhode and Strumpf document that attempts at manipulation in early twentieth century political markets
were typically unsuccessful.


                                                16
        It was feared that the DARPA markets would create the opportunity for a terrorist
to profit from an act of terrorism or an assassination. This concern may have been
misplaced, both because the proposed markets were unlikely to have included terrorism
or assassination contracts in the first place, and because the small scale of these markets
means that terrorists would not have been able to earn much relative to the presumed
going rate for an assassination. An alternative view holds that such trade is actually a
good thing to the extent that trading ultimately reveals previously secret information
about the intentions of terrorist groups. That said, if terrorists are sophisticated enough to
place bets in futures markets, surely they can do so with standard futures contracts on oil
prices, by selling short stock in insurance companies or the entire stock market, and the
like. Indeed, rumors have circulated widely that there was unusual trading in options on
United and American Airlines stock in the week prior to the attacks of September 11,
2001. A careful analysis by Poteshman (2004) found little evidence to support these
rumors, suggesting that if terrorists did profit from their actions, they neither left a
noticeable footprint nor needed a prediction market to do so.


3. Market Design

        The success of prediction markets, like any market, can depend on their design
and implementation. Some of the key design issues include how buyers are matched to
sellers, the specification of the contract, whether real money is used, and whether a
diversity of information exists in a way that provides a basis for trading. We consider
these in turn.
        In most prediction markets, the mechanism that matches buyers to sellers is a
continuous double-auction, with buyers submitting bids and sellers submitting asking
prices, and with the mechanism executing a trade whenever the two sides of the market
reach a mutually agreeable price. However, the new prediction markets in
announcements of economic statistics operate more like the parimutuel systems that are
common in horse-race betting. In a parimutuel system, all of the money that is bet goes
into a common pot and is then divided among the winners (after subtracting transaction
costs). Many prediction markets are also augmented by market makers who announce
willingness to buy and sell at a certain range of prices; similarly, most sports bets are


                                            17
placed with bookmakers who post prices. Finally, while these mechanisms are relatively
useful for simple markets, Hanson (2003) has proposed the use of market scoring rules to
allow for simultaneous predictions over many combinations of outcomes. Instead of
requiring separate markets for each combination of possible outcomes, traders effectively
bet that the sum of their errors over all predictions will be lower.
       For a prediction market to work well, contracts must be clear, easily understood,
and easily adjudicated. For example, we don’t see contracts like “Weapons of Mass
Destruction are not in Iraq,” but rather contracts specifying whether such weapons will
have been found by a certain date. This requirement for clarity can sometimes turn out to
be complex. In the 1994 U.S. Senate elections, the Iowa markets proposed what looked to
be a well-specified market, with contracts paying according to the number of seats won
by each party. The day after the election (and while votes were still being counted in
some jurisdictions), Senator Richard Shelby (D-Alabama) switched sides to become a
Republican. As another example, in the course of Ortner’s (1998) internal prediction
market on whether a software project would be delivered to the client on schedule, the
client changed the deadline.
       One intriguing question is how much difference it makes whether prediction
markets are run with real money or with some form of play-money. Legal restrictions on
gambling have led some groups like NewsFutures.com to adopt play-money exchanges,
with those who amass the largest play-fortunes eligible for prizes. Prices on play and
real-money exchanges are not linked by arbitrage: in August 2003, for example,
George W. Bush was a 67 percent favorite to win reelection on real-money exchanges,
but was a 50-50 bet on NewsFutures. However, we do not yet have sufficient
comparative data to know the extent to which money makes predictions more accurate.
Indeed, it has been argued that the play-money exchanges may even outperform real-
money exchanges because “wealth” can only be accumulated through a history of
accurate prediction. In a suggestive experiment, Servan-Schreiber, Wolfers, Pennock and
Galebach (2004) compared the predictive power of the prices from real-money and play-
money exchanges over the 2003 NFL football season, finding that both yielded
predictions that were approximately equally accurate. Interestingly, both sets of prices
also outperformed all but a dozen of 3,000 people in an online contest, and also easily



                                            18
outperformed the average assessments of these “experts.” One practical advantage of
play money contracts is that they offer more freedom to experiment with different kinds
of contracts. On play-money exchanges, such as Foresight Exchange, one often sees quite
loosely worded “contracts” such as that a “scientific study will conclude that astrology is
a statistically significant predictive method to describe an individual’s personality traits.”
        Even well-designed markets will fail unless a motivation to trade exists.7 Most
prediction markets are not large enough to allow hedging against specific risks.
However, the play-money exchanges and sports gambling industry both suggest that it
may be possible to motivate (small-scale) trading simply through the thrill of pitting
one’s judgment against others, and being able to win a monetary prize may sharpen this
motivation. Trade also requires some disagreement about likely outcomes. Disagreement
is unlikely among fully rational traders with common priors. It is more likely to occur
when traders are overconfident in the quality of their private information or in their
ability to process public information or when they have priors that are sufficiently
different to allow them to agree to disagree.
        These insights suggest that some prediction markets will work better when they
concern events that are widely discussed, since trading on such events will have higher
entertainment value and there will be more information on whose interpretation traders
can disagree. Ambiguous public information may be better in motivating trade than
private information, especially if the private information is concentrated, since a cadre of
highly informed traders can easily drive out the partly informed, repressing trade to the
point that the market barely exists. Indeed, attempts to set up markets on topics where
there are insiders with substantial information advantages have typically failed. For
instance, the Tradesports contracts on the next Supreme Court retirement or the future of
the papacy have generated very little trade despite the inherent interest in these questions.
Trade can also be subsidized either directly, or indirectly by adding noise trades into the
market, which provides the potential to profit from trading.
        Finally, the power of prediction markets derives from the fact that they provide
incentives for truthful revelation, they provide incentives for research and information


7
  The inflation futures market on the Coffee, Sugar, and Cocoa Exchange is a case in point; this market
generated little volume, ultimately failing.


                                                 19
discovery, and the market provides an algorithm for aggregating opinions. As such,
these markets are unlikely to perform well when there is little useful intelligence to
aggregate, or when public information is selective, inaccurate, or misleading. Further,
the weights that markets give to different opinions may not be an improvement on
alternative algorithms where the accuracy of pundits is directly observable. For example,
the public information on the probability of weapons of mass destruction in Iraq appears
to have been of dubious quality, so it is perhaps unsurprising that both the markets were
as susceptible as general public opinion to being misled.


4. Making Inferences from Prediction Markets


       How might economists use the results from prediction markets in subsequent
analysis? The most direct form of inference involves using these predictions directly. For
instance, in their experiments at Hewlett-Packard, Chen and Plott (2002) elicited
expectations of future printer sales, which were of direct interest for internal planning
purposes.
       Some analyses have tried to link the time series of expectations elicited in
prediction markets with time series of other variables. For instance, in Leigh, Wolfers,
and Zitzewitz (2003), we interpreted movements in the Saddam Security as an index for
the risk of war, and interpreted the comovement with the oil price shown in Figure 2 as a
causal relationship, concluding that war led to a $10 per barrel increase in oil prices. A
similar analysis suggested that equity prices had built in a 15 percent war discount.
Applying a similar methodology, Slemrod and Greimel (1999) linked the price of a Steve
Forbes security in the 1996 Republican primary market with a rising interest rate
premium on municipal bond prices because Forbes’s signature issue was a “flat tax” that
would have eliminated the tax exemption for municipal bond interest. As with any
regression context, one must be cautious before inferring that these correlations reflect
causation, and must consider the issues of reverse causation, omitted variables, statistical
significance, functional form, and the like.
       It seems quite possible to design prediction market contracts so that they would
bring out the connection between an event and other variables. For instance, in 2002 we



                                           20
could have floated two securities, one paying $P if Saddam were ousted in a year (where
P is the future oil price), with the purchase price refunded otherwise, and another that
paid $P if Saddam remains in power, again refunding the purchase price. The difference
in the equilibrium price of these two securities can be interpreted as the market’s
expectation of the effect of ousting Saddam on oil prices. This inference does not require
researchers to wait until sufficient variation in the political situation has accrued for a
regression to be estimated. Moreover, changes in the market’s beliefs about how ousting
Saddam would affect oil prices can be directly measured through such a conditional
market.
        Very few of these contingent markets have been constructed, though this year’s
Iowa Electronic Market on the 2004 presidential election is instructive. Table 5 shows
the prices of a series of contracts which are standard index contracts that pay a penny for
each percentage of the two-party popular vote won by each party, but are contingent in
that the contract pays out only if the democratic nominee is also successfully predicted.
These contracts pay nothing if the nominee is not correctly predicted.


Table 5: Contingent Markets: 2004 Presidential Election
Contracts pay according to Vote Share, Conditional on the Democratic Nominee

 Contract pays         Democratic              Republican            Implied Prob.        Expected
 conditional on       Candidate Vote            Vote Share               this             Share of
 specific                 Share                against this           Candidate           Popular
 Democratic                                     Candidate              wins the            Vote if
 Candidate           (Contract price, $)     (Contract price, $)      Nomination         Nominated

                              A                         B                C=A+B              D=A/C
 John Kerry                 $0.344                   $0.342               68.6%              50.1%
 John Edwards               $0.082                   $0.066               14.8%              55.4%
 Howard Dean                $0.040                   $0.047                8.7%              46.0%
 Wesley Clark               $0.021                   $0.025                4.6%              45.7%
 Other Dems                 $0.015                   $0.017                3.2%              46.9%
Notes: Columns A and B show the prices of contracts that pay a penny for each percentage of the two-party
popular vote won by Democrats or Republicans respectively, conditional on picking the winner of the
Democratic nomination. (Contracts pay $0 if the selected candidate does not win the Democratic
nomination.)
Source: Closing prices as of January 29, 2004, Iowa electronic markets.


        Because the Democratic and Republican shares of the two-party vote must sum to
one, a portfolio containing contracts tied to both the Democratic and Republican vote


                                                21
shares, but conditional on Kerry winning the nomination, will definitely pay $1 if Kerry
wins the primary, and $0 otherwise. Implicitly then, this market embeds a winner-takes-
all market on the Democratic primary race, and adding the prices shown in columns A
and B yields the prices of these synthetic securities that represent the probability that any
specific candidate wins the Democratic nomination (shown in column C). The final
column calculates the implied expected vote share for each candidate, if that candidate
were to win the nomination, by deflating the cost of the Democratic vote share contract
conditional on that candidate by the probability of that candidate actually winning the
nomination. Hanson (1999) has called these contingent markets “decision markets”,
arguing that these expectations should be used to guide decision-making. As such,
delegates to the Democratic convention interested in selecting the strongest candidate
would simply compare the ratios in the final column and accordingly vote for John
Edwards. Berg and Reitz (2003) make a related argument using data from the 1996
Republican nomination race.
       While we are optimistic that these data on contingent prediction markets can be
used to inform decision-making, some care is required. In making statements about the
comovement of two variables, social scientists have long struggled to distinguish
correlation from causation, and these decision markets do not resolve this issue.
       One could imagine that traders hold a frequentist view of probability and that they
price the securities in Table 5 by simply inventing hundreds of possible scenarios, and
prices simply reflect average outcomes across these scenarios. An econometrician
running regressions based on these hundreds of scenarios would note a robust correlation
between Edwards winning the nomination and the Democrats winning the presidency.
But a careful econometrician would be reluctant to infer causation, noting that there are
important “selection effects” at play, as the scenarios in which Edwards wins the
nomination are not random. For example, the markets may believe that Edwards will not
win the nomination unless Southern Democrats become energized, but if this does
happen, it is likely that Edwards will win both the nomination and the presidency.
Alternatively, with Kerry viewed as the likely nominee, Edwards may be perceived as a
possible nominee only if he shows himself to be a politician of extraordinary ability,
overcoming Kerry’s early lead in the delegate count. If so, it also seems likely that a



                                           22
candidate of such extraordinary ability would win the general election. Or Edwards
might be perceived as thin-skinned, and likely to drop out of the race if it appears that the
Democratic party is unlikely to win the White House. As such, the relatively high price
of the Edwards-Democratic security may reflect either something about Edwards’ ability
or the selection effects that lead him to win the nomination.
         Just as econometricians often deal with selection effects by adding another
equation that explicitly models the selection process, there is a prediction market analogy
- floating another contract that prices the variables driving the selection of Democratic
candidates. For example, adding a contract that pays off if a candidate drops out of the
nomination race early would allow an assessment of the extent to which prices of
contingent contracts are being driven by that specific selection mechanism, thereby
yielding a more accurate indication of candidate ability. But since many key traits of
candidates may be unobservable or difficult to capture in a contract that would attract
trading, it may be impossible to rely fully on contingent markets to guide voters to the
candidate with the greatest vote-winning potential.8
         These relatively simple contingent markets, as well as more complex
combinatorial markets, are as yet virtually untested and remain a useful focus for further
research. There may be important and interesting applications in domains where
selection problems are minimal.


5. Innovative Future Applications?

         Prediction markets are extremely useful for estimating the market’s expectation of
certain moments. Simple market designs can elicit expected means or probabilities, more
complex markets can elicit variances, and contingent markets can be used to elicit the
market’s expectations of covariances and correlations, though as with any estimation
context, further identifying assumptions are required before a causal interpretation can be
made. The research agenda on these markets has reflected an interplay between theory,
experiments, and field research, drawing on scholars from economics, finance, political


8
 Furthermore, it is worth noting that the incentives to manipulate a contract rise with its use in decision
making, and the apparent failure of past manipulation attempts mentioned above do not guarantee that it
would fail in this context.


                                                   23
science, psychology, and computer science. This research program has established that
prediction markets provide three important roles: 1) incentives to seek information;
2) incentives for truthful information revelation; and 3) an algorithm for aggregating
diverse opinions. Current research is only starting to disentangle the extent to which the
remarkable predictive power of markets derives from each of these forces.
       Prediction markets doubtlessly have their limitations, but they may be useful as a
supplement to the other relatively primitive mechanisms for predicting the future like
opinion surveys, politically appointed panels of experts, hiring consultants, or holding
committee meetings. We are already seeing increasing interest in these markets in the
private sector, with the experiments at Hewlett-Packard now being supplemented with
new markets on pharmaceuticals and the likely success of future technologies on
NewsFutures.
       DARPA’s ill-fated attempt at establishing a Policy Analysis Market ultimately
failed. However, it seems likely that private-sector firms will continue to innovate and to
create new prediction markets, so policymakers will still be able to turn to prediction
markets run by firms like Tradesports, Net Exchange, Incentive Markets and
NewsFutures. It may be a sensible political outcome to have these event markets run by
publicly-regulated, private-sector firms. Nonetheless, to the extent that the valuable
information generated by trade in these markets is not fully internalized into the profits
earned by these private firms, prediction markets may be underprovided.




                                           24
6. References


Aït-Sahalia, Yacine, Yubo Wang, and Francis Yared (2001), “Do Options Markets
Correctly Price the Probabilities of Movement of the Underlying Asset?” Journal of
Econometrics, 102, 67-110.

Athanasoulis, Stefano, Robert Shiller, and Eric van Wincoop (1999), “Macro markets and
financial security,” Economic Policy Review, 21-39.

Bates, David (1991) “The Crash of ’87: Was It Expected? The Evidence from Options
Markets,” Journal of Finance 46(3), 1009-44.

Berg, Joyce and Thomas Rietz (2003), “Prediction Markets as Decision Support
Systems”, Information Systems Frontiers, 5(1).

Berg, Joyce, Robert Forsythe, Forrest Nelson and Thomas Rietz (2001) “Results from a
Dozen Years of Election Futures Markets Research,” forthcoming in Charles Plott and
Vernon Smith (Eds) Handbook of Experimental Economic Results.

Chen, Kay-Yut and Charles Plott (2002), “Information Aggregation Mechanisms:
Concept, Design and Field Implementation for a Sales Forecasting Problem.”

Camerer, Colin (1998), “Can Asset Markets be Manipulated? A Field Experiment with
Racetrack Betting,” Journal of Political Economy 106(3).

Forsythe, Robert, Thomas Rietz and Thomas Ross (1999), “Wishes, Expectations and
Actions: Price Formation in Election Stock Markets,” Journal of Economic Behavior and
Organization, 39, 83-110.

Hanson, Robin (1999) “Decision Markets,” IEEE Intelligent Systems, 14(3), 16-19.

Hanson, Robin (2003) “Combinatorial Information Market Design,” Information Systems
Frontiers, 5(1), 105-119.

Heckman, James J. (1979) “Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error,”
Econometrica 47(1), 153-61.

Leigh, Andrew, Justin Wolfers and Eric Zitzewitz (2003), “What do Financial Markets
Think of War in Iraq?”, NBER Working Paper 9587.

Leigh, Andrew and Justin Wolfers (2002), “Three Tools for Forecasting Federal
Elections: Lessons from 2001”, Australian Journal of Political Science 37(2).

Looney, Robert (2003), “DARPA’s Policy Analysis Market for Intelligence: Outside the
Box or Off the Wall”, Strategic Insights, Vol. II Issue 9, September 2003.



                                        25
Ortner, Gerhard (1998), “Forecasting Markets – An Industrial Application”, mimeo,
Technical University of Vienna.

Pennock, David, Steve Lawrence, C. Lee Giles, and Finn Arup Nielsen (2001), “The Real
Power of Artifical Markets,” Science, 291, 987-988.

Plott, Charles and Shyam Sunder, (1982), “Efficiency of experimental security markets
with insider information: An application of rational-expectations models,” Journal of
Political Economy, 90(4), 663-98.

Plott, Charles and Shyam Sunder, (1988), “Rational Expectations and The Aggregation of
Diverse information in Laboratory Security Markets,” Econometrica, 56, 1085-1118.

Poteshman, Allen (2004), “Unusual Option Market Activity and the Terrorist Attacks of
September 11, 2001”, mimeo, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
Rubenstein, Mark (1994), “Implied Binomial Trees,” Journal of Finance, 49, 771-818.
Rhode, Paul and Koleman Strumpf (2004), “Historical Presidential Betting Markets”,
Journal of Economic Perspectives, Spring 2004.

Servan-Schreiber, Emile, Justin Wolfers, David Pennock and Brian Galebach (2004),
“Prediction Markets: Does Money Matter?”, Electronic Markets 14:3, Fall 2004.

Shiller, Robert (2003), The New Financial Order: Risk in the Twenty-first Century,
Princeton University Press: Princeton, NJ.

Shleifer, Andrei and Robert Vishny (1997), “The Limits of Arbitrage,” Journal of
Finance 52(1), 35-55.

Slemrod, Joel and Timoth Greimel (1999), “Did Steve Forbes Scare the Municipal Bond
Market?”, Journal of Public Economics, 74(1), 81-96.

Spann, Martin and Bernd Skiera (2003), “Internet-Based Virtual Stock Markets for
Business Forecasting”, Management Science, 49, 1310-1326.

Strumpf, Koleman (2004), "Manipulating the Iowa Political Stock Market", mimeo,
University of North Carolina.

Tetlock, Paul (2004), “How Efficient are Information Markets? Evidence from an Online
Exchange”, mimeo, Harvard University.

Thaler, Richard H., and William T. Ziemba. 1988. “Anomalies: Parimutuel Betting
Markets: Racetracks and Lotteries,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 2, No. 2.
Spring, pp. 161-174.




                                         26
