                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    HOW MUCH DOES HOUSEHOLD COLLATERAL CONSTRAIN REGIONAL RISK
                            SHARING?

                                            Hanno Lustig
                                      Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh

                                        Working Paper 10505
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w10505


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2004




© 2004 by Hanno Lustig and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
How Much Does Household Collateral Constrain Regional Risk Sharing?
Hanno Lustig and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
NBER Working Paper No. 10505
May 2004, Revised July 2008
JEL No. E2

                                           ABSTRACT

We construct a new data set of consumption and income data for the largest US metropolitan areas,
and we show that the covariance of regional consumption and income growth varies over time and
in the cross-section. In times and regions where collateral is scarce, regional consumption growth
is about twice as sensitive to income growth. Household-level borrowing frictions can explain this
new stylized fact. When the value of housing relative to human wealth falls, loan collateral shrinks,
borrowing (risk-sharing) declines, and the sensitivity of consumption to income increases. Our model
aggregates heterogeneous, borrowing-constrained households into regions characterized by a common
housing market. The resulting regional consumption patterns quantitatively match those in the data.


Hanno Lustig
UCLA Anderson School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C413
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
hlustig@anderson.ucla.edu

Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 W 4th Street, Suite 9-120
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
svnieuwe@stern.nyu.edu
1     Introduction
On average, US metropolitan areas share only a modest fraction of region-specific income risk. But
this fraction varies substantially over time. The dashed line in Figure 1 plots the ratio of the regional
cross-sectional consumption to income dispersion, a standard measure of risk sharing. This measure
fell by half between 1978 and 1988, while it doubled between 1988 and 1995 before falling back
to its 1988 level in 2002. This stylized fact presents a new challenge to standard models, because
it reveals that the departures from complete market allocations fluctuate over time. Conditioning
on a measure of housing collateral helps to understand this aspect of consumption in the data.
Our empirical measure of housing collateral scarcity broadly tracks the variation in this regional
consumption-to-income dispersion ratio. It is close to its highest level in 1978, falls by half between
1978 and 1988, increases again until 1996, and falls back to its 1988 level in 2002. According to
our estimates, the fraction of regional income risk that is traded away, more than doubles when we
compare the lowest to the highest collateral scarcity period in postwar US data.

                                        [Figure 1 about here.]

    A second, and related stylized fact is the quantity anomaly: the dispersion of regional con-
sumption exceeds the dispersion of regional income. This quantity anomaly has previously been
documented in international (e.g. Backus, Kehoe and Kydland (1992), and Lewis (1996)) and in
state-level data (e.g. Atkeson and Bayoumi (1993), Hess and Shin (2000) and Crucini (1999)).
    We propose an equilibrium model of household risk sharing that produces the time-variation
in regional risk sharing as well as the quantity anomaly. The model adds a regional dimension to
the model of Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh (2005), a crucial extension to generate the quantity
anomaly. Within each region, households face a stochastic income process that has a household-
specific and a region-specific component. What prevents perfect consumption insurance is that
households can share income risk only to the extent that borrowing is collateralized by housing
wealth. Human wealth is not collateralizable. The key ingredient for replicating the quantity anomaly
is that borrowing constraints operate at the household level. Such constraints are much tighter than
the constraints that would be faced by a stand-in agent at the regional level. Because there is some
intra-regional risk-sharing, household consumption, as a share of regional consumption, is potentially
less negatively correlated than household income within a region. Aggregation to the regional
level produces inter-regional consumption dispersion that exceeds regional income dispersion, at
least when housing collateral is not too abundant. The key ingredient for replicating the time-
variation is variation in the value of housing collateral. Variation in the housing supply and the
equilibrium house price shift the effectiveness of the household risk sharing technology over time.
A reduction in the value of housing collateral tightens the household collateral constraints, causing

                                                   1
regional consumption growth to respond more to regional income shocks. The ratio of income-to-
consumption dispersion increases as collateral becomes scarcer.
    The null hypothesis of perfect insurance is usually tested by projecting regional consumption
growth on income growth. The collateral effect in our model introduces an interaction term of
region-specific income growth with housing collateral. According to the theory, the sign on this
interaction term should be negative. When collateral is scarce, a shock to region-specific income
leads to a larger change in region-specific consumption. We run this linear regression on actual
data and on data generated by our calibrated model. In the actual data, the sign on the interaction
term is indeed negative. The housing collateral effect is economically significant. Housing collateral
scarcity in the 95th percentile of the empirical distribution is associated with 42% of region-specific
income shocks being shared, while collateral scarcity in the 5th percentile level corresponds to regions
sharing 86% of income risk. The same regression on model-generated data for consumption and
income replicates these results. The advantage of this risk-sharing test, based on the interaction
effect of the collateral measure and income growth, is that is more specific than the standard
regression, and the appropriate test for our collateral model. There is evidence from the cross-
section as well. The income elasticity of consumption growth doubles in the quartile of regions with
the least collateral, compared to those regions in the highest quartile.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 sets up the model, characterizes
equilibrium allocations and prices, calibrates, and computes it. Section 3 describes the data and
compares the results from the linear consumption growth regressions in the model and in the data.
Section 4 presents additional evidence for the housing collateral mechanism. We find similar results
for Canadian provinces and find that there is also a positive relationship between the degree of risk
sharing and regional measures of collateral. Section 5 concludes.



2     A Theory of Time-Varying Risk Sharing

In this section we provide a model that replicates two key features of the observed regional consump-
tion and income distribution. First, the average ratio of the cross-sectional consumption dispersion
to income dispersion is larger than one, i.e. the quantity anomaly. Second, this ratio increases as
collateral becomes scarcer.
    The model is a dynamic general equilibrium model that approximates the modest frictions in-
hibiting perfect risk-sharing in advanced economies like the US. The model is based on two ideas:
that debts can only be enforced to the extent that they can be collateralized, and that the primary
source of collateral is housing. Our emphasis on housing, rather than financial assets, reflects three
features of the US economy: the participation rate in housing markets is very high (2/3 of house-

                                                   2
holds own their home), the value of the residential real estate makes up over seventy-five percent
of total assets for the median household (Survey of Consumer Finances, 2001), and housing is a
prime source of collateral.
   We relax the assumption in the Lucas (1978) endowment economy that contracts are perfectly
enforceable, following Alvarez and Jermann (2000), and allow households to file for bankruptcy,
following Lustig and Chien (2007). Each household owns part of the housing stock. Housing
provides both utility services and collateral services. When a household chooses not to honor its
debt repayments, it loses all housing collateral but its labor income is protected from creditors.
Defaulting households regain immediate access to credit markets. The lack of commitment gives
rise to collateral constraints whose tightness depends on the relative abundance of housing collateral.
As a result, the effectiveness of the household risk sharing technology endogenously varies over time
due to movements in the value of housing collateral.1
   The section starts with a description of the environment in 2.1 and market structure in 2.2. We
then provide a characterization of equilibrium allocations in section 2.3. The model gives rise to
a simple, non-linear risk-sharing rule. The model has two levels of heterogeneity: households and
regions. The key friction, collateralized borrowing, operates at the household level. We construct
regional consumption and income by aggregating across households in a region. We show in 2.4 that
the household collateral constraints give rise to tighter constraints at the regional level than those
that would arise if there was a representative agent in each region. Section 2.5 calibrates the model
and section 2.6 explains the computational procedure. Section 2.7 simulates the model. It shows
that the aggregation from the household to the regional level generates the quantity anomaly at the
regional level. In the next section, we use the same simulated data to estimate linear consumption
growth regressions at the regional level.


2.1    Uncertainty, Preferences and Endowments
We consider an economy with a continuum of regions. There are two types of infinitely lived
households in each of these regions, and households cannot move between regions.


Uncertainty     There are three layers of uncertainty: an event s consists of x , y , and z . We use s t
to denote the history of events s t = (x t , y t , z t ), where x t ∈ X t denotes the history of household
events, y t ∈ Y t denotes the history of regional events and z t ∈ Z t denotes the history of aggregate
events. π(s t |s0 ) denotes the probability of history s t , conditional on observing s0 .
   The household-level event x is first-order Markov, and the x shocks are independently and
   1
    Ortalo-Magne and Rady (2002), Ortalo-Magne and Rady (2006) and Pavan (2005) have also developed models
that deliver this feature.

                                                     3
identically (henceforth i.i.d.) distributed across regions. In our calibration below, x takes on one of
two values, high (hi) or low (lo). When x = hi, the first household in that region is in the high
state, and, the second household is in the low state. When x = lo, the first household is in the
low state. The region-level event y is also first-order Markov and it is i.i.d. across regions. We will
appeal to a law of large numbers (LLN) when integrating across households in different regions.2


Preferences   The households j in each region i rank consumption plans consisting of (non-durable)
                                                        
non-housing consumption ctij (s t ) and housing services htij (s t ) according to the objective func-
tion in equation (1).
                                             ∞
                                            XX
                               U(c, h) =                    β t π(s t |s 0 )u(ct (s t ), ht (s t )),            (1)
                                           s t |s 0   t=0

where β is the time discount factor, common to all regions. The households have power utility over
a CES-composite consumption good:

                                                  1 h ε−1   ε−1
                                                                i (1−γ)ε
                                                                    ε−1
                                   u(ct , ht ) =     ct + ψht
                                                       ε      ε
                                                                         ,
                                                 1−γ

The preference parameter ψ > 0 converts the housing stock into a service flow, γ is the coefficient
of relative risk aversion, and ε is the intra-temporal elasticity of substitution between non-durable
and housing services consumption.3


Endowments      Each of the households, indexed by j, in a region, indexed by i, is endowed with a
                               
claim to a labor income stream ηtij (xt , yt , z t ) . The aggregate non-housing endowment {ηta (z t )}
is the sum of the household endowments in all regions:
                                                            X
                                         ηta (z t ) =             πz (yt )ηti (yt , z t )
                                                             yt


where πz (yt ) denotes the fraction of regions that draws aggregate state z . Likewise, the regional
                         
non-housing endowment ηti (yt , z t ) is the sum of the individual endowments of the households in
that region:
                                                                  X
                                        ηti (yt , z t ) =             ηtij (xt , yt , z t ).
                                                              j=1,2

The left hand side does not depend on xt , because the two household endowments always sum to
the regional endowment, regardless of whether the first household is in the high or the low state.
   2
     The usual caveat applies when applying the LLN; we implicitly assume the technical conditions outlined by Uhlig
(1996) are satisfied.
   3
     These preferences belong to the class of homothetic power utility functions of Eichenbaum and Hansen (1990).
The special case of separability corresponds to γε = 1.

                                                                  4
    Each region i receives a share of the aggregate non-housing endowment denoted by η̂ti (yt , zt ) ≫
                                                                                                                 ηti (yt ,z t )
0. Thus, regional income shares are defined as in the empirical section: η̂ti (yt , zt ) =                        ηta (z t ) .
Household j’s labor endowment share in region i, measured as a fraction of the regional endowment
share, is denoted η̂ˆtj (xt ) ≫ 0. The shares add up to one within each region: η̂ˆt1 (xt ) + η̂ˆt2 (xt ) = 1.
The level of the labor endowment of household j in region i can be written as:

                                       ηtij (xt , yt , z t ) = η̂ˆtj (xt )η̂ti (yt , zt )ηta (z t ).

    In addition, each region is endowed with a stochastic stream of non-negative housing services
χit (y t , z t ) ≫ 0. In contrast to non-housing consumption, the housing services cannot be transported
across regions. We will come back to the assumptions we make on χi at the end of section 2.3.
So far, we have made the following assumptions about the endowment processes:


Assumption 1. The household-specific labor endowment share η̂ˆj only depends on xt . The regional
income share η̂ti only depends on (yt , zt ). The events (x , y , z ) follow a first-order Markov process.



2.2       Trading

We set up an Arrow-Debreu economy where all trade takes place at time zero, after observing the
initial state s0 .4 We denote the present discounted value of any endowment stream {d} after a
                                             P        P∞
history s t as Πs t [{dτ (s τ )}], defined by s τ |s t τ =t [pτ (s τ |s t ) dτ (s τ |s t )], where pt (s t ) denotes the
Arrow-Debreu price of a unit of non-housing consumption in history s t .
    Households in each region purchase a complete, state-contingent consumption plan
                                                 ij ij t                             ∞
                                                 ct (θ0 , s ), htij (θ0ij , s t )     t=0


where θ0ij denotes initial non-labor wealth.5 They are subject to a single time zero budget constraint
which states that the present discounted value of non-housing and housing consumption must not
exceed the present discounted value of the labor income stream and the initial non-labor wealth:
                              ij ij t                                                          
                       Πs0     ct (θ0 , s ) + ρit (s t )htij (θ0ij , s t ) 6 θ0ij + Πs0 ηtij (s t ) ,                   (2)

where ρit (s t ) denotes the rental price of housing services in region i.

   4
     The same allocation can also be decentralized with sequential trade.
   5 ij
    θ0 denotes the value of household j’s initial claim to housing wealth, as well as any other financial wealth that is in
zero net aggregate supply. We refer to this as non-labor wealth. The initial distribution of non-labor wealth is denoted
Θ0 .

                                                                    5
Collateral Constraints            In this time-zero-trading economy, collateral constraints restrict the value
of a household’s consumption claim net of its labor income claim to be non-negative:
                             ij ij τ                                                              
                     Πs t     cτ (θ0 , s ) + ρiτ (s τ )hτij (θ0ij , s τ ) ≥ Πs t ητij (xτ , yτ , z τ ) .                    (3)

The left hand side denotes the value of adhering to the contract following node s t ; the right hand
side the value of default. Default implies the loss of all housing collateral wealth, and a fresh
start with the present value of future labor income. The households in each region are subject to a
sequence of collateral constraints, one for each future state s τ . These constraints are not too tight,
in the sense of Alvarez and Jermann (2000), in an environment where agents cannot be excluded
from trading.6
    These constraints differ from the typical solvency constraints that decentralize constrained ef-
ficient allocations in environments with exclusion from trading upon default.7

Definition 1. A Kehoe-Levine equilibrium is a list of allocations {ctij (θ0ij , s t )}, {htij (θ0ij , s t )} and prices
{ρit (s t )}, {pt (s t )} such that, for a given initial distribution Θ0 over non-labor wealth holdings and
initial states (θ0 , s0 ), (i) the allocations solve the household problem, (ii) the markets clear in all
states of the world:

Consumption markets clear for all t, z t :
                      X XZ                                             π(x t , y t , z t |x0 , y0 , z0 )
                                      ctij (θ0ij , x t , y t , z t )                                     dΘ0 = ηta (z t )
                     j=1,2 x t ,y t
                                                                                π(z t |z0 )

Housing markets in each region i clear for all t, x t , y t , z t :
                                            X
                                                   htij (θ0ij , x t , y t , z t ) = χit (y t , z t ).
                                           j=1,2



2.3     Equilibrium Allocations
To characterize the equilibrium consumption dynamics we use stochastic consumption weights that
describe the consumption of each household as a fraction of the aggregate endowment (see appendix
A for a complete derivation). Instead of solving a social planner problem, we characterize equilibrium
   6
     See Lustig and Chien (2007) for a formal proof.
   7
     Most other authors in this literature take the outside option upon default to be exclusion from future participation
in financial markets (e.g. Kehoe and Levine (1993), Krueger (1999), Krueger and Perri (2006), and Kehoe and Perri
(2002)). If we imposed exclusion from trading instead, the solvency constraints would be looser on average, but the
same mechanism would operate. The reason is that in autarchy the household would still have to buy housing services
with its endowment of non-housing goods. An increase in the relative price of housing services would worsen the outside
option and loosen the solvency constraints, as it does in our model.

                                                                           6
allocations and prices directly off the household’s necessary and sufficient first order conditions.
The household problem is a standard convex problem: the objective function is concave and the
constraint set is convex. In equilibrium, for any two households j and j ′ in any two regions i and i ′ ,
the level of marginal utilities satisfies:

           ij       ij                                                        ′ ′              ′ ′    ′ ′       ′ ′     ′ ′
          ξt+1 uc (ct+1 (θ0ij , s t , s ′ ), ht+1
                                              ij                          ij
                                                  (θ0ij , s t , s ′ )) = ξt+1      ij
                                                                              uc (ct+1 (θ0i j , s t , s ′ ), ht+1
                                                                                                              ij
                                                                                                                  (θ0i j , s t , s ′ )),

at any node (s t , s ′ ), where ξij is the consumption weight of household j in region i. Our model pro-
vides an equilibrium theory of these consumption weights. We focus here on equilibrium allocations
in the model where preferences over non-durable consumption and housing services are separable
(γε = 1), but all results carry over to the case of non-separability.



Cutoff Rule         The equilibrium dynamics of the consumption weights are non-linear. They follow
a simple cutoff rule, which follows from the first order conditions of the constrained optimization
problem. The weights start off at ξ0ij = ν ij at time zero; this initial weight is the multiplier on the
initial promised utility constraints. The new weight ξtij of a generic household ij that enters period
               ij
t with weight ξt−1 equals the old weight as long as the household does not switch to a state with
a binding collateral constraint. When a household enters a state with a binding constraint, its new
weight ξtij is re-set to a cutoff weight ξt (xt , yt , z t ).
                                                   (
                                                        ij                        ij
                                                       ξt−1                   if ξt−1 > ξt (xt , yt , z t )
                            ξtij (ν ij , s t ) =                               ij
                                                                                                                                           (4)
                                                       ξt (xt , yt , z t ) if ξt−1 ≤ ξt (xt , yt , z t )

ξt (xt , yt , z t ) is the consumption weight at which the collateral constraint (3) holds with equality. It
does not depend on the entire history of household-specific and region-specific shocks (x t , y t ), only
the current shock (xt , yt ). This amnesia property crucially depends on assumption 1. The reason is
that the right hand side of the collateral constraint in (3) only depends on the current shock (xt , yt )
when the constraint binds. This immediately implies that household ij’s consumption share cannot
depend on the region’s history of shocks (see proposition 3 in appendix A for a formal proof).
    The consumption in node s t of household ij is fully pinned down by this cutoff rule:
                                                                                       γ1
                                                                 ξtij (ν ij , s t )
                                                   ctij (s t ) =                             cta (z t ).                                   (5)
                                                                      ξta (z t )

Its consumption as a fraction of aggregate consumption equals the ratio of its individual stochastic
consumption weight ξtij raised to the power                           1
                                                                      γ   to the aggregate consumption weight ξta . This
aggregate consumption weight is computed by integrating over the new household weights across

                                                                          7
all households, at aggregate node z t :
                                       X XZ                                       γ1 π(x t , y t , z t |x0 , y0 , z0 ) j
                      ξta (z t )   =                       ξtij (ν i,j , s t )                                         dΦ0 ,   (6)
                                                                                               π(z t |z0 )
                                       j=1,2 x t ,y t


where Φj0 is the cross-sectional joint distribution over initial household consumption weights ν and
the initial shocks (x0 , y0 ) for households of type j = 1, 2. By the law of large numbers, the aggregate
weight process only depends on the aggregate history z t .
    The risk sharing rule for non-housing consumption in (5) clears the market for non-durable con-
sumption by construction, because the re-normalization of consumption weights by the aggregate
consumption weight ξta guarantees that the consumption shares integrate to one across regions.
It follows immediately from (4), (5), and (6) that in a stationary equilibrium, each household’s
consumption share is drifting downwards as long as it does not switch to a state with a binding
constraint, while the consumption share of the constrained households jump up. The rate of decline
of the consumption share for all unconstrained households is the same, and equal to the aggregate
                     a
weight shock gt+1 ≡ ξt+1 /ξta . When none of the households is constrained between nodes z t and
z t+1 , the aggregate weight shock gt+1 equals one. In all other nodes, the aggregate weight shock
is strictly greater than one. The risk-sharing rule for housing services is linear as well:

                                                               ij    ij     t
                                                                                 γ1
                                                             ξt   (ν    , s   )
                                              htij (s t ) = i t t t χit (yt , z t ),                                           (7)
                                                            ξt (x , y , z )

where the denominator is now the regional weight shock, defined as
                                                                         X                                γ1
                                              ξti (x t , y t , z t ) =              ξtij (ν ij , s t )          .
                                                                         j=1,2


The appendix verifies that this rule clears the housing market in each region.8

Equilibrium State Prices               In each date and state, random payoffs are priced by the unconstrained
household, who have the highest intertemporal marginal rate of substitution (Alvarez and Jermann
2000). The price of a unit of a consumption in state s t+1 in units of s t consumption is their
intertemporal marginal rate of substitution, which can be read off directly from the risk sharing rule
in (5):
                                                                                      a
                                                                                             −γ
                                                pt+1 (s t+1 )                         ct+1            γ
                                                                  =β                                 gt+1 .                    (8)
                                            pt (s t )π(st+1 |st )                      cta
   8
    In the case of non-separable preferences between non-housing and housing consumption (γε 6= 1), the equilibrium
consumption allocations also follow a cutoff rule, similar to the one in equations (4), (5), and (7). In this case, the
consumption weight changes when the non-housing expenditure share changes, even if the region does not enter a state
with a binding constraint. The derivation is in a separate appendix, available on the authors’ web sites.

                                                                          8
This derivation relies only on the invariance of the unconstrained household’s weight between t and
t + 1. The first part is the representative agent pricing kernel under separability. The collateral
constraints contribute a second factor to the stochastic discount factor, the aggregate weight shock
raised to the power γ.


Regional Rental Prices                 The equilibrium relative price of housing services in region i, ρi , equals
the marginal rate of substitution between consumption and housing services of the households in
that region:
                                                                                                 ! −1ε                      −1ε
                                       uh (ctij (θ0ij , s t ), htij (θ0ij , s t ))        htij                    ξta χit
                ρit (y t , z t )   =                                                 =ψ                  =ψ                         .                  (9)
                                       uc (ctij (θ0ij , s t ), htij (θ0ij , s t ))        ctij                    ξti cta

The second equality follows from the CES utility kernel; the last equality substitutes in the equi-
librium risk sharing rules (5) and (7). Because each region consumes its own housing services
endowment, the rental price is region-specific and depends on the region-specific shocks y t .


Non-Housing Expenditure Shares                            Using the risk sharing rule under separable utility, it is easy
to show that the non-housing expenditure share is the same for all households j in region i (see
appendix A):
                                                              ctij
                                                           ij      i ij
                                                                        ≡ αijt = αit
                                                          ct + ρt ht
   In the remainder of the paper, we focus on the case of a perfectly elastic supply of housing
services at the regional level. To do so, we impose an additional restriction on the regional housing
endowments.

                                                                                                                    ξti a
Assumption 2. The regional housing endowments χit are chosen such that                                                       t
                                                                                                                    ξta ct (z )         = κχit (y t , z t ),
for some constant κ and for all y t , z t .

   Under this assumption, the equilibrium expenditure shares αi are equal across regions and a
function of the aggregate history z t only: αit = αt (z t ). Likewise, rental prices only depend on z t .
Without this assumption, the expenditure shares would also depend on the history of region-specific
shocks, imputing too much volatility to these shares. In the data, housing expenditure shares are
not very volatile over time and quite similar across regions (Davis and Ortalo-Magne 2007).


Tightness of the Collateral Constraints                               Because of the collateral constraints, labor income
shocks cannot be fully insured in spite of the full set of consumption claims that can be traded.
How much risk sharing the economy can accomplish depends on the ratio of aggregate housing

                                                                           9
collateral wealth to non-collateralizable human wealth. Integrating housing wealth and human
across all households in all regions, that ratio can be written as:
                                                       hn                      oi
                                                                       1
                                                Πz t     cta (z t ) αt (z t) − 1
                                                                                                   ,                 (10)
                                                            Πz t [{cta (z t )}]

where in the numerator we used the assumption that the housing expenditure shares are identical
across regions. In the model, we define the collateral ratio myt (z t ) as the ratio of housing wealth
to total wealth:                                                 hn                         oi
                                                                                  1
                                                          Πz t      cta (z t ) αt (z t) −   1
                                       myt (z t ) =                  hn                    oi    .
                                                                                      1
                                                                 Πz t cta (z t ) αt (z  t)


If the aggregate non-housing expenditure share is constant, the collateral ratio is constant at 1 − α.
Suppose the aggregate endowment η a = c a is constant as well. Then my or α index the risk-sharing
capacity of the economy. When α = 1, my = 0 is zero and there is no collateral in the economy.
All the collateral constraints necessarily bind at all nodes and households are in autarchy.9 On the
other hand, as α becomes sufficiently small, my becomes sufficiently large, and perfect risk sharing
becomes feasible, because the solvency constraints no longer bind in any of the nodes s t .




2.4     Tighter Constraints

A region is just a unit of aggregation. We define regional consumption as the sum of consumption
of the households in a region:
                                                                         X
                                      cti (θ0i1 , θ0i2 , y t , z t ) =           ctij (θ0ij , x t , y t , z t ).
                                                                         j=1,2


The regional consumption share is defined as a fraction of total non-durable consumption, as in the
                              cti
empirical analysis: ĉti =    cta .

    The constraints faced by these households are tighter than those faced by a stand-in agent, who
consumes regional consumption and earns regional labor income, in each region: By the linearity of
the pricing functional Π(·), the aggregated regional collateral constraint for region i is just the sum


   9
    Proof: If a set of households with non-zero mass had a non-binding solvency constraint at some node (x t , y t , z t ),
                                                                                 ′    ′
there would have to be another set of households with non-zero mass at node (x t , y t , z t ) that violate their solvency
constraint.

                                                                         10
of the household collateral constraints over households j in region i:
X               ij ij t                                                                                                                
        Πs t     ct (θ0 , s ) + ρit (y t , z t )htij (θ0ij , s t ) = Πs t cti (θ0i1 , θ0i2 , y t , z t ) + ρit (y t , z t )χit (yt , z t ))
j=1,2
                                                                    X                ij                                    
                                                                ≥         Πs t        ηt (xt , yt , z t ) = Πs t ηti (yt , z t ) for all s t
                                                                      j


This condition is necessary, but not sufficient: If household net wealth is non-negative in all states
of the world for both households, then regional net wealth is too, but not vice-versa. In particular,
it is the household in the x = hi state whose constraint is crucial, not the average household’s.




    Regional consumption shares depend on the history of household-specific income shocks x t , but
                                                                                                                                       ξti (x t ,y t ,z t )
only in a limited sense. The changes in the regional consumption shares ĉti (x t , y t ) =                                                 ξta (z t )        are
governed by the growth rate of the regional weight ξti relative to that of the aggregate weights
ξta . This is a measure of how constrained the households in this region are relative to the rest of
the economy. When one of the households switches from the low to the high state, her weight
increases, causing regional consumption to increase even when the regional income share stays
constant (η̂ˆtj increases but η̂ i may be constant). As we show in our simulations below, this is why
the cross-sectional dispersion of regional consumption shares exceeds the cross-sectional dispersion
of regional income shares. In section 2.7, we explain that this effect depends on the redistributive
nature of idiosyncratic shocks at the household level. But because these household shocks are i.i.d
across regions, their effects disappear when we integrate over all household-specific histories by the
law of large numbers:
                               Z                                              Z
                                                                                             ξi (x t , y t )
                                              ĉti (x t , y t )dΠ(x t )   =                                  dΠ(x t ) ≃ ĉti (y t ).                      (11)
                                   x t ∈X t                                       x t ∈X t        ξta

Even though the collateral constraints pertain to households and households within a region are
heterogeneous, on average, the regional consumption share ĉti (y t ) behaves as if it is the consumption
share of a representative household in the region facing a single, but tighter, collateral constraint.
This insight is quantitatively important. If we simply considered constraints at the regional level
and calibrated the model to regional income shocks, the constraints would hardly bind. To an
econometrician with only regional data generated by the model, it looks as if the stand-in agent’s
consumption share is subject to preference shocks or measurement error. These preference shocks
follow from switches in the identity of the constrained household within the region. This provides
one structural justification for our assumption of measurement error in regional consumption shares
introduced in section 3.2.

                                                                                   11
2.5     Calibration

Preference Parameters            We consider the case of separable utility by setting γ at 2 and ǫ at .5,
the estimate of the intratemporal elasticity of substitution by Yogo (2006).10 In the benchmark
calibration, the discount factor β is set equal to .95. We also explore lower values for β.


Aggregate Endowment Processes                   Following Mehra and Prescott (1985), the aggregate non-
housing endowment growth rate follows an AR(1) with mean 0.0183, standard deviation 0.0357,
and autocorrelation -.14. It is discretized as a two-state Markov chain. The aggregate housing
endowment process has the same average growth rate. Following Piazzesi, Schneider and Tuzel
                                                                                       α
                                                                                          
(2007), we assume that the log of the aggregate non-housing expenditure ratio ℓ = log 1−α
follows an autoregressive process:

                                             ℓt = µℓ + .96 log ℓt−1 + ǫt ,

with σǫ = .03 and µℓ was chosen to match the average US post-war non-housing expenditure ratio
of 4.41. Denote by L the domain of ℓ.


Average Housing Collateral Ratio                To keep the model as simple as possible, we abstracted from
financial assets or other kinds of capital (such as cars) that households may use to collateralize
loans. According to Flow of Funds data, 75% of household borrowing in the data is collateralized
by housing wealth. However, to take into account other sources of collateral, we calibrate the
collateral ratio to a broader measure of collateral than housing alone.
    We use two approaches to calibrate the average US ratio of housing wealth to housing plus
human wealth: a factor payments and an asset values approach. First, we examine the factor
payments on both sources of wealth. Between 1946 and 2002, the average ratio of total US
                                                                                                         ρh
rental income to labor income (compensation of employees) plus rental income                           ρh+ηa   was 0.034
(data from NIPA Table 1.12). This measure of rental income includes imputed rents for owner-
occupied housing. Second, we look at asset values (Flow of Funds data). Over the same period,
the average ratio of US residential wealth to labor income is 1.66. We match this ratio in a a
stationary equilibrium with a collateral ratio of 0.025. Both approaches suggest a ratio smaller than
five percent.
    The above calculation ignores non-housing sources of collateral. A broader collateral mea-
sure also includes financial wealth as a source of collateral. Its factor payments are net dividends
  10
    Yogo estimates this elasticity off the cointegration relationship between the relative price of durables to non-durables
and the quantities of durable and non-durable consumption.

                                                            12
and interest payments by domestic corporations. We treat proprietary income as a flow to non-
collateralizable human wealth. The factor payment ratio is now 0.08. In terms of asset values,
the average ratio of the market value of US non-farm, non-financial corporations plus residential
wealth to labor income is 2.68 (see Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh (2007) for data construction).
We match this ratio in a a stationary equilibrium with a collateral ratio of 0.05. Both approaches
suggest a collateral ratio smaller than ten percent.
    We calibrate to the broad measure of collateral and set the average collateral ratio equal to
0.10. We scale up the quantity of labor income in the model to simultaneously match an average
collateral ratio of 10 percent and a non-housing expenditure ratio of 4.41.


Region-Specific and Household-Specific Income                       We use a 5-state first-order Markov process
to approximate the regional labor income share dynamics (Tauchen and Hussey 1991): log η̂ti =
          i
.94 log η̂t−1 + eti with the standard deviation of the shocks σe set to 1 percent. The estimation
details are in appendix B. We do not model permanent income differences between regions. Finally,
as is standard in this literature, we use a 2-state Markov process to match the level of household
labor income share η̂ˆtj (as a fraction of regional labor income) dynamics. The persistence is .9 and
the standard deviation of the shock is 3 percent (see Heaton and Lucas (1996)).


2.6      Computation of Markov Stationary Equilibrium
When aggregate shocks move the non-housing expenditure share α and the collateral ratio around,
the joint measure over consumption shares and states changes over time. Instead of keeping
track of the entire measure or the entire history of aggregate shocks in the state space, we com-
pute policy functions that depend on a truncated history of aggregate weight shocks: −     →g =            k
                              11
[g−1 , g−2 , . . . , g−k ] ∈ G.
    We assign each household a label ĉ, which is this household’s consumption share at the end
of the last period. Let C denote the domain of the normalized consumption weights. Consider a
household of type 1. Its new consumption weight at the start of the next period follows the cutoff
rule ̟ 1 (ĉ, x , y , ℓ, →
                         −
                         g k ) : C × X × Y × L × G −→ C:

                                  ̟ 1 (ĉ, x , y , ℓ, →
                                                      −
                                                      g k ) = ĉ if ĉ > ̟1 (x , y , ℓ, →
                                                                                        −
                                                                                        g k)
                                                            = ̟1 (x , y , ℓ, →
                                                                            k
                                                                             −
                                                                             g ) elsewhere,

where ̟ 1 (x , y , ℓ, →
                      −
                      g k ) is the cutoff consumption share for which the collateral constraints hold with
  11
    The model tells us which moment of the distribution in the last period to keep track of: if many agents were
severely constrained last period and g−1 was large, very few are constrained this period and g is small.

                                                             13
equality, or equivalently, net wealth is zero. The cutoff consumption share satisfies

                                          C 1 (̟ 1 (x , y , ℓ, →
                                                               −
                                                               g k ), x , y , ℓ, →
                                                                                 −
                                                                                 g k )) = 0,

where C 1 (ĉ, x , y , ℓ, →
                          −
                          g k ) : C ×X ×Y ×L×G −→ R+ is the net wealth function. The policy functions
for a household of type 2 are defined analogously. Next period’s consumption shares are:

                                                             ̟ 1 (ĉ, x , y , ℓ, →
                                                                                 −
                                                                                 g k)
                                                    ĉ ′ =                            ,
                                                                         g
            P           R
where g =       j=1,2   C×X×Y ×L×G
                                          ̟ j (ĉ, x , y ; ℓ, →
                                                              −
                                                              g k )dΦj (ĉ, x , y ; ℓ, →
                                                                                       −
                                                                                       g ∞ ) is the actual aggregate weight
shock. Let Φ (ĉ, x , y ; ℓ, →
                 j           −
                             g ∞ ) denote the joint measure over ĉ and (x , y ) which depends on the
infinite history of shocks, and let Ξ(ℓ, →−
                                          g ) denote the joint measure over ℓ and g.
                                                        ∞


Definition 2. An approximate k th -order Markov stationary equilibrium consists of a forecasting func-
tion g(ℓ, −
          →
          g ), a measure Φj (ĉ, x , y ; ℓ, →
            k
                                            −
                                            g ) for each type j and a policy function {̟ j (ĉ, x , y ; ℓ, →
                                                       ∞
                                                                                                           −
                                                                                                           g )}              k   j=1,2

that implements the cutoff rule {̟ (x , y , ℓ, →
                                               −j
                                               g k )}j=1,2 , where the forecasting function has zero av-
erage prediction errors:

           →
           −        XZ                    Z
       g(ℓ, g k ) =                                           ̟ j (ĉ, x , y ; ℓ, →
                                                                                  −
                                                                                  g k )dΦj (ĉ, x , y ; ℓ, →
                                                                                                           −
                                                                                                           g ∞ )dΞ(ℓ, →
                                                                                                                      −
                                                                                                                      g ∞)
                                −
                                →
                                g ∞ |−
                                     →
                                     gk       C×X×Y ×L×G
                        j=1,2


   To approximate the household’s net wealth function C(·), we use 5th -degree Tchebychev poly-
nomials in the two continuous state variables, the consumption weights ̟ and the log expenditure
ratio ℓ. We compute a first-order Markov equilibrium with k = 5. The prediction errors are percent-
age deviations of actual from spent aggregate consumption. These approximation errors are small.
They never exceed 1.9% in absolute value, they are .3% on average and their standard deviation is
about .4%. The computation is accurate.


2.7    Results from Model Simulation
This section shows that the model generates an equilibrium distribution of regional consumption,
income and housing collateral that closely resembles that in the data. In particular, it generates
the quantity anomaly. Not only is the ratio of consumption-to-income dispersion greater than one
on average, it also increases when collateral is scarce. We simulate a panel of T = 15, 000 periods
and N = 100 regions. On average, the ratio of housing wealth to total wealth, my , is 10%. In
order to compare model and data more easily in the rest of the paper, we define a re-normalized
                                                                       my max −myt+1
                                             f t+1 =
collateral ratio that it is always positive: my                        my max −my mi n
                                                                                       .   The re-normalized housing collateral
      f t+1 is a measure of collateral scarcity ; when the collateral ratio is at its maximum value
ratio my

                                                                    14
f = 0, whereas a reading of 1 means that collateral is at its lowest level. We construct my
my                                                                                       f by
setting my max and my min equal to the maximum and minimum value in simulation. The resulting
                            f is 0.71 on average.
collateral scarcity measure my
   Figure 2 shows the cross-sectional dispersion of regional consumption relative to the cross-
sectional dispersion of regional income in the model. Two features are important. First, the
model generates the quantity anomaly. The average ratio of consumption-to-income dispersion
exceeds one. For the 23 US MSA’s, the mean consumption-to-income dispersion ratio over the
1952-2002 sample is 1.28. In our model it is 1.22. Second, when housing collateral is scarce, the
cross-sectional consumption-to-income dispersion is higher. The ratio of consumption dispersion
to income dispersion is almost twice as high when collateral scarcity is at its highest value in the
simulation. We found the same variation in the data (Figure 1). Finally, the turning points in the
cross-sectional dispersion of consumption coincide with the turning points in the housing collateral
ratio. For example, between periods 325 and 375 the dispersion ratio increases by 40 percent, from
.15 to .23 as the collateral scarcity increases from .5 to .9.


                                        [Figure 2 about here.]


Understanding the Quantity Anomaly           Regional consumption is very sensitive to regional in-
come shocks, in spite of the fact that most of the risk faced by households has been traded away
in equilibrium, even at low collateral ratios. This is apparent in figure 3. Its two panels contrast
risk-sharing at the regional and at the household level. The upper panel plots the ratio of re-
gional consumption dispersion to income dispersion, while the lower panel plots the same ratio but
for household consumption and income. The dispersion measures are conditional cross-sectional
standard deviations. The collateral scarcity measure is on the horizontal axis. Since the housing
collateral ratio moves around over time, we display a scatter plot.


                                        [Figure 3 about here.]


   As is apparent from the bottom panel of Figure 3, two-thirds of total household income risk is
insured on average. The ratio of consumption to income dispersion at the household level is below
one. Yet, in the top panel, the standard deviation of consumption to income dispersion at the
regional level is above one when housing collateral is scarce! What explains this quantity anomaly?
First, the cross-sectional standard deviations of household consumption shares at the household
level are smaller than the cross-sectional standard deviation of the endowment shares:
                                                               
                                      std ĉˆt+1
                                             ij
                                                   < std η̂ˆt+1
                                                            ij
                                                                  ,                            (12)

                                                   15
as long as some risk sharing is feasible in equilibrium. Second, at the regional level, the follow-
ing inequality holds for household consumption shares (as a fraction of the regional endowment),
denoted ĉˆij for household j = 1, 2 in region i:
                                                                          
                             std ĉˆi1 + ĉˆi2       > std η̂ˆt+1
                                                              i1
                                                                  + η̂ˆt+1
                                                                       i2
                                                                             = 0,                  (13)

where the last step follows because the endowment shares η̂ˆi1 + η̂ˆi2 = 1 add up to one at the
regional level, but the consumption shares do not: ĉˆi1 + ĉˆi2 6= 1 . Hence, this reversal comes about
because (1) the household income share shocks ∆ log η̂ˆt+1
                                                       ij
                                                           are perfectly negatively correlated across
the households within region by construction, while (2) the individual household weight shocks
that result from these shocks are not perfectly negatively correlated, because of risk sharing. As
a result, in much of the parameter space we find that the cross-sectional standard deviation of
regional consumption (as a share of the aggregate endowment) exceeds that of income:

                                              i
                                                           i
                                                                
                                        std ĉt+1   > std η̂t+1   ,
                          
where ĉ i = ĉˆij + ĉˆij η̂ i . More generally, household-level income growth is more negatively cor-
related within a region than consumption growth because of risk-sharing. Therefore, when we
aggregate from the household to the regional level, household risk sharing gives rise to regional
consumption growth volatility that exceeds regional income growth volatility.
                                                                                    ij
   Figure 4 plots the consumption shares as a fraction of the aggregate endowment ĉt+1 (full line)
             ij
and income η̂t+1 (dotted line) shares for two households j = 1, 2 living in the same region i in
                                                             i                       i
the top panel. The bottom panel plots regional consumption ĉt+1 and income shares η̂t+1 for the
same region i and for the same simulated sequence of shocks. Clearly, the negative correlation of
income shocks reduces the volatility of regional income shares relative to regional consumption. It
is important to point out that this effect depends specifically on the specific redistributive nature of
household-level idiosyncratic risk. If there was a continuum of households and idiosyncratic shocks
would be fully independent across agents, this effect would not be operative. Presumably, in the
data, there are shocks that favor one industry or sector in a region. Those are the shocks that our
specification captures.

                                          [Figure 4 about here.]

The link between risk sharing and the ratio of consumption to income dispersion is not monotone.
There are two off-setting effects. First, as the supply of collateral decreases, the cross-sectional
standard deviation of household consumption growth (on the left hand side of equation 13) increase
and it approaches the cross-sectional standard deviation of household income growth from below in
equation (12). In the case of autarchy, this becomes an equality. On the other hand, as the supply

                                                        16
of collateral decreases, the cross-sectional standard deviation of regional consumption growth (on
the left hand side of equation 13) decreases and it approaches the standard deviation of regional
income growth from above. The latter effect is because regional consumption growth becomes
more negatively correlated across households within a region. To see these two effects at work,
we consider an economy without aggregate uncertainty; this economy grows at a constant rate.
Figure 5 plots the ratio of consumption to income dispersion against the collateral ratio. Each
dot represents a different equilibrium of an economy with a different collateral ratio. The graph
reveals that, in the low to medium collateral range, the first effect dominates and the regional
consumption-to-income dispersion ratio decreases as the collateral supply increases. However, in
the medium-to-high collateral ratio, the second effect dominates and the regional consumption-
to-income dispersion ratio increases. Importantly, this non-monotonicity does not affect the slope
coefficient in a regression of regional consumption growth on income growth, and hence will not
hamper our empirical work in section 3. These slope coefficients decrease monotonically as we
increase the collateral supply, as is clear from figure 6. This figure represents the same equilibria as
figure 5.

                                             [Figure 5 about here.]

                                             [Figure 6 about here.]



3        Testing the Collateral Mechanism
In this section we link our model to the traditional risk-sharing tests based on linear consumption
growth regressions, the workhorse of the consumption insurance literature (Cochrane (1991), Mace
(1991), Nelson (1994), Attanasio and Davis (1996), Blundell, Pistaferri and Preston (2008), and
ensuing work).12 These regressions are a useful diagnostic of the key relationship between the
degree of risk sharing and the scarcity of housing collateral that we set out to test. Section 3.1
describes the US metropolitan data that we use. Section 3.2 then estimates the linear consumption
regressions in the data. Consistent with the regional risk-sharing literature that uses state level data
(Van Wincoop (1996), Hess and Shin (1998), DelNegro (1998), Asdrubali, Sorensen and Yosha
(1996), Athanasoulis and Wincoop (1998), and Del Negro (2002)), we reject full consumption
insurance among US metropolitan regions. More importantly, and new to this literature, we find
that collateral scarcity increases the correlation between income growth shocks and consumption
    12
     Our paper also makes contact with the large literature on the excess sensitivity of consumption to predictable
income changes, starting with Flavin (1981), who interpreted her findings as evidence for borrowing constraints, and
followed by Hall and Mishkin (1982), Zeldes (1989), Attanasio and Weber (1995) and Attanasio and Davis (1996), all
of which examine at micro consumption data.

                                                        17
growth. These collateral effects are economically significant. Finally, section 3.3 runs the same
regressions, but on model-generated data. The size of the coefficients, and the regression R2 in the
model are similar to the ones in the data. In sum, we replicate the variation in the income elasticity
of regional consumption growth that we document in the data.
                                                                                   i
   The previous section delivered a formal theory of regional consumption weights ξt+1 that tied
the distribution of these weights to the housing collateral ratio. We saw that the weights followed a
                                                                      i
cut-off rule, where the cut-off depended on the current income shock ηt+1 and the housing collateral
ratio, in addition to the history of aggregate shocks. Equivalently, regions i’s consumption share
                                                 i      i     a
in deviation from the cross-sectional average, ξ̂t+1 = ξt+1 /ξt+1 , is a non-linear function of the
                               i                                               f t+1 . All growth
region-specific income shock η̂t+1 and the housing collateral scarcity measure my
rates of hatted variables denote the growth rates in the region in deviation from the cross-regional
average, and the averages are population-weighted.
   To make contact with the linear consumption growth regressions in the literature, we assume
here that the growth rate of the log regional consumption share is linear in the product of the housing
                                                              i                      i
                                                                       f t+1 ∆ log η̂t+1
collateral ratio and the regional income share shock: ∆ log ξ̂t+1 = −γ my                . Under our
assumption of separable preferences, this assumption delivers a linear consumption growth equation
which simply involves regional income share growth interacted with the collateral ratio:

                                            i                   i
                                    ∆ log ĉt+1   f t+1 ∆ log η̂t+1
                                                = my                .                             (14)

                                          f t+1 is zero, this region’s consumption growth equals
The interpretation is straightforward. If my
                                                                                f t+1 is one,
aggregate consumption growth. There is perfect insurance. On the other hand, if my
this region’s consumption wedge is at its largest, and the region is in autarchy: its non-housing
consumption cti (growth) equals its labor income ηti (growth). While simple, this specification
captures the important features of the link between consumption, income, and housing collateral in
the model. Put differently, this linear specification of the consumption weights turns out to work
well inside the model.



3.1    Data

We construct a new data set of US metropolitan area level macroeconomic variables, as well as
standard aggregate macroeconomic variables. All of the series are annual for the period 1951-2002.
   We believe that metropolitan area data are a good choice to study the question of risk-sharing
and the role of housing collateral. First, metropolitan area data have not been used before to study
risk-sharing and are an interesting addition to the literature. Second, compared to state-level data,
each MSA is a relatively homogenous region in terms of rental price shocks. Since we do not have

                                                   18
good data on household-level variation in housing prices, metropolitan areas are a natural choice.
If housing prices are strongly correlated within a region, there are only small efficiency gains from
looking at household instead of regional consumption data if the objective is to identify the collateral
effect. Second, many have argued that household level data contain substantial measurement error
(e.g., Cogley (2002)). Aggregation to the regional level should alleviate this problem.


Aggregate Macroeconomic Data                We use two distinct measures of the nominal housing collateral
stock HV : the market value of residential real estate wealth (HV r w ) and the net stock current cost
value of owner-occupied and tenant occupied residential fixed assets (HV f a ). The first series is from
the Flow of Funds (Federal Board of Governors) for 1945-2002 and from the Bureau of the Census
(Historical Statistics for the US) prior to 1945. The last series is from the Fixed Asset Tables
(Bureau of Economic Analysis) for 1925-2001. Appendix C provides detailed sources. HV r w is a
measure of the value of residential housing owned by households, while HV f a which is a measure of
the total value of residential housing. Real per household variables are denoted by lower case letters.
The real, per household housing collateral series hv r w and hv f a are constructed using the all items
consumer price index from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, pa , and the total number of households
from the Bureau of the Census. Aggregate nondurable and housing services consumption, and labor
income plus transfers data are from the National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA). Real per
household labor income plus transfers is denoted by η a and real per capita aggregate consumption
is c a .


Measuring the Housing Collateral Ratio                In the model the housing collateral ratio my is defined
as the ratio of collateralizable housing wealth to housing wealth plus non-collateralizable human
wealth.13 In Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh (2005), we show that the log of real per household real
estate wealth (log hv ) and labor income plus transfers (log η) are non-stationary in the data. This is
true for both hv r w and hv f a . We compute the housing collateral ratio as my hv = log hv −log η and
remove a constant and a trend. The resulting 1925-2002 time series my r w and my f a are mean
zero and stationary, according to an ADF test. Formal justification for this approach comes from
a likelihood-ratio test for co-integration between log hv and log η (Johansen and Juselius (1990)).
We refer the reader to Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh (2005) for details of the estimation. The
trend removal is necessary to end up with a stationary variable that can be used in the regression
analysis below. We discuss the implication of the trend in the housing wealth-to-income ratio for
   13
     Human wealth is an unobservable. We assume that the non-stationary component of human wealth H is well
approximated by the non-stationary component of labor income Y . In particular, log (Ht ) = log(Yt ) + ǫt , where ǫt is
a stationary random process. This is the case if the expected return on human capital is stationary (see Jagannathan
and Wang (1996) and Campbell (1996)). The housing collateral ratio then is measured as the deviation from the
co-integration relationship between the value of the aggregate housing collateral measure and aggregate labor income.

                                                         19
risk-sharing in the conclusion. The housing collateral ratios display large and persistent swings
between 1925 and 2002. The correlation between my r w and my f a is 0.86. In the empirical work,
                                              ^
we construct the collateral scarcity measures my         ^
                                                 r w and my f a by setting my max and my min equal
to the respective 1925-2002 sample maximum and minimum of my r w and my f a.


Regional Macroeconomic Data               We construct a new panel data set for the 30 largest metropoli-
tan areas in the US. The regions combine for 47 percent of the US population. The metropolitan
data are annual for 1951-2002. Thirteen of the regions are metropolitan statistical areas (MSA).
The other seventeen are consolidated metropolitan statistical areas (CMSA), comprised of adjacent
and integrated MSA’s. Most CMSA’s did not exist at the beginning of the sample. For consistency
we keep track of all constituent MSA’s and construct a population weighted average for the years
prior to formation of the CMSA. We use regional sales data to measure non-durable consumption.
Sales data have been used by DelNegro (1998) at the state level, but never at the metropolitan
level. The appendix compares our new data to other data sources that partially overlap in terms
of sample period and definition, and we find that they line up. The elimination of regions with
incomplete data leaves us with annual data for 23 metropolitan regions from 1951 until 2002. We
denote real per capita regional income and consumption by η i and c i , and we define consumption
                                                                                                  cti
and income shares as the ratio of regional to aggregate consumption and income: ĉti =            cta   and
         ηti
η̂ti =   ηta .   The details concerning the consumption, income and price data we use are in the data
appendix C.


3.2        Linear Consumption Growth Regressions in Data

To bring the theory to the data, we consider the consumption growth regression in equation (14). In
all regressions, we include regional fixed effects to pick up unobserved heterogeneity across regions,
and we take into account measurement error in non-durable consumption. We express observed
consumption shares with a tilde and assume that income shares are measured without error. The
linear model collapses to the following equation for observed consumption shares c̃:

                                       i
                                                                         
                               ∆ log c̃t+1   = a0i + a1 my            i
                                                        f t+1 ∆ log η̂t+1      i
                                                                            + νt+1 ,

where the left hand side variable is observed consumption share growth and a0i are region-specific
                                                            i
fixed effects. All measurement error terms are absorbed in νt+1 . This equation resembles the
standard consumption growth equation in the consumption literature, except for the collateral
interaction term. We can rewrite this specification once more with a separate regional income
growth term, using the actual housing collateral ratio instead of the collateral scarcity measure

                                                        20
f t+1 :
my
                                  i
                                                                                   
                          ∆ log c̃t+1   = b0i + b1 ∆ log ŷt+1
                                                           i
                                                                 + b2 myt+1∆ log ŷti + νt+1
                                                                                         i
                                                                                             .
                                                                   my                 max
The parameter b1 in the second specification corresponds to a1 my max −my mi n in the first specification
                                                 1
and the coefficient b2 corresponds to −a1 my max −my mi n . We focus on the estimation results for this

second specification.14


Estimation Specifics            We assume that the measurement error in regional consumption share
                                                                                        
growth,      νti ,   is orthogonal to lagged values housing collateral ratio: E νti my
                                                                                    f t−k = 0, ∀k ≥ 0.
Since only aggregate variables affect the aggregate housing collateral ratio my and only region-
specific measurement error enters in ν i , this assumption follows naturally from the theory.
   The benchmark estimation method is generalized least squares (GLS), which takes into account
cross-sectional correlation in the residuals ν i and heteroscedasticity. If the residuals and regressors
are correlated, the GLS estimators of the parameters in the consumption growth regressions are
inconsistent. To address this possibility, we report instrumental variables estimation results (by
three-stage least squares) in addition to the GLS results. Because of the autoregressive nature
   f , we use two, three and four-period leads of the dependent and independent variables as
of my
instruments (Arellano and Bond (1991)).
   The estimation results are in table 1. The first two lines report the results for the entire sample
1952-2002 and the two different collateral measures. Lines 3-4 report the results for the 1970-
2002 sub-sample; lines 5-6 use labor income plus transfers, only available for 1970-2000, instead of
disposable income. Finally, lines 7-8 report the instrumental variables (IV) estimates.

                                                 [Table 1 about here.]

   First, the null hypothesis of full insurance among U.S. regions, H0 : b1 = b2 = 0, is strongly
rejected. The p-value for a Wald test is 0.00 for all rows in table 1. This is consistent with the
findings of the regional risk-sharing literature for US states (see e.g. Hess and Shin (1998)).
   Second, the correlation of region-specific consumption growth and region-specific income growth
is higher when housing collateral is scarce: b2 < 0 is negative in all rows. The coefficient b2 is
estimated precisely in most rows. The coefficients b1 and b2 , together with the average housing
collateral ratio, imply that one-third of disposable income growth shocks end up in consumption
growth, while two-thirds of shocks are insured away on average. Most importantly, there is sub-
stantial time variation in the degree of risk sharing depending on the level of the collateral ratio.
For example, the estimates in row 2 imply that the income elasticity of consumption share growth
varies between .58, when my = my min = −.124, and .13, when my = my max = +.13, using my f a
  14
       A previous version of the paper presented consistent results across both specifications.

                                                            21
as the collateral measure. The fifth percentile value for my r w and the coefficient on [b1 , b2 ] in row
1 imply a degree of risk-sharing of 42 percent. The 95th percentile implies a degree of risk-sharing
of 86 percent. The time variation is stronger in the 1970-2000 period and estimated more precisely,
regardless of which income measure we use (rows 3-6). Rows 7-8 of table 1 report IV estimates
where income changes are instrumented by 2 and 3-period leads of independent and dependent
variables. The instrumental variables estimates reject full insurance, and the coefficient estimates
are close to the ones obtained by GLS. Again, these lend support to the collateral channel. Overall,
the point estimates imply large shocks to the regional risk sharing technology in the US induced by
changes in the housing collateral ratio.


3.3    Linear Consumption Growth Regression in Model
Finally, we use the same simulation to re-estimate the consumption share growth regressions that
we ran on the regional consumption share data in section 3.2. The results are reported in Table 2.
   The slope coefficients vary between [.38, −1.59], for β = .95, and [.62, −1.88], for β = .75 .
Because my is .10 on average in the simulation, the average fraction of income shocks that ends
up in consumption is 22% for β = .95. That implies that 78% of income risk is insured on average.
For β = .75, the average fraction of risk that is shared among regions is 57%. The 66% estimate
for the average fraction of income risk shared in the data (see Table 1) corresponds to a value for
β between .95 and .90. More importantly, the slope coefficients imply a lot of time-variation in
the degree of risk sharing. In the model, the 5th and 95th percentile of my
                                                                         f are .55 and .95. That
distribution implies a 90% confidence interval for the degree of risk-sharing of [69, 83] percent for
β = .95 and [48, 66] percent for β = .75.
   The estimates reveals that the income elasticity coefficient in the model-generated sample varies
between -.04 when my = my max and .34 when my = my min , in the case of β = .95. In the case
of β = .75, the coefficient varies between .09 and .54. In the data, the slope coefficients varied
between .28 and .45 (see Table 1). Also, the regression R2 are close to those in the data, around
7%. They are low because regional risk is small compared to household risk.

                                         [Table 2 about here.]

   To understand the regression results, recall that in equilibrium, the growth rate of the regional
consumption shares is determined by the difference between the growth rates of the regional weight
                                                     i              i            a
and the growth rate of the aggregate weight: ∆ log(ĉt+1 ) = ∆ log ξt+1 − ∆ log ξt+1 . As argued in
                    i                                                               i
section 2.4, ∆ log ξt+1 only responds to regional income shocks on average (∆ log η̂t+1 ). The effect
                                                                         i
of household-specific shocks x is absorbed in the regression error term νt+1 . The slope coefficients
in Table 2 reflect two forces. First, in case of a positive shock to household or regional income, the

                                                   22
cutoff shares ξit+1 are much higher when housing collateral is scarce. Second, in case of a negative
                                                                                  a
income shock, the household consumption shares drift down at a higher rate ∆ log ξt+1 in the low
collateral economy. The same logic applies to the regional consumption shares because it is the
sum of the shares for the two types of households. The effects are more pronounced for lower
discount rates.



4     Additional Evidence for Collateral Channel
In this section, we provide additional support for the housing collateral mechanism. First, our
empirical results continue to hold for a non-separable utility function specification. Second, we find
evidence that the degree of risk-sharing is also tied to regional collateral measures. Using regional
measures of the housing collateral stock to sort regions into bins, we find that the income elasticity
of consumption growth for regions in the lowest housing collateral quartile of US metropolitan
areas is more than twice the size of the same elasticity for areas in the highest quartile, and
their consumption growth is only half as correlated with aggregate consumption growth. Linear
consumption growth regressions that use regional instead of aggregate collateral measures produce
similar results. Third, we look at province data for Canada and find the same positive relationship
between housing collateral and consumption insurance, both for aggregate and regional collateral
measures.


4.1    Non-Separable Utility
Our previous results are robust to the inclusion of expenditure share growth terms which arise from
the non-separability of the utility function. The point estimates for the slope coefficients on income
growth interacted with the collateral ratio are very similar, but the expenditure share growth terms
are not significant. The results are reported in a separate appendix, downloadable from the authors’
web sites.


4.2    Estimation of the Linear Model using Regional Collateral Measures
While solving a model where the housing collateral ratio is different across regions is beyond the
scope of the current paper, we find support in the data for a similar relationship between regional
consumption data and regional measures of collateral.
    For each of the US metropolitan areas we construct a measure of regional housing collateral,
combining information on regional repeat sale price indices with Census estimates on the housing
stock. The data construction of the regional housing wealth follows Case, Quigley and Shiller

                                                 23
(2001) and is detailed in appendix C.4. The regional housing collateral ratios for each metropolitan
area are constructed in the same way as the national measure, but from regional housing wealth and
regional income measures. In the consumption growth regressions below, we also use the regional
home ownership rate as a second measure of housing collateral.
   To explore the cross-sectional variation in housing collateral, we conduct two exercises. First,
we sort the 23 MSA’s by their collateral ratio in each year and look at average population-weighted
consumption growth and income growth for the 6 regions with the lowest and the 6 regions with the
highest regional collateral ratio. Table 3 shows the results. Regions in the first group (highest col-
                  f i is 0.84 on average, reported in column 1) experience more volatile consumption
lateral scarcity, my
growth (column 2) that is only half as correlated with US aggregate consumption growth (column
                                                                   i
                                                         f is 0.23 on average). The last three
3) than for the group with the most abundant collateral (my
columns report the result of a time-series regression of group-averaged consumption share growth
on group-averaged income share growth. The income elasticity of consumption share growth is
0.66 (with t-stat 1.9) for the group with the most scarce collateral, whereas it is only 0.32 (with
t-stat 1.3) for the group with the most abundant collateral. For the first group full insurance can
be rejected, whereas for the last group it cannot.

                                         [Table 3 about here.]

   Second, we estimate linear consumption growth regression results for the case of separable
preferences:
                          i
                                                                             
                  ∆ log ĉt+1   = b0i + b1 ∆ log η̂t+1
                                                   i           i
                                                         + b2 Xt+1         i
                                                                   ∆ log η̂t+1      i
                                                                                 + νt+1 .

Table 4 presents the results. The regional collateral measure X i is the home-ownership rate in
region i in the first row and the regional housing collateral ratio my i in the second row. For
both variables, we find that the correlation between consumption and income share growth is lower
when the region-specific collateral measure is higher. The effects are large and the coefficients are
precisely measured. For example, the region-specific collateral measures X i = my i vary between
-.25 and .25. The implied variation in the degree of risk sharing is between 45 and 74 percent.
   This paper is not about a direct housing wealth effect on regional consumption: For an average
unconstrained household that is not about to move, there is no reason to consume more when
its housing value increases, simply because it has to live in a house and consume its services
(see Sinai and Souleles (2005) for a clear discussion). In the third row of the table, we add the
regional collateral measure as a separate regressor to check for a regional housing wealth effect on
consumption. The coefficient, b3 , is significant, but it has the wrong sign. After controlling for
the risk-sharing role of housing, we find no separate increase in regional consumption growth when
regional housing collateral becomes more abundant. In sum, regions consume more when total

                                                    24
regional labor income increases and this effect is larger when housing wealth is smaller relative to
human wealth in that region.
   We also used bankruptcy indicators as a regional collateral measure and found that they were
insignificant. US states have different levels of homestead exemptions that households can invoke
upon declaring bankruptcy under Chapter 7. We used both the amount of the exemption and a
dummy for MSA’s in a state with an exemption level above $20, 000. In neither regression did we
find a significant coefficient.

                                       [Table 4 about here.]

   Finally, measurement error may be a concern for the regional consumption data. However,
as long as the the standard deviation of consumption measurement error does not systematically
increase in times or regions with scarce collateral, measurement error would bias the coefficient
estimates downwards, strengthening the case for the collateral mechanism in US regional data.


4.3    Canadian Data
As a robustness check, we repeat the analysis with data from Canadian provinces. While we only
have data available for ten provinces from 1981-2003, the consumption data are arguably more
standard. The data are on non-durable consumption (personal expenditures on goods and services
less expenditures on durable goods) instead of retail sales. The income measure is personal dis-
posable income. We construct real per capita consumption and income shares, using the provincial
CPI series. The housing wealth series measure the market value of the net stock of fixed residential
capital, a measure corresponding to hv f a . These housing wealth series are available for Canada, as
well as for the ten provinces. The housing collateral ratio is constructed in the same way as for the
U.S. data. Appendix C.5 describes these data in more detail.

                                       [Table 5 about here.]

   Table 5 confirms our finding for the U.S. that the degree of risk-sharing varies substantially
with the housing collateral ratio. In the first row, we use the aggregate collateral ratio. Since
^
my f a is .5 on average and my f a is zero on average, they show that Canadian provinces share
85% of income risk on average. This is higher than in the U.S., presumably because there is
more government redistribution. More importantly, the degree of risk sharing varies over time.
When housing collateral is at its lowest point in the sample (in 1985), only 63% of income risk
is shared, whereas in 2003, the degree of risk-sharing is 95%. In rows 2 and 3 we use the same
collateral measure, but now measured at the regional level. Again we find a precisely estimated
slope coefficient with the right sign. Lastly, we confirm our finding for the U.S. data, that these

                                                 25
results are not driven by a wealth effect. In row 3, the coefficient on the housing collateral ratio b3
shows up with the wrong sign.
    Finally, in UK data, Campbell and Cocco (2007) also find evidence in favor of a collateral effect
on regional consumption using aggregate measures of housing wealth.



5        Concluding Remarks
The availability of housing collateral significantly impacts regional risk sharing. We construct a
new data set of consumption and income data for the largest US metropolitan areas. Not only
do we reject perfect consumption insurance among these regions, we also find that times in which
collateral is scarce are associated with significantly less risk-sharing. Canadian data show similar
patterns. This time-varying degree of risk-sharing is a new stylized fact that standard models are
unable to address.
    A model with limited commitment and default resulting in the loss of housing collateral gen-
erates the same positive co-movement between the consumption-to-income dispersion ratio and
housing collateral scarcity. Importantly, it jointly generates the quantity anomaly: the fact that
the consumption-to-income dispersion ratio is above one on average, and why this ratio co-moves
positively with housing collateral scarcity. To generate this quantity anomaly, the model has two
dimensions of heterogeneity: households and regions. This structure enables us to translate a mod-
est friction at the household level into a substantial deviations of perfect risk-sharing at the regional
level.
    This approach is useful because it provides a single explanation for the apparent lack of consump-
tion insurance at different levels of aggregation. But it differs from most of the work in regional or
international risk sharing which adopts the representative agent paradigm. That literature typically
relies on frictions impeding the international flow of capital resulting from the government’s ability
to default on international debt or to tax capital flows (e.g. Kehoe and Perri (2002)), or resulting
from transportation costs (e.g. Obstfeld and Rogoff (2003)). Such frictions cannot account for
the lack of risk sharing between regions within a country or between households within a region.
    The collateral mechanism explored here may also help explain low-frequency patterns in house-
hold risk-sharing. In recent work, Krueger and Perri (2006) document that the dramatic increase
in labor income inequality in the US between 1970 and 2002 was not accompanied by a similar
increase in household consumption inequality. Our housing collateral effect seems consistent with
these trends in household consumption and income inequality. In the US, the raw ratio of residential
wealth to labor income increased from 1.4 in 1980 to 1.9 is 2002 and the ratio of mortgages to
income increased from .45 to .80. A persistent increase in housing collateral of that magnitude

                                                   26
would give a substantial boost to risk sharing and a bring about a reduction in the cross-sectional
dispersion of consumption relative to income.




                                                27
References
Alvarez, Fernando and Urban Jermann, “Efficiency, Equilibrium, and Asset Pricing with Risk of
    Default.,” Econometrica, 2000, 68 (4), 775–798.

Arellano, Manuel and Stephen Bond, “Some Tests of Specification for Panel Data: Monte Carlo
    Evidence and an Application to Employment Equations,” Review of Economic Studies, 1991,
    58, 277–297.

Asdrubali, Pierfederico, Bent Sorensen, and Oved Yosha, “Channels of Interstate Risk Sharing:
    United States 1963-1990,” Quaterly Journal of Economics, 1996, 111, 1081–1110.

Athanasoulis, Stefano and Eric Van Wincoop, “Risk Sharing Within the United States: What
    Have Financial Markets and Fiscal Federalism Accomplished?,” Working Paper Federal Reserve
    Bank of New York, 1998, 9808.

Atkeson, Andy and Tamim Bayoumi, “Do Private Capital Markets Insure Regional Risk? Evidence
    from the United States and Europe.,” Open Economies Review, 1993, 4, 303–324.

Attanasio, Orazio P. and Guglielmo Weber, “Is Consumption Growth Consistent with Intertem-
    poral Optimization? Evidence from the Consumer Expenditure Survey,” Journal of Political
    Economy, 1995, 103 (6), 1121–57.

     and Steven J. Davis, “Relative Wage Movements and the Distribution of Consumption,”
    The Journal of Political Economy, December 1996, 104 (6), 1127–1262.

Backus, David, Patrick Kehoe, and Finn Kydland, “International Real Business Cycles,” Journal
    of Political Economy, 1992, 100 (4), 745–75.

Blundell, Richard, Luigi Pistaferri, and Ian Preston, “Consumption Inequality and Partial Insur-
    ance,” American Economic Review, 2008. Forthcoming.

Campbell, John Y., “Understanding Risk and Return,” The Journal of Political Economy, April
    1996, 104 (2), 298–345.

     and Joao Cocco, “How Do House Prices Affect Consumption? Evidence from Micro Data,”
    Journal of Monetary Economics, 2007, 54(3), 591–621.

Case, Karl E. and Robert J. Shiller, “Prices of Single-Family Homes Since 1970: New Indexes
    for Four Cities,” New England Economic Review, September/October 1987, pp. 46–56.

                                              28
    , John M. Quigley, and Robert J. Shiller, “Comparing Wealth Effects: The Stock Market
    versus The Housing Market,” October 2001. UC Berkeley Working Papers.

Cochrane, John H., “A Simple Test of Consumption Insurance,” The Journal of Political Economy,
    October 1991, 99 (5), 957–976.

Cogley, Timothy, “How Fast Can the New Economy Grow? A Bayesian Analysis of the Evolution
    of Trend Growth,” August 2002. Mimeo Arizona State University.

Crucini, Mario J., “On International and National Dimensions of Risk Sharing,” Review of Eco-
    nomics and Statistics, 1999, 81, 73–84.

Davis, Morris and Francois Ortalo-Magne, “Household Expenditures, Wages, Rents,” November
    2007. Working Paper University of Maddison, Wisconsin.

Del Negro, Marco, “Asymmetric Shocks Among U.S. States,” Journal of International Economics,
    2002, 56, 273–297.

DelNegro, Marco, “Aggregate Risk Sharing Across US States and Across European Countries,”
    January 1998. Yale University mimeo.

Eichenbaum, Martin and Lars Peter Hansen, “Estimating Models with Intertemporal Substitution
    Using Aggregate Time Series Data,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 1990, 8
    (1), 53–69.

Flavin, Marjorie, “The Adjustment of Consumption to Changing Expectations About Future In-
    come,” Journal of Political Economy, 1981, 89 (5), 974–1009.

Hall, Robert E. and Frederic S. Mishkin, “The Sensitivity of Consumption to Transitory Income:
    Estimates from Panel Data on Households,” Econometrica, 1982, 50, 461–481.

Heaton, John and Deborah Lucas, “Evaluating the Effects of Incomplete Markets on Risk Sharing
    and Asset Pricing,” Journal of Political Economy, 1996, 104 (3), 443–87.

Hess, Gregory D. and Kwanho Shin, “Intranational Business Cycles in the United States,” Journal
    of International Economics, April 1998, 44 (2), 289–313.

     and      , “Risk Sharing by Households Within and Across Regions and Industries,” Journal
    of Monetary Economics, 2000, 45, 533–560.

Jagannathan, Ravi and Zhenyu Wang, “The Conditional CAPM and the Cross-Section of Ex-
    pected Returns,” Journal of Finance, 1996, 51, 3–54.

                                              29
Johansen, Soren and Katarina Juselius, “Maximum Likelihood Estimation and Inference on Coin-
    tegration with Applications to the Demand for Money,” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and
    Statistics, May 1990, 52, 169–210.

Kehoe, Patrick J. and Fabrizio Perri, “International Business Cycles with Endogenous Incomplete
    Markets,” Econometrica, May 2002, 70 (3), 907–928.

Kehoe, Timothy and David Levine, “Debt-Constrained Asset Markets.,” Review of Economic
    Studies, 1993, 60, 865–888.

Krueger, Dirk, “Risk Sharing in Economies with Incomplete Markets.” PhD dissertation, University
    of Minnesota 1999.

     and Fabrizio Perri, “Does Income Inequality Lead to Consumption Inequality? Evidence and
    Theory,” The Review of Economic Studies, 2006, 73, 163–193.

Lewis, Karen, “What Can Explain The Apparent Lack of International Consumption Risk-
    Sharing?,” Journal of Political Economy, 1996, 104, 267–297.

Lucas, Robert, “Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy,” Econometrica, 1978, 46 (6), 1429–54.

Lustig, Hanno and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, “Housing Collateral, Consumption Insurance and
    Risk Premia: An Empirical Perspective,” Journal of Finance, 2005, 60 (3), 1167–1219.

     and      , “The Returns on Human Capital: Good News on Wall Street is Bad News on Main
    Street,” Forthcoming Review of Financial Studies, 2007.

     and Yi-Li Chien, “The Market Price of Aggregate Risk and the Wealth Distribution,” January
    2007. http://ssrn.com/abstract=290917.

Mace, Barbara J., “Full Insurance in the Presence of Aggregate Unicertainty,” The Journal of
    Political Economy, October 1991, 99 (5), 928–956.

Marcet, Albert and Ramon Marimon, “Recursive Contracts,” 1999. working paper Universitat
    Pompeu Fabra.

Mehra and Edward Prescott, “The Equity Premium: A Puzzle.,” Journal of Monetary Economics,
    1985, 15 (2), 145–161.

Nelson, Julie A., “On Testing for Full Insurance using Consumer Expenditure Survey Data,” The
    Journal of Political Economy, April 1994, 102 (2), 384–394.

                                              30
Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff, “The Six Major Puzzles in International Economics: Is
    There a Common Cause?,” Working Paper Harvard and UC Berkeley, 2003.

Ortalo-Magne, Francois and Sven Rady, “Homeownership: Low Household Mobility, Volatile
    Housing Prices, and High Income Dispersion,” November 2002. Working Paper University of
    Maddison Wisconsin.

     and      , “Housing Market Dynamics: On the Contribution of Income Shocks and Credit
    Constraints,” Review of Economic Studies, 2006, 73, 459–485.

Pavan, Marina, “Consumer Durables and Risky Borrowing: The Effects of Bankruptcy Protection,”
    Working Paper Boston College, 2005.

Piazzesi, Monika, Martin Schneider, and Selale Tuzel, “Housing, Consumption and Asset Pric-
    ing,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2007, 83(3), 531–569.

Pollakowski, Henry O., “Data Sources for Measuring House Price Changes,” Journal of Housing
    Research, 1995, 6 (3), 377–389.

Sinai, Todd and Nicholas Souleles, “Owner-Occupied Housing as a Hedge Against Rent Risk,”
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2005, 120(2), 763–789.

Tauchen, George and Robert Hussey, “Quadrature-based Methods for Obtaining Approximate
    Solutions to Nonlinear Asset Pricing Models,” Econometrica, 1991, 59, 371–396.

Uhlig, Harald, “A Law of Large Numbers for Large Economies,” Economic Theory, 1996, 8,
    41–50.

Van Wincoop, Eric, “Regional Risk Sharing,” European Economic Review, 1996, 40, 219–254.

Yogo, Motohiro, “A Consumption-Based Explanation of Expected Stock Returns,” Journal of
    Finance, 2006, 61 (2), 539–580.

Zeldes, Stephen, “Consumption and Liquidity Constraints: An Empirical Investigation,” Journal
    of Political Economy, 1989, 97, 305–346.




                                               31
A          Technical Appendix
This appendix spells out the household problem in an economy where all trade takes place at time zero.



Household
n         Problem
                o A household of type (θ0i j , s0 ) purchases a complete contingent consumption plan
                                                                           
 c0i j (θ0i j , s0 ), hi j (θ0i , s0 )     at time-zero market state prices p, pρi . The household solves:

                                                                              sup U(c i j (θ0i j , s0 ), hi j (θ0i j , s0 ))
                                                                           {c ij ,hij }


subject to the time-zero budget constraint
                                                          hn                                                oi            hn oi
                                                  Πs0       c0i j (θ0i j , s0 ) + ρi (s0 )hi j (θ0i j , s0 ) 6 θ0i j + Πs0 η0i j ,

and an infinite sequence of collateral constraints for each t and s t
                                                      hn                                                    oi     hn           oi
                                               Πs t     cti j (θ0i j , s t ) + ρi (s t )hti j (θ0i j , s t ) ≥ Πs t ηti j (s t ) , ∀s t .


                                                                                    
Dual Problem Given Arrow-Debreu prices p, pρi the household with label (θ0i j , s0 ) minimizes the cost C(·) of
delivering initial utility w0i j to itself:
                                                                                                                          
                                         C(w0i j , s0 )      =      min c0i j (w0i j , s0 ) + h0i j (w0i j , s0 )ρi0 (s0 )
                                                                    {c,h}
                                                                       X                                                                                 
                                                                    +       p(s t |s0 ) cti j (w0i j , s t |s0 ) + hti j (w0i j , s t |s0 )ρit (s t |s0 )
                                                                         st


subject to the promise-keeping constraint

                                                                              U0 ({c i j }, {hi j }; w0i j , s0i ) ≥ w0i j

and the collateral constraints
                                                     hn                                                           oi            hn                  oi
                                              Πs t        cti j (w0i j , s t ) + ρit (s t )hti j (w0i j , s t )        ≥ Πs t        ηti j (s t )        , ∀s t .


       The initial promised value w0i j is determined such that the household spends its entire initial wealth: C(w0i j , s0 ) =
                         
θ0i j + Πs0 {η i j (s t )} . There is a monotone relationship between θ0i j and w0i j . The above problem is a standard, convex
programming problem. We set up the saddle point problem and then make it recursive by defining cumulative multipliers
(Marcet and Marimon (1999)). Let ν i j be the Lagrange multiplier on the promise keeping constraint and γti j (w0i j , s t )
be the Lagrange multiplier on the collateral constraint in history s t . Define a cumulative multiplier at each node:
                       P
ζti j (w0 , s t ) = 1 − s t γti j (w0i j , s t ). Finally, we rescale the market state price p̂t (s t ) = pt (z t )/β t πt (s t |s0 ). By using
Abel’s partial summation formula and the law of iterated expectations to the Lagrangian, we obtain an objective function
that is a function of the cumulative multiplier process ζ i :
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                 XX                                ζ ij
                                                                                      t  (w0
                                                                                            ij
                                                                                               , s t
                                                                                                     |s0 )p̂ t (s t
                                                                                                                    )  c ij
                                                                                                                         t  (w  0
                                                                                                                                 ij
                                                                                                                                    , s t
                                                                                                                                          ) + ρ i
                                                                                                                                                t (s t
                                                                                                                                                       )h t (w0
                                                                                                                                                               ij
                                                                                                                                                                  , s t
                                                                                                                                                                        )    
            D(c, h, ζ i j ; w0i j , s0 ) =                        β t π(s t |s0 )                                                                                       
                                                                                                            +γti j (w0i j , s t )Πs t η i                                   
                                                  t≥0 s t


                                                                                                   32
such that
                                         ζti j (w0i j , s t ) = ζt−1
                                                                 ij
                                                                     (w0i j , s t−1 ) − γti j (w0i j , s t ), ζ0i j (w0i j , s0 ) = 1

Then the recursive dual saddle point problem is given by:

                                                                     inf sup D(c i j , hi j , ζ i j ; w0i j , s0 )
                                                                  {c ij ,hij } {ζ ij }


such that
                                                   XX
                                                               β t π(s t |s0 )u(cti j (w0i j , s t ), hti j (w0i j , s t )) ≥ w0i j
                                                   t≥0    st

To keep the mechanics of the model in line with standard practice, we re-scale the multipliers. Let

                                                                                                       νij
                                                                         ξti j (ν, s t ) =                             ,
                                                                                                ζti j (w0i j , s t )

The cumulative multiplier ξi j (ν, s t ) is a non-decreasing stochastic sequence, which is initialized at ν i j at time zero. We
can use ν i j as the household label. If the constraint for household (ν i j , s0 ) binds, it goes up, else it stays put. This
follows immediately from the complementary slackness condition for the solvency constraint.


Optimal Non-Housing Consumption The first order condition for c(ν i j , s t ) is :

                                                    p̂t (s t ) = ξti j (ν i j , s t )uc (cti j (ν i j , s t ), hti j (ν i j , s t )).

Upon division of the first order conditions for any two households i j and kl , the following restriction on the joint
evolution of marginal utilities over time and across states must hold:

                                                          uc (cti j (ν i j , s t ), hti j (ν i j , s t ))   ξtkl (ν kl , s t )
                                                                                                          =                      .                            (15)
                                                         uc (ctkl (ν kl , s t ), htkl (ν kl , s t ))        ξti j (ν i j , s t )

Growth rates of marginal utility of non-durable consumption, weighted by the multipliers, are equalized across agents:
                            ij                      ij
 i
ξt+1  (ν i j , s t+1 ) uc (ct+1 (ν i j , s t+1 ), ht+1  (ν i j , s t+1 ))   p̂t+1 (s t+1 )    kl
                                                                                             ξt+1  (ν kl , s t+1 ) uc (ct+1
                                                                                                                        kl
                                                                                                                            (ν kl , s t+1 ), ht+1
                                                                                                                                              kl
                                                                                                                                                  (ν kl , s t+1 ))
    i                            i j                i j
                                                                          =          t
                                                                                           =     kl                          kl               kl
                                                                                                                                                                   .
   ξt (ν i j , s t )        uc (ct (ν i j , s t ), ht (ν i j , s t ))          p̂t (s )        ξt (ν kl , s t )        uc (ct (ν kl , s t ), ht (ν kl , s t ))

     In the case of separable preferences between non-housing and housing consumption, there is a simple mapping from
the multipliers ξ at s t to the equilibrium allocations of both commodities. We refer to this mapping as the risk-sharing
rule:                                                                                                         1
                                                                                          ξi j (ν i j , s t ) γ a t
                                                                  cti j (ν i j , s t )   = t a t               ct (z )                                        (16)
                                                                                               ξt (z )
where
                                                     X X Z  ij                1 π(x t , y t , z t |x , y , z )
                                                                                γ                     0 0 0
                                      ξta (z t )   =        ξt (ν i j , s t )                     t |z )
                                                                                                                 dΦj0 ,
                                                       t t
                                                                                           π(z        0
                                                      j =1,2 x ,y

where Φj0 is the cross-sectional joint distribution over initial consumption weights and initial endowments for a household
of type j. By the law of large numbers, the aggregate weight process only depends on the aggregate history z t . It is
easy to verify that this rule satisfies the optimality condition and the market clearing conditions.
     The time zero ratio of marginal utilities is pinned down by the ratio of multipliers on the promise-keeping constraints.
For t > 0, it tracks the stochastic weights ξ. From the first order condition w.r.t. ξti j (ν i j , s t ) and the complementary

                                                                                             33
slackness conditions, we obtain a reservation weight policy:

                                                           ξti j      =       ij
                                                                             ξt−1     ij
                                                                                  if ξt−1 > ξt (xt , yt , z t ),                                                                         (17)
                                                           ξti j      =                          t
                                                                             ξt (xt , yt , z ) otherwise.                                                                                (18)

where the cutoff ξt is defined such that the collateral constraints hold with equality:
                             hn                                                                                                oi            hn            oi
                      Πs t        cti j (ν i j , s t ; ξt (ν i j , s t )) + ρi (s t )hi (ν i j , s t ; ξt (ν i j , s t ))           = Πs t     ηti j (s t ) .

The history-independence of the cutoff is established in proposition 3.




Optimal Housing Consumption The risk-sharing rule for housing services also follows a cutoff rule:
                                                                                                 γ1
                                                                                    ξti j (s t )
                                                              hti j (s t ) =                               χit (y t , z t ),                                                             (19)
                                                                                 ξti (x t , y t , z t )

where the denominator is now the regional weight shock, defined as

                                                                                                X            1
                                                                                                               γ
                                                                   ξti (x t , y t , z t ) =       ξti j (s t ) .
                                                                                                j =1,2


To minimize notation, we dropped the ν in the ξ functions. Given this risk sharing rule and the form of the utility
function, the regional rental price for any region i is given by:
                                                                                         ! −1                          −1ε
                                                                                 hti j
                                                                                            ε
                                                                                                             ξta χit
                                                               ρit    =ψ                         =ψ
                                                                                 cti j                       ξti cta

We now verify that this risk-sharing rule clears the housing market in each region and satisfies the first order condition
for housing services consumption.




                                                                                                                                                                 γ1                     γ1
Proof. First, note that these risk sharing rules clear the housing market in each region because ξti 1 (s t )                                                          + ξti 2 (s t )           =
ξti by definition. Second, we check that it satisfies the first order condition for non-durable and durable consumption:

                                                   ξti j uc (cti j (s t ), hti j (s t ))        =        p̂t (s t |s0 )
                                                    ξti j uh (cti j (s t ), hti j (s t ))       =        ρit (y t , z t )p̂t (s t |s0 )

Recall that the marginal utility of non-housing consumption and housing consumption are:
                                                                                          h     −1  ε−1           ε−1
                                                                                                                      i 1−εγ
                                                                                                                         ε−1
                                        uc (cti j (s t ), hti j (s t ))       = (cti j )    (cti j ) ε + ψ(hti j ) ε
                                                                                                 ε



                                                                                         −1
                                                                                             h        ε−1            ε−1
                                                                                                                         i 1−εγ
                                                                                                                            ε−1
                                        uh (cti j (s t ), hti j (s t ))       = ψ(hti j ) ε (cti j ) ε + ψ(hti j ) ε

                                                                                                                                                                                               −1
In the case of separability, ε = γ1 , and the marginal utility of housing services becomes: uh (cti j (s t ), hti j (s t )) = ψ(hti j ) ε .

                                                                                            34
Substituting this into the optimality condition for housing produces the following expression:
                                                             "               1
                                                                                          # −1                                    −1/ε
                                                         (ξti ,j ) γ
                                                                                                 ε
                                          −1                                                                χi ,t
                        ξti j ψ(hti j )    ε   = ξti j ψ             χi ,t                               =ψ                                      =     ρit (y t , z t )p̂t (s t |s0 )
                                                            ξti                                             ξti

where the second equality follows from inserting the risk sharing rule for housing services, and the last equality follows
                            1
from separability, γ =      ε.      Likewise, inserting the risk sharing rule for non-durable consumption into the optimality
condition gives:
                                                                "                1
                                                                                         # −1ε                          −1
                                                                    (ξti ,j ) γ a                      ca                      ε
                                                     ξti j ψ                   ct                    = ta                            =      p̂t (s t |s0 )
                                                                      ξta                              ξt

                                                                                                                                                                                                      −1ε
                                                                                                                                                                                            ξta χit
Dividing through by the last line of the preceding equation, we obtain the following result: ρit = ψ                                                                                        ξti cta
                                                                                                                                                                                                              for any
household j in region i . This is exactly the rental price we conjectured at the start, together with the risk sharing rule,
which confirms that the risk sharing rule satisfies the first order condition for optimality. The risk sharing rule also
clears the housing market in every region and it clears the market for non-durable consumption.



The Non-Housing Expenditure Share The non-housing expenditure share is the same for all households j
in region i :
                                                                                         cti j
                                                                                                               ≡ αitj ≡ αit .
                                                                                 cti j   +   ρit hti j


Proof. To show this, we use the equilibrium risk-sharing rule for non-housing and housing consumption, as well as the
expression for ρit to obtain:
                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                         ξtij (ν ij ,s t ) γ
                                                                                                              ξta (z t )        cta (z t )
                             αitj     =                           1                                  h                                   i −1ε                  1
                                                 ξtij (ν ij ,s t ) γ                                          ξta              i
                                                                                                                           χt (yt ,z )t          (ξtij (s t )) γ
                                                      ξta (z t )       cta (z t ) + ψ                    ξti (y t ,z t )    cta (z t )            ξti (y t ,z t )
                                                                                                                                                                    χit (yt , z t )
                                                                            1
                                      =                       h                                          i ε−1
                                                                       ξta           χit (yt ,z t )           ε
                                                1+ψ               ξti (y t ,z t )     cta (z t )


Note that this expression is the same for all households j in region i .



    Assumption 2 imposes that the regional shares αi only depend on the aggregate history z t : αit = αt (z t ). Hence,
                                 ξti a
we assume that the ratio         ξta ct    = χit for all regions, and all aggregate histories. Note that all regions have the same
rental price as well, as a result of this assumption.



History Independence of the Cutoff Rule

                                                                                                                                                                                        ctij
Proposition 3. In a state with a binding collateral constraint, the equilibrium consumption share, ĉti j =                                                                             cta    , only depends
                   t
on (xt , yt ) and z .


                                                                                                            35
Proof. When the collateral constraint binds for household i j,
                              "(                          "                                        #)#
                                                                  ρit (s t )hti j (w0i j , s t )                  hn                      oi
                       Πs t        cti j (w0i j , s t )   1+                                             = Πs t     ηti j (xt , yt , z t ) ,
                                                                       cti j (w0i j , s t )
                                                                                               hn                                     oi
                                                                             1
                                          Πs t   ĉti j cta (z t )                         = Π s t    ˆti j (xt )η̂ i (yt , zt )ηta (z t ) ,
                                                                                                     η̂
                                                                       αt (z t )

where the second line follows from the definition of the non-housing expenditure share, and we use assumption 2.
    Obviously, the right hand side does not depend on (x t−1 , y t−1 ), only on (xt , yt ). Fix an arbitrary aggregate history
z t . We can take two households with histories (x t−1 ′, xt , y t−1 ′, yt ) and (x t−1 ′′, xt , y t−1 ′′, yt ). The right hand side is
the same for both, because the labor endowment share process is first order Markov in (x, y , z) (see assumption 1),
and the pricing functional only depends on z t . So, the left hand side has to be the same for both regions as well.
Since the non-housing expenditure share only depends on the aggregate history z t , this immediately implies that the
household’s consumption share ĉti j can only depend on (xt , yt , z t ) when the collateral constraint binds.



B       Calibration of Regional Labor Income Shocks
We use the regional data set described in appendix (C) to calibrate the persistence of the regional income share process,
used in section 2.5. We estimate an AR(1) process for the log disposable income share between 1952 and 2002:

                                                                    i
                                                              log η̂t+1     =       .9434 log η̂ti + νt+1
                                                                                                      i


                                                                                    (0.0092)              (0.0286)



If we introduce fixed effects, to correct for permanent income differences, the slope coefficient drops to .85. Based
on these estimates, we set the AR(1) coefficient equal to 0.94 and the standard deviation of the innovation equal to
0.01. We use the Tauchen and Hussey (1991) method to discretize the AR(1) process into a 5-state Markov chain.
The grid points are
                                                          [−0.0879, −0.0440, 0, 0.0440, 0.0879]

and the transition matrix is:
                                                                                                                           
                                                     0.9526 0.0474 0.0000                                0             0
                                                                                               
                                                 0.0069             0.9666 0.0265 0.0000                             0
                                                                                               
                                                                                               
                                                 0.0000             0.0140 0.9721 0.0140 0.0000
                                                                                               
                                                 0.0000             0.0000 0.0265 0.9666 0.0069
                                                                                               
                                                   0.0000            0.0000 0.0000 0.0474 0.9526

Likewise, we calibrate the household income share process (as a fraction of the regional income), η̂ˆi ,j , as a two state
Markov chain. The states are [.6, 1.4] and the transition matrix is [.9, .1 ; .1, .9].




                                                                                         36
                                         This is a separate data appendix for
                    How Much Does Household Collateral Constrain Regional Risk Sharing?



C      Data Appendix
This appendix describes the metropolitan data set in detail. First we define aggregate collateral measures (section
C.1). Then, we define the US metropolitan areas and describe the sample (section C.2). In section C.3, we describe
metropolitan consumption and income data and compare them to US aggregates. In section C.4, we describe regional
collateral measures. Finally, in section C.5, we describe the Canadian data.


C.1      Aggregate Collateral Measures
Residential Wealth 1890-1970: Historical Statistics of the United States, Colonial Times to 1970, series N197,
”Non-farm Residential Wealth”. Original source: Grebler, Blanck and Winnick, The Capital Formation in Residential
Real Estate: Trends and Prospects, Princeton University press, 1956 (Tables 15 and A1). Excluded are clubs, motels,
dormitories, hotels and the like. The series measures the current value of structures and land. Structures are reported
in current dollars by transforming the value in constant dollars by the construction cost index (series N121 and 139).
Structures in constant dollars are obtained from an initial value of residential wealth in 1890 (based on 1890 Census
report ‘Real Estate Mortgages’) and estimates of net capital formation in constant dollars. Land values are based on
an estimation of the share of land value to total value using federal Housing Administration data. These estimates are
in Winnick, Wealth Estimates for Residential Real Estate, 1890-1950, doctoral dissertation, Columbia University, 1953.
    1945-2001: Flow of Funds, Federal Reserve Board, Balance sheet of households and non-profit organizations
(B.100, row 4). Line 4: Market value of (owner-occupied) household real estate (code FL155035015). The market
value of real estate wealth includes land and structures, inclusive vacant land, vacant homes for sale, second homes
and mobile homes.


Fixed Assets 1925-2001: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Fixed Asset Tables, Current cost of net stock of owner-
occupied and tenant-occupied residential fixed assets for non-farm persons. This includes 1-4 units and 5+ units and
is the sum of new units, additions and alterations, major replacements and mobile homes.


C.2      Metropolitan Areas
Definition The concept of a metropolitan areas is that of a core area containing a large population nucleus,
together with adjacent communities having a high degree of economic and social integration with that core. They
include metropolitan statistical areas (MSA’s), consolidated metropolitan statistical areas (CMSA’s), and primary
metropolitan statistical areas (PMSA’s). An area that qualifies as an MSA and has a population of one million or more
may be recognized as a CMSA if separate component areas that demonstrate strong internal, social, and economic
ties can be identified within the entire area and local opinion supports the component areas. Component areas, if
recognized, are designated PMSA’s. If no PMSA’s are designated within the area, then the area remains an MSA.
    The S&MM survey uses the definitions of MSA throughout the survey and of CMSA when CMSA’s are created.
We use the 30 metropolitan areas described in table 6. Before the creation of the CMSA’s, we keep track of all separate
MSA’s that later form the CMSA in order to obtain a consistent time series. For example, the Dallas-Forth Worth

                                                          37
CMSA consists of the population-weighted sum of the separate Dallas MSA and Forth Worth MSA until 1973 and of
the combined area thereafter.


Households The total number of households in the 30 metropolitan areas is 47 percent of the US total in 2000
compared to 40 percent in 1951. The total number of households are from the Bureau of the Census. Most of
the increase occurs before 1965. Likewise, the 30 metropolitan areas we consider contain exactly 47 percent of the
population in 1999 (see tables 6 and 7, first column).


                                                 [Table 6 about here.]



C.3      Metropolitan Consumption and Income Data
Price Indices Data are for urban consumers from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The Consumer Price all items
Index pti ,a , its rent component pti ,h and the food component pti ,c are available at the metropolitan level (Bureau of
Labor Statistics). The price of rent is a proxy for the price of shelter and the price of food is a proxy for the price
of non-durables. We use the rent and food components because the shelter and non-durables components are only
available from 1967 onwards. Two-thirds of consumer expenditures on shelter consists of owner-occupied housing. The
Bureau of Labor Statistics uses a rental equivalence approach to impute the price of owner-occupied housing. Because
ρit is a relative rental price, our theory is conceptually consistent with the Bureau of Labor Statistics approach. All
indices are normalized to 100 for the period 1982-84.


Consumption and Income Inter-regional risk-sharing studies use retail sales data as a proxy for non-durable
consumption (DelNegro (1998) and references therein). Such data for metropolitan areas have not been used before.
We collect retail sales data from the annual Survey of Buying Power published by Sales & Marketing Management
(S&MM). Nominal non-durable consumption for region i , Cti , is total retail sales minus hardware and furniture sales
and vehicle sales. From the same source we obtain the number of households in each region, Nti . Real per household
consumption c i is nominal non-durable consumption deflated by pti ,c and divided by the number of households Nti .
    Disposable personal income Yti is also from S&MM. Disposable personal income consists of labor income, financial
market income and net transfers. We also use a more narrow labor income measure: labor income plus net transfers
from the Regional Economic Information System (REIS). The latter is only available for 1970-2000. Real per household
disposable income η i is nominal disposable income deflated by pti ,a and divided by the number of households Nti .
    There are no complete consumer price index data for Baltimore, Buffalo, Phoenix, Tampa and Washington. There
are no complete consumption and income data for Anchorage. Elimination of these regions leaves us with annual data
for 23 metropolitan regions from 1951 until 2002. This is the regional data set we use in the empirical work.


Comparison We compare non-durable retail sales and disposable income with aggregate consumption and income
data (Table 7), with metropolitan non-durable consumption data from the Consumption Expenditure Survey (Bureau of
Labor Statistics, 1986-2000, Table 8) and with metropolitan labor income data plus transfers from the REIS for 1969-
2000 (Table 9). The correlation between the growth rates of aggregate real non-durable consumption per household
and the metropolitan average of real non-durable retail sales per household is 0.77. Also, our metropolitan data are
highly correlated with the metropolitan data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics and the REIS.

                                                           38
Source and Definitions We collect data from the Survey of Buying Power (and Media Markets), a special
September issue of the magazine Sales and Marketing Management. The data are proprietary and we thank S&MM
for permission to use them. We use five series and reproduce the S&MM definitions below.
    Total retail sales measures sales from five major store groups considered to be the primary channels of distribution
for consumer goods in local markets. Store group sales represent the cumulative sales of all products and or services
handled by a particular store type, not just the product lines associated with the name of the store group. The five
store groups are: food stores, automotive dealers, eating and drinking places, furniture, home furnishings and appliance
stores, and general merchandize stores. Total retail sales reflect net sales. Receipts from repairs and other services by
retailers are also included, but retail sales by wholesalers and service establishments are not.
    Automotive dealer sales are sales by retail establishments primarily engaged in selling new and used vehicles for
personal use and in parts and accessories for these vehicles. This includes boat and aircraft dealers and excludes gasoline
service stations.
    Furniture, home furnishings and appliance store sales measures sales by retail stores selling goods used for the home,
other than antiques. It includes dealers in electronics (radios, TV’s, computers and software), musical instruments and
sheet music, and recordings.
    Households measures the number of households, defined by the Census which includes all persons occupying a
housing unit. A single person living alone in a housing unit is also considered to be a household. The members of a
household need not be related.
    Effective Buying Income is an income measure of income developed by S&MM. It is equivalent to disposable
personal income, as produced by the Bureau of Economic Analysis in the NIPA tables. It is defined as the sum
of labor market income, financial income and net transfers minus taxes. Labor income is wages and salaries, other
labor income (such as employer contributions to private pension funds), and proprietor’s income (net farm and non-
farm self-employment income). Financial income is interests (from all sources), dividends (paid by corporations),
rental income (including imputed rental income of owner-occupants of non-farm dwellings) and royalty income. Net
transfers is Social Security and railroad retirement, other retirement and disability income, public assistance income,
unemployment compensation, Veterans Administration payments, alimony payments, alimony and child support, military
family allotments, net winnings from gambling, and other periodic income minus social security contributions. Taxes
is personal tax (federal, state and local), non-tax payments (fines, fees, penalties, ...) and taxes on owner-occupied
nonbusiness real estate. Not included is money received from the sale of property, the value of income in kind (food
stamps, public housing subsidy, medical care, employer contributions for persons), withdrawal of bank deposits, money
borrowed, tax refunds, exchange of money between family members living in the same household, gifts and inheritances,
insurance payments and other types of lump-sum receipts. Income is benchmarked to the decennial Census data.
    We create a durable retail sales series by adding automotive dealer sales and furniture, home furnishings and
appliance store sales. Non-durable retail sales is total retail sales minus durable retail sales.


Comparison with Aggregate Data We construct aggregate non-durable retail sales per households and
compare it to aggregate non-durable consumption per household. The aggregate consumption data are from the
National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA). The two nominal time series are very similar. Non-durable metropolitan
retail sales per household are on average 17 percent higher than national non-durable consumption per household. Their
correlation between their growth rates is 0.75. The one exception is 1999 when retail sales grow at a rate of 19.6
percent compared to 5.6 percent for non-durable consumption. We believe this is an anomaly in the data and deflate
the 1999 retail sales so that the metropolitan average growth rate equals the national one. This correction is identical
across areas. The volatility of NIPA consumption growth is 2.57 percent whereas the volatility of aggregated S&MM

                                                             39
non-durable retail sales is 2.89 percent. For comparison, the volatility of non-durable retail sales growth at the regional
level varies between 3.8 percent (Washington-Baltimore CMSA) and 8.3 percent (Dallas-Forth Worth CMSA).
    We compare the sum of motor vehicles and parts and furniture and household equipment for the US. to the
metropolitan data on automotive dealer sales and furniture, home furnishings and appliance store sales. Nationwide,
these two categories of consumption make up 84 percent of all durable purchases. Sales are higher by an average of 30
percent. The pattern of the two series mimic each other closely. The correlation between national durable consumption
growth and the average metropolitan durable retail sale growth is 0.80. For 1999 the sales data show a much bigger
increase than the durable consumption data (27 percent versus 8.6 percent). As for non-durables, we correct the
1999 metropolitan retail sales for this discrepancy. We refer to the two series as metropolitan non-durable and durable
consumption per household.
    Effective buying income (EBI) per household corresponds to the Bureau of Economic Analysis’s disposable income
(personal income minus personal tax and non-tax payments). The S&MM income data are tracking disposable income
closely. There are a two discrete jumps in the EBI time-series (1988 and 1995), but the concept remains disposable,
personal income. The S&MM is not precise as to which income categories were excluded between 1987 and 1988 and
between 1994 and 1995. From comparing the definition of EBI before and after the changes, it seems to us that the
most important changes are the exclusion of other labor income (such as employer contributions to pension plans, ...)
and income in kind (such as food stamps, housing subsidies, medial care,...). To obtain a consistent time-series, we
correct the S&MM income data by the ratio of average EBI to disposable income from the NIPA. This correction is
identical across areas. We refer to this series as metropolitan disposable income per household. Table 7 summarizes.


                                                   [Table 7 about here.]


Comparison with CEX Data We compare the SM&M data to the non-durable and durable consumption data
from the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX). Based on household data, the Bureau of Labor Statistics (Bureau
of Labor Statistics) provides metropolitan averages for 13 overlapping two-year periods (1986-87 until 1994-95 and
1996-97 until 1999-2000). The two data sources have 25 regions with full data in common. Buffalo is in the CEX
sample until 1994-95 and is replaced by Tampa, Denver and Phoenix from 1996-97 onwards.
    Consumption expenditures on non-durables are defined as in Attanasio and Weber (1995): It includes food at
home, food away from home, alcohol, tobacco, utilities, fuels and public services (natural gas, heating fuel electricity,
water, telephone and other personal services), transportation (gasoline and motor oil, public transportation), apparel
and services (clothes, shoes, other apparel products and services), entertainment, personal care products and services,
reading, and miscellaneous items. Durable consumption includes vehicle purchases and household furnishings and
equipment. Consumption expenditures on housing services measure the cost of shelter. pti h hti is comprised of owned
dwellings, rented dwellings and other lodging. The CEX imputes the cost for owner-occupied dwellings by adding
up mortgage interest rates, property taxes and maintenance, improvements, repairs, property insurance and other
expenditures. The average expenditure share on housing was 31.5 percent in 2000.
    Non-durable and housing services consumption add up to 55-60 percent of total annual consumption expendi-
tures. Excluded consumption items are consumer durables (furniture, household supplies), vehicle purchases, insurance
(vehicle, life, social security), health care and education.
    For each area, we construct bi-annual averages from the S&MM consumption data. The correlation between all
data cells is 0.77 for non-durables and 0.66 for durables. The average correlation across regions is 0.88 for non-durables
and 0.73 for durables. We conclude that the metropolitan sales data give an accurate measure of consumption on
non-durables and durables at the metropolitan level.

                                                               40
    We also compare the bi-annual averages of before-tax income from the CEX with the metropolitan disposable
income. The correlation is high for each region. The average correlation across regions is 0.94 and is 0.91 for all data
cells jointly. Table 8 summarizes the correlations by region for the 25 areas with all 13 periods.

                                                 [Table 8 about here.]


Comparison with REIS Data Disposable income contains two important channels of insurance. It includes
income from financial markets and the net income from government transfers and taxes. For consumption to fully
capture income smoothing, the income concept should exclude smoothing that takes place through financial markets,
credit markets and through the federal tax and transfer system. The Regional Economic Information System (REIS)
of the Bureau of Economic Analysis allows us to construct separate series for labor market income, financial market
income and net transfers for each metropolitan area.
    For the overlapping period 1969-2000, we compute the correlation between the idiosyncratic component of log
                                                                                           
disposable income, log ŷti ,d , from the S&MM and labor income plus transfers log ŷti ,l t from the REIS. Table 9
shows that the correlation is generally high, but with a few exceptions (Miami, Cincinnati, Milwaukee). The average
correlation is 0.64. This imperfect correlation is due to a combination of measurement error in income and insurance
through financial markets. The discrepancy warrants use of both income measures in the empirical analysis.

                                                 [Table 9 about here.]


C.4      Regional Housing Collateral
Following Case et al. (2001), we construct the market value of the housing stock in region i as the product of four
components:
                                                HVti = Nti HOti HPti V0i

V0i is the median house price for detached single family housing from the US Bureau of the Census for 2000. For the
CMSA’s, it is constructed as a population weighted average of the median home value for the constituent MSA’s.
Population data are from the REIS.


Home Ownership Home ownership rates HOti are from the US Bureau of the Census. We combine home
ownership rates for 1980, 1990 and 2000 from the Decennial Census with annual home ownership data for the largest
75 cities for 1986-2001, also from the Bureau of the Census. We project a home ownership rate for 1986 using the 1980
and 1990 number and the annual changes in the national home ownership rate. We use the changes in the major cities
to infer MSA-level changes between 1986 and 1990. Between 1981 and 1986 and 1975 and 1979 we apply national
changes to the MSA’s. This procedure captures most of the regional and time series behavior of home-ownership rates.
Table 10 illustrates the large regional differences in the median home value and home ownership rate in 1980 and 2000.


House Price Index HPti is the housing price index from the Office of Federal Housing Enterprize Oversight, based
on the weighted repeat sales method of Case and Shiller (1987). It measures house price increases in detached single
family homes between successive sales or mortgage refinancing of the identical housing unit. The index is available for
1975-2000 for all MSA’s in our sample. We construct an index for the CMSA’s as a population weighted average of
the MSA’s. The OFHEO database contains 17 million transactions over the last 27 years. There is a literature on
quality-controlled house price indices. They broadly fall into two categories. Hedonic methods capture the contribution

                                                           41
of narrowly defined dwelling unit and location characteristics to the price of a house in a certain region (number of
bedrooms, garage, neighborhood safety, school district, etc.). Out of sample, houses are priced as a bundle of such
characteristics. Repeat sales indices are based on houses that have been sold or appraised twice. Because they pertain
to the same property, they control for a number of hedonic characteristics (bedrooms, neighborhood safety, etc.). See
Pollakowski (1995) for a literature review and a description of data availability.


Regional Housing Collateral Ratio The regional collateral ratio my i is measured in the same way as the
                                                                                                                   i
aggregate
    i  collateral ratio my . We regress the difference between the log real per capita housing value log hv =
log HV
     p a,i and the log real per capita labor income on a constant and a time trend. The housing collateral ratio is the
residual from that regression. The resulting measure is available for 1975-2000.

                                                     [Table 10 about here.]


C.5      Canadian Data
All data for Canada are from Statistics Canada (CANSIM), obtained from the Provincial Economic Accounts. They
span the period 1981-2003, and the cross-section contains 10 provinces: Alberta, British Columbia, Manitoba, New
Brunswick, Newfoundland and Labrador, Nova Scotia, Ontario, Quebec, Saskatchewan, and Prince Edward Island.
We also use aggregate data for Canada. Consumption at the aggregate and regional level is measured as personal
expenditures on non-durables and services less personal expenditures on durable goods. income is defined as personal
disposable income. For each region, there is also a consumer price index and a population series available. The
corresponding tables are 384-002 and 384-002.
    The housing wealth data measure the stock of fixed residential capital for single and multiple dwellings. The series
measures the end-of-year net stock at current prices, and are available from 1941 onwards. This value represents the
cost of replacing the depreciated residential stock and is constructed using the perpetual inventory method. These
series are available for Canada, as well as the ten provinces. The table is 030-0002.
    As for the U.S. data, we calculate regional consumption shares are the ratio of real per capita regional consumption
to real per capita aggregate consumption. We do the same for the income measure. We compute growth rates of
the shares as log changes. The regional and aggregate housing collateral ratios my are computed as the residual from
a regression of the log housing wealth-to-income ratio on a constant and a trend. The collateral scarcity measure is
                      my max −myt
            f =
computed as my       my max −my min ,   where my max and my mi n are the sample maximum and minimum. In our sample, the
maximum value for my is reached in 2003 (0.0495), and the minimum in 1985 (-.1102).




                                                              42
                         Table 1: Income Growth Elasticity of Consumption Shares in Data



                                       Coll. Measure               b1      σb1           b2           σb2          R2
                                       1         my r w            .35    (.03)         -.30         (.26)         6.5
                                       2           my f a          .36    (.03)        -1.74         (.50)         6.8
                                       3         my r w            .33    (.02)         -.64         (.17)         4.7
                                       4           my f a          .37    (.02)        -2.12         (.31)         5.0
                                       5         my r w            .48    (.02)        -1.03         (.23)        10.5
                                       6           my f a          .51    (.03)        -1.13         (.30)        10.4
                                       7         my r w            .31    (.04)         -.32         (.38)
                                       8           my f a          .32    (.04)        -1.75         (.64)

                                i
                                                                                        
Notes: We estimate: ∆ log c̃t+1      = b0i + b1 ∆ log η̂t+1
                                                         i      + b2 myt+1 ∆ log η̂t+1i           i
                                                                                             + νt+1  . Rows 1-2 are for the period 1952-2002 (1166
observations). Rows 3-4 are identical to rows 1-2 but are for the period 1970-2002 (759 observations). The measure of regional income
is disposable personal income in rows 1-4 and 7-8. Regressions 5-6 use labor income plus transfers, available only for 1970-2000. In each
block, the rows use the variables my r w and my f a, estimated for the period 1925-2002. my max (my mi n ) is the sample maximum (minimum)
in 1925-2002. The coefficients on the fixed effect are not reported. Estimation is by feasible Generalized Least Squares, allowing for
both cross-section heteroscedasticity and contemporaneous correlation. Rows 7-8 are the results for the instrumental variable estimation
                                             i
by 3SLS. Instruments are a constant, log(η̂t+2             i
                                                 ), log(η̂t+3           i
                                                               ), log(η̂t+4 ), ∆ρ̂it+2 , ∆ρ̂it+3 , ∆ρ̂it+4 , log(c̃t+2
                                                                                                                   i            i
                                                                                                                       ), log(c̃t+3          i
                                                                                                                                    ), log(c̃t+4 ), and myt+2 ,
myt+3 , myt+4 . The sample is 1952-1998 (1051 observations). All results are for 23 US metropolitan areas.




                        Table 2: Income Growth Elasticity of Consumption Shares in Model



                               β            b1                b2          R2          mymi n        mymax          mean(my )
                              .95          0.385            −1.596       0.077        0.026          0.267               .106
                              .90          0.552            −1.498       0.074        0.034          0.284               .106
                              .85          0.553            −1.434       0.068        0.034          0.266               .106
                              .75          0.628            −1.883       0.071        0.042          0.277               .106


Notes: The sample is a model-simulated panel for 1000 years (annual data) and 100 regions with γ = 2, ǫ = .5 and the AR(1) process for
the non-housing
                  expenditure share in equation (2.5). Each  rowi corresponds to a different value of the time discount factor β. We estimate:
        i
∆ log ĉt+1   = b0i + b1 ∆ log η̂t+1
                                 i                        i
                                       + b2 myt+1 ∆ log η̂t+1   + νt+1 . The first 3 columns report the slope coefficient and the regression’s R2 .
The three last columns of the table report the min, max and mean of the collateral ratio myt over the simulated sample. The mean of my
is .10 and the mean of my f is .71.




                                                                               43
                                       Table 3: Cross-Regional Variation in Collateral.


                           fi
                           my           std(∆ log(cti ))           cor r (∆ log(cti ), ∆ log(cta ))         Slope       [t-stat]         R2
                  1       0.842             0.033                               0.257                       0.659       [1.896]          .13
                  2       0.577             0.032                               0.233                       0.354       [0.987]          .04
                  3       0.407             0.018                               0.278                       0.472       [1.757]          .11
                  4       0.226             0.028                               0.502                       0.319       [1.283]          .06


Notes: Quartiles ranked from high to low collateral scarcity. The sample is 1975-2000 (annual data). All results are for 23 US metropolitan
                                                                                                f it . The first column reports the average
areas sorted each year into quartiles based on that period/region’s collateral scarcity measure my
collateral scarcity overt the sample for each quartile. The second column reports the standard deviation of average population-weighted
non-durable consumption growth in each quartile. The third column reports the correlation with real per capita US non-durable consumption
growth (NIPA). The fourth column reports the slope coefficient in a time series regression of average population-weighted consumption
share growth on average population-weighted income share growth for each quartile. The regional income measure is disposable personal
income. The fifth and sixth columns reports the t-stat and regression R2 .




                          Table 4: Risk-Sharing Tests with Regional Collateral Measures.


                      Coll. Measure          b1            σb1            b2            σb2            b3            σb3           R2
                      1         HO i         .45           (.02)         -.11           (.03)                                      6.1
                      2         my i         .40           (.02)         -.57           (.12)                                      6.2
                      3         my i         .39           (.02)         -.45         (0.14)          -0.03         (0.003)        6.6

                                                                           i
                                                                                                                               
Notes: Rows 1 and 2 of the table reports estimation results for ∆ log ĉt+1       = b0i + b1 ∆ log η̂t+1
                                                                                                     i           i
                                                                                                           + b2 Xt+1         i
                                                                                                                     ∆ log η̂t+1      i
                                                                                                                                   + νt+1 . Rows
                                                                                                         
3 of the table reports estimation results for ∆ log ĉt+1 = b0 + b1 ∆ log η̂t+1 + b2 Xt+1 ∆ log η̂t+1 + b3 Xt+1 + νt+1 . In row 1, X i is
                                                        i       i             i            i           i           i       i

the region-specific home-ownership rate (575 observations). In row 2 and row 3, X i = my i is the region-specific housing collateral ratio
(569 observations). It is measured as the residual from a regression of the log ratio of real per capita regional housing wealth to real per
capita labor income, log(hvti ) − log(ηti ), on a constant and a time trend. A higher my i means more abundant collateral in region i. In
all regressions η is disposable income. The coefficients on the fixed effect b0i is not reported. Estimation is by feasible Generalized Least
Squares allowing for both cross-section heteroscedasticity and contemporaneous correlation. All regressions are for the period 1975-2000
for 23 US metropolitan areas, the longest period with metropolitan housing data.




                                                                               44
                                      Table 5: Risk-Sharing Tests with Canadian Data.


                                                                                 Panel A
                    Coll. Measure          b1         σb1          b2           σb2                                         R2
                    1        my f a        .15       (.02)        -2.03        (.41)                                       37.3
                    2         my i         .18       (.02)        -.83         (.28)                                       34.9
                                                                          Panel B: Wealth Effect
                    Coll. Measure          b1         σb1          b2           σb2            b3             σb3           R2
                    3         my i         .18       (.02)        -.78         (0.29)       −0.008         (0.002)         35.1

                                                                i
                                                                                                                   
Notes: Row 1 (panel A) reports estimation results for ∆ log ĉt+1     = b0i + b1 ∆ log η̂t+1
                                                                                         i           i
                                                                                               + b2 Xt+1         i
                                                                                                         ∆ log η̂t+1      i
                                                                                                                       + νt+1 . Finally, row 3 (panel
                                            i
                                                   i              i
                                                                                i           i
                                                                                                        i       i
B) reports estimation results for ∆ log ĉt+1 = b0 + b1 ∆ log η̂t+1 + b2 Xt+1 ∆ log η̂t+1 + b3 Xt+1 + νt+1 . Rows 1 uses the aggregate
collateral measure for Canada my f a. In rows 2 and 3, X i is the regional collateral measure my i in Canadian province i. Both the aggregate
and regional housing collateral ratios are measured as the residual from a regression of the log ratio of real per capita regional housing wealth
to real per capita labor income on a constant and a time trend. The coefficients on the fixed effect, a0i or b0i are not reported. Estimation
is by feasible Generalized Least Squares allowing for both cross-section heteroscedasticity and contemporaneous correlation. All regressions
are for the period 1981-2003 for 10 Canadian provinces. The panel contains 220 observations.




                                                                          45
                         Table 6: Population and Composition of Metropolitan Areas.


                    Anchorage (AK), MSA                  261       Miami CMSA                              3,897
                    Atlanta (GA), MSA                    4,145       Miami, FL                             58.1%
                    Baltimore (MD), MSA                  2,557       Fort Lauderdale, FL                   41.9%
                    Boston CMSA                          6,068     Milwaukee CMSA                          1,691
                      Boston, MA-NH                      58.6%       Milwaukee-Waukesha, WI                88.8%
                      Worcester, MA-CT                   8.7%        Racine, WI                            11.2%
                      Lawrence, MA-NH                    6.7%      Minneapolis (MN-WI) MSA                 2,797
                      Lowell, MA-NH                      5.1%      New York CMSA                           21,134
                      Brockton, MA                       4.3%        New York, NY                          45.5%
                      Portsmouth-Rochester, NH-ME        4.2%        Bergen-Passaic, NJ                    6.6%
                      Manchester, NH                     3.4%        Bridgeport, CT                        0.5%
                      Nashua, NH                         3.3%        Dutchess County, NY                   1.2%
                      New Bedford, MA                    3.2%        Danbury, CT                           0.4%
                      Fitchburg-Leominster, MA           2.5%        Jersey City, NJ                       3.0%
                    Buffalo (NY), MSA                    1,169       Middlesex-Somerset-Hunterdon, NJ      5.6%
                    Chicago CMSA                         9,176       Monmouth-Ocean, NJ                    5.4%
                      Chicago, IL                        90.3%       Nassau-Suffolk, NY                    13.5%
                      Gary, IN                           6.9%        Newburgh, NY-PA                       1.8%
                      Kenosha, WI                        1.6%        Newark, NJ                            9.9%
                      Kankakee, IL                       1.1%        New Haven-Meriden, CT                 6.2%
                    Cincinnati CMSA                      1,983       Stamford-Norwalk, CT                  0.6%
                      Cincinnati, OH-KY-IN               92.6%       Trenton, NJ                           1.7%
                      Hamilton-Middletown, OH            7.4%        Waterbury, CT                         0.5%
                    Cleveland CMSA                       2,946     Philadelphia CMSA                       6,194
                      Cleveland-Lorain-Elyria, OH        76.4%       Philadelphia, PA-NJ                   82.4%
                      Akron, OH                          23.6%       Wilmington, NC                        9.5%
                    Dallas CMSA                          5,254       Atlantic-Cape May, NJ                 5.7%
                      Dallas, TX                         67.4%       Vineland-Millville-Bridgeton, NJ      2.3%
                      Fort Worth-Arlington, TX           32.6%     Phoenix - Mesa MSA                      3,276
                    Denver CMSA                          2,597     Pittsburgh (PA), MSA                    2,356
                      Denver, CO                         81.7%     Portland CMSA                           2,273
                      Boulder-Longmont, CO               11.3%       Portland-Vancouver, OR-WA             84.7%
                      Greeley, CO                        7.0%        Salem, OR                             15.3%
                    Detroit CMSA                         5,463     Saint Louis (MO-IL), MSA                2,606
                      Detroit, MI                        81.4%     San Diego (CA), MSA                     2,825
                      Ann Arbor, MI                      10.6%     San Francisco CMSA                      7,056
                      Flint, MI                          8.0%        San Francisco, CA                     24.6%
                    Honolulu (HI), MSA                   876         San Jose, CA                          23.9%
                    Houston CMSA                         4,694       Oakland, CA                           34.1%
                      Houston, TX                        89.5%       Vallejo-Fairfield-Napa, CA            7.4%
                      Galveston-Texas City, TX           5.3%        Santa Cruz-Watsonville, CA            3.6%
                      Brazoria, TX                       5.2%        Santa Rosa, CA                        6.5%
                    Kansas City (MO-KS), MSA             1,782     Seattle CMSA                            3,562
                    Los Angeles CMSA                     16,440      Seattle-Bellevue-Everett, WA          67.9%
                      Los Angeles-Long Beach, CA         58.1%       Tacoma, WA                            19.8%
                      Orange County, CA                  17.4%       Bremerton, WA                         6.5%
                      Riverside-San Bernardino, CA       20.0%       Olympia, WA                           5.8%
                      Ventura, CA                        4.6%      Tampa (FL), MSA                         2,404
                                                                   Washington,DC-MD-VA-WV, PMSA            4,948

Total population numbers (in thousands) are displayed next to the metropolitan areas. For the Consolidated Metropolitan areas (CMSA),
the constituent MSA’s are listed and the fraction of their population in the total of the CMSA is shown next to their name. All numbers
are from the Regional Economic Information System of the Bureau of Economic Analysis for the year 2000.




                                                                  46
                                   Table 7: Comparison With Aggregate US data.

                         Year     HH       metr. HH      NDS      NDS to       DS       DS to     EBI      EBI to
                                 (000)       (%)          ($)      NDC         ($)       DC       ($)        DI
                        1951     17,623      39.4        3,008     1.23        799      1.36     5,959      1.15
                        1960     23,080      43.7        3,519     1.22        899      1.26     7,711      1.11
                        1970     28,332      44.7        4,688     1.09       1,180     1.05     11,936     1.03
                        1980     36,144      44.7        9,683     1.12       2,660     1.24     24,975     1.00
                        1990     41,784      44.8       15,418     1.15       5,531     1.37     43,698     0.95
                        2000     49,379      47.2       24,741     1.30      11,888     1.90     56,566     0.83

The first column gives the number of households in the metropolitan data set. The second column gives the fraction of US households
that are in the metropolitan data set. The third column gives the nondurable retail sales per household (in $) in the metropolitan data set
(NDS). The fourth column gives the ratio of non-durable retail sales per household to non-durable consumption per household in the NIPA
data (NDC). The fifth and sixth column do the same for durable sales and consumption (DS and DC). The seventh and eight column give
the effective buying income per household in the metropolitan data set (EBI) and the ratio of the latter to disposable income per household
from NIPA (DI).




                                      Table 8: Comparison With Household Data.

                                               MSA                    Nond.Cons       Dur.Cons   Income
                                    Washington, DC (PMSA)               0.926          0.660      0.973
                                     Baltimore, MD (PMSA)               0.973          0.791      0.956
                                       Atlanta, GA (MSA)                0.740          0.522      0.944
                                       Miami, FL (CMSA)                 0.533          0.399      0.922
                                       Dallas, TX (CMSA)                0.939          0.839      0.917
                                      Houston, TX (CMSA)                0.936          0.955      0.932
                                    Los Angeles, CA (CMSA)              0.836          0.845      0.944
                                   San Francisco, CA (CMSA)             0.921          0.797      0.981
                                     San Diego, CA (MSA)                0.838          0.511      0.961
                                      Portland, OR (CMSA)               0.989          0.932      0.973
                                      Seattle, WA (CMSA)                0.928          0.841      0.935
                                       Honolulu, HI (MSA)               0.858          0.409      0.956
                                     Anchorage, AK (MSA)                0.931          0.601      0.847
                                     New York, NY (CMSA)                0.952          0.727      0.957
                                    Philadelphia, PA (CMSA)             0.812          0.698      0.932
                                      Boston, MA (CMSA)                 0.876          0.515      0.799
                                      Pittsburgh, PA (MSA)              0.921          0.759      0.846
                                       Chicago, IL (CMSA)               0.803          0.601      0.953
                                       Detroit, MI (CMSA)               0.960          0.534      0.956
                                     Milwaukee, WI (CMSA)               0.792          0.636      0.949
                                 Minneapolis-St, Paul, MN (MSA)         0.940          0.863      0.972
                                     Cleveland, OH (CMSA)               0.881          0.878      0.956
                                     Cincinnati, OH (CMSA)              0.898          0.864      0.974
                                      St. Louis, MO (MSA)               0.881          0.815      0.945
                                   Kansas City, MO-KS (MSA)             0.958          0.708      0.961
                                             Average                    0.881          0.708      0.938

Correlation of household non-durable consumption, durable consumption and income data, aggregated by the CEX for metropolitan areas
and the metropolitan area non-durable and durable retail sales and disposable income data from S&MM.




                                                                   47
                                Table 9: Comparison With Regional Income Data
                                South and West          Coeff.        Northeast and Midwest           Corr.
                           Washington, DC (PMSA)         0.79         New York, NY (CMSA)             0.84
                            Baltimore, MD (PMSA)         0.42        Philadelphia, PA (CMSA)          0.82
                              Atlanta, GA (MSA)          0.73          Boston, MA (CMSA)              0.73
                              Miami, FL (CMSA)          -0.18          Pittsburgh, PA (MSA)           0.57
                              Dallas, TX (CMSA)          0.63           Buffalo, NY (MSA)             0.77
                             Houston, TX (CMSA)          0.86           Chicago, IL (CMSA)            0.76
                           Los Angeles, CA (CMSA)        0.85           Detroit, MI (CMSA)            0.74
                          San Francisco, CA (CMSA)       0.65         Milwaukee, WI (CMSA)            0.12
                            San Diego, CA (MSA)          0.75     Minneapolis-St, Paul, MN (MSA)      0.70
                            Portland, OR (CMSA)          0.57         Cleveland, OH (CMSA)            0.90
                             Seattle, WA (CMSA)          0.60         Cincinnati, OH (CMSA)           -0.23
                              Honolulu, HI (MSA)         0.84          St. Louis, MO (MSA)            0.54
                            Anchorage, AK (MSA)          0.80       Kansas City, MO-KS (MSA)          0.57
                              Phoenix, AZ (MSA)          0.83
                             Denver, CO (CMSA)           0.67                 Average                 0.64

Correlation of regional disposable income from S&MM and labor income plus Transfers from REIS.




                          Table 10: Median Home Value and Home-Ownership Rate.

                                              MSA                     V80      V00    HO80     HO00
                                 Washington, DC (PMSA)                79.9    178.9   54.3     64.0
                                 Baltimore, MD (PMSA)                 51.4    134.9   60.0     66.9
                                 Atlanta, GA (MSA)                    47.7    135.3   61.4     66.4
                                 Miami, FL (CMSA)                     57.0    126.1   61.5     63.2
                                 Dallas-Fort Worth, TX (CMSA)         45.6    100.0   64.7     60.4
                                 Houston, TX (CMSA)                   52.8    89.7    59.1     60.7
                                 Tampa, FL (MSA)                      39.9    93.8    71.7     70.8
                                 San Francisco, CA (CMSA)              98.4   353.5     55.8   57.8
                                 Los Angeles, CA (CMSA)                87.6   203.3     53.8   54.8
                                 San Diego, CA (MSA)                   90.0   227.2     55.1   55.4
                                 Portland, OR (CMSA)                   60.8   165.4     63.2   63.0
                                 Seattle, WA (CMSA)                    66.0   195.4     63.8   62.9
                                 Honolulu, HI (MSA)                   129.5   309.0     49.9   54.6
                                 Anchorage, AK (MSA)                   89.2   160.7     56.6   60.1
                                 Denver, CO (CMSA)                     69.1   179.5     63.0   66.4
                                 Phoenix, AZ (MSA)                     59.2   127.9     68.7   68.0
                                 New York, NY (CMSA)                  62.5    203.1     44.2   53.0
                                 Philadelphia, PA (CMSA)              42.2    122.3     67.7   69.9
                                 Boston, MA (CMSA)                    52.0    203.0     54.8   60.6
                                 Pittsburgh, PA (MSA)                 42.7    68.1      69.0   71.3
                                 Buffalo, NY (MSA)                    39.7    89.1      63.7   66.2
                                 Chicago, IL (CMSA)                   62.8    159.0     58.5   65.2
                                 Detroit, MI (CMSA)                   43.5    132.6     70.2   72.2
                                 Milwaukee, WI (CMSA)                 59.2    131.9     61.1   62.1
                                 Minneapolis-St, Paul, MN (MSA)       62.3    141.2     67.2   72.4
                                 Cleveland, OH (CMSA)                 52.1    117.9     66.6   68.8
                                 Cincinnati, OH (CMSA)                47.9    116.5     63.8   67.1
                                 St. Louis, MO (MSA)                  41.8    99.4      68.2   71.4
                                 Kansas City, MO-KS (MSA)             43.5    104.7     66.4   67.9
                                 Tampa, FL (MSA)                      59.9    85.2      73.0   71.0

The table shows median home values for 1980 and 2000 (in thousands of nominal dollars) and the home ownership rate for 1980 and 2000.
All data are from the US Bureau of the Census, Decennial Survey 1980 and 2000




                                                                 48
                                                                                                                         Std(cons)/std(y)
                                                                                  0.7                                                                                        1.8




                                                                                  0.6                                                                                        1.6




                                                                                                                                                                                   Consumption−to−Income Dispersion
                                                            Collateral Scarcity
                                                                                  0.5                                                                                        1.4




                                                                                  0.4                                                                                        1.2




                                                                                  0.3                                                                                        1




                                                                                  0.2                                                                                        0.8
                                                                                        1952         1962         1972        Year          1982         1992         2002




          Figure 1: Housing Collateral Scarcity and Consumption/Income Dispersion in Data.
This figure plots the ratio of regional consumption-to-income dispersion (dashed line, plotted against the right axis). Both consumption and
income are measured in deviation from the cross-regional mean. The solid line is our collateral scarcity measure, plotted against the left
axis. The sample consists of annual data from 1952 until 2002 for 23 US Metropolitan Statistical Areas. The data are discussed in section
3.1.




                                                            1.5                                                                                                                                                         1


                                                            1.4                                                                                                                                                         0.95


                                                            1.3                                                                                                                                                         0.9


                                                            1.2                                                                                                                                                         0.85
                         Consumption−to−Income Dispersion




                                                            1.1                                                                                                                                                         0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               collateral scarcity



                                                                     1                                                                                                                                                  0.75


                                                            0.9                                                                                                                                                         0.7


                                                            0.8                                                                                                                                                         0.65


                                                            0.7                                                                                                                                                         0.6


                                                            0.6                                                                                                                                                         0.55


                                                            0.5                                                                                                                                                         0.5
                                                                                  0            50   100     150    200          250         300    350          400   450                                             500
                                                                                                                         Simulation Periods




         Figure 2: Housing Collateral Scarcity and Consumption/Income Dispersion in Model.
                                                                                      f (solid line, measured against the right axis) against
The figure plots a simulated time path for T = 500 of the collateral scarcity measure my
the ratio of regional consumption dispersion to regional income dispersion (dashed line, measured against the left axis). The parameters are
γ = 2, ǫ = .5, β = .95. The average collateral ratio is 10 percent.




                                                                                                                               49
                                             Consumption−to−Income Dispersion
                                                                                1.4

                                                                                1.3

                                                                                1.2

                                                                                1.1

                                                                                 1

                                                                                0.9

                                                                                0.8

                                                                                0.7
                                                                                           0.4        0.5        0.6            0.7    0.8    0.9        1
                                                                                                                 Collateral Scarcity
                          Consumption−to−Income Dispersion


                                                                                0.5

                                                                          0.45

                                                                                0.4

                                                                          0.35

                                                                                0.3

                                                                          0.25

                                                                                0.2
                                                                                           0.4        0.5        0.6            0.7    0.8    0.9        1
                                                                                                                 Collateral Scarcity




                                                                                Figure 3: The Quantity Anomaly at the Regional Level.
Scatter diagram of collateral and consumption-to-income dispersion ratios. The upper panel is for regions. The lower panel is for households.
                                                                                           gt (horizontal axis) against the ratio of regional
The figure plots, for a simulated time path (T = 2, 500), the collateral scarcity measure my
consumption dispersion (cross-sectional standard deviation of regional consumption in levels) to regional income dispersion (cross-sectional
standard deviation of regional income in levels)(vertical axis, upper panel), and household consumption-to-income dispersion (vertical axis,
lower panel) (again consumption and income in levels). The parameters are γ = 2, ǫ = .5, β = .95. The average collateral ratio is 10
percent.


                     2


                   1.5


                     1


                   0.5


                     0
                                      10                                              20         30         40     50            60    70    80     90       100



                   1.4


                   1.2


                     1


                   0.8


                   0.6
                                      10                                              20         30         40     50            60    70    80     90       100




                                                        Figure 4: Household and Regional Consumption Dynamics.
Simulation of 100 observations from equilibrium for benchmark economy. The parameters are γ = 2, ǫ = .5, β = .95. The average collateral
                                                                  ij                                         ij
ratio is 10 percent. The top panel plots household consumption ĉt+1  (full line) against household income η̂t+1 (dotted line) as a share of
the aggregate endowment for household j = 1, 2 in region i. The bottom panel plots regional consumption ĉt+1  i  (full line) against regional
          i
income η̂t+1  (dotted line) as a share of the aggregate endowment for region i.




                                                                                                                     50
                                                                         2




                                     Consumption−to−Income Dispersion
                                                                        1.5




                                                                         1




                                                                        0.5




                                                                         0
                                                                              0   0.02   0.04   0.06    0.08          0.1    0.12   0.14   0.16   0.18
                                                                                                       Collateral Ratio my




                           Figure 5: Risk Sharing and Consumption/Income Dispersion.
Scatter Plot of the ratio of the cross-sectional standard deviation of regional consumption to the cross-sectional standard deviation of
                       i
regional income std(ĉˆi ) against the collateral ratio my . Simulation from steady-state equilibria for an economy without aggregate risk.
                 std(η )
Each dot represents an equilibrium for the economy with the housing collateral ratio displayed on the horizontal axis. The parameters are
γ = 2, ǫ = .5, β = .95. The collateral ratio my varies from 1 percent to 18 percent.




                                                                        0.4



                                                                  0.35



                                                                        0.3
                           Slope Coefficient




                                                                  0.25



                                                                        0.2



                                                                  0.15



                                                                        0.1



                                                                  0.05
                                                                              0   0.02   0.04   0.06    0.08          0.1    0.12   0.14   0.16   0.18
                                                                                                       Collateral Ratio my




           Figure 6: Risk Sharing and Sensitivity of Consumption Growth to Income Growth.
Scatter Plot of the slope coefficient in a consumption growth regression against the collateral ratio my . We run the following cross-sectional
                    i
regression: ∆ log ĉt+1                    i
                        = a0 + a1 ∆ log η̂t+1  + εit+1 , i = 1, . . . , 5000 with a panel of 5000 households. The figure plots a1 against my .
Simulation from steady-state equilibria for an economy without aggregate risk. Each dot represents an equilibrium for the economy with
the housing collateral ratio displayed on the horizontal axis. The parameters are γ = 2, ǫ = .5, β = .95. The collateral ratio my varies from
1 percent to 18 percent.




                                                                                                           51
