NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A PORTRAIT OF THE ARTIST AS A VERY YOUNG
OR VERY OLD INNOVATOR:
CREATIVITY AT THE EXTREMES OF THE LIFE CYCLE
David W. Galenson
Working Paper 10515
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10515
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2004

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2004 by David W. Galenson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

A Portrait of the Artist as a Very Young or Very Old Innovator:
Creativity at the Extremes of the Life Cycle
David W. Galenson
NBER Working Paper No. 10515
May 2004
JEL No. J4
ABSTRACT
Orson Wells made Citizen Kane, his greatest movie, when he was 25 years old; Frank Lloyd Wright
designed Fallingwater, his most famous house, when he was 70. Contrasts as great as this raise the
question of whether there is a general explanation of when in their lives great innovators are most
creative. For each of seven artistic disciplines, this paper examines a major innovation made by a
very young artist, and another made by an old one, with the goal of understanding the role of the
artist's age and experience in the accomplishment. The analysis shows why youth was necessary for
the innovations of such conceptual artists as F. Scott Fitzgerald, Arthur Rimbaud, Maya Lin, and
Orson Welles, all of whom produced their masterpieces before the age of 30, and why extensive
experience was necessary for the innovations of such experimental artists as Piet Mondrian,
Elizabeth Bishop, Henrik Ibsen, and Frank Lloyd Wright, all of whom made major contributions
after the age of 60. This paper demonstrates the generality of the distinction between conceptual and
experimental innovators in artistic disciplines, and the value of the analysis in explaining the very
different relationships between age and creativity for the two types of artist.
David W. Galenson
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
sogrodow@midway.uchicago.edu

3

As I believe no man a real poet or genius of any sort who does not
go on improving till eighty and over, I shall begin again and again
as often as you set me right.
Robert Browning to
Thomas Carlyle, 18561
You know, the great mystery that requires 20 years doesn’t exist in
any field.
Orson Welles, 19602
Recent research on important painters, poets, and novelists has established that there are
two different types of creativity, and that each is associated with a distinct life cycle of important
achievements.3 Conceptual innovators arrive suddenly at innovations based on new ideas. These
often constitute immediate and radical changes in basic conventions of their disciplines.
Although these innovations can be made at any time, the most radical, and consequently the most
important, usually occur early in a career, when the artist has not yet become committed to habits
of thought about the discipline, and is better able to perceive and appreciate extreme deviations
from existing methods and practices.
In contrast, experimental innovators arrive gradually at innovations based more heavily
on perception. Their major innovations normally appear piecemeal in increments, which are the
results of an extended period of trial and error. The greatest experimental innovations are based
on long chains of experimentation, and therefore usually emerge only after many years of work,
late in an artist’s career.
The purpose of this paper is to sharpen our understanding of this analysis by examining a
series of extreme examples of both types of creativity. These are drawn both from the artistic
disciplines that have already been considered in this regard and from others that have not

4
previously been studied. Examining extreme cases - of important innovations made very early or
very late in artists’ careers - can serve to spotlight the most basic differences between the
conceptual and experimental approaches. Doing this in a wide variety of activities can
furthermore underscore the most basic elements that are common to each of the two types of
innovation.
The conceptual innovations considered here were all made by artists aged 31 or younger;
one was produced by a poet at the age of just 16. The experimental innovations studied here were
all made by artists aged 58 and above; two were made by artists above the age of 70. All these
innovations were among the most important works of very important members of their
disciplines, and consequently most rank among the most important contributions to the
respective disciplines in their times. They include what many literature critics consider the Great
American Novel, and what most film critics consider the Great American Movie - indeed, the
Greatest Movie Ever Made.
In every one of the following case studies, the goal is to understand the role of the artist’s
age, and career experience, in the accomplishment of the specific achievement selected. Thus for
the conceptual innovators a basic question is how an artist so young can make such an important
contribution to a discipline: what characteristics of the innovation reflect the artist’s youth? For
the experimental innovators, a basic question is why this late work is more important than most,
or all, of the artist’s earlier output: what about this innovation was aided by the artist’s
considerable experience? By asking these questions about these many individual masterpieces in
a diverse group of arts, we can gain greater insight into how age affects the production of major
artistic advances.

5
Fine Artists
If Picasso is the archetypal finder, who, then, is the seeker?
Mondrian, no doubt.
David Sylvester, 19954
I couldn’t imagine a more banal activity than simply providing
visual kicks to the public.
Joseph Kosuth, 19705
Piet Mondrian arrived in New York in October, 1940, after the windows of his London
studio were broken and the house next to his was destroyed by German bombs. Mondrian
painted in New York for the next 3 ½ years, until his death in 1944. He spent much of that time
working on a group of paintings he had started in Paris and London and brought with him to
New York, and he consequently began and completed only three new paintings while in New
York. The last of these, Broadway Boogie-Woogie, which he completed in 1943, is reproduced in
more textbooks of art history than any other painting Mondrian executed in his career of more
than 50 years.6 Remarkably, therefore, the last painting Mondrian completed, at the age of 71, is
considered by art historians to be the most important one he ever made.
Mondrian’s goals for his art were both vast and imprecise. He wrote extensively, if often
incomprehensibly, about the purposes of art and the means of achieving them. Both were
influenced by Mondrian’s belief in Theosophy. Carel Blotkamp explained that Mondrian took
from Theosophy the conviction “that all life is directed towards evolution, and that ... it is the
goal of art to give expression to that evolution.”7 A key turning point in Mondrian’s art occurred
around the time of his move from his native Holland to Paris in 1912, when his recognition of
the importance of Cubism led him to believe that abstraction could present a purer version of
reality, and consequently represent a more advanced stage of evolution. The aim of his art

6
became the creation of relationships between colors, and between shapes, that would transcend
naturalism:
Pure abstract art becomes completely emancipated, free of
naturalistic appearances. It is no longer natural harmony but
creates equivalent relationships. The realization of equivalent
relationships is of the highest importance for life. Only in this way
can social and economic freedom, peace, and happiness be
achieved.8
Mondrian believed that artists could serve as leaders of society in moving toward these universal
goals. He recognized that the goals were distant, but he was patient: “he never rushed himself,
apparently convinced that evolution in art, as in the universe, was an extremely slow process.”9
Mondrian’s working methods were explicitly based on intuition: “Pure intuition becomes
conscious through long culture and creates pure abstract art, which arises neither from intellect
nor from vague intuitive feeling.”10 Although his geometric compositions are often assumed to
be the result of calculation, he told a friend this was never the case:
I believe that it is possible by means of horizontal and vertical
lines, created consciously but not calculatingly, guided by a higher
intuition and brought to harmony and rhythm... to arrive at a work
of art which is as strong as it is true ... And chance must be as far
removed as calculation.11
The artist Harry Holzman, who financed Mondrian’s immigration to the United States and later
became his heir, confirmed Mondrian’s claim:
There was no program, no symbols, no “geometry” or system of
measure; only intuition determined the total rhythm of the
relationships, by trial and error. The given space of the canvas, the
given tension of its proportion, its size, were likewise
experimentally determined and varied. Intuitive experience for
Mondrian could only be direct, immediate, sensual.12
The criteria that guided Mondrian’s experimentation were aesthetic. An artist who knew

7
Mondrian in Paris recalled watching him work in the 1920s: “if the black line was too thick, he’d
take a piece of white paper, or a paper of about the same color as the color planes next to that
line, and then he pasted it onto the canvas, and then held it at a distance to see ‘is the line the way
I want it or not.’”13 Similarly, a friend from his last years in New York explained that Mondrian
proceeded visually: “He tests each picture over a long period by eye: it is a physical adjustment
of proportion through training, intuition, and testing.”14
Mondrian’s art developed gradually over decades of experimentation. John Golding has
pointed out that from an early stage of his career he worked in series, indicating that he was
concerned with themes rather than individual motifs.15 Michel Seuphor recalled that although the
differences between two paintings might appear insignificant to a layman, Mondrian often
considered the changes significant: “‘Even so, it’s another step,’ he once said to a friend who
was studying a new picture of his, ‘or don’t you think so? Don’t you find that it represents even a
little step forward?’”16 Mondrian’s dogged persistence made the cumulative effect of these many
little steps very great. As David Sylvester reflected, “A Mondrian retrospective is not just a
procession of great pictures, but a progression which in itself is an aesthetic experience: the
trajectory of the man’s art becomes as much a thing of beauty as the art.”17 The observation is
apt, for Mondrian’s lifelong quest came to have a goal more complex than simply making
images. A scholar who recently studied a group of paintings that Mondrian executed during the
last decade of his life concluded that “Mondrian’s painting practice in New York seems to reflect
an accelerating doubt about whether it is possible, or even desirable, ever to finish a painting...
Mondrian had not abandoned the idea of a product, just redefined it as a discovery or a solution,
not a painting.”18 Thus the painter Carl Holty wrote of visiting Mondrian’s studio in New York:

8
“Watching the pictures change into others as he worked, I asked him whether he wasn’t losing
good pictures in numbers because of his exigence. He said, ‘I don’t want pictures. I just want to
find things out.’”19
Mondrian’s method of constructing his paintings involved extended revision and
correction, due to his uncertainty, but the geometric shapes and limited palette of primary colors
that made up his finished work are often taken to imply that his completed paintings are
impersonal and mechanical. So for example Clement Greenberg’s obituary of the painter
predicted that “Mondrian will be reproached for the anonymity with which he strove for the
ruled precision of the geometer and the machine in executing his paintings: their conceptions can
be communicated by a set of specifications and dimensions, sight unseen, and realized by a
draftsman.”20 A number of artists and critics denied this, however. John Coplans observed that,
particularly in Mondrian’s late works, “a very pronounced brushwork is an important
compositional element of his painting.” Coplans contended that in fact the surface of Mondrian’s
paintings subtly expressed the uncertainty and doubt that lay at the core of his art:
Perfection and imperfection lie side by side within his paintings,
mutually contradicting one another - the razor-sharp edge of the
black lines contrasted against the suffused surfaces. This conflict
between means and ends transmits a psychic tension... [T]his
duality serves as a check against ritualization and virtuosity and
enables his work to transmit the drama of search and struggle
without making a spectacle of it.21
Mondrian’s artistic goals, practices, and extended progress identify him as a
quintessentially experimental artist. The key question is how this helps us to understand why
Broadway Boogie-Woogie emerges as his most important individual work. The answer appears
to be that in this late painting Mondrian combined a number of elements that he had developed

9
and painstakingly refined over the course of more than 30 years with several bold new devices.
Meyer Schapiro pointed out the elements of Broadway Boogie-Woogie that Mondrian drew from
his own earlier work: “We see again the stabilizing grid; the molecular scattered units; the
repeated arrays of primary color as in his Neo-Impressionist phase; and the composition of large
squares applied as separate planes of color.”22 All these components had first appeared in
Mondrian’s paintings between 1909 and 1917. To these long-established elements of his
vocabulary Mondrian then added significant new departures. Thus in Broadway Boogie-Woogie
he eliminated the network of black lines that had characterized his work since his first encounter
with Cubism. As he explained to a curator, in 1943 he had decided that his use of black lines to
define planes constituted drawing rather than painting: “In drawing, the lines are the principal
means of expression; in painting, the color planes.”23 At the same time Mondrian introduced a
new illusion of three-dimensionality into his work: “At certain crossings of the grid, he has
extended the color of the square unit to a neighboring unit of one or the other band.
Distinguished by this accent, one band seems to come forward in crossing its perpendicular.”24 In
contrast to the stable, architectural effects of his paintings of the previous two decades, in his
great late paintings Mondrian achieved new depth, dynamism, and movement. This was a
product of the wisdom he had gained through four decades of research, based on both a profound
knowledge of his craft and an understanding of the value of the willingness to experiment with
bold new changes: “at the age of seventy-one he was quite prepared to begin his artistic life
anew.”25 Both his expertise and his openness to new approaches were direct consequences of the
experimental nature of Mondrian’s approach to art.
In 1965, while he was a student at New York’s School of Visual Arts, Joseph Kosuth

10
made a work titled One and Three Chairs. It consists of a wooden folding chair, flanked on one
side by a life-size photograph of the same chair, and on the other by an enlarged photograph of a
dictionary definition of the word “chair.” Nearly four decades later, Kosuth is approaching the
age of 60, but One and Three Chairs remains by far his best-known work. A recent study found
that it is in fact the single work made by an American artist during the 1960s that is most often
reproduced in textbooks of art history.26 How did Joseph Kosuth produce a work this important
when he was just 20 years old?
In 1964, Kosuth decided that painting was dead: “It was my belief that painting had been
dried up, used up.”27 He later explained that painting had served to enrich the visual experience
of people who lived prior to the 20th century, but that the development of modern technology movies, television, and transportation - had made this function obsolete: “The visual experiences
of the modern day man make paintings impotent and pathetic trophies to forgotten
aristocracies.”28 For Kosuth, Marcel Duchamp’s innovation of the unassisted readymade - the
presentation of unaltered manufactured objects as works of art - had decisively shifted the
emphasis of art from appearance to conception.29
As a 20-year-old art student, Kosuth consequently decided that being an artist necessarily
involved questioning the nature of art. This could not be done using traditional means: “If you
make paintings, you are already accepting (not questioning) the nature of art.”30 He needed to
find an alternative means that emphasized conception and ideas rather than execution and
objects: “the artist’s duty is really to present new ideas - new ideas about what art is - not just to
make new works within the accepted framework.”31 Part of Kosuth’s solution to this problem lay
in the use of language: “I chose language for the ‘material’ of my work because it seemed the

11
only possibility with the potential for being a neutral non-material.”32 Another part of his
solution lay in using photography “as a non-art device as an alternative to painting within the art
context; I used photography in a way which was detached and indexed to the general use of
photography in the culture, rather than the craft of a ‘fine art’ of photography.” To emphasize the
insignificance of the craft of the photographic process, Kosuth never took his own photographs.33
One and Three Chairs was one of the first products of this combination of language and
photography. Each time it was exhibited, Kosuth would have a new photograph of the chair
taken in its new location. He explained that the change in the object was part of its meaning:
I liked that the work itself was something other than simply what
you saw. By changing the location, the object, the photograph and
still having it remain the same work was very interesting. It meant
that you could have an art work which was that idea of an art
work, and its formal components weren’t important. I felt I had
found a way to make art without formal components being
confused for an expressionist composition. The expression was in
the idea, not the form - the forms were only a device in the service
of the idea.34
Kosuth’s emphasis on avoiding “expressionist composition” places him squarely within a
movement that had begun a decade earlier, in which Jasper Johns, Robert Rauschenberg, Frank
Stella, Andy Warhol, and others had sought to create new forms of art that eliminated the
emotional and psychological symbolism of Abstract Expressionism, which had dominated
American art in the late 1940s and early ‘50s. Yet One and Three Chairs was among the most
radical attempts of the time to move art beyond physical objects into a more purely conceptual
realm. In doing this, it struck a responsive chord with many young artists who wished to separate
art from the commercialism of the market. As Kosuth later recognized, his early innovations
were part of a growing artistic protest against American society: “It is impossible to understand

12
this without understanding the sixties, and appreciate [Conceptual art] for what it was: the art of
the Vietnam war era.”35 Kosuth’s work quickly affected other artists, as both the role of language
and the use of photography became central elements of many of the most important
developments in fine art in the late 1960s and beyond.
As Kosuth grew older, his views of art became somewhat more nuanced, and he qualified
his youthful categorical dismissal of painting. Thus for example at a symposium in 1982, he
explained that “Actually, when I first described [painting] as dead I was a kid - and I was
projecting into the future.”36 But in fact it was apparently the confidence and simplicity of his
youthful view of art that allowed him to make the radical departures from traditional artistic
practices that gained influence with other young artists who were seeking ways to present ideas
without making conventional art objects. That Kosuth could produce a contribution to fine art as
influential as One and Three Chairs at such an early age was a result of his success at creating a
form of art that embodied a complex idea without requiring the command of traditional artistic
methods and materials that required extensive study and practice.
Novelists
Yes, that was and ever is my greatest torment - I never can control
my material. Whenever I write a novel, I crowd it up with a lot of
separate stories and episodes; therefore the whole lacks proportion
and harmony.
Fyodor Dostoevsky to Nikolay
Strachov, April 23, 1871.37
I want to write something new, something extraordinary and
beautiful and simple and intricately patterned.
F. Scott Fitzgerald to Maxwell
Perkins, July, 1922, about his plans
for The Great Gatsby.38

13
There is widespread agreement with the judgment of Edward Wasiolek that “When
Dostoevsky completed The Brothers Karamazov in November of 1880 - less than three months
before his death - he was at the height of his creative powers.”39 There is also general agreement
that this final novel was Dostoevsky’s greatest achievement: Konstantin Mochulsky considered it
to be “not only a synthesis of Dostoevsky’s creative work, but also the culmination of his life,”
and Sigmund Freud declared that “The Brothers Karamazov is the most magnificent novel ever
written.”40
Why Dostoevsky produced his greatest work at the age of 59, in the final year of his life,
can be understood by an artistic examination of his artistic goals and the methods he devised to
seek them. Dostoevsky devoted his art, and his life, to a pursuit of the unattainable: W. J.
Leatherbarrow observed that for him “truth was infinite, commensurate with the wisdom of
God’s creation, and the search for it was an unfinalizable spiritual - not merely intellectual quest.”41 The great novels of Dostoevsky’s final two decades presented a series of innovations
aimed at communicating this belief, and at gaining a deeper understanding of it.
Mikhail Bakhtin argued that in these late works “Dostoevsky is the creator of the
polyphonic novel. He created a fundamentally new novelistic genre.”42 This innovation
constituted a new way to represent the indeterminacy and uncertainty of human life.43 In place of
the single controlling voice of earlier novelists, Dostoevsky created novels with “a plurality of
independent and unmerged voices and consciousnesses, a genuine polyphony of fully valid
voices.”44 One consequence of this was that no single character became the organizing focus of
the novel: thus “the work seems to oscillate between several possible novels, each somehow
intended by a different character. It is this peculiar plurality that creates that special sense of

14
palpitating contradictoriness we recognize as quintessentially Dostoevskian.”45
Dostoevsky believed in free will: as one scholar explained, he believed that “the future is
unpredictable not only because of innumerable casual factors but also because the past does not
wholly determine the present. It shapes, but does not make, our choices.”46 He employed a series
of devices to avoid a narrative structure that presented a linear sequence of events, and in so
doing made them appear inevitable. The polyphonic novel was a means of allowing the
characters of a novel “to be truly free, capable of surprising not only other characters but also the
author.” Dostoevsky’s creative process was “designed specifically to provoke unexpected events
or ideas, and the process would be a failure if it did not produce them.”47 Bakhtin approvingly
quoted the analysis of the critic Victor Shklovsky:
Fyodor Mikhailovich loved to jot down plans for things; he loved
even more to develop, mull over, and complicate his plans; he did
not like to finish up a manuscript... As long as a work remained
multi-leveled and multi-voiced, as long as the people in it were still
arguing, then despair over the absence of a solution would not set
in.48
Bakhtin observed that the same was true for individual characters: “As long as a person is alive
he lives by the fact that he is not yet finalized, that he has not yet uttered his ultimate word... In
[Dostoevsky’s] major heroes, ... the profound consciousness of their own unfinalizability and
indeterminacy is realized in very complex ways, by ideological thought, crime, or heroic deed.”49
In Bakhtin’s view, Dostoevsky’s plots were devised to make possible this open-endedness: “Plot
in Dostoevsky is absolutely devoid of any sort of finalizing functions. Its goal is to place a
person in various situations that expose and provoke him, to bring people together and make
them collide in conflict - in such a way, however, that they do not remain within this area of plot-

15
related contact but exceed its bounds.”50
Gary Saul Morson has observed that many novelists are surprised by the actions of their
characters, as the authors’ initial plans are disrupted by the developing personalities of their
actors. Yet he noted that most authors then revise their manuscripts to hide their surprise from
readers, often by rewriting earlier sections so the characters’ actions no longer appear
inconsistent. Dostoevsky specifically avoided doing this, for he wanted readers to see that he had
not determined his characters’ fate in advance.51 One way he did this was through the
serialization of his novels. He avoided planning his novels beyond the episodes that he was
currently writing. Once these were published, and unexpected developments appeared in later
installments, readers would see that the characters’ fate “was open or, rather, they had no fate.
The work’s sections were to be understood as tending to no predetermined result, not as the mere
unfolding of a plan in several parts.”52
From at least the time of The Idiot, which he published in 1868, Dostoevsky avoided
predetermining the outcomes of his novels. Joseph Frank wrote that after Dostoevsky completed
the first part of The Idiot, “it is clear from Dostoevsky’s notebooks and letters that he had no
satisfactory idea of how to continue the action. This uncertainty persists all through the middle
sections of the book, ... where Dostoevsky is obviously writing from scene to scene with only the
loosest thread of any central narrative line.”53 As Shklovsky observed, “Dostoevsky’s plans
contain by their very nature an open-endedness which in effect refutes them as plans.”54
Dostoevsky’s point was to communicate through the very composition of his novels the belief
declared by one of his characters in The Idiot: “It’s life that matters, nothing but life - the process
of discovering, the everlasting and perpetual process, not the discovery itself at all.”55

16
Dostoevsky was a quintessential experiment seeker: as Malcolm Jones observed,
“Dostoevsky himself always insisted that the important thing was not the achievement of the
goal but the process of trying to reach it.”56 It is therefore not surprising that his greatest work is
valued for questions rather than answers: “The Brothers Karamazov matters not for its assertions
and not for its denials but for its questions, to which there are no easy answers... Dostoevsky is
important because of the questions he asks about his society and about the beliefs held by men in
it, and above all because of his ability to dramatize the questions and show that they are real
ones.”57
That this greatest work came at the end of Dostoevsky’s career was not an accident, for
its greatness was a product of both his increasing technical mastery of his craft and his greater
insight into the human condition. Thus Mochulsky describes his earlier books as the laboratory
in which Dostoevsky developed the philosophical and artistic elements of Karamazov, with the
ideology taken from Diary of a Writer, the structure of the family chronicle from A Raw Youth,
the conflict between religious faith and disbelief from The Devils, and the scheme of a novel
about a major crime from The Idiot. Similarly, Mochulsky traces prototypes of Karamazov’s
central characters to the earlier novels.58 And beyond these literary survivals, Karamazov drew
on Dostoevsky’s personal struggles, not only his long reflection on religious belief but also his
experience of tragedy. Thus early in 1878 Dostoevsky’s work on Karamazov was interrupted by
the death of his three-year-old son Alyosha. In an attempt to assuage the writer’s grief, his wife
convinced him to visit the monastery of Optina Pustyn, where he met with the elder, Father
Ambrosius. Dostoevsky used his vivid knowledge of a parent’s grief in his poignant account in
Karamazov of the devastation of a peasant woman at the death of her child, and Dostoevsky’s

17
wife believed that the words Father Zosima used to console the woman in the novel were the
same ones that Father Ambrosius had asked Dostoevsky to convey to her in sending her his
blessing after the death of their son.59 From his survey of the sources of The Brothers
Karamazov, it is consequently not surprising that Mochulsky concludes that “spiritually
[Dostoevsky] had worked on it his entire life... Everything that he experienced, thought, and
created finds its place in this vast synthesis.”60
F. Scott Fitzgerald published The Great Gatsby in 1925, when he was just 29 years old.
Although the book initially met with a mixed critical reception, and its sales greatly disappointed
Fitzgerald, since the writer’s premature death in 1940 Gatsby’s reputation has risen greatly.61
Today not only is there a broad consensus that it is Fitzgerald’s best work, but many scholars
consider it to be one of the greatest novels ever written by an American.62 Over time, as
recognition of the magnitude of Fitzgerald’s achievement in Gatsby increased, the discontinuity
it represented in his career became clear. Thus in 1966 a scholar observed that “One of the most
difficult problems in Fitzgerald scholarship in the nineteen-fifties and sixties has been the
attempt to explain the sudden maturing of Fitzgerald in 1925, with the publication of The Great
Gatsby. Nothing in Fitzgerald’s earlier writing prepares for the authority and the aesthetic control
over material that is so impressive in his third novel.”63 Perhaps equally puzzling is Fitzgerald’s
subsequent failure to match the quality of Gatsby. Thus John Berryman observed that “Suddenly
he was able, not yet thirty, to lay out and execute a masterpiece. He was happily married, widely
admired, and had made money. One might have expected such a career of production as
American artists rarely have achieved. What happened then?”64
Fitzgerald’s sudden rise and fall can be understood as consequences of the conceptual

18
basis of his best fiction, which used lyrical prose, simplified characters, and symbolic stage props
and settings in the service of allegorical plots. So for example after Fitzgerald’s death, Lionel
Trilling reflected that the significance of The Great Gatsby lay in the ingenuity of its form,
which derived from its “intellectual intensity.” He observed that the book’s characters and
settings were all simplified symbols used to serve the story’s central idea:
the characters are not “developed”: the wealthy and brutal Tom
Buchanan, haunted by his “scientific” vision of the doom of
civilization, the vaguely guilty, vaguely homosexual Jordan Baker,
the dim Wolfsheim, who fixed the World Series of 1919, are
treated, we might say, as if they were ideographs, a method of
economy that is reinforced by the ideographic use that is made of
the Washington Heights flat, the terrible “valley of ashes” seen
from the Long Island Railroad, Gatsby’s incoherent parties, and
the huge sordid eyes of the oculist’s advertising sign.
Trilling added parenthetically: “It is a technique which gives the novel an affinity with The
Waste Land.”65 T. S. Eliot himself appears to have appreciated the parallels between his own
poetry and the themes and techniques of Fitzgerald’s prose, for in 1925 he wrote to tell
Fitzgerald that Gatsby “excited me more than any new novel I have seen, either English or
American, for a number of years,” and that he considered it “the first step American fiction has
taken since Henry James.”66 More recently, Richard Ruland and Malcolm Bradbury described
Gatsby as “a symbolist tragedy” told with “a symbolist mode of writing that informs everything Gatsby’s dreams, parties, even his shirts - with an enchanted glow.”67
Gatsby is elegant in both style and structure, and it is no surprise that lyric poets are
prominent among its admirers. When it was published Conrad Aiken called it “a highly colored
and brilliant little novel which, by grace of one cardinal virtue, quite escapes the company of
most contemporary American fiction - it has excellence of form,” and two decades later John

19
Berryman judged that “The Great Gatsby is in Chekhov’s sense a purely graceful book (‘When a
man spends the least possible number of movements over some definite action, that is grace’).”68
Fitzgerald’s own confidence in his accomplishment similarly serves to identify Gatsby as a
conceptual breakthrough, for when he completed the book he wrote to his editor “I think my
novel is about the best American novel ever written.”69
The technical basis for Fitzgerald’s maturation in The Great Gatsby has been traced to his
newfound ability to distance himself from the story. Like his earlier books, Gatsby was based on
Fitzgerald’s own experiences and feelings, but in Gatsby he used two specific literary devices to
achieve greater objectivity. One was what he called “composite characterization,” as Fitzgerald
explained that Jay Gatsby “started as one man I knew and then changed into myself - the
amalgam was never complete in my mind.”70 The second, which Fitzgerald apparently borrowed
from Joseph Conrad, was his use of an observer, rather than the author, as the book’s narrator.71
Both devices allowed Fitzgerald to attain a feeling of greater objectivity in Gatsby than in his
earlier novels, and thus to give a more universal significance to his own experiences and
feelings.
The experience and feelings in question, however, were those of a young artist, and in
this lay the source of both the power of Fitzgerald’s achievement in Gatsby and his subsequent
inability to go beyond it. Critics have long been aware that the strength of Fitzgerald’s vision in
Gatsby came from its youthful simplicity and clarity. Lionel Trilling observed that “A writer’s
days must be bound each to each by his sense of his life, and Fitzgerald the undergraduate was
father of the best in the man and the novelist.” Trilling remarked that Fitzgerald was perhaps the
last significant writer to believe in the Romantic fantasy of heroism, and commented that “To us

20
it will no doubt come more and more to seem a merely boyish dream.”72 Alfred Kazin agreed,
noting that “Fitzgerald was a boy, the most startlingly gifted and self-destructive of all the lost
boys, to the end.” As such, he was able to create a small world, clearly perceived: “Fitzgerald’s
world is a little one, a superior boy’s world - precocious in its wisdom, precocious in its
tragedy.”73
But Fitzgerald could not retain the simplicity of his vision throughout all of even his
relatively brief life. John Aldridge recognized this when he wrote that “Gatsby was written
during that fragile moment when the drive of youth meets with the intuitive wisdom of first
maturity, and before either the diseases of youth or the waverings of age begin to show
through.”74 J. B. Priestley appears to have had this same phenomenon in mind when he analyzed
what he called the two contrasting and opposed strains within Fitzgerald. The first, which
dominated his early work, was that of the optimistic and romantic adolescent who passed
through Princeton into the apparently unlimited opportunities of the 1920s, believing his life
would always be charmed. The second strain, a detached and cool observer who gained control
as the romantic boy withered in the face of disappointments and failures, was an adult artistpriest dedicated to his craft but lacking in exuberance. Neither strain alone could produce the
highest art, and Priestley believed that Gatsby was Fitzgerald’s finest achievement “because it
seems to me to represent the one point of balance between these two conflicting strains in him,
the brief period when they were able to collaborate successfully.”75
Interestingly, Fitzgerald appears to have understood not only the distinction drawn here
between conceptual and experimental artists, but also the difference in their creative life cycles.
Thus late in his life, in giving advice to his daughter about how she should prepare for a literary

21
career, he wrote that “The talent that matures early is usually of the poetic, which mine was in
large part. The prose talent depends on other factors - assimilation of material and careful
selection of it, or more bluntly: having something to say and an interesting, highly developed
way of saying it.”76 His own explanation of the declining quality of his work after Gatsby does
not appear to have drawn on this analysis, however. Thus for example in 1929 he wrote to his
friend Ernest Hemingway that he believed that he had written too much in the five years prior to
the publication of Gatsby, and that he had used up all his material: the three novels, dozens of
stories, and many articles and movie scripts “may have taken all I had to say too early.”77
Elsewhere he offered a more poetic explanation:
I have asked a lot of my emotions - one hundred and twenty
stories. The price was high, right up with Kipling, because there
was one little drop of something - not blood, not a tear, not my
seed, in every story, it was the extra I had. Now it has gone and I
am just like you now.78
From the vantage point of the present study, however, Fitzgerald was unable to match the
achievement of The Great Gatsby in the last 15 years of his life neither because he lacked subject
matter nor because he had used up his stock of some magical emotional elixir of artistry. Instead
the source of his artistic decline may simply have lain in the inevitable impact of accumulating
experience and aging, for the growth over time in the complexity of his perception of the real
world deprived him of the ability to recapture the simplicity and clarity of the allegorical world
he had created in his youth.
Poets
I accustomed myself to pure hallucination: I saw quite frankly a
mosque in place of a factory, a school for drummers attended by
angels, carriages on the roads in the sky, a living-room at the

22
bottom of a lake, monsters, mysteries.
Arthur Rimbaud, 187379
No matter what theories one may have, I doubt very much that
they are in one’s mind at the moment of writing or that there is
even a physical possibility that they could be.
Elizabeth Bishop, 195080
André Breton, the poet and founder of Surrealism, considered Arthur Rimbaud the father
of modern poetry.81 Remarkably, Rimbaud completed his career as a poet at the age of 19, when
he renounced literature; although he lived another 18 years, until his death at 37, he never again
wrote verse. Rimbaud had written what would become his most famous poem, “Le Bateau ivre,”
in 1871, when he was 16.82 A recent scholar called this “the first great Symbolist poem,” and it
has received considerable attention from poets as well as critics - among those who have
translated it into English, for example, are Samuel Beckett and Robert Lowell.83 These striking
facts about Rimbaud’s remarkable career dramatically raise the question of how he could make
so great an achievement so young, in such a brief span of time.
Rimbaud grew up in the provincial town of Charleville, in northeastern France. He had an
unhappy childhood, and by his own account took refuge in imaginary adventures. He was a
brilliant student, and became a rebellious adolescent. At 15, with the encouragement of Georges
Izambard, a young poet who was one of his teachers, Rimbaud began to write poetry. The next
year Rimbaud wrote two letters, one to Izambard, the other to another young poet, which have
become known as the “Lettres du voyant.” In them Rimbaud proposed nothing less than a new
theory of poetry. Edmund Wilson observed that this theory, “though more violent and
apocalyptic than most expressions of Symbolist doctrine, prophesied the advent of Symbolism.”
Rimbaud believed that “one must be a visionary - one must make oneself a visionary.” This

23
would be achieved systematically through hallucination: “The poet makes himself a visionary
through a long, immense and reasoned derangement of all the senses.”84 By suppressing his
conscious senses, the poet would find a new voice. Thus Rimbaud declared that “It is wrong to
say: I think. One ought to say: I am being thought. I is Another.” Rimbaud effectively wanted the
poet to become the medium of an oracle, but rather than a divine oracle that spoke from without,
his goal was to find an oracle that came from within himself, the voice of the poet’s own
subconscious.85
“Le Bateau ivre” was the first major work based on Rimbaud’s new theory. Wallace
Fowlie observed that it is “not only a successful poem in itself, it is the archetype of all future
work. It contains his principal themes, the order of his experiences, the evolution of his work and
his poetics.”86 The language of the poem literally describes the voyage of a drunken boat,
narrated by the boat, describing both its adventures and emotions, as it passes from servitude to
liberty, and finally to debilitation and disintegration. The poem is obviously allegorical, but the
symbolism is never clearly identified, and as a result there have been many different
interpretations of the poem.87 Like Rimbaud’s other poetry, “Le Bateau ivre” uses esoteric and
inventive language to produce vivid and complex images.
The greatest literary influence on “Le bateau ivre” was Charles Baudelaire, who Rimbaud
considered “the first seer, king of poets.”88 Yet Marjorie Perloff has argued that Rimbaud made a
key departure from Baudelaire. Whereas the symbolism of Baudelaire’s poetry remained
anchored to his perception of external reality, Rimbaud’s “Le Bateau ivre” was no longer
concerned with providing links between his images and the outside world, but instead with
recording the processes of exploration of his own consciousness. This would constitute the

24
beginning of a powerful force, not only in modern poetry but in the arts in general, by creating an
art based not on perception but on conception. The artists who would follow this practice include
not only many Symbolist poets but also many leading painters of the twentieth century: thus for
example Picasso declared that he painted not what he saw, but what he knew based on his
acquaintance with specific real objects. Yet Rimbaud’s departure was even more radical, for in
presenting directly the products of the poet’s subconscious Perloff observed that he advocated
using the poem “as language construction in which the free play of possible significations
replaces iconic representation.”89 Thus, perhaps for the first time, Rimbaud produced modern art
that was not based in any way on representation of actual or even possible objects or
experiences. Rimbaud’s belief in the autonomous use of language and images accounts for the
enigmatic nature of the symbolism of “Le Bateau ivre,” and the many contending critical
readings of the poem. It also accounts for Rimbaud’s choice of an ocean voyage as the central
subject of the poem despite the fact that he had never seen an ocean.
The importance of “Le Bateau ivre” thus appears to derive in large part from its role as
the first embodiment of a radical new theory of poetry, a work executed by a self-proclaimed
prophet whose goal was not only to revolutionize poetry, but to inspire other poets to become
visionaries and change society.90 Anna Balakian has attributed Rimbaud’s ability to make such a
bold departure specifically to his youth: “At heart, the deviation that his poetry represents is akin
to the sensations experienced in childhood. Every child in his dreams plays that delightful game
of creating a world which is as far removed from this one as possible, a world that becomes more
and more absurd as his efforts to pass the limits of the known are increased.” For Balakian,
Rimbaud’s poetry can be explained as a peculiar anomaly: “by a miracle - that imagination of

25
childhood, somewhat prolonged in him, was still his when he developed the philosophical and
verbal power which should have come much later, after that excessively imaginative impulse had
been attenuated.” This unlikely juxtaposition created in Rimbaud’s poetry “the only image
perhaps ever recorded of the world as seen through children’s eyes, a world wholly incompatible
with the age of reason.”91
After retiring from literature at 19, Rimbaud went on to a career as an adventurer and
sometime African trader in a variety of commodities, including contraband guns and slaves, that
would make him an inspiration for twentieth-century artistic rebels ranging from Henry Miller
and William Burroughs to Bob Dylan and Jim Morrison. More remarkable than these later
escapades, however, was his ability to create new poetic forms, that would inspire major
twentieth-century movements in poetry and other arts, between the ages of just 16 and 19. This
ability was a direct consequence of the radically conceptual nature of his work, which combined
the vivid imagination of a child with the verbal skills of an adult.
Elizabeth Bishop published her first poems in a high school magazine at the age of 14.92
Unlike Rimbaud, however, she continued to write verse in her 20s, and well beyond. In 1976, at
the age of 65, she published “One Art,” which is the second most frequently anthologized of all
her poems.93
Bishop’s poetry is celebrated for its visual qualities. Randall Jarrell wrote that “all her
poems have written underneath, I have seen it,” and Robert Lowell declared in 1969 that “I am
sure no living poet is as curious and observant as Miss Bishop.”94 Bishop herself told a critic that
“the settings, or descriptions, of my poems are almost invariably just plain facts - or as close to
the facts as I can write them.”95 Her poems were crafted thoughtfully and painstakingly. In a

26
1947 review, Lowell described her poems as “unrhetorical, cool, and beautifully thought-out,”
and called Bishop “one of the best craftsmen alive.”96 In a poem written for Bishop in 1973,
Lowell compared her to the experimental painter Albert Ryder: “His painting was repainting, /
his tiniest work weighs heavy in the hand.” Ryder’s endless revision of his paintings, which left
them heavy from accumulated layers of paint, was Lowell’s analogy for Bishop’s extended
searches for just the right words to complete her poems: “Do / you still hang your words in air,
ten years / unfinished, glued to your notice board, with gaps / or empties for the unimaginable
phrase.”97
Another friend of Bishop’s, Marianne Moore, praised her poetry for its understatement:
“With poetry as with homilectics, tentativeness can be more positive than positiveness, and in
North & South [1946] a much instructed persuasiveness is emphasized by uninsistence.”98
Bishop’s own statements of her goals often reflected her diffidence, as for example when she
told an interviewer that “I always try to stick as much as possible to what really happened when I
describe something in a poem.”99
The descriptive intent of her poetry, its visual nature, her careful craftsmanship, and her
tentativeness all identify Bishop as an experimental artist. A biographer recognized this in
observing that Bishop was “a poet whose method was her message.”100 Bishop herself
emphasized that poetry was not merely a part of her life, but her way of living: “Writing poetry
is a way of life, not a matter of testifying but of experiencing. It is not the way one goes about
interpreting the world, but the very process of sensing it.”101
Like other great experimental artists, Bishop developed her art gradually. In spite of her
instinctual reticence, over time her poetry became more personal, and drew more heavily on her

27
own thoughts and experiences.102 Reading the openly autobiographical poems her friend Robert
Lowell published in his landmark book Life Studies was one of the events that prompted her to
reconsider her own work.103 Thus in 1957, when Bishop was 46, in a letter to Lowell about his
new work she expressed her admiration for his achievement and frustration at her own timidity:
“Oh heavens, when does one begin to write the real poems? I certainly feel as if I never had. But
of course I don’t feel that way about yours - they all seem real as real - and getting more so.”104
Gradually thereafter Bishop’s own poetry became more autobiographical, and more assured. In a
review of a new volume of her poems in 1969, John Ashbery observed that Bishop’s work had
recently gained new maturity:
Perhaps some of the urgency of the North & South poems [1946]
has gone, but this is more than compensated by the calm control
she now commands. Where she sometimes seemed nervous... she
now is easy in a way that increased knowledge and maturity
allow.105
Similarly, in a more recent review of Bishop’s career, Jacqueline Vaught Brogan concluded that
“Bishop’s verse matured as she did, so that her late work is her best.”106
“One Art” appeared in the last of Bishop’s books published during her lifetime. It takes
the form of a villanelle, a 16th-century form made up of a series of three-lined stanzas and a final
quatrain, in which the first and third lines of the first stanza are repeated alternately in the
succeeding stanzas as a refrain, and together form a final couplet in the quatrain. Written ten
years after the suicide of Lota de Macedo Soares, who had been Bishop’s lover for more than 15
years, in “One Art” Bishop expressed both the enormity of her loss and her belief that the need to
write about it was the greatest source of her ability to bear that loss. Beginning with the
apparently innocuous statement that “The art of losing isn’t hard to master,” the poem effectively

28
portrays life as a series of losses, which grow as the poem proceeds, from trivial household items
to mementos, to houses, to cities, to continents, and finally to a loved one. The irony of the
opening statement grows with each repetition, as the increasing magnitude of the losses makes
them more and more painful to the author. The contrast between the rigid requirements of the
villanelle form and the poem’s intensely emotional subject serves to heighten the sense of pain,
for as the poem progresses the reader becomes increasingly aware of the enormous effort the
author is making to hold her emotions in check.107 In the poem’s final line Bishop violates the
villanelle’s strict form, interrupting the final refrain with a parenthetic instruction to herself “(Write it!)” - that underscores her recognition that it is only in producing her art that she can
endure her greatest loss. Bishop’s papers contain no less than 17 drafts of “One Art,” in the
course of which she not only searched for the right words, but carefully explored her
emotions.108 The poem reveals a mature artist subtly adapting a complex poetic form to her
purposes, firmly using the skill she has acquired over decades to help her understand and survive
her pain. The title of the poem implies that for Bishop her poetry and her life were one and the
same.
In a eulogy for a friend, Elizabeth Bishop wrote: “There are some people whom we envy
not because they are rich or handsome or successful, although they may be any or all of these,
but because everything they are and do seems to be all of a piece, so that even if they wanted to
they could not be or do otherwise.”109 The observation applies equally to Bishop herself, with the
integration of her life and art, and her consistent efforts to achieve “clarity and simplicity.”110
The greatness of her late work was a consequence of her increasing technical mastery, born of
years of experimentation, combined not only with a growing understanding of her emotions, but

29
also a growing willingness to express that understanding in her art.
Sculptors
The only principle in art is to copy what you see.
Auguste Rodin111
We must take the object which we wish to create and begin with its
central core. In this way we shall uncover new laws and new forms
which link it invisibly but mathematically to an EXTERNAL
PLASTIC INFINITY and to an INTERNAL PLASTIC INFINITY.
Umberto Boccioni, Technical
Manifesto of Futurist Sculpture,
1912112
In 1891 Emile Zola, as president of the Société des Gens de Lettres, awarded a
commission to Auguste Rodin for a sculpture of the novelist Honoré de Balzac, who had been a
founder of the literary society. When Rodin finally completed a plaster version of his Monument
to Balzac, seven years later, he was 58 years old. He considered the sculpture to be his most
important work, "the sum of my whole life, result of a lifetime of effort, the mainspring of my
aesthetic theory."113 Yet when the sculpture was exhibited at the Salon of 1898 it caused a storm
of protest by critics. The Société des Gens de Lettres voted to dishonor its contract and refuse the
statue, and a group of young artists actually plotted to vandalize it.114 Stung by the criticism,
Rodin withdrew Balzac from the Salon, and moved it to his home outside Paris. The statue was
not cast in bronze until 1939, more than two decades after Rodin's death. George Heard
Hamilton observed of Balzac that “the true originality of the work was reflected in the fact that
there were no proper words to confine it;” Alfred Barr described it as “one of the very great
sculptures in the entire history of Western art.”115
Rodin's career developed slowly. His early failure in three attempts to gain admission to
the prestigious Ecole des Beaux Arts caused him to spend nearly two decades as an assistant to

30
other sculptors, and he did not begin to enjoy real professional success until the age of 40. His art
also developed slowly. Rainer Maria Rilke, who worked for several years as Rodin's secretary,
observed that “his work developed through long years. It has grown like a forest.”116 The reason
for this was clear to Rilke, for he explained that Rodin's art “depended upon an infallible
knowledge of the human body” that he acquired slowly and painstakingly: “His art was not built
upon a great idea, but upon a craft.”117 It was not only Rodin's craft that grew slowly, but also
individual works: “I am unfortunately a slow worker, being one of those artists in whose minds
the conception of work slowly takes shape and slowly comes to maturity.”118
Rodin's experimental art was avowedly visual: “I strive to express what I see with as
much deliberation as I can.”119 Ideas did not precede, but followed, form: “One must never try
to express an idea by form. Make your form, make something, and the idea will come.”120 The
realism of Rodin’s figures was such that early in his career he was dogged by charges that he had
cast his sculptures from life. Infuriated by these rumors, he subsequently took care to make his
figures larger than life size. He did not work from imagination or memory, but always in the
presence of a model: he confessed that “I have no ideas when I don’t have something to copy.”121
Unlike some sculptors who made figures that were intended to be seen only from the front, or
who might made a figure from a single front and single back view, Rodin created figures that
were to be seen in the round. His working process was iterative and incremental:
I place the model so that light, outlining it against a
background, illuminates the contour. I execute it, I change my
position and that of my model, and thus I see another contour, and
so on successively all around the body.
I begin again; I come closer and closer to the contours, and
I refine them.
Since the human body has an infinite number of contours, I

31
multiply them as far as possible or so far as I think useful.122
Rodin’s awareness of the body’s infinite number of contours makes it unsurprising that
he often had difficulties with completing his sculptures. He was incapable of planning his
projects in advance, and usually began his works without any clear conception of their final
appearance.123 He admitted that “I often begin with one intention and finish with another.”124 He
often reached an impasse and put a work aside for a time: “I lay my work aside while it is yet
unfinished, and for months I may appear to abandon it. Every now and then, however, I return to
it and correct or add a detail here and there. I have not really abandoned it, you see, only I am
hard to satisfy.”125 Nor did this process always result in a successful outcome, particularly with
large and complex works that would have benefited from careful planning. Thus George Heard
Hamilton voiced a common criticism of Rodin when he remarked that he was “not strictly a
monumental sculptor, for he had difficulty in imposing a formal unity upon many separate
elements.”126
Rodin in fact became known, by some admirers as well as many detractors, as a sculptor
of unfinished works. In 1889 Edmond de Goncourt criticized Rodin’s figures for incomplete
execution, and compared his sculpture to recent developments in painting: “Amidst the present
infatuation with Impressionism, when all of painting remains in the sketch stage, [Rodin] ought
to be the first to make his name and gloire as a sculptor of unfinished sketches.”127 Rodin
defended his fragmentary works against the charge that they were unfinished: “When my works
do not consist of the complete body ... people call it unfinished. What do they mean?
Michelangelo’s finest works are precisely those which are called ‘unfinished.’”128 Rudolf
Wittkower has argued that Rodin’s fragmentary sculptures were in fact finished: “The discovery

32
that the part can stand for the whole was Rodin’s, and Brancusi along with scores of other
sculptors accepted the premise. In contrast to Michelangelo, whose unfinished works were
unfinished, Rodin created partial figures which are the finished product.”129 Years of study of
Rodin’s methods, however, led Albert Elsen to a different conclusion about both the fragments
and the complete figures: “What now seems heroic and contemporary about Rodin is ... his
passion for the act of making rather than completing sculpture... His personal problem was in
setting for himself impossible absolutes of perfection toward which he dedicated a lifetime of
striving. It is doubtful that at his death he would have pronounced any of his works finished or
immutable.”130 Rodin himself recognized that he often sacrificed good works to the pursuit of
perfection: “Wishing to do better, one sometimes demolishes even what one has done well; but
one must be possessed by the demon of the best.”131
Characteristically, Rodin produced the Monument to Balzac through a long process of
trial and error. Elsen’s analysis of the many works that made up this project prompted him to
observe that “One must look at the whole long series to see how slowly and naturally Balzac’s
posture and the position of his limbs evolved, rather than resulting from a sudden decision.”132
Rodin failed to meet several deadlines for delivery of the statue, and on one of these occasions he
expressed his frustration: “As if it were possible, while one is searching, to be ready on a fixed
date!”133 Even when he finally delivered the work in 1898, Rodin would have liked to keep it
longer:
I should prefer to contemplate it every day for a while, and wait
until a sudden inspiration, such as occasionally flashes through the
brain, came to flood my imagination and enable me to perfect and
idealize my work. For a work, even when achieved, is never
perfect; it is always susceptible to a modification that can increase

33
its beauty.134
The Monument to Balzac made striking use of Rodin’s central contributions to sculpture.
Rodin wanted his sculptures to represent figures in movement, and he often animated them by
fixing transitory gestures and poses. Thus he portrayed Balzac not in formal dress or in quiet
reflection, but instead in the monk’s robe he wore while working, in a dramatic stance, his head
thrown back in a moment of creative inspiration:
By convention, a statue in a pubic place must represent a great man
in a theatrical attitude which will cause him to be admired by
posterity. But such reasoning is absurd. I submit there was only
one way to evoke my subject. I had to show Balzac in his study,
breathless, hair in disorder, eyes lost in a dream, a genius who in
his little room reconstructs piece by piece all of society in order to
bring it into tumultuous life before his contemporaries and
generations to come.135
Rodin was also concerned with creating atmospheric effects that would integrate his figures with
their environment. The jagged profile of Balzac, the deep cavities of the face and hair, and the
rough surface of the robe all created strong contrasts of light and shadow that called attention to
the relationship between the figure and its surroundings. Throughout Rodin’s career he had used
subjects that were not conventionally beautiful, but in the rough treatment of the Monument to
Balzac he “created the first authentically ‘ugly’ work of modern art.”136 The effectiveness with
which Rodin combined these characteristic concerns and practices was a direct consequence of
the maturity of this late stage of his career. As Rilke declared in tribute to his friend, “it is an
underlying patience in Rodin which renders him so great.”137
Futurism was founded as a literary movement in 1908 by the Italian poet F. T. Marinetti,
and the next year it was extended into painting, under the leadership of a young artist named

34
Umberto Boccioni. In 1912 Boccioni decided to learn to make sculptures, and he devoted a year
to that art before returning to painting. World War I effectively brought Futurism to an end in
1916, and in that year Boccioni was killed while serving in the Italian army. John Golding has
observed that in its brief career Futurist visual art produced a single major masterpiece, a
sculpture by Boccioni titled Unique Forms of Continuity in Space.138 A recent survey confirmed
Golding’s judgment, finding that this sculpture is illustrated in more textbooks of art history than
any single work by such great modern sculptors as Rodin, Henry Moore, Alberto Giacometti,
and David Smith.139 Remarkably, therefore, although Boccioni’s total production of sculptures
has been estimated at just a dozen, one of these, which he executed at the age of 31, is among the
most celebrated sculptures of the modern era.
Futurism was a conceptual movement from the outset. Marinetti stated one of its central
themes in his first Futurist manifesto in 1909 when he declared that “the world’s magnificence
has been enriched by a new beauty: the beauty of speed.”140 A central concern of Futurist
painting would consequently be the representation of motion. When Boccioni and four other
painters joined the movement, they explained that they wanted not to portray “a fixed moment in
universal dynamism,” but rather “the dynamic sensation itself”; to represent movement over
time, they intended to create visual syntheses of “what one remembers and of what one sees.”141
A central feature of Futurism was its self-consciously revolutionary attitude. Marinetti’s
founding statement in 1909 described itself as a “violently upsetting incendiary manifesto,” and
the painters who joined him the next year opened their first manifesto with a declaration that
theirs was a “cry of rebellion.”142 A closely associated theme was the youth of the participants, as
Marinetti’s first manifesto remarked that “the oldest of us is thirty, so we have at least a decade

35
for finishing our work” before they would be surpassed by younger artists.143
In a number of respects Futurism became a prototype for later art movements, perhaps as
much for its novel practices as for its art. Malevich and many other advanced artists learned the
Futurist lesson that written texts could be a valuable tool in expanding the audience for
innovative conceptual art. In less than a decade Futurist artists produced dozens of pamphlets,
usually specifically titled as manifestos, on subjects ranging from poetry and painting to theater
and film, and even to new forms of men’s clothing.144 Historians have observed that the
Futurists’ publication of manifestos typically preceded the execution of the relevant works of art,
and have remarked that this effectively made the manifestos blueprints for works of art.145
Marjorie Perloff also made the observation that with this practice the Futurists made the
manifestos a part of their art: “to talk about art becomes equivalent to making it.”146 It appears
that the influence of Futurism was increased not only by the function of written texts as
supporting documents for works of art, but in some cases directly by the texts, even in the
absence of associated works of art.147 The texts could in fact have an impact even on artists who
rejected the Futurists’ art. So for example in 1912 Franz Marc wrote to his friend Kandinsky of
the Futurists that “I cannot free myself from the strange contradiction that I find their ideas, at
least for the main part, brilliant, but am in no doubt whatsoever as to the mediocrity of their
works.”148
In 1909 Boccioni was an ambitious young painter working in a conventional PostImpressionist style when he met the dynamic Marinetti, who described himself as the “caffeine
of Europe.”149 Marinetti inspired Boccioni, and proceeded to “drag him, technically unprepared
and with a torrent of only partially formulated ideas, into the mainstream of modern art.”150

36
Boccioni quickly adopted a highly conceptual approach to art. Thus he wrote to a friend that a
new painting was “done completely without models, and all the tricks of the trade are sacrificed
to the ultimate cause of emotional expression ... [T]he emotion will be presented with as little
recourse as possible to the objects that have given rise to it.”151
Boccioni and the other Futurist painters aimed to portray motion as a dynamic process
that occurred and was experienced over time. They also wanted to represent the tendency of both
light and motion to destroy the concreteness of forms, thus emphasizing the interplay between
objects and their environment.152 Late in 1911 Boccioni spent a month in Paris, where he saw
new Cubist techniques that he quickly adapted to Futurist ends in his paintings.153 While in Paris
Boccioni appears to have become aware that there was not yet a Cubist school of sculpture, and
that sculpture had consequently lagged behind painting in the development of advanced art. A
consequence of this was that he might make an immediate impact on the art world by extending
the concerns of Futurist art to sculpture.154 In March of 1912 Boccioni wrote to a friend that “I
am obsessed these days by sculpture. I think I can perceive a complete revival of this mummified
art.”155 The next month he published a manifesto proposing a Futurist sculpture that would both
represent movement and portray the interaction of the figure and its environment.156
Boccioni then began to make sculptures.157 In June of 1913 he exhibited 11 sculptures at
a Paris gallery. Guillaume Apollinaire’s review praised his achievement: “Varied materials,
sculptural simultaneity, violent movement - these are the innovations contributed by Boccioni’s
sculpture.” Apollinaire closed the review with a facetious reference to Unique Forms of
Continuity in Space: “Flash: We have been informed that Boccioni’s “muscles at full speed”
have taken to the road. As of this writing, they have not been recaptured.”158

37
In Unique Forms, the surfaces of an advancing figure are broken into parts, but instead of
the straight lines and sharp angles of Cubism they have been transformed into irregularly curved
planes that blend together in a graceful composition. Their orientation and aerodynamic shapes
create forms that appear bulky and muscular at the same time that they seem to flow in response
to strong winds blowing in the face of the figure. In this sculpture Boccioni produced a novel
synthesis, drawing on plastic forms taken from classical Greek sculpture and techniques of
spatial organization borrowed from advanced modern painting, to create a three-dimensional
representation of the effects, in both vision and memory, of a combination of power and speed.
Boccioni considered Unique Forms “the most liberated” of his sculptures.159 He
apparently gave up sculpting after he executed it, and Golding concluded that “with its
completion, Boccioni seems to have realized that he had achieved the definitive masterpiece for
which he longed.”160 Not only did Boccioni succeed in making a major contribution to modern
sculpture at the age of just 31, but he did it just a year after making his first sculptures. Even
then, he believed that he could have achieved much more, and at an earlier age, under the proper
circumstances. Thus when he reported to a friend Apollinaire’s praise for his 1913 exhibition, he
added that in spite of his excitement at his success, “I end up sad and discouraged. I think about
what I would have done by now if I had grown up with Paris or Berlin as my environment.”161
Playwrights
My task has been the description of humanity.
Henrik Ibsen, 1898162
You are free to see in Monsieur Ubu all the multiple allusions you
wish, or a simple puppet, the deformation by a schoolboy of one of
his teachers who represented for him all that is grotesque in the
world.

38
Alfred Jarry, December 10, 1896163
A recent survey called Hedda Gabler “perhaps the most perfectly structured play of the
modern theater.”164 It was written by Henrik Ibsen in 1890, when he was 62 years old, and was
one of a series of plays that made Ibsen the preeminent dramatist of the late nineteenth century.
Ibsen is commonly described as the founder of the modern theater.165 He is celebrated for
the innovation of the realistic drama. Ibsen once explained that “My object was to make the
reader feel that he was going through a piece of real experience.”166 George Bernard Shaw
observed that when Ibsen began writing, the theater dealt largely with contrived situations, “and
it was held that the stranger the situation, the better the play.” Ibsen changed this: “He gives us
not only ourselves, but ourselves in our own situations. The things that happen to his stage
figures are things that happen to us.”167 In his first published article James Joyce had made the
same observation: “Ibsen has chosen the average lives in their uncompromising truth for the
groundwork of all his later plays.”168
Ibsen achieved this realism by beginning with his characters: “Always I proceed from the
individuals; the stage-setting, the dramatic ensemble, all that comes naturally, and causes me no
worry, once I feel sure of the individual in every aspect of his humanity.”169 Once Ibsen had his
characters in mind, writing a play was a process of getting to know them, and he did this in a
series of stages:
As a rule, I make three drafts of my dramas which differ very
much from each other in characterization, not in action. When I
proceed to the first sketch of the material I feel as though I had the
degree of acquaintance with my characters that one acquires on a
railway journey... With the next draft I see everything more
clearly, I know the characters just about as one would know them
after a few weeks’ stay in a spa; I have learned the fundamental

39
traits in their characters as well as their little peculiarities; yet it is
not impossible that I might make an error in some essential matter.
In the last draft, finally I stand at the limit of knowledge; I know
my people from close and long association - they are my intimate
friends, who will not disappoint me in any way.170
Ibsen developed his characters during this process not only through their speeches, but also their
actions: “Many of the details occur to me during the process of composition, bit by bit as I get
along.”171 Their physical appearance could also change, for Ibsen had to visualize the characters
as he wrote: “To write is to see.”172 In view of the central role of characterization in Ibsen’s
process of composition, it is not surprising that Henry James would predict that Ibsen would
always be loved by actors: “He cuts them out work to which the artistic nature in them joyously
responds - work difficult and interesting, full of stuff and opportunity.”173 Just a few years later,
a leading actor confirmed James’ view: “It is easier, I think, to get inside the skin of an Ibsen part
than any other, for the simple reason that the characterization is so minute and elaborate, the
words are so full of suggestion, that the actor has infinite scope for the exercise of his best
qualities.”174
The primary importance of characterization points to the experimental nature of Ibsen’s
art, as does another central feature of his plays, their focus on change. Arthur Miller concluded
that “If his plays, and his method, do nothing else they reveal the evolutionary quality of life.
One is constantly aware, in watching his plays, of process, change, development.”175 Eric
Bentley explained that this awareness was a product of Ibsen’s method of exposition: “Generally,
with Ibsen, we feel we are his companions in a search and therefore... are not given summaries of
what has been thought already but are present at the thinking.”176 In his major late plays the
endings were often not fully resolved, reflecting “a conception of life which Ibsen considered

40
more true than that represented by the stage convention of a conclusively happy or tragic end as
the curtain falls.”177 Elizabeth Hardwick observed that in Ibsen’s late plays “His people are not
fixed. They are growing, moving, uncertain of their direction in life.” She traced this quality to
an uncertainty in the playwright: “We feel Ibsen himself created certain characters out of a
musing wonder and deep, intriguing uncertainty.”178
Ibsen developed his mature art in an extended series of major works, ranging from A
Doll’s House (1879) and The Wild Duck (1884) through Hedda Gabler (1890) to The Master
Builder (1892) and John Gabriel Borkman (1896). All of these plays embodied his distinctive
innovations, including the use of discussion as a primary focus of interest, and the portrayal of
realistic characters, and actions, that had the effect of “making the spectators themselves the
persons of the dramas.”179 The plays’ subject matter directly treated major social issues of their
time. True to his experimental nature, Ibsen’s work did not change abruptly but evolved
gradually: “Ibsen chose the path of constant development ... Not the smallest fascination of Ibsen
is the unity of his work, the profound meaning in the relation of play to play.”180
No single play dominates Ibsen’s career, but Hedda Gabler was among his greatest
achievements. In a contemporary review, Henry James remarked that the study of an exasperated
woman would not have seemed a promising subject, but that the play demonstrated “the folly of
quarreling with an artist over his subject. Ibsen has had only to take hold of this one in earnest to
make it, against every presumption, live with an intensity of life.”181 For many critics Hedda was
Ibsen’s greatest character; thus Harold Bloom declared that “What Anna Karenina was to
Tolstoy, and Emma Bovary to Flaubert, Hedda was to Ibsen.”182 Elizabeth Hardwick observed
that “Hedda Gabler challenges and pleases and is the most fascinating, humanly interesting of

41
Ibsen’s women. Actresses long to play the role.”183 John Northam explained that Ibsen’s success
in this characterization was a result of his subtle use of his full experience as a playwright: “our
informative details have been infinitely small, and ordinary; but they have been organized so
precisely, into patterns so self-consistent that through them we have become aware of the
development of a character whose main failing was inarticulateness... Through visual suggestion
we have come to know the stifling pressures and the fierce reaction... We have been reached, not
by the novelist’s techniques operating solely through the mind, but through the eyes; never was
Ibsen more a practicing playwright than he was when he created Hedda Gabler.”184
Ibsen’s innovations made his plays extremely controversial in his own time. The loudest
complaints came from those who believed that the theater should provide amusing entertainment
in ways that would not challenge prevailing social values. These complaints most often
denounced the ugliness of Ibsen’s subjects. So for example one London critic declared that
“Hedda Gabler is the study of a malicious woman of evil instincts, jealous, treacherous, coldhearted, and, as it seems to us, wholly out of place on the stage,” while another reflected that “to
conceive of the Ibsen drama gaining an extensive or permanent foothold on the stage is hardly
possible. Playgoing would then cease to be an amusement and become a penance.”185 Other
critics complained that their evening’s entertainment lacked any edifying resolution: “If [Ibsen]
is a prophet, he is one who has no mission, no message to give us ... He only puts the destroying
question; never does he furnish even a hint of the saving answer.”186 Yet to many young artists
Ibsen’s dramas were intensely exciting, as they laid the foundations for a theater that would
explore important social and psychological problems, and in so doing become a more integral
part of modern intellectual life. In recognition of this Luigi Pirandello, one of the leading

42
playwrights of the next generation, declared that “After Shakespeare, without hesitation, I put
Ibsen first.”187
In 1961, a critic named Martin Esslin published a book defining a movement he called
the Theater of the Absurd, which included such playwrights as Samuel Beckett, Eugène Ionesco,
Jean Genet, and Harold Pinter. Esslin declared that this theater “strives to express its sense of the
senselessness of the human condition and the inadequacy of the rational approach by the open
abandonment of rational devices and discursive thought.” Esslin dated the beginning of this
movement very precisely, to the evening of December 10, 1896, when a Paris theater company
first presented Ubu Roi, a play written by Alfred Jarry.188
Jarry was 23 years old when Ubu Roi opened in Paris. The origins of the work went back
eight years, to when the 15-year-old Jarry and two school friends in a provincial lycée first wrote
a puppet play about their physics teacher. The obese and incompetent teacher had long been
ridiculed by his students, and Jarry and his friends drew on a rich oral tradition in satirizing
Monsieur Hébert, whose name had variously been transformed into Heb, Hébé, and eventually
Ubu. Unlike his classmates, Jarry persisted in developing the epic history of the imaginary
adventures of Ubu even after he left school.
At 17 Jarry moved to Paris, where he soon abandoned his plans to attend college in favor
of becoming a writer. He became part of a literary group that included the leading Symbolist
poets and novelists of the time, and began to publish stories about Ubu and his supposed science
of “´Pataphysicks.” Although Jarry’s language was often bombastic, he in fact worked
methodically in developing ´Pataphysicks into a system:
´Pataphysicks is the science of the realm beyond metaphysics... It

43
will study the laws which govern exceptions and will explain the
universe supplementary to this one...
Definition: ´Pataphysicks is the science of imaginary
solutions.189
Jarry wanted to create a theater purely of the imagination, that made no appeal to facts or logic.
As a recent biographer explained, in Jarry’s conception “theater should imitate the logic of
dreams, and should therefore employ symbolism, condensation, disconnection of images, and
displacement; it should have an elusive, ephemeral and haunting quality.”190
In Ubu Roi, the greedy and cowardly Ubu becomes King of Poland, tortures and kills
many of his subjects, and is ultimately chased out of the country. The monstrous character of
Ubu drew liberally upon that of Falstaff and the inspiration of Rabelais, and the staging of the
play was based on the marionette forms in which Jarry had first performed it. When Ubu Roi was
first presented to the public in 1896, the play had been widely advertised and its opening night
was attended by many of Paris’ leading critics and eminent literary figures. Controversy began
immediately. When the curtain was raised, the actor portraying the gross Ubu stepped forward
and spoke his first line, a common obscenity that Jarry had appropriated to ´Pataphysicks by
adding a single letter. The audience erupted into shouting, whistling, and even fighting as
admirers and detractors expressed their approval, shock, and anger. The actors had to wait 15
minutes before the play could resume, and many more interruptions followed in the course of the
evening.191
Ubu Roi was given a second performance the next evening, but then closed, and was
never again performed in Jarry’s lifetime. Yet the impact of its opening night gave Jarry
immediate fame in literary circles, as for weeks afterward favorable and unfavorable views of the

44
play were debated in Paris’ major newspapers. This proved to be the high point of Jarry’s career.
He continued to write about Ubu, and over time began to assume the character’s manner of
speaking. Not unlike Rimbaud, Jarry attempted to stimulate his imagination through
hallucination, which eventually proved self-destructive.
Roger Shattuck observed that “at thirty Jarry had completed his best years, enjoyed a
unique notoriety in the literary world of Paris, and was already looked up to by a new
generation.”192 Among his young followers were the symbolist poet Guillaume Apollinaire and
Apollinaire’s friend Pablo Picasso, who became fascinated by Jarry and appropriated many of his
eccentricities, even, after Jarry’s death, carrying around the gun that Jarry had always kept with
him. John Richardson, the most exacting biographer of Picasso’s early career, has argued that
Picasso’s breakthrough into Cubism in 1907 was inspired not only generally by the iconoclastic
example of Jarry’s efforts to blend fantasy and reality in ´Pataphysicks, which aimed to abolish
traditional standards of beauty and good taste, but even more specifically by a particular
illustration that Jarry gave for his new science. Thus Richardson argues that Jarry anticipated the
multiple viewpoints of Cubism in a ´Pataphysickal treatise of 1898: “to claim the shape of a
watch is round [is] a manifestly false proposition - since it appears in profile as a narrow
rectangular construction, elliptical on three sides; and why the devil would one only have noticed
its shape at the moment of looking at the time?”193
Jarry died at the age of just 34, of tuberculosis aggravated by his drinking. His major
achievement, Ubu Roi, had already made a powerful impression on many Symbolist artists. So
for example immediately after the play’s first performance Stéphane Mallarmé had written to
Jarry that in Ubu he had created “a prodigious personage of rare and resistant texture, and you

45
have done it as a sure, sober, dramatic sculptor. He has joined the repertory of the best taste and
already haunts me.”194 Many years later, another playwright who had also attended that first
performance reflected that “the schoolboy Jarry, to mock a professor, had without knowing it
created a masterpiece in painting that somber and oversimplified caricature with brushstrokes in
the manner of Shakespeare and the puppet theater.”195 Whether or not Jarry recognized the
importance of his achievement, in Roger Shattuck’s apt words “the schoolboy imagination had
succeeded in throwing dung in the public eye.”196 Jarry’s ability to do this appears to have
depended critically on his youth, for both the simplicity of his artistic vision and the confident
iconoclasm with which he presented it to the public are hallmarks of the youthful conceptual
innovator.
Architects
Each day we feared that he’d change what he had settled the day
before. We’d point out as he started revising a drawing, “But Mr.
Wright, yesterday you decided it this way.” His answer was
standard. “That was all right yesterday, but it’s not right today.” He
never left anything alone. He no sooner got a system going than
he’d upset it all.
Edgar Tafel on his
apprenticeship to Frank Lloyd
Wright197
My idea appears very quickly and is fully formed when it arrives. I
do not work and rework the idea.
Maya Lin 198
Frank Lloyd Wright began his career as an architect in 1887, at the age of 20. Over the
course of the next 72 years he produced designs for more than 1000 buildings, of which more
than 400 were constructed. No single building has clearly emerged as his greatest work, but
among those that have received the greatest attention is Fallingwater, a house Wright built at

46
Bear Run, Pennsylvania, in 1937, when he was 70 years old. When the house was completed,
Time featured Wright on its cover, with a drawing of the house behind him - the first time the
magazine had an architect on its cover.199 A recent survey of American architecture described
Fallingwater as “Wright’s most famous building of all,” and a leading architectural scholar called
it “one of the complete masterpieces of twentieth-century art.”200
Early in his career Wright formulated a set of propositions to define his concept of
organic architecture, which “evolved from a set of architectural principles in the 1890s into a
lifestyle by the 1930s.”201 These principles emphasized the importance of simplicity of form,
harmony between a building and its natural setting, the use of natural colors, and using materials
to express their own nature rather than imitating other materials. Wright wanted buildings to
share the human virtues of sincerity, truthfulness, and graciousness. Within these basic
guidelines Wright developed distinctively new architectural forms, which never ceased to change
as he continually experimented throughout his long career. Yet Wright’s style evolved gradually,
and a recent survey concluded that “when we look at the totality of his oeuvre, we see in his form
language a remarkable coherence, continuity, and recurrence of motifs.”202
By 1900, Wright had developed his celebrated Prairie Style. Its distinctive features
included an emphasis on long horizontal lines, relating its buildings to the open spaces of the
Midwestern plains, and a blurring of the distinction between interior and exterior spaces,
achieved through covered but open areas around a building’s perimeter.203 Over time Wright
continued to experiment and to simplify the style, and the most famous of the Prairie houses,
Chicago’s Robie House, was completed in 1910.
Wright’s experimental approach is revealed not only in the continual evolution of his

47
style but also in his reluctance to determine his buildings’ final forms. He advised architects to
let their ideas grow slowly:
Conceive the building in the imagination, not on paper but in the
mind... Let it live there - gradually taking more definite form
before committing it to the draughting board. When the thing lives
for you - start to plan it with tools... Working on it with triangle
and T-square should modify or extend or intensify or test the
conception.204
During the time the design was taking shape, or “germinating,” Wright needed to have its setting
firmly in mind: “A building should appear to grow easily from its site and be shaped to
harmonize with its surroundings.”205 Wright not only avoided committing himself to plans on
paper as long as possible, but he typically made changes in his projects until the actual materials
were set in place, and sometimes even after. A biographer observed that “his impromptu methods
of designing, which led to his continual failure to prepare complete working drawings, made it
necessary for him to be on the site as often as possible during the time that a building was under
construction.” Although this annoyed many builders, and dismayed many clients as alterations
during construction raised their costs, it never fazed Wright, for “to him the process of
construction was a process of refinement as well.”206 A former student of Wright’s recalled that
“he always changed everything. A perpetual state of flux. ‘The last change is made when the
boom comes down,’ he’d snort.”207 Wright explained his attitude more gently when a client
complained to him of the delays, and expenses, that resulted from Wright’s constant changes
during the construction of one of his most important projects: “You see the building grows as it
is built and is none too easy, therefore, to keep up with always.”208
Wright came to be considered as the leading modern architect for the innovative work he

48
produced during 1890-1910, but during the next two decades he was eclipsed by a number of
younger European architects, including Walter Gropius and Mies van der Rohe. By the time of
the Depression he had few clients, not only because of the economic climate but because, then
past the age of 60, Wright was felt to be out of date. When the Pittsburgh department store owner
E. J. Kaufmann approached Wright to design his weekend house near a stream at Bear Run,
Wright seized the opportunity to make a bold statement that would revive his career. He
succeeded spectacularly.
Wright’s design of Fallingwater drew heavily on his own earlier buildings, including
Robie House and his own home at Taliesin. Thus the house features his trademark terraces,
overhangs, rough stonework, and a variety of other features that had developed from the Prairie
Style. Yet true to his experimental nature, in his desire to outdo the leading European modern
architects Wright was also willing to borrow their major innovations. So from the work of Mies,
Gropius, Le Corbusier, Schindler, and Neutra, Wright took such prominent features of
Fallingwater as cantilevers, extensive use of concrete and glazing, and an overall Cubist plan.209
Wright used these innovations, however, for his own purposes - to underscore the superiority of
his own organic architecture over the rigidity of the severe functionalist style of the Europeans.
Thus a scholar recently observed that Fallingwater “used the modernist vocabulary of floating
planes, but everything about it contradicted the functionalism of the style: its color, its definition
by and of the landscape, its framing of vistas from within, and its metaphorical interpretation of
human confrontation with nature, symbolically summed up in the stairs that descend from the
living room to the water. Each material - stone, glass, concrete - was assigned a function, yet
each was consonant with the site over a waterfall.”210

49
Fallingwater drew on the full experience of Wright’s five decades as an architect. He first
visited Bear Run in December, 1934, but did not produce his first known plans for the house
until September of the next year. Before presenting these plans to the client Wright made at least
three, and perhaps four, visits to the site. In a recent study Franklin Toker concluded that the
traditional story that Wright drew his first plans for Fallingwater in just a few hours, on the
morning of September 22, 1935, as E. J. Kaufmann drove from Milwaukee to Taliesin, is
probably a myth, and that he had likely made drawings for his own use before that date.211 Toker
observed that Fallingwater contains two dramatic features that above all others made it famous the visual illusion that the stream actually runs through the house, and the extension of the upper
balcony beyond the one below it. Toker’s study of Wright’s drawings of the plans for the house
led him to conclude that one of these, the oversailing balcony, was not part of the plan Wright
initially drew on September 22, but that at some point that morning “he erased its original
parapet line and set a new one 19 feet farther out, which made the upper balcony oversail the
living room by 6 feet.” The effect was striking: “Fallingwater now took on a totally new image,
with the famous crisscross of its two main balconies.”One of Fallingwater’s most famous
features, which “defies all structural and functional logic,” was thus an improvisation that Wright
added after nine months of study of the project. Nor did Wright’s changes cease with his
construction drawings. In June of 1936, for example, with construction of Fallingwater already
under way, from Taliesin Wright sent new plans that changed the shape of the three massive
concrete bolsters that served as the building’s main source of support - several days after the
bolsters had been poured. Wright’s assistant who was supervising construction promptly “tore
down the just-completed bolsters and helped construct a new set in late July. Wright was

50
determined to give Fallingwater a thrilling profile, whatever the cost.”212
Fallingwater became the focus of a great flood of publicity, including feature articles in
hundreds of newspapers and magazines, and an unprecedented exhibit devoted to the house at
New York’s Museum of Modern Art. It quickly became “the most famous private house in the
world.”213 Wright also received “the biggest PR boost of his career, and the perfect vehicle to
hype his comeback,” in the form of a special issue of Architectural Forum devoted to the
architect, “which has no rival as the most famous issue of any architectural magazine in any
language.”214
Wright’s success was the result of producing a bold and dramatic design that synthesized
major elements of his own past art with key innovations from the work of his leading European
rivals, all in the service of his own organic principles: hovering over two waterfalls, and
anchored among three large boulders, Fallingwater was an unmistakable example of the
integration of modern architecture and nature. Approaching the age of 70, Wright produced “the
most complex house of the twentieth century” through an extended and painstaking experimental
process that drew on his vast working experience and mature aesthetic judgment.215
In a recent survey of 40 textbooks of art history, two works were found to be tied for the
distinction of being reproduced more often than any others made by American artists during the
1980s. One of these was Tilted Arc, executed in 1981 by the sculptor Richard Serra, who was
then 42 years old and widely recognized as one of the most important living American artists.
The other was the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, dedicated in 1982, which had been designed by
Maya Lin at the age of 21, during her senior year in college.216
Lin originally made her design for the memorial as an assignment in an architecture

51
seminar she took at Yale. After thinking about the purpose of the memorial, she wanted to see
the site, so Lin and a few friends traveled to Washington, D. C. She later recalled that “it was at
the site that the idea for the design took shape”:
I had a simple impulse to cut into the earth.
I imagined taking a knife and cutting into the earth,
opening it up, an initial violence and pain that in time would
heal.217
Lin’s plan was to have two long walls of polished black granite, arranged in a V shape, placed in
the ground to form an embankment. One of the walls was to point to the Lincoln Memorial, the
other to the Washington Monument: “By linking these two strong symbols for the country, I
wanted to create a unity between the country’s past and present.”218 Lin realized that the strength
of her design lay in its simplicity:
On our return to Yale, I quickly sketched my idea up, and it almost
seemed too simple, too little. I toyed with adding some large flat
slabs that would appear to lead into the memorial, but they didn’t
belong. The image was so simple that anything added to it began to
detract from it.219
After Lin had completed her design, she decided to enter it in the national competition for
the veterans memorial. She found that the most difficult part of the entry was producing a onepage description of the project: “It took longer, in fact, to write the statement that I felt was
needed to accompany the required drawings than to design the memorial.”220 Lin explained that
the description was “critical to understanding the design,” because the Memorial reflected her
conceptual approach to art. Lin’s artistic goals are explicitly ideational:
Each of my works originates from a simple desire to make people
aware of their surroundings, not just the physical world but also the
psychological world we live in.221
The Memorial prominently features the carved names of all the soldiers killed or missing in

52
Vietnam, reflecting Lin’s belief that “writing is the purest of art forms... Words can be the most
direct means of sharing our thoughts.”222 The resemblance of the walls of the Memorial to an
open book is not accidental, as Lin explained that “the memorial is analogous to a book in many
ways.”223 In creating art, Lin generally begins with words:
I begin by imagining an artwork verbally. I try to describe
in writing what the project is, what it is trying to do. I need to
understand the artwork without giving it a specific materiality or
solid form. I try not to find the form too soon. Instead, I try to think
about it as an idea without a shape.224
The most important thing is to begin with a good concept: “a simple clear idea or moment of
inspiration is the soul of the piece.” The Memorial satisfied this criterion, for it “was born of an
instantaneous idea to cut open the earth.”225
Architectural projects are inevitably collaborative, for architects must consider the wishes
of clients. Any collaboration can require compromises and deviations from an architect’s original
plans, but the potential for interference with Lin’s design was enormous because of the public
role of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, and the many controversies that still surround the
Vietnam War. Thus even after her design was chosen by an eight-person selection committee, it
had to go through an extended process of review by government agencies and public scrutiny, in
the course of which many strenuous objections were raised, by Vietnam veterans and others, to
the non-representational nature of Lin’s model. In an eventual compromise, a sculpture of three
male soldiers was placed some distance from Lin’s monument, and later a sculpture of three
female figures and a wounded soldier was also placed further away. Yet when the Memorial was
dedicated in the fall of 1982, Lin found it did reflect her original intention: “the place was
frighteningly close to what it should be.”226

53
Lin’s design was a radical departure from earlier memorial architecture, for the Memorial
was influenced much more strongly by Minimalist sculpture than by traditional memorials. Her
use of abstract forms initially shocked veterans and others who had expected a realistic portrayal
of soldiers in combat, which would explicitly pay tribute to their heroism and patriotism. Yet
when the Memorial was completed, it quickly came to be recognized as a moving tribute to the
soldiers who had died in Vietnam. Today it is not only the most visited memorial in the capital,
but it is widely considered to have established a new level of excellence for memorial
architecture. So for example when the Lower Manhattan Development Corporation held a
competition for a memorial to the victims of the 2001 attack on the World Trade Center, Maya
Lin was appointed to the five member jury. When the eight final designs were presented to the
public, the architecture critic for the New Yorker remarked that although all of these were
intelligent and sophisticated, they received a lukewarm reaction from critics and the public
because “in the post-Vietnam-memorial age, we may have come to expect too much of a
memorial.” The problem was that Lin had set a new standard: “Lin’s Vietnam memorial set the
bar very high.”227
In the two decades since she designed the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, Lin has pursued a
career as a architect and sculptor. A recent profile observed that “Now a beneficiary of a stream
of commissions, this still-young master is riding her good fortune, turning out institutional and
private projects while also making the individual sculptures to which she attaches such
importance.”228 Yet the survey of textbooks found no other work by Lin reproduced in even a
single book.229 Thus from the vantage point of art scholars Lin’s contribution consists of a single
work, that one scholar describes as “one of the most compelling monuments in the United

54
States.”230 That a 21-year-old artist could conceive an idea that would be fully expressed in one
enormously successful project, and that would be followed by no others deemed significant by
art scholars, is a quintessentially conceptual phenomenon. Unlike the aging Frank Lloyd Wright,
who worked surrounded by assistants and apprentices at an academy dedicated to making his art,
the young Maya Lin worked alone: the Vietnam Veterans Memorial was first given solid form in
mashed potatoes at her college dining hall.231 And unlike Wright’s extended and painstaking
revisions, the Memorial “was born of an instantaneous idea.”232 These features of Lin’s method,
and the success of her design, may all have been consequences of her youth and lack of
experience. As one of the jurors for the competition commented on seeing Lin’s unorthodox
entry, the architect “must really know what he is doing to dare to do something so naive.”233
Movie Directors
Q: During the shooting [of Citizen Kane], did you have the
sensation of making such an important film?
Welles: I never doubted it for a single instant.
Interview with Orson Welles,
1964234
I do think that there is an art to the making of a motion picture.
There are some great artists in the business. I am not one of them.
John Ford, 1973235
There is remarkably widespread agreement that Citizen Kane is the most important American
movie ever made. Thus for example Citizen Kane ranked first in a “definitive selection of the
100 greatest American movies of all time,” as determined by a poll of more than 1,500 members
of the American film community conducted in 2000 by the American Film Institute.236 Citizen
Kane also placed first in a ranking of the 100 best films of the 20th century compiled by The
Village Voice from a poll the newspaper conducted of 50 distinguished film critics. The

55
screenplay for Citizen Kane similarly ranked first in a 2001 survey of the members of the Writers
Guild of America.237 Nor is Kane’s fame limited to the United States. Once every decade, the
British film magazine Sight & Sound conducts an international poll of critics and directors to
determine the 10 best movies ever made. Citizen Kane placed first in this poll in 1962, and
repeated this success in every subsequent decennial poll, including the most recent one in
2002.238 When Sight & Sound recently reprinted a paperback edition of Pauline Kael’s book on
the making of Citizen Kane, titled Raising Kane, the only print on the book’s front cover read
“Pauline Kael on the best film ever made.”239 Francois Truffaut recalled the enormous impact of
Citizen Kane: “This film has inspired more vocations to cinema throughout the world than any
other.”240 Among the most celebrated facts about Citizen Kane is that it was directed and
coauthored by the boy-wonder Orson Welles, who also played the title role, when he was just 25
years old. It was Welles’ first film.
The importance of Citizen Kane derived in large part from its technical virtuosity. So for
example a recent survey of film history explained its contribution:
It enabled the spectator not only to look through the frame at a
make-believe world, but to see once again, so to speak, the frame
as a constructed image... [N]o single aspect of Citizen Kane was
entirely original or unknown to filmmakers, but the work’s
startling impact came from its total effect, the concentration,
comprehensiveness, and unity of its stylistic effort... Welles strove
with his collaborators to utilize multiple innovations in nearly
every shot and scene throughout the whole film.241
Citizen Kane’s technical sophistication was not accidental, but was a result of exceptionally
careful planning. Both the film’s composer and its photographer emphasized that they were
given exceptional amounts of time to plan and achieve the novel aims they and Welles had

56
formulated. Thus Bernard Herrmann wrote that he and Wells agreed that “the dynamics of all
music in the picture should be planned ahead of time.” Contrary to the normal Hollywood
procedure in which musical scores were not written until filming was completed, Herrmann was
given time to write his score before filming began, and was then allowed to work on the film as it
was being shot and edited. In a number of scenes, film sequences were actually tailored to match
the music. Herrmann observed of the completed movie that “the result is an exact projection of
the original ideas in the score.”242 Similarly, Gregg Toland explained that “the photographic
approach to Citizen Kane was planned and considered long before the first camera turned.” This
allowed Toland time not only to formulate novel plans, but to make extensive experiments with
equipment and sets to make the plans possible. In this he had Welles’ full support: “Orson
Welles was insistent that the story be told most effectively, letting the Hollywood conventions of
movie-making go hang if need be.” Toland credited Welles for the opportunity: “Such
differences as exist between the cinematography in Citizen Kane and the camera work on the
average Hollywood product are based on the rare opportunity provided me by Orson Welles,
who was in complete sympathy with my theory that the photography should fit the story.”243
The meticulous planning of Welles and his collaborators produced a movie that contained
many innovations involving both sound and sight. A number of the sound innovations reflected
Welles’ earlier experience in radio. These included musical bridges - the introduction of music in
the middle of a scene, to change the mood and foreshadow the transition to the next scene; sound
montages - series of short bursts of speech, that revealed the reactions of a number of characters
in quick succession; and overlapping dialogue tracks that mimicked the interruptions of real
conversation, with variation in sound levels that allowed one voice to be heard at a time. The

57
visual innovations in Citizen Kane have become even more famous. A number of these were
used to attain what Toland called “human-eye focus,” with much greater depth of field than
movies normally afforded. Contributing to this was the staging, with construction of
exceptionally deep sets, so the action of a scene could occur simultaneously at different distances
from the camera; the use of extremely wide-angle lenses, with high-speed films, and very high
levels of illumination, which allowed sharp focus throughout the deep space of the sets, and
often created the startling effect of having important action in the background; and long camera
takes that allowed greater freedom of movement and extended ensemble acting for the players.
The greater realism produced by the novel device of building ceilings over the sets also
permitted the dramatic low-angle shots that became one of the movie’s technical trademarks.
Citizen Kane became celebrated for its many innovative technical devices, but Welles’
greatest achievement probably lay in the integration of these many devices in the service of the
film’s story.244 The dramatic use of chiaroscuro in lighting, the fragmentation of the film’s action
in physical depth, staccato bursts of spoken words, and many other technical effects all served to
underscore the symbolic content of the film. Jorge Luis Borges recognized this when he
observed that Citizen’s Kane’s subject is “the discovery of the secret soul of a man,” and
explained that “In astonishing and endlessly varied ways, Orson Welles exhibits the fragments of
the life of the man, Charles Foster Kane, and invites us to combine and reconstruct them.”245 The
variety of technical means used to tell the story parallels the variety of views of Kane presented
by different characters, which evolved from the original idea motivating the film: thus Welles
recalled that the story of Kane began with “the idea of telling the same thing several times - and
showing exactly the same scene from wholly different points of view. Basically, the idea

58
Rashomon used later on.”246
Welles’ conceptual approach to making movies is reflected in his emphasis on the
primacy of dialogue over images or action. Thus in a 1964 interview he declared: “I know that in
theory the word is secondary in cinema but the secret of my work is that everything is based on
the word. I do not make silent films. I must begin with what the characters say. I must know
what they say before seeing them do what they do.”247 For Welles, a good script was necessary
for a good film: “I’m sure I can’t make good films unless I also write the screenplay.”248
Citizen Kane is a conceptual masterpiece, a great early work executed by an important
conceptual innovator. It dominates Welles’ career. Thus Gerald Mast observed that “unlike
Hitchcock, Lubitsch, Chaplin, Hawks, or Ford, whose reputations rest on a great number of
impressive films, critical respect for Orson Welles rests primarily on one film, Citizen Kane.”249
Andrew Sarris stressed the allegorical nature of the film: “Kane develops two interesting themes:
the debasement of the private personality of the public figure, and the crushing weight of
materialism. Taken together, these two themes comprise the bitter irony of an American success
story that ends in futile nostalgia, loneliness, and death.”250 Francois Truffaut recognized that
Welles had achieved what all young directors hope to do: “To shoot Citizen Kane at twenty-five
years of age, is this not the dream of all the young habitués of the cinematheques?”251
A great deal of critical energy has been devoted to explaining how a young director could
produce such a great masterpiece as his first movie. Although Welles had no prior experience as
a film director, he had behind him a great deal of experience, and success, as an actor and
director in the theater and radio: as Truffaut put it, Kane is “the only first film made by a man
who was already famous.” For Truffaut, the movie bore witness to Welles’ iconoclasm: “Wells,

59
with extraordinary arrogance, had rejected the rules of cinema, the limits of its powers of
illusion.”252 Citizen Kane drew liberally on the expertise Welles had acquired in the other arts.
Peter Bogdanovich reflected that “Citizen Kane is like watching a consummate artist grappling
for the first time with the intoxication of his found vocation. All his passions - theatre, magic,
circus, radio, painting, literature - suddenly fused into one... No other director discovering the
medium was as ready or as mature.”253 Pauline Kael stressed the importance of an attitude in
Welles that Bernard Herrmann and Gregg Toland had both described: “He was young and open...
Welles was so eager to try out new ideas that even the tough, hardened studio craftsmen were
caught up by his spirit, just as his co-workers in the theatre and in radio had been.”254 Welles
himself had a slightly different explanation. When asked where he’d gotten the confidence to
make such a major effort so young, he replied: “Ignorance, ignorance, sheer ignorance - you
know there’s no confidence to equal it. It’s only when you know something about a profession, I
think, that you’re timid or careful.”255
Many movie critics consider John Ford to have been a great director. In 1973, when the
American Film Institute established its Life Achievement Award to honor individuals “whose
talent has, in a fundamental way, advanced the film art, and whose accomplishments have been
acknowledged by scholars, critics, professional peers, and the general public,” the first award
was given to Ford. The Institute’s citation declared that “No individual has more fully explored
on film the American experience.”256 Ford has been the subject of monographs not only by the
distinguished critic Andrew Sarris, but also by the directors Lindsay Anderson and Peter
Bogdanovich. Anderson considered that Ford was “probably the greatest film director working in
the world’s richest film making tradition.” 257When Orson Welles was asked which American

60
directors he most admired, he replied “the old masters. By which I mean John Ford, John Ford
and John Ford.”258
Ford directed more than 140 movies, and won six Oscars. Curiously, however, no one of
his movies has emerged clearly as a masterpiece. No Ford film was ranked among the top 20
American movies of all time in the American Film Institute’s survey conducted in 2000, and
only three of his films were ranked in the top 100. The Institute’s citation for Ford’s Life
Achievement Award did not mention any specific movie, but instead referred collectively to
Ford’s films as “a creative tapestry representing over 50 years of work.”259 Although there is
considerable disagreement even among Ford’s admirers over what constitutes his best work, a
number of experts have named The Searchers as his greatest achievement. So for example John
Baxter called it “Ford’s most perfect philosophical statement,” and Gerald Peary considered it
“the pinnacle of Ford’s cinematic accomplishment.”260 Ford directed The Searchers in 1956, at
the age of 62.261
That Ford may have been a master without a masterpiece and that his work was excellent
late in his career both appear to have been consequences of the fact that his approach to art was
experimental. Ford’s work is consistently praised for its visual qualities. Alfred Hitchcock stated
that “A John Ford film was a visual gratification.”262 Elia Kazan declared that Ford “taught me to
tell it in pictures.”263 Orson Welles made a similar statement when asked how he learned his
visual style:
I’ve only been influenced by somebody once: prior to making
Citizen Kane I saw [Ford’s] Stagecoach forty times. I didn’t need
to learn from somebody who had something to say, but from
somebody who would show me how to say what I had in mind;
and John Ford is perfect for that.264

61

Federico Fellini stressed Ford’s direct appeal to another one of the senses: “When I think of
Ford, I sense the smell of barracks, of horses, of gunpowder.”265
Ford’s films are known for their stories and for ensemble acting. Thus a recent history of
film cited Ford as “a good example of the studio director who defined himself over a long career
by way of story and performance. It is possible to speak of a kind of Fordian world... peopled by
a repertory group of players.”266 Unlike Welles, Ford did not consider the script to be a critical
determinant of the quality of a movie. Thus he explained that “After all, you’ve got to tell your
story through the people who portray it. You can have a weak, utterly bad script - and a good
cast will turn it into a good picture.”267 Gerald Mast observed that “Ford’s method emphasized
visual images rather than talk,” and Ford agreed, stating that “Pictures, not words, should tell the
story.”268 On another occasion Ford elaborated on his philosophy:
When a motion picture is at its best, it is long on action and short
on dialogue. When it tells its story and reveals its characters in a
series of simple, beautiful, active pictures, and does it with as little
talk as possible, then the motion picture medium is being used to
its fullest advantage.269
Ford’s goal was to achieve immediacy and realism: “I try to make people forget they’re
in a theatre. I don’t want them to be conscious of a camera or a screen. I want them to feel what
they’re seeing is real.”270 He distrusted not only extensive dialogue but also complex technical
devices: “I like, as a director and a spectator, simple, direct, frank films. Nothing disgusts me
more than snobbism, mannerism, technical gratuity... and, most of all, intellectualism.”271
Lindsay Anderson remarked that Ford achieved a wide range of emotional effects through
technical mastery, but that he never allowed technique to obtrude on narrative: “Ford remains

62
always a story-teller.”272
Although Ford began directing movies at the age of 23, his early work was
undistinguished. Thus Andrew Sarris commented that if Ford’s career had ended in 1929 - when
he was 35, and had already directed more than 65 films - “he would deserve at most a footnote in
film history.”273 Like that of other experimental artists, Ford’s work developed gradually, and
with considerably continuity: Peter Bogdanovich remarked that “Every Ford movie is filled with
reverberations from another - which makes his use of the same players from year to year, decade
to decade, so much more than just building ‘a stock company’ - and one film of his cannot really
be looked at as separate from the rest.”274 Ford is widely considered to have improved his work
until late in his life. Andrew Sarris judged that “the last two decades of his career were his
richest and most rewarding.”275 Similarly, Peter Bogdanovich considered Ford’s late films his
best, “not only in execution but in depth of expression.”276
The explanation of why Ford’s work improved as he aged may be the same as the answer
he himself gave when asked how he chose where to place his cameras: “You shoot what would
look best on the screen. Experience, instinct. That’s it.”277 Andrew Sarris considered The
Searchers a stylistic summation of “all the best of what Ford had been,” and emphasized its
beauty: “The Searchers is rich in all the colors and textures of the seasons and the elements, from
the whiteness of winter snows to the brownness of summer sands.”278 Sarris believed that Ford’s
experience was the key to his late achievements: “The economy of expression that Ford has
achieved in fifty years of film-making constitutes the beauty of his style.”279
Young Geniuses and Old Masters
There is, it seems, a graph of creativity which can be plotted

63
through an artist’s career.

Sir Alan Bowness, 1989280

This consideration of important contributions made either very early or very late in an
artist’s career in seven different artistic disciplines demonstrates not only that there are dramatic
differences in basic characteristics of the work of conceptual and experimental innovators, but
also that there are significant similarities within each of these categories across disciplines.
Conceptual innovators historically have been those artists most often described as
geniuses, as their early manifestations of brilliance have been taken to indicate that these
individuals were born with extraordinary talents. Conceptual innovators normally make their
most important contributions to a discipline not long after their first exposure to it. These early
innovators are often perceived as irreverent and iconoclastic. Among the cases examined here,
Kosuth, Rimbaud, Boccioni, and Jarry offer examples of artists whose lack of respect for, or lack
of interest in, earlier work in their disciplines figured prominently in their ability to make bold
new departures from existing practices. Conceptual innovations are often very simple. Although
Kosuth, Boccioni, and Lin had not spent long periods of time acquiring the complex skills
common to many practitioners of their disciplines, the radical simplifications they made in their
art allowed them to avoid the need for those skills. Kosuth, Rimbaud, Boccioni, Jarry, and Lin all
shared the extremely rapid formation of ideas that characterizes many conceptual innovations, as
the central elements of their major contributions arrived in brief moments of inspiration.
Conceptual innovations often involve radical leaps, producing work that not only does not
resemble other artists’ work, but equally does not resemble the innovator’s own earlier work. All
seven major conceptual innovations considered here share this characteristic, as in each case the

64
specific work examined marked a sharp discontinuity in the career of the artist. A consequence
of the sudden declaration of conceptual innovations together with their radical nature is their
frequent landmark status. In six of the seven cases considered here, the work examined in this
paper clearly dominates the innovator’s career. Thus the mention of Kosuth, Fitzgerald,
Boccioni, Jarry, Lin, or Welles immediately brings to mind a single trademark work. Perhaps
most fundamentally, this examination of seven major conceptual contributions underscores the
certainty of these important conceptual innovators. All seven of the artists had great confidence
in the validity and significance of their innovations, and this allowed them to put forward radical
contributions early in their careers in spite of their knowledge that many, if not most,
practitioners of their disciplines would be hostile to their ideas.
Experimental innovators are most often praised for their wisdom and judgment. All the
experimental innovations examined here are considered prime examples of superb
craftsmanship, the result of experience acquired over the course of long careers by their creators.
All seven experimental innovators considered here are celebrated for their deep understanding
and respect for the traditions of their disciplines. With the exception of Wright’s Fallingwater,
the major works considered here were not intended as definitive statements, but were instead
provisional, subject to later modification or further development, reflecting their author’s lack of
certainty in their accomplishment. It is this uncertainty that is the most basic common
characteristic of these great experimental innovators. Bishop, Rodin, Ibsen, Wright, and Ford all
continued beyond the specific contributions examined here, progressively modifying their
innovations in later works through further experimentation; Mondrian and Dostoevsky were
prevented from doing this only by death. The work of these experimental innovators not only

65
makes explicit statements of uncertainty and ambiguity, but in some cases has implicit
expressions of uncertainty built into its fabric. Notable examples of this include the irregular
brushstrokes of Mondrian’s late paintings and Dostoevsky’s innovation of the polyphonic novel.
This paper’s examination of seven major conceptual innovators has interesting
implications for a familiar problem that has previously been considered almost exclusively in
relation to one artist at a time, of why some important artists decline precipitously after making a
great early contribution. Some conceptual artists become tied to an early important innovation,
and produce later work that effectively repeats it in subject or technique. Jarry is an extreme
example of an artist who became the captive of his early achievement, but to a lesser degree
Kosuth, Lin, and Welles all revisited their early innovations in their later work. In some cases a
conceptual innovator loses the power of his early approach by aiming to produce later works that
are more complex. Kosuth and Lin have both made later contributions that are more involved but
less influential than their early masterpieces, and the failure of Tender is the Night to match the
importance of The Great Gatsby is probably due to Fitzgerald’s attempt to write a more complex
novel. In each of these cases, the artist’s decline appears to have been a consequence of the
failure to recognize that the key to the success of an early landmark contribution lay in its
simplicity. In yet other cases, a brilliant conceptual innovator may lose interest in his discipline.
It is often difficult to determine whether this plays a role in the career of a particular innovator,
but among the most dramatic instances of it is surely Rimbaud’s definitive decision to abandon
poetry at the age of 19.
This paper clearly demonstrates the generality of the distinction between conceptual and
experimental innovators in artistic disciplines. In a wide range of very different activities it is

66
readily apparent that some artists are conceptual, and others experimental. Examination of their
contributions furthermore allows us to understand why it is that important conceptual
innovations are generally made by the young, and major experimental contributions by the old.

67
Footnotes
I thank Robert Jensen and Joshua Kotin for discussions, participants in a seminar at the
American University of Paris for comments on an earlier draft, and the National Science
Foundation for financial support.

1.

Woolford and Karlin 1996, 31.

2.

Welles 2002, 81.

3.

Galenson 2001; 2003a; 2004a; Jensen, 2004.

4.

Sylvester 1995, 431.

5.

Kosuth 1989, 44.

6.

Galenson 2004b.

7.

Blotkamp 1995, 15.

8.

Mondrian 1986, 224.

9.

Blotkamp 1995, 94.

10.

Mondrian 1986, 224.

11.

Blotkamp 1995, 81.

12.

Cooper and Spronk 2001, 18.

13.

Cooper and Spronk 2001, 49.

14.

Seuphor 1956, 181.

15.

Golding 2000, 12-13.

16.

Seuphor 1956, 151, 198.

17.

Sylvester 1995, 434.

18.

Cooper and Spronk 2001, 53-54.

19.

Holty 1957, 21.

68

20.

Greenberg 1986, 189.

21.

Coplans 1996, 32-34.

22.

Schapiro 1979, 256.

23.

Mondrian 1986, 356.

24.

Schapiro 1979, 256-57.

25.

Golding 2000, 41.

26.

Galenson 2003b.

27.

Kosuth 1989, 125-26.

28.

Kosuth 1991, 36.

29.

Kosuth 1991, 18.

30.

Kosuth 1989, 13.

31.

Kosuth 1989, 31.

32.

Kosuth 1991, 91.

33.

Kosuth 1991, 217.

34.

Kosuth 1991, 50.

35.

Kosuth 1991, 139.

36.

Kosuth 1991, 204.

37.

Dostoevsky 1961, 217.

38.

Mizener 1951, 170.

39.

Wasiolek 1967, xii.

40.

Mochulsky 1967, 597; Wasiolek 1967, 41.

41.

Leatherbarrow 2002, 16.

69

42.

Bakhtin 1984, 7.

43.

Morson 1994, 91.

44.

Bakhtin 1984, 6.

45.

Morson 1994, 94.

46.

Leatherbarrow 2002, 233.

47.

Morson 1994, 91, 98.

48.

Bakhtin 1984, 39.

49.

Bakhtin 1984, 58.

50.

Bakhtin 1984, 276-77.

51.

Morson 1994, 98.

52.

Leatherbarrow 2002, 229.

53.

Morson 1994, 136.

54.

Bakhtin 1984, 39.

55.

Leatherbarrow 2002, 228.

56.

Leatherbarrow 2002, 172.

57.

Lary 1973, 147-48.

58.

Mochulsky 1967, 596-97.

59.

Mochulsky 1967, 571-73; Dostoevsky 1975, 294.

60.

Mochulsky 1967, 596.

61.

Claridge 1991; II, 181-94.

62.

Wagner 1988, 882; Claridge 1991; II, 209.

63.

Claridge 1991; II, 456.

70

64.

Claridge 1991; IV, 46.

65.

Trilling 1951, 252. On the conceptual nature of The Waste Land, see Galenson 2003a.

66.

Fitzgerald 1945, 310; Claridge 1991; IV, 396.

67.

Ruland and Bradbury 1991, 299-30.

68.

Claridge 1991; II, 179; IV, 44.

69.

Bruccoli 1994, 80.

70.

Turnbull 1963, 309, 358.

71.

Claridge 1991; IV, 423; Miller 1962, 92, 106.

72.

Trilling 1951, 246, 249.

73.

Kazin 1942, 323.

74.

Aldridge 1985, 51-52.

75.

Claridge 1991; IV, 201-03.

76.

Bruccoli 1994, 455.

77.

Bruccoli 1994, 169.

78.

Fitzgerald 1945, 165.

79.

Bloom 1988, 18.

80.

Schwartz and Estess 1983, 281.

81.

Perloff 1999, 295.

82.

Fowlie 1965, 24; Cohn 1973, 156.

83.

Brereton 1965, 194.

84.

Wilson 1959, 270.

85.

Perloff 1999, 60-61.

71

86.

Fowlie 1965, 112.

87.

Weinberg 1966, Chap. 5; Frohock 1963, Chap. 5

88.

Perloff 1999, 64; Starkie 1939, Chap. 10.

89.

Perloff 1999, 64-66.

90.

Charvet 1967, 79.

91.

Balakian 1947, 77-78.

92.

Bishop 1994, xxiii.

93.

Galenson 2003a.

94.

Schwartz and Estess 1983, 181, 206.

95.

Bishop 1994, 621.

96.

Lowell 1990, 76.

97.

Schwartz and Estess 1983, 207. On Ryder as an experimental painter see
Galenson 2002.

98.

Kalstone 1989, 101.

99.

Monteiro 1996, 42.

100.

Kalstone 1989, 101.

101.

Monteiro 1996, 51.

102.

Schwartz and Estess 1983, 253; Kalstone 1989, 222.

103.

Kalstone 1989, 190.

104.

Bishop 1994, 348.

105.

Schwartz and Estess 1983, 204-05.

106.

Serafin 1999, 101.

72

107.

Schwartz and Estess 1983, 150.

108.

McCabe 1994, 33.

109.

Schwartz and Estess 1983, 277.

110.

Monteiro 1996, 99.

111.

Rodin 1983, 11.

112.

Apollonio 1973, 52.

113.

Elsen 1963, 89.

114.

Grunfeld 1987, 374-77.

115.

Hamilton 1967, 68-69; Elsen 1963, 202.

116.

Elsen 1965, 110.

117.

Elsen 1965, 115.

118.

Lampert 1986, 135.

119.

Elsen 1965, 154.

120.

Elsen 1963, 141.

121.

Elsen 1965, 164.

122.

Elsen 1965, 155.

123.

Elsen 1963, 35, 39.

124.

Elsen 1963, 141.

125.

Lampert 1986, 135.

126.

Hamilton 1967, 65.

127.

Grunfeld 1987, 289.

128.

Grunfeld 1987, 573.

73

129.

Wittkower 1977, 255.

130.

Elsen 1963, 145.

131.

Elsen 1965, 168.

132.

Elsen 1963, 96.

133.

Grunfeld 1987, 316.

134.

Elsen 1963, 102.

135.

Elsen 1974, 28.

136.

Hamilton 1967, 68-69.

137.

Elsen 1965, 114.

138.

Golding 1972, 3.

139.

Galenson 2004c.

140.

Apollonio 1973, 21.

141.

Apollonio 1973, 27, 47.

142.

Apollonio 1973, 22, 24.

143.

Apollonio 1973, 23.

144.

Apollonio 1973 reprints many of these.

145.

E.g. Taylor 1961, 17; Golding 1972, 6-7.

146.

Perloff 1986, 90.

147.

E.g. see Golding 2000, 53.

148.

Apollonio 1973, 7.

149.

Coen 1988, xliii.

150.

Golding 1972, 4.

74

151.

Coen 1988, 94.

152.

Taylor 1961, 12-30; Haftmann 1965, 109.

153.

Golding 1972, 12.

154.

Golding 1972, 14; also see Coen 1988, 205.

155.

Golding 1972, 14.

156.

Apollonio 1973, 51-65.

157.

Coen 1988, 203.

158.

Apollinaire 1972, 321.

159.

Coen 1988, 216.

160.

Golding 1972, 28.

161.

Coen 1988, 204.

162.

Miller 1968, 20.

163.

Stillman 1983, 56-57.

164.

Magill 1989, 362.

165.

E.g. Miller 1968, l; Templeton 1997, 323.

166.

Miller 1968, 45.

167.

Lyons 1987, 32.

168.

Lyons 1987, 49.

169.

Lucas 1962, 43.

170.

Miller 1968, 44.

171.

Tennant 1965, 17; Miller 1968, 45.

172.

Lucas 1962, 43-44.

75

173.

Egan 1972, 242.

174.

Egan 1972, 328.

175.

McFarlane 1994, 227.

176.

Fjelde 1965, 16.

177.

Tennant 1965, 116.

178.

Hardwick 2001, 37-38.

179.

Lyons 1987, 33.

180.

Fjelde 1965, 17.

181.

Egan 1972, 240.

182.

Bloom 2002, 232.

183.

Hardwick 2001, 52.

184.

Lyons 1987, 192.

185.

Egan 1972, 223, 219.

186.

Egan 1972, 324-25.

187.

Lucas 1962, 1.

188.

Esslin 1991, 24, 356.

189.

Shattuck 1958, 187.

190.

Stillman 1983, 55.

191.

Esslin 1991, 356-60; Shattuck 1958, 159-64.

192.

Shattuck 1958, 169.

193.

Richardson 1991, 360-66.

194.

Shattuck 1958, 177.

76

195.

Esslin 1991, 360.

196.

Shattuck 1958, 163.

197.

Tafel 1979, 165.

198.

Lin 2000, 3:09.

199.

Toker 2003, 267.

200.

Gelernter 1999, 258; Scully 1960, 26-27.

201.

Riley 1994, 32-22.

202.

Riley 1994, 32.

203.

Gelernter 1999, 216-18.

204.

Toker 2003, 142-43.

205.

Riley 1994, 33; Toker 2003, 142.

206.

Gill 1987, 189, 250-51.

207.

Tafel 1979, 165.

208.

Gill 1987, 367.

209.

Toker 2003, 164-71; Levine 1996, 240-43.

210.

Riley 1994, 46.

211.

Toker 2003, 180.

212.

Toker 2003, 186, 190, 207.

213.

Toker 2003, 299.

214.

Toker 2003, 253.

215.

Toker 2003, 7.

216.

Galenson 2003b.

77

217.

Lin 2000, 4:10.

218.

Lin 2000, 4:11.

219.

Lin 2000, 4:11.

220.

Lin 2000, 4:11.

221.

Lin 2000, 2:03.

222.

Lin 2000, 2:03.

223.

Lin 2000, 4:14.

224.

Lin 2000, 3:05.

225.

Lin 2000, 4:44-45.

226.

Lin 2000, 4:16.

227.

Goldberger 2003, 50.

228.

Munro 2000, 485-86.

229.

Galenson 2003b.

230.

Stokstad 1995, 1162.

231.

Lin 2000, 7:03.

232.

Lin 2000, 4:45.

233.

Lin 2000, 4:12.

234.

Welles 2002, 123-24.

235.

Ford 2001, 158.

236.

Ash 2003, 192.

237.

Ash 2003, 192.

238.

Ash 2003, 194-95.

78

239.

Kael 2002.

240.

Truffaut 1994, 279.

241.

Sklar 1993, 222.

242.

Gottesman 1971, 69-72.

243.

Gottesman 1971, 73-76.

244.

Nichols 1976, 274-75.

245.

Gottesman 1971, 127.

246.

Welles and Bogdanovich 1992, 53.

247.

Welles 2002, 102.

248.

Welles 2002, 46.

249.

Mast 1986, 266.

250.

Gottesman 1971, 103.

251.

Gottesman 1971, 131.

252.

Truffaut 1994, 281-83.

253.

Welles and Bogdanovich 1992, 91.

254.

Kael 2002, 131-32.

255.

Welles 2002, 80.

256.

American Film Institute 1973.

257.

Anderson 1981, 9.

258.

Welles 2002, 135.

259.

In contrast, when Orson Welles received the third Life Achievement Award two
years later, the citation mentioned by name just one movie, Citizen Kane, which it
described as “a benchmark in world cinema, an achievement against which other films
are still measured.”

79

260.
261.
262.

Baxter 1971, 144; Ford 2001, x.
Although Ford’s date of birth has often been given as 1895 - even by Ford himself
- recent scholarship has established that he was born in 1894. Gallagher 1986, 2.
Ford 2001, ix.

263.

Ford 2001, ix.

264.

Welles 2002, 76.

265.

Ford 2001, ix.

266.

Fell 1975, 209.

267.

Ford 2001, 16.

268.

Mast 1986, 252; Ford 2001, 64.

269.

Ford 2001, 47.

270.

Ford 2001, 85.

271.

Ford 2001, 71.

272.

Anderson 1981, 110-13.

273.

Sarris 1976, 34.

274.

Bogdanovich 1978, 31.

275.

Sarris 1976, 124.

276.

Bogdanovich 1978, 24.

277.

Ford 2001, 87.

278.

Sarris 1976, 170, 174.

279.

Sarris 1968, 47.

280.

Bowness 1989, 51.

1
References
Aldridge, John. 1985. After the Lost Generation. New York: Arbor House.
American Film Institute. 1973. “John Ford: Life Achievement Award Tribute Address.”
AFI.com.
Anderson, Lindsay. 1981. About John Ford... London: Plexus.
Apollinaire, Guillaume. 1972. Apollinaire on Art: Essays and Reviews 1902-1918. Boston: MFA
Publications.
Apollonio, Umbro, editor. 1973. Futurist Manifestos, New York: Viking Press.
Ash, Russell. 2003. Top 10 of Film. New York: DK Publishing.
Bakhtin, Mikhail. 1984. Problems of Dostoevsky’s Poetics. Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press.
Balakian, Anna. 1947. Literary Origins of Surrealism. New York: New York University Press.
Baxter, John. 1971. The Cinema of John Ford. London: Zwemmer.
Bishop, Elizabeth. 1994. One Art. New York: Farrar, Strauss, Giroux.
Bloom, Harold, editor. 1988. Arthur Rimbaud. New York: Chelsea House Publishers.
Bloom, Harold, 2002. Genius. New York: Warner Books.
Blotkamp, Carel. 1995. Mondrian: The Art of Destruction. New York: Harry N. Abrams.
Bogdanovich, Peter. 1978. John Ford. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Bowness, Alan. 1989. The Conditions of Success. New York: Thames and Hudson.
Brereton, Geoffrey. 1965. An Introduction to the French Poets. London: Methuen.
Bruccoli, Matthew, editor. F. Scott Fitzgerald: A Life in Letters. New York: Charles Scribner’s
Sons.
Charvet, P. E. 1967. A Literary History of France, Vol. 5. London: Ernest Benn.
Claridge, Henry, editor. 1991. F. Scott Fitzgerald: Critical Assessments. 4 volumes. Mountfield:
Helm Information.

2

Coen, Ester. 1988. Umberto Boccioni. New York: Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Cohn, Robert. 1973. The Poetry of Rimbaud. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Cooper, Harry, and Ron Spronk. 2001. Mondrian: The Transatlantic Paintings. New Haven:
Yale University Press.
Coplans, John. 1996. Provocations. London: London Projects.
Dostoevsky, Anna. 1975. Dostoevsky, New York: Liveright.
Dostoevsky, Fyodor. 1961. Letters of Fyodor Michailovitch Dostoevsky, New York: Horizon
Press.
Egan, Michael, editor. 1972. Ibsen: The Critical Heritage. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Elsen, Albert. 1963. Rodin. New York: Museum of Modern Art.
Elsen, Albert. 1965. Auguste Rodin: Readings on His Life and Work. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall.
Elsen, Albert. 1974. Origins of Modern Sculpture. New York: George Braziller.
Esslin, Martin. 1991. The Theatre of the Absurd. Third edition. London: Penguin Books.
Fell, John. 1975. Film. New York: Praeger.
Fitzgerald, F. Scott. 1945. The Crack-Up. New York: New Directions.
Fjelde, Rolf, editor. 1965. Ibsen. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Ford, John. 2001. Interviews. Jackson: University Press of Mississippi.
Fowlie, Wallace. 1965. Rimbaud. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Frohock, W. M. 1963. Rimbaud’s Poetic Practice. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Galenson, David. 2001. Painting outside the Lines: Patterns of Creativity in Modern Art.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Galenson, David. 2002. “The Methods and Careers of American Painters in the Late Nineteenth
Century.” Unpublished paper, University of Chicago.

3
Galenson, David. 2003a. “Literary Life Cycles: The Careers of Modern American Poets.”
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 9856.
Galenson, David. 2003b. “The Reappearing Masterpiece: Ranking American Artists and Art
Works of the Late Twentieth Century.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper 9935.
Galenson, David. 2004a. “A Portrait of the Artist as a Young or Old Innovator: Measuring the
Careers of Modern Novelists.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
10213.
Galenson, David. 2004b. “Toward Abstraction: Ranking European Painters and Paintings of the
Early Twentieth Century.” Unpublished paper, University of Chicago.
Galenson, David. 2004c. “Ranking Modern Sculptors and Sculptures.” Unpublished paper,
University of Chicago.
Gallagher, Tag. 1986. John Ford. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Gelernter, Mark. 1999. A History of American Architecture. Hanover: University Press of New
England.
Gill, Brendan. 1987. Many Masks: A Life of Frank Lloyd Wright. New York: G. P. Putnam’s
Sons.
Goldberger, Paul. 2003. “Memories.” The New Yorker. December 8. p. 50.
Golding, John. 1972. Boccioni’s “Unique Forms of Continuity in Space.” Newcastle: University
of Newcastle upon Tyne.
Golding, John. 2000. Paths to the Absolute. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Gottesman, Ronald, editor. 1971. Focus on Citizen Kane. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Greenberg, Clement. 1986. Collected Essays and Criticism, Vol. 1. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Grunfeld, Frederic. 1987. Rodin. New York: Henry Holt and Company.
Haftmann, Werner. 1965. Painting in the Twentieth Century. New York: Frederick A. Praeger.
Hamilton, George Heard. 1967. Painting and Sculpture in Europe 1880-1940. Harmondsworth:
Penguin Books.

4
Hardwick, Elizabeth. 2001. Seduction and Betrayal. New York: New York Review of Books.
Holty, Carl. 1957. “Mondrian in New York: A Memoir.” Arts. Vol. 31, No. 10 (1957), 17-21.
Jensen, Robert. 2004. “Anticipating Artistic Behavior: New Research Tools for Art Historians.”
Historical Methods, forthcoming.
Kael, Pauline. 2002. Raising Kane. London: Methuen Publishing.
Kalstone, David. 1989. Becoming a Poet. New York: Farrar, Straus, Giroux.
Kazin, Alfred. 1942. On Native Grounds. New York: Harcourt, Brace, and World.
Kosuth, Joseph. 1989. Interviews, 1969-1989. Stuggart: Edition Patricia Schwartz.
Kosuth, Joseph. 1991. Art After Philosophy and After: Collected Writings, 1966-1990.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Lampert, Catherine. 1986. Rodin. London: Arts Council of Great Britan.
Lary, N. M. 1973. Dostoevsky and Dickens. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Leatherbarrow, W. J., editor. 2002. The Cambridge Companion to Dostoevsky. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Levine, Neil. 1996. The Architecture of Frank Lloyd Wright. Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
Lin, Maya. 2000. Boundaries. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Lowell, Robert. 1990. Collected Prose. New York: Noonday Press.
Lucas, F. L. 1962. The Drama of Ibsen and Strindberg. London: Cassell.
Lyons, Charles, editor. 1987. Critical Essays on Henrick Ibsen. Boston: G. K. Hall.
Magill, Frank, editor. 1989. Masterpieces of World Literature. New York: Harper Collins.
Mast, Gerald. 1986. A Short History of the Movies. Fourth edition. New York: Macmillan.
Mc Cabe, Susan. 1994. Elizabeth Bishop. University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press.
Mc Farlane, James, editor. 1994. The Cambridge Companion to Ibsen. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

5

Miller, J. William. 1968. Modern Playwrights at Work, Vol. 1. New York: Samuel French.
Miller, James. 1964. F. Scott Fitzgerald. New York: New York University Press.
Mizener, Arthur. 1951. The Far Side of Paradise: A Biography of F. Scott Fitzgerald.
Cambridge: Riverside Press.
Mochulsky, Konstantin. 1967. Dostoevsky. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Mondrian, Piet. 1986. The New Art - The New Life: The Collected Writings of Piet Mondrian.
Boston: G. K. Hall.
Monteiro, George. 1996. Conversations with Elizabeth Bishop. Jackson: University of
Mississippi.
Morson, Gary. 1994. Narrative and Freedom. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Munro, Eleanor. 2000. Originals. New edition. New York: Da Capo Press.
Nichols, Bill, editor. 1976. Movies and Methods. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Perloff, Marjorie. 1986. The Futurist Moment. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Perloff, Marjorie. 1999. The Poetics of Indeterminacy: Rimbaud to Cage. Evanston:
Northwestern University Press.
Richardson, John. 1991. A Life of Picasso, Vol. 1. New York: Random House.
Riley, Terence. 1994. Frank Lloyd Wright. New York: Museum of Modern Art.
Rodin, Auguste. 1983. Rodin on Art and Artists. New York: Dover Publications.
Ruland, Richard, and Malcolm Bradbury. 1991. From Puritanism to Postmodernism. New York:
Viking Press.
Sarris, Andrew. 1968. The American Cinema. New York: E. P. Dutton.
Sarris, Andrew. 1976. The John Ford Movie Mystery. London: Secker and Warburg.
Schapiro, Meyer. 1979. Modern Art. New York: George Braziller.
Schwartz, Lloyd, and Sybil Estess, editors. 1983. Elizabeth Bishop and Her Art. Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan Press.

6
Scully, Vincent. 1960. Frank Lloyd Wright. New York: George Braziller.
Serafin, Steven, editor. 1999. The Continuum Encyclopedia of American Literature. New York:
Continuum.
Seuphor, Michel. 1956. Piet Mondrian: Life and Work. New York: Harry N. Abrams.
Shattuck, Roger. 1958. The Banquet Years. New York: Harcourt, Brace.
Sklar, Robert. 1993. Film. New York: Harry N. Abrams.
Starkie, Enid. 1939. Arthur Rimbaud. New York: W. W. Norton.
Stillman, Linda. 1983. Alfred Jarry. Boston: Twayne Publishers.
Stokstad, Marilyn. 1995. Art History. New York: Harry N. Abrams.
Sylvester, David. 1997. About Modern Art. New York: Henry Holt.
Tafel, Edgar. 1979. Apprentice to Genius. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Taylor, Joshua. 1961. Futurism. New York: Museum of Modern Art.
Templeton, Joan. 1997. Ibsen’s Women. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Tennant, P. F. D. 1965. Ibsen’s Dramatic Technique. New York: Humanities Press.
Toker, Franklin. 2003. Fallingwater Rising: Frank Lloyd Wright, E. J. Kaufmann, and America’s
Most Extraordinary House. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Trilling, Lionel. 1951. The Liberal Imagination. New York: Viking Press.
Truffaut, François. 1994. The Films in My Life. New York: Da Capo Press.
Turnbull, Andrew. 1963. The Letters of F. Scott Fitzgerald. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons.
Wasiolek, Edward. 1967. The Brothers Karamazov and the Critics. Belmont, California:
Wadsworth Publishing Company.
Wagner, Linda. 1988. “Ernest Hemingway, F. Scott Fitzgerald, and Gertrude Stein.” In Emory
Elliott, editor, Columbia Literary History of the United States. New York: Columbia
University Press. Pp. 873-86.
Weinberg, Bernard. 1966. The Limits of Symbolism. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

7
Welles, Orson, and Peter Bogdanovich. 1992. This is Orson Welles. New York: Harper Collins.
Welles, Orson. 2002. Interviews. Jackson: University Press of Mississippi.
Wilson, Edmund. 1959. Axel’s Castle. New York: W. W. Norton.
Wittkower, Rudolf. 1977. Sculpture: Processes and Principles. New York: Harper and Row.
Woolford, John, and Daniel Karlin. 1996. Robert Browning. London: Longman Publishing.

