NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EXCHANGE RATE VOLATILITY AND
THE CREDIT CHANNEL IN EMERGING MARKETS:
A VERTICAL PERSPECTIVE
Ricardo Caballero
Arvind Krishnamurthy
Working Paper 10517
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10517
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2004

This paper is an extensively re-written an expanded version of: “A Vertical Analysis of Crises and
Intervention: Fear of Floating and Ex-ante Problems,” April 2001, and “A Vertical Analysis of Monetary
Policy in Emerging Markets,” March 2003. We thank Francisco Gallego, Andrew Hertzberg, Stavros
Panageas, Raghuram Rajan, Roberto Rigobon and Andres Velasco for their comments on these earlier
versions, as well as seminar participants at Bank of Canada, Brown, Chicago, Columbia, IMF, MIT, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, the World Bank, and the ME-NBER group. Caballero thanks the NSF for nancial
support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Ricardo Caballero and Arvind Krishnamurthy. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Exchange Rate Volatility and the Credit Channel in Emerging Markets: A Vertical Perspective
Ricardo Caballero and Arvind Krishnamurthy
NBER Working Paper No. 10517
May 2004
JEL No. E0, E4, E5, F0, F3, F4, G1
ABSTRACT
Firms in emerging markets are exposed to severe financial frictions and credit constraints, that are
exacerbated by the sudden stop of capital inflows. Can monetary policy offset this external credit
squeeze? We show that although this may be the case during moderate contractions (or in partial
equilibrium), the expansionary effect of monetary policy vanishes during severe external crises. The
exchange rate jumps to reduce the dollar value of domestic collateral until equilibrium in domestic
financial markets is consistent with the external constraint. An expansionary monetary policy in this
context raises the value of domestic collateral but it exacerbates the exchange rate depreciation
(beyond the standard interest parity effect) and has little effect on aggregate activity. However there
is a dynamic linkage between monetary policy and sudden stops. The anticipation of a dogged
defense of the exchange rate worsens the consequences of sudden stops by distorting the private
sector incentive to take precautions against these shocks. For similar general equilibrium reasons,
dollarization of liabilities has limited impact during a sudden stop, but it has significant
underinsurance consequences.
Ricardo J. Caballero
Department of Economics
MIT
Room E52-252a
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
caball@mit.edu
Arvind Krishnamurthy
Finance Department
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
a-krishnamurthy@northwestern.edu

1

Introduction

Emerging markets can suﬀer severe contractions when capital inﬂows suddenly reverse
(“sudden stops”). What is the right monetary policy response to this event? Answering
this important question requires understanding the mechanisms through which monetary
policy can aﬀect sudden stops and their consequences. The main contribution of this paper
is to re-think the workings of the credit channel in emerging market economies, and to
propose an alternative view that shifts the focus from credit-channel and aggregate demand
to insurance considerations.
Much of the recent literature on emerging markets crises highlights the limited ﬁnancial
development of these economies and the severe credit squeeze experienced by local ﬁrms
during crises. From this structure, two opposing arguments are commonly made regarding
optimal monetary policy. Extrapolating from developed economy credit channel analysis,
some advocate an expansionary monetary policy to oﬀset the eﬀect of the credit squeeze
during downturns. While, others advocate a contractionary monetary policy and dogged
defense of the exchange rate during crises. Proponents of the latter view do not disagree
upon the centrality of the credit channel mechanism, but argue that a depreciating exchange
rate will have dramatic eﬀects in the credit channel mechanism, through a deterioration in
borrowers’ balance sheets. The argument is that this eﬀect is most likely to happen when
the economy is dollarized and when inﬂation-credibility is limited.1
The starting point of our analysis is the observation from Caballero and Krishnamurthy
(2002) that credit constraints in emerging markets may exist both at the country level as
well as the ﬁrm level. A ﬁrm may have limited collateral, and therefore be constrained in
borrowing from either domestic or foreign lenders. Or, the country as a whole may have
limited international collateral, and therefore domestic ﬁrms are constrained in borrowing
from foreign investors.2 Extrapolating from developed economy analysis misses this distinction because in developed economies the credit constraint plausibly exists only at the
ﬁrm level. The distinction is important for thinking through the eﬀects of monetary policy
because a sudden stop created by the reversal of capital inﬂows is predominantly about a
binding international collateral constraint.
We argue that during mild crises, the distinction between domestic and international
constraints is immaterial. Analysis of this case can be conducted in the standard credit
1

For both sides of the argument see, e.g., Furman and Stiglitz (1998), Fischer (1999), Aghion et al (2000),

Cespedes et al (2000), Gertler et al (2001), Christiano et al. (2004), and Calvo and Reinhart (2003).
2
The importance of international collateral constraints for emerging markets was ﬁrst identiﬁed in the
sovereign debt literature (see, for example, Eaton and Gersovitz, 1981, or Bulow and Rogoﬀ, 1989).

1

channel framework. Much of the recent debate on monetary policy during crises implicitly
assumes this to be the relevant scenario. As is stressed in the credit channel literature (e.g,
Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist, 1989, and Kiyotaki and Moore, 1997), increasing the net
worth of borrowers is the optimal response to a negative shock. Our analysis of this case
reinforces the conclusions in the literature: There is some ambiguity regarding whether the
optimal monetary policy is to raise or lower interest rates. It depends on the extent of
liability dollarization and inﬂation credibility of the central bank.
The recipe of using monetary policy to increase the net worth of borrowers fails when
the credit constraint exists at the country level. The reason is that monetary policy only
regulates the borrowing of a domestic agent from a domestic lender. Thus when the marginal
lender is a foreign investor, monetary policy is ineﬀective because it does not alter the
international collateral of the country.3 We argue that this is the relevant case for emerging
markets’ crises.
Although monetary expansions have little eﬀect on output during a severe crises, they
have important general equilibrium eﬀects on asset prices. In partial equilibrium, it is
still true that a monetary expansion raises ﬁrms’ borrowing capacity by increasing their
domestic liquidity. But in general equilibrium the expansion just translates into a decline
in the relative price of domestic liquidity vis-a-vis international liquidity, not in an expansion
in international liquidity (i.e. it does not loosen the international constraint). We show that
the fall in the price of domestic liquidity implies a temporary exchange rate depreciation
during the crisis. In fact, the depreciation of the exchange rate is beyond the depreciation
due to the standard interest parity mechanism. The depreciation does weaken balance sheets
as some have argued in the context the credit channel. But it is not ﬁrm-level balance sheets
that are to blame; The exchange rate depreciation is just the general equilibrium conterpart
of the tight international constraint.
Our conclusions regarding the eﬀects of monetary policy are independent of the dollarization of balance sheets. Monetary policy is impotent during crises whether or not
dollarized balance sheets undo the beneﬁcial eﬀects of lowering interest rates. The reason,
again, is that domestic dollarization just tightens constraints at the ﬁrm level, it does not
alter the aggregate international collateral of the country.4
3

While in very diﬀerent terms, Dornbusch (2001) also expresses his uneasiness about the assumption that

emerging economies with access to monetary policy can use it to boost activity. For example, in criticizing
the standard view, he writes: “The loss of the lender of last resort [argument] is intriguing. This argument
is based on the assumption that the central bank – rather than the treasury or the world capital market –
is the appropriate lender...”
4
Dollarization of external liabilities has some additional external insurance implications which we discuss
later in this paper and, more thoroughly, in Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2003a). This is not an issue for

2

The second main theme of the paper concerns the insurance eﬀects of monetary policy.
Despite the apparent impotence of monetary policy during sudden stops, expectations regarding a particular monetary rule have important eﬀects on the private sector’s ex-ante
decisions. The anticipation of monetary policy actions during crises aﬀect agent’s expectations of the relative price of domestic to international liquidity, which in turn aﬀects the
private sector’s insurance decisions against sudden stops. If the private sector expects a
dogged defense of the exchange rate, then it also expects a smaller decline of the value
of domestic to international liquidity. Conversely, if it expects an expansionary monetary
policy, then it expects a sharper decline in the relative price of domestic liquidity. The
incentive to hoard international over domestic liquidity is more pronounced in the latter
than in the former case. Importantly, hoarding more international liquidity is desirable
when there are negative pecuniary externalities in the use of international liquidity, a feature that is inherent to economies with underdeveloped ﬁnancial markets (see Caballero
and Krishnamurthy 2001).
From this perspective, our argument connects with the literature on the virtues of ﬂexible
versus ﬁxed exchange rate systems.5 In our model, a ﬂexible exchange rate system coupled
with a countercyclical monetary policy, provides better insurance incentives to the private
sector than a policy of defending the exchange rate during sudden stops.6 More generally,
monetary policy and its constraints have (unintended) consequences for the private sector’s
insurance decisions with respect to sudden stops. Policies that exacerbate the (partial
equilibrium) domestic credit squeeze during sudden stops, or constraints that limit the
central bank’s ability to relax domestic ﬁnancial constraints, lead to ex-ante imprudent
private sector actions.
In Section 2 we present a model of market segmentation in which we draw a distinction
between domestic and international liquidity. Section 3 describes the consequences of monetary policy in the segmented ﬁnancial market. In particular, we show the over-sensitivity
of the exchange rate to monetary policy, and the role of the exchange rate in endogenously
aligning the extent of domestic credit squeeze with the limited international liquidity. In
Section 4 we turn to the ex-ante consequences of monetary policy and its private insurance
implications. We show that the strategy of tightening monetary policy during crises lowers
the private return to taking preventive measures and hence discourages it.
the analysis of this paper since we allow for state contingent debt.
5
See, e.g., Edwards and Levy-Yeyati (2003) for evidence supporting the advantages of a ﬂexible exchange
rate in absorbing external shocks.
6
Our mechanism is distinct (or in addition to) the standard free insurance argument in the moral hazard
perspective of crises (see, e.g., Dooley 2000). We return to this comparison after developing our model.

3

In section 5 we revisit the dollarization of liabilities argument, but now in the context
of our dual-liquidity model. We show that the balance-sheet eﬀect typically emphasized
in this literature has no aggregate consequences in general equilibrium during the crisis.
However, and following our argument above, there is a dynamic cost. Dollarization lowers
the expected return on hoarding international liquidity and hence reduces the private sector incentives to take adequate precautions against sudden stops. In section 6 we highlight
that not having the credibility or willingness to conduct a countercyclical monetary policy
means that an insurance mechanism against crises is lost. Thus, one should look for alternative measures that induce the private sector to carry more international liquidity into
crisis states. Examples of these measures include taxation of capital inﬂows, international
liquidity requirements, and large sterilizations of capital inﬂows. While enacting these measures may be costly, they should be seen as yet another cost of having lost the ability to
use monetary policy in an environment of recurrent external crises.
Section 7 shows that our main conclusions are robust to the relaxation of some of the
main stylized assumptions of our model, such as the presence of a “diagonal” supply of
funds or an alternative model of money. Section 8 concludes and is followed by a technical
appendix.

2

A Model of External Crises

We study a three date economy (t = 0, 1, 2) with a single (tradeable) good. Date 0 is a
fully ﬂexible planning period. Agents make investment and ﬁnancing decision at this date.
At date 1 an external crisis may occur. We assume that there are two states of the world
at date 1, ω ∈ {b, g}, which occur with probabilities {π, 1 − π}. The crisis can occur only
if the b-state realizes. At date 2 agents repay all debts and consume.

2.1

Private Sector

There is a unit measure of domestic ﬁrms. Each has access to a production technology.
Building a plant of size k at date 0 requires a ﬁrm to invest c(k) — with c(.) ≥ 0, c > 0 and
c > 0. The output from production depends on the shocks at date 1. There is a maximum
of Ak output goods at date 2, but if negative shocks hit ﬁrms then only ak (a < A) output
goods may be produced. A more detailed description is given below.
Domestic ﬁrms have no resources at date 0. They must import capital goods and borrow from foreigners to ﬁnance their investment. Each ﬁrm is run by a domestic entrepreneur/manager who has risk-neutral preferences over date 2 consumption of the single good.
Thus, ﬁnancing and investment decisions are taken to maximize expected plant proﬁts at
4

date 2.
Domestic ﬁrms face signiﬁcant ﬁnancial constraints and hence their ﬁnancial net worth
aﬀects investment decisions. We assume that ﬁrms are endowed with w units of international
collateral, in the form of receivables arriving at date 2. Our central assumption is that only
these receivables have collateral value to foreigners (e.g., prime exports).
We disregard explicit equilibrium default and assume that all ﬁnancing is done via fully
collateralized debt contracts. Moreover, we assume that the debt contracts are made fully
contingent on the state at date 1. We relax this in Section 5 when discussing dollarized
external debt, since the problem of dollar debt is essentially one of liabilities that are too
inﬂexible.
At date 0, when ﬁrms sign debt contracts with foreigners, the contracted repayments of
must not exceed w. Foreigners lend against this collateral at dates 0 and 1 at the rate

fω
i∗0

and i∗1 from period 0 to 1, and 1 to 2, respectively.
We also assume that domestic agents have some “domestic” assets which they can only

trade to other domestic agents. First, we assume that the minimum date 2 output of ak
can be pledged as collateral to other domestic agents. Second, we assume that agents are
endowed with M units of domestic money (see below) that they can sell to other agents.
This modelling captures the distinction between domestic borrowing capacity and international borrowing capacity. We think of the domestic assets as “peso” assets, while
the international collateral are “dollar” assets. Thus, changes in the exchange rate have an
eﬀect on the dollar value of domestic assets but not that of the international assets.

2.2

Credit constraints during crises

A crisis, is a time when there is a shortage of resources available to ﬁnance investments.
Formally, we model the external crisis by assuming that the demand for external resources
rises in the b-state, while holding the international collateral ﬁxed. An alternative (and more
realistic) modelling of a shortage of external resources would be to assume that international
collateral contracts during the crisis, while demand for external resources remains ﬁxed. The
implications of these two modelling strategies are similar for our purposes, but our approach
reduces the number of assumptions and equations required. In particular, we do not need
to add an assumption of incomplete international insurance markets.7
In the g-state there are no shocks and investment is unaﬀected. Let us now turn to
7

See Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2001) for the alternative approach. See Broner et al. (2003) for

evidence that some of these international collateral shocks are due to shocks to specialist investors (in our
framework, this is as if suddenly foreign lenders decide to reduce the share of w that is part of international
collateral).

5

deﬁning the shock in the b-state, and explaining how it aﬀects investments.
The plants of one-half of the ﬁrms receive a shock at date 1 that lowers output per
plant from A to a. The shock only arrives in the b-state, but is idiosyncratic in that each
ﬁrm receives the shock with probability 1/2. The productivity decline can be oﬀset by
reinvesting θk (θ ≤ 1) goods, to give date 2 output of,
Ã(θ)k = (a + θ∆)k ≤ Ak,

where

∆ ≡ A − a,

so that Ã(1) = A. We assume that the return on reinvestment exceeds the international
interest rate:
∆ − 1 > i∗1 .
This means that ﬁrms will borrow as much as possible to ﬁnance reinvestment. A crisis
occurs if ﬁrms are ﬁnancially constrained at date 1, so that θ < 1. We make parametric
assumptions to ensure that this occurs in equilibrium only in the b-state (see the appendix).
A ﬁrm that receives a production shock is termed distressed. To cope with the shock,
the ﬁrm ﬁrst borrows directly from foreigners against its net international collateral of
w − f . After this, it must turn for funds to the domestic ﬁrms that did not receive a shock
(termed intact). As noted above, domestic agents accept the money held by distressed
ﬁrms as payment. They also accept ak of the output from a ﬁrm’s plants as collateral for
any domestic debt. Thus the domestic (real) liquidity of ﬁrms entering date 1 (i.e., the
date 2 goods that can be pledged to domestic agents) is,
ak + M /e2 ,

(1)

where e2 is the date 2 nominal exchange rate (also the price level).
Intact ﬁrms have no output at date 1 either, so they must borrow from foreigners if they
are to ﬁnance the distressed ﬁrms. At the interest rate of i∗1 , they can borrow up to

w−f
1+i∗1

from foreigners.
Since at date 1 ﬁrms, in aggregate, can borrow from foreigners up to
wn ≡

w−f
,
1 + i∗1

(2)

we refer to wn as the international liquidity of the country during the crisis.

2.3

Central Bank

The central bank has M units of money outstanding at date 0. At date 1, it may choose
to inject (M − M ) more money into ﬁrms. We assume that this money is distributed as
“helicopter” drops to ﬁrms, and redeemed at date 2 with taxes collected by the government.
6

We do not provide a detailed description of the government’s tax powers and its tax base.
Instead we assume that the government collects T goods via non-distortionary taxation,
and that these taxes do not come from ﬁrms. We think of these taxes as resources from a
consumer sector that has a date 2 endowment of y c ≥ T . When it is eﬀective, expansionary
monetary policy transfers resources from consumers to the corporate sector.8
We assume that the central bank is credible in maintaining the date 2 price level at one,
so that money injections do not lead to inﬂation. We relax this assumption in Section 6
when we discuss inﬂation credibility. Thus, for now, the date 2 exchange rate is e2 = 1.
Our model of the monetary transmission mechanism involves no monetary frictions,
because our qualitative conclusions do not depend on the presence of these frictions and
ignoring them simpliﬁes the exposition. The domestic “peso” interest rate is zero in our
environment and is unaﬀected by monetary policy. Therefore the usual channel (through the
interest parity condition) by which monetary policy aﬀects the exchange rate is absent in our
model. Despite this, we show that in our model monetary policy still aﬀects the exchange
rate. For this reason we refer to the exchange rate movements induced by monetary policy
as “over-responsive.” Our results should be interpreted as in addition to those that arise
from the movement in the peso-rate and its eﬀect through the interest-parity condition. In
Section 7, we sketch a more standard model in which money provides a transaction service,
thus conﬁrming that our results are robust to this simpliﬁcation.

3

Monetary Policy, Exchange Rate Determination, and the
Credit Channel

In this section we examine the equilibrium in the crisis state at date 1. Thus, for now,
we take the date 0 investment decision of k and the ﬁnancing decision of f as given. We
study the case where credit constraints are binding in this crisis-state, illustrating that the
power of monetary policy to relax these constraints changes from mild (horizontal) to severe
(vertical) crises.
All of the discussion in this section takes place after the bad state has realized at date
1 and the central bank has injected (M − M ) pesos in response.

3.1

Mild and Severe Crises (Date 1)

At date 1, distressed ﬁrms need to borrow in order to ﬁnance their production shock. Their
total net worth, measured in dollars, is
8

ak+M
e1

+ wn . Clearly as M rises so does net worth,

See, e.g., Woodford (1990) and Holmstron and Tirole (1998) for a similar assumption.

7

at least for a given e1 . The key question is whether e1 depreciates with an expansionary
monetary policy and by how much. We argue that the answer to this question depends
critically on the severity of the crisis. If the latter is severe, a monetary expansion is
ineﬀective in raising output and leads to an exchange rate over-reaction. This happens
despite full inﬂation target credibility (e2 = 1), as it reﬂects the fall in the real value of
domestic collateral (i.e. not a monetary phenomenon).
Let us consider equilibrium at date 1. Distressed ﬁrms can borrow wn directly from
foreign investors. Thereafter they must turn to other domestic agents to raise resources.
Recall that intact ﬁrms can also borrow wn from foreign investors. Moreover, since they
are willing to accept domestic money as payment as well as purchase debt claims backed
by ak of collateral, they can also ﬁnance the production shock of the distressed ﬁrms.
There are two regions of interest. If,
1 n 1 ak + M
w >
.
2
2 1 + i∗1
8

(3)

then intact ﬁrms have suﬃcient access to foreign funds to satisfy demand from all distressed
ﬁrms. We refer to this case as the Horizontal region, because the supply of funds from intact
ﬁrms is elastic at the margin.
The other case, is when,

1 n 1 ak + M
w <
,
2
2 1 + i∗1

while wn < k/2. That is, intact ﬁrms have insuﬃcient resources to satisfy demand from
distressed ﬁrms. We refer to this case as the Vertical region because the supply of funds is
inelastic at the margin.

3.2

Horizontal region (mild crises): The standard credit channel

Intact ﬁrms have portfolios that include domestic loans, money, and international collateral.
Indiﬀerence requires that i∗1 be the interest rate on the domestic loans as well. The exchange
rate can also be determined from this indiﬀerence condition. Since the return on holding
money must be equal to 1 + i∗1 , the exchange rate is,
e1 = 1 + i∗1 .

(4)

This equation is the interest parity condition given that e2 = 1 and that money provides no
special transaction service (so the peso-interest-rate is zero). Note that the exchange rate
is unresponsive to monetary injections.
Total reinvestment is determined by the total resources of individual distressed ﬁrms’,
θH k = wn +

ak + M
w − f + ak + M
=
< 2wn ,
e1
1 + i∗1

θH < 1,

(5)

where the superscript H denotes the horizontal equilibrium. The ﬁrst inequality shows that
the economy has not used all of its international liquidity, while θH < 1 indicates that the
economy is in a crisis: distressed ﬁrms are not able to meet their production shock fully
because of their binding ﬁnancial constraints.
As we mentioned above, we refer to this as the horizontal region because the price
of loans is not aﬀected by their quantity. In principle, a distressed ﬁrm could continue
borrowing at the given interest rate i∗1 , as long as its own ﬁnancial constraint is relaxed.
We can see the eﬀects of monetary injections from the preceding expressions. It operates
though a credit-channel a la Bernanke and Gertler (1995). From (5) we note that injecting
money increases the resources of the distressed ﬁrms and increases their investment. From
(4) we note that this policy has no eﬀect on exchange rates in the horizontal region, so the
monetary expansion is a powerful mechanism to raise the dollar value of distressed ﬁrms’
collateral. It is possible that reintroducing the standard interest parity eﬀect (which we
9

have suppressed) will work against this conclusion. But as we show next, in the Vertical
region we reach the unambiguous conclusion that the exchange rate eﬀect will neutralize
monetary expansions.

3.3

The Vertical region (severe crises): Over-responsive Exchange Rate

In this region, the international supply of funds faced by emerging market economies during
external crises is vertical (i.e. price inelastic). Since all investment at date 1 is eventually
ﬁnanced by foreigners, the stock of international liquidity is what determines investment in
this region:
θV k = 2wn ,

(6)

where the superscript V stands for vertical equilibrium. Note that domestic collateral does
not appear at all in this expression.
Consider the exchange rate next. Since intact ﬁrms borrow up to their maximum capacity from foreigners and hold portfolios only composed of domestic money and loans against
domestic collateral, it must be that the return on holding domestic money exceeds i∗1 . That
is,
e1 > 1 + i∗1 ,
and the date 1 exchange rate is depreciated.
Indiﬀerence between holding money and domestic loans implies that the (dollar) interest
rate on loans against domestic collateral also rises above i∗1 . In equilibrium, loans collateralized by w are made at rate i∗1 , while those collateralized by ak are made at a higher rate
of id1 , where,
id1 = e1 − 1 > i∗1 .
Figure 1 represents the equilibrium determination of e1 . The vertical axis is the price,
e1 , while the horizontal axis measures domestic reinvestment. For e1 = 1 + i∗1 , intact ﬁrms
elastically supply their international liquidity to distressed ﬁrms. However, at the point
wn , intact ﬁrms run out of international liquidity, and the supply curve turns vertical.
On the other side of the domestic ﬁnancial market, distressed ﬁrms demand as much as
international liquidity as they can obtain as long as the exchange rate is less than or equal
to ∆. However, they are constrained in their domestic borrowing by their holdings of money
and domestic collateral. The demand for international liquidity turns downward at some
point, and eﬀective demand is

M +ak
e1 .

Figure 1 represents two cases: one equilibrium in the

horizontal region (panel a) and one in the vertical case (panel b).

10

This ﬁgure illustrates how e1 rises above 1 + i∗1 in the vertical region when international
liquidity is scarce. Note also that e1 can never exceed ∆, the marginal product of reinvestment for distressed ﬁrms. However, there is a large interval for demand within which e1 lies
strictly between 1 + i∗1 and ∆. In this case,
e1 =

M + ak
> 1 + i∗1 .
wn

(7)

We can see that monetary injections have a very diﬀerent eﬀect in the vertical than
in the horizontal region. From (6), we note that injecting money has no eﬀect on date 1
reinvestment. This is because the economy has a shortage of international liquidity, and
reallocating domestic liquidity has no real (aggregate) eﬀect.
As before, the net worth of distressed ﬁrms is,
wn +

ak + M
.
e1

That is, the credit channel is still active and the net worth of distressed ﬁrms is what determines reinvestment at date 1. But the exchange rate now is over-responsive to monetary
injections. Referring back to equation (7), we see that monetary injections are oﬀset onefor-one by a depreciation in the exchange rate. Essentially, the exchange rate depreciates to
ensure that the dollar net worth remains at a level consistent with the availability of exter11

nal funds. This role of the exchange rate, captured in (7), is what is behind the monetary
ineﬀectiveness result.

3.4

Discussion: The credit channel in emerging markets

Panels (a) and (b) in Figure 2 summarize the diﬀerences between the horizontal and vertical
views. In their downward sloping segments, demands are equal to (ak + M )/e1 .
In the horizontal case, the increase in domestic net worth of distressed ﬁrms caused by
expanding monetary policy raises date 1 investment, leaving e1 unaﬀected. In the vertical
region, the same increase has no eﬀect on equilibrium investment, and only raises e1 .

We view the horizontal region as relevant for developed economies; w is plentiful and
there is no distinction between domestic and international liquidity. It may also apply for
emerging economies experiencing moderate contractions. The vertical region, on the other
hand, seems to be a better description of the environment faced by emerging markets during
severe external crises.
There are two points to emphasize from this analysis. First, it may be that other
mechanisms overturn the result that injecting money is expansionary in the horizontal
region (for example, debts may be dollarized, as we discuss shortly). But in the vertical
region, we reach the unambiguous conclusion that injecting money is fully oﬀset by the
12

depreciation in the exchange rate.
This leads to a second point. If a researcher looks at the net worth of credit constrained
ﬁrms during a crisis, he will always conclude that the reason for monetary policy ineﬀectiveness is the deterioration in net worth triggered by the exchange rate depreciation — in
particular, he will blame dollarization of liabilities (more on this below). But this is not
the right conclusion in the vertical region. The main credit constraint behind the crisis is
an aggregate constraint not a microeconomic one; the exchange rate depreciation is simply
the equilibrium response to such restriction.

4

Underinsurance and Monetary Policy

Of course all our claims so far are from the perspective of date 1 in the b-state, when wn
is already given. But what is the impact of anticipated monetary policy in the event of a
crisis on date 0 decisions? We turn to this discussion next.
We show that a central bank that is expected to contract money in the event of a vertical
crisis at date 1, actually causes the private sector to alter date 0 decisions so as to arrive
at date 1 with a smaller wn . By supporting the date 1 currency, the central bank causes
the private sector to over-borrow at date 0, and underinsure against the crisis. Conversely,
expansionary monetary policy gives the private sector incentives to insure against the crisis
and reduce date 0 borrowing.

4.1

Private Sector Date 0 Decisions and eb1

At date 0, the private sector decides how much to borrow from foreign investors and how
much real investment to undertake. The borrowing contracts specify an amount loaned to
a domestic ﬁrm and a repayment at date 2, f ω , contingent on the date 1 (aggregate) state
ω ∈ {b, g}. Since the funds raised from this loan are used in date 0 investment, and since
foreign investors are risk neutral, the date 0 budget constraint is,
c(k) ≤



1
(1 +

i∗0 )(1

+

i∗1 )



(1 − π)f g + πf b .

In the g-state at date 1, all ﬁrms make proﬁts of,
Ak + (w − f g ) + M .
In the b-state, one-half of the ﬁrms are distressed and they make proﬁts of,


w − fb
ak + M
+
1 + i∗1
eb1
13



∆,

(8)

while the other half are intact and make proﬁts of,
Ak + (w − f b )

eb1
+ M.
1 + i∗1

Combining these expressions leads to the following problem for a ﬁrm at date 0,
PRIV:
maxk,f g ,f b

(1 − π)(Ak + w − f g + M )
+π 12

s.t.



A+

a e∆b
1



k + (∆

b
+ eb1 ) w−f
1+i∗1



+ 1+

∆
eb1





M

f g, f b ≤ w
c(k) ≤

1
b
(1+i∗0 )(1+i∗1 ) (πf

+ (1 − π)f g ).

Our technical assumptions (see the appendix) guarantee that f g = w and f b < w.
The former holds as long as increasing investment in k at date 0 is more proﬁtable than
investment in international markets. And, f b < w as long as saving some resources to
absorb the production shocks at date 1 is more valuable than using all of those resources
toward investment at date 0. It is apparent from the private program that eb1 is the only
equilibrium price that inﬂuences the date 0 decision. Let us study this connection more
closely.
Since f g = w, we simply need to consider the tradeoﬀ between increasing f b and reducing
k. At date 0, building a marginally larger plant increases (expected) date 2 proﬁts by,
1
(1 − π)A + π
2



∆
A+a b
e1



.

(9)

Building this larger plant requires the ﬁrm to raise an additional c (k) at date 0. The
probability of a crisis is π, so in order to raise an additional c (k) at date 0, f b must rise by,
c (k)(1 + i∗0 )(1 + i∗1 )
.
π
The cost to the ﬁrm of raising f b is that there are fewer resources to absorb the date 1
production shock. The fall in expected proﬁts due to having fewer resources is,


π

∆ + eb1
2(1 + i∗1 )



c (k)(1 + i∗0 )(1 + i∗1 )
,
π

which can be simpliﬁed to:




c (k)(1 +

i∗0 )

∆ + eb1
2



.

(10)

The optimal choice of k by the private sector equalizes (9) and (10). We note two comparative statics, and the conclusion that follows from them: (1) The beneﬁt of building a
14

larger plant size is decreasing in eb1 ; (2) The marginal cost of investing is increasing in eb1 .
For both reasons, k is decreasing with respect to eb1 .9
The investment/ﬁnancing decision at date 0 is really to create a (real) “peso” plant at
the cost of having less “dollar” assets in the b-state. The reason for this is that the output
from k can only be used as domestic collateral and hence is aﬀected by the value of the
exchange rate. On the other hand, to build the plant, the ﬁrm has to raise f b , meaning
that there is less international liquidity in the b-state.
Intuitively, the reason why eb1 matters is that it changes the terms of this investment/ﬁnancing decisions. A more depreciated eb1 gives ﬁrms less incentive to increase k
and more incentive to decrease f . This is the reason that k is decreasing with respect to eb1 .

4.2

Consumption Maximizing eb1

We now ask what level of the exchange rate, eb1 , is required in order for the date 0 decisions
to maximize (expected) aggregate consumption. We show that for eb1 < ∆, the private
sector generally over-borrows and over-invests relative to this benchmark.
Consider ﬁrst the date 0 decisions of the private sector, (k, f g , f b ), that maximize aggregate consumption. To arrive at this program we simply substitute out the exchange rate of
eb1 from PRIV. If we substitute the market clearing condition for eb1 from (7) into PRIV
we ﬁnd that,
AGG:
maxk,f g ,f b

(1 − π)(Ak + w − f g ) + π

s.t.

f g, f b ≤ w
c(k) ≤

1
b
(1+i∗0 )(1+i∗1 ) (πf



w−f b
1+i∗1 ∆

+

A+a
2 k



+ (1 − π)f g ).

The tradeoﬀ between increasing k versus f b is very diﬀerent here than in PRIV. The
beneﬁt of increasing plant size is,
1
(1 − π)A + π (A + a) .
2
For eb1 < ∆, this beneﬁt is strictly lower than the private sector’s computation. On the cost
side, borrowing more to build this plant costs,
c (k)(1 + i∗0 )∆.
For eb1 < ∆, the cost lies strictly above the private sector’s computation.
9

It is not eb1 , per se, that matters in this tradeoﬀ, but

exchange rate) times one plus the

ip1

eb
1
e2

(i.e. the expected future depreciation of the

(the peso-rate). Since we have set e2 = 1 and ip1 = 0, this point is

obscured. We relax these assumptions later in the paper.

15

We conclude that, if eb1 < ∆, then the private sector’s date 0 decisions involve overborrowing and overinvesting.
Intuitively, the cause of this date 0 over-investment is that the private sector undervalues
international liquidity in the b-state. At the aggregate level, resources in the b-state always
generate a return of ∆ from date 1 to date 2. On the other hand, ﬁrms see the cost of
not having date 1 resources as proportional to eb1 . As long as eb1 < ∆, the private sector’s
investment choices do not lead to maximization of date 2 expected aggregate consumption.

4.3

The Eﬀect of Anticipated Monetary Policy

The previous result highlights a basic feature of the environment. Relative to the consumptionmaximizing outcome, the private sector is always biased towards over-borrowing and overinvesting. Thus we have a clear benchmark to evaluate policies that aﬀect the exchange
rate. In particular, the private sector’s biases are exaggerated by a central bank that attempts to stabilize eb1 . More generally, since the central bank can aﬀect eb1 with its choice of
M , it can reduce this over-borrowing problem through monetary policy. A straightforward
argument establishes that if the private sector expects an increase in M if a crisis takes
place at date 1, then k will be reduced at date 0 and expected date 2 consumption will
rise.10

5

Dollarization of Liabilities

The credit channel literature in emerging markets has highlighted the role played by dollarization of domestic liabilities in magnifying the contraction. Indeed, even in our framework,
a depreciated exchange rate deteriorates balance sheets by lowering the value of domestic
assets relative to liabilities. But our framework qualiﬁes the main conclusion from the literature: While dollarization may have the balance-sheet eﬀect highlighted in that literature
during mild crises (horizontal region), it does not during severe crises (vertical region).
At the ﬁrm level, it will seem that the problem is one of dollarized liabilities: Firms are
credit constrained, and the depreciated exchange rate will worsen balance sheets. But the
relevant constraint is a shortage of aggregate international liquidity, not a ﬁrm-level balance
sheet problem. That is, in a vertical crisis, the country faces a macroeconomic constraint
not a microeconomic one.11
10

The argument is by contradiction. Suppose that increasing M causes k to rise. Then from market

clearing at date 1 it must also cause eb1 to rise. However, since k is a decreasing function of eb1 , k must fall.
This is a contradiction. Therefore k is decreasing in M and aggregate consumption is increasing in M .
11
There can be distributional eﬀects – i.e. from those that don’t receive M to those that do, or from those
with more dollarized liabilities to those with less liabilities – but these are likely to be subordinate to the

16

However, for the insurance reasons we discuss in the previous section, dollarization is
not innocuous. It will generally lead to private sector underinsurance. Let as discuss these
dates 1 and 0 issues in turn.

5.1

Dollarization during severe crises: A fallacy of aggregation

In order to discuss domestic dollarization, we introduce a set of domestic consumers who
lend to ﬁrms at date 0. For the purpose of this subsection, it is suﬃcient to start the analysis
at date 1, given some pre-existing debt. Suppose that ﬁrms arrive at the date 1 crisis-state
with some dollar-denominated debt, bd , with domestic consumers. Thus, a distressed ﬁrm’s
investment is given as,

ak + M − e1 bd
.
(11)
e1
The literature emphasizes the fact that from (11) a depreciation reduces the dolar value
θk = wn +

of local assets ak and M while it leaves unchanged the value of dollarized liabilities e1 bd .
Moreover, since a monetary expansion depreciates the exchange rate it may worsen balance
sheets and, perversely, turn contractionary.
But, as we argue in Section 3, this analysis does not consider that under severe crisis
the main binding constraint is the lack of aggregate international liquidity. Thus all these
considerations of the eﬀect of M on e1 , and hence on the domestic credit squeeze, are
important for distributional issues (from more to less dollarized ﬁrms and consumers) but
not for the aggregate. The exchange rate reacts to monetary policy precisely to cause a
credit squeeze that equilibrates investment demand with the limited external supply. At
the aggregate level, distressed ﬁrms’ investment is still:
θk = 2wn .

(12)

Replacing (12) into (11), yields a new expression for the exchange rate as a function of M :
eb,d
1 =

ak + M
wn + bd

where the eb,d
1 stands for the equilibrium exchange rate with dollarized liabilities. This exchange rate expression needs to be contrasted with expression, eb,p
1 , when domestic liabilities
are denominated in pesos, bp :

ak + M − bp
.
wn
¿From these two expressions, we can consider the eﬀect of monetary expansions on the
eb,p
1 =

exchange rate in economies with diﬀerent degree of dollarization:

0 < eb,d
1 (M ) =

wn

1
1

< n = eb,p
1 (M ) .
d
+b
w

aggregate constraint.

17

(13)

The ﬁrst implication of this expression is that expanding money always depreciates the
exchange rate. A central bank that is concerned with the balance sheet position of ﬁrms
(as in (11)) will be inclined to contract money and support the exchange rate. But since
during a vertical crisis, the important constraint is that of (12), the central bank will be
protecting the wrong margin.
The second implication of (13) is that during severe crises the exchange rate in a dollarized economy will be less responsive to a monetary expansion than that of the non-dollarized
economy. This is a sort of market based fear of ﬂoating, as it results from equilibrium considerations for a given monetary policy, and not from any additional caution that the central
bank may chose to adopt when liabilities are dollarized. The reason for this result is precisely that a depreciation is more contractionary in a dollarized economy, and therefore can
more easily generate the domestic credit squeeze needed to reduce investment demand to
levels compatible with the limited availability of international liquidity.

5.2

Underinsurance eﬀect of dollarization

There is a more subtle eﬀect of dollarization in our framework. A central bank at date 1
that is concerned with preserving the balance sheets of ﬁrms may, in the vertical region,
choose to support the exchange rate. But boosting eb1 causes ﬁrms to undervalue insuring
against the b-state and set f b higher. This follows from the underinsurance results of the
previous section. In this sense, the negative eﬀect of central bank support of the exchange
rate is that external liabilities will become less contingent. In a model with richer options
on the denomination of liabilities, this eﬀect will lead to excessive dollarization of liabilities
(see Caballero and Krishnamurthy, 2003a).12
That is, while we challenge the standard view that dollarization of liabilities is a key
factor during severe crises, we argue that it is an important factor behind crises due to the
negative eﬀects it has on private agents external insurance decisions.

5.3

Dollarization of External Liabilities

Before concluding this section we should point out that there is a related but distinct issue
which is that of the dollarization of external liabilities. This refers to the fact that most
emerging market external debt is not denominated in the issuing country’s currency. If debt
is denominated in a country’s own currency, then the debt will be eﬀectively contingent on
aggregate outcomes. In practice, of course, unlike our theoretical assumptions, there is very
12

This implication is supported by Bleakley and Cowan (2002) who ﬁnd that in economies with ﬁxed

exchange rates the match between the denomination of liabilities and that of revenues is weaker that in
economies with ﬂexible exchange rates.

18

little contingent debt issued by emerging markets. Thus, if developing economies could
or would borrow abroad in their own currency, they would eﬀectively obtain insurance
from foreigners against events that depreciate their currency, such as the tightening of
external ﬁnancial constraints. The “original sin” literature in, e.g., Hausmann et al (2001)
highlight reluctance on the supply side of that market, while Caballero and Krishnamurthy
(2003a) describe demand side problems, behind the lack of contingency of external debt.
In our current analysis, external dollarization simply means that there is less contingency
in liabilities so that f b is higher and closer to f g . As a result, the country will have less
international liquidity in the crisis-state. It is worth also noting that the problem of external
liability dollarization is reinforced by the underinsurance eﬀects of dollarization of domestic
liabilities as discussed above.
Adding external liability dollarization to our problem is conceptually straightforward
and makes the supply of international funds at date 1 eﬀectively diagonal, but nothing
substantive changes in our analysis. We discuss this extension in Section 7.

6

Policy Constraints and Policy Options

In many instances, a central bank faces constraints that force it to support the exchange
rate. Dollarization of domestic liabilities is one such instance (whether the market or the
central bank determines this is not important for our argument here). Inﬂation credibility
problems is another one. We begin this section with a discussion of inﬂation credibility,
and then turn to alternative policy instruments when monetary policy is constrained to be
pro-cyclical or less counter-cyclical than desirable. There is an important diﬀerence in the
costs of losing monetary policy during severe crises vis-a-vis doing so in mild ones. In the
latter, as in the standard Mundell-Fleming context, the cost is that the central bank loses
a countercyclical instrument to smooth ﬂuctuations. In the former, on the other hand, the
cost is mainly an “insurance” one. The central bank loses a relatively cheap instrument
to induce the private sector to take adequate precautions against crises. In the standard
framework, the natural response to the loss of monetary policy is to search for another
countercyclical policy instrument (e.g., ﬁscal policy). In the vertical crisis environment,
the natural response is to search for an alternative insurance mechanism. We discuss such
alternatives in the second part of this section.

6.1

Limited Inﬂation Credibility

Limited inﬂation credibility has two eﬀects in our environment. First, a central bank with
a history of high inﬂation cannot aﬀord the inﬂationary consequences of an exchange rate
19

depreciation during a crisis. This is a common explanation for the apparent “fear of ﬂoating”
of central banks in emerging economies (see, e.g., Calvo and Reinheart (2003)). However, for
the reasons we have outlined above, the anticipation of a contractionary monetary policy
during a vertical crisis will exacerbate the private sector’s underinsurance problem and
thereby worsen the crisis.
A second problem caused by limited inﬂation credibility is that a central bank that
expands monetary policy in a crisis will have a limited eﬀect on real balances. That is,
in our environment a central bank does better by increasing real money balances during a
crisis. However a central bank with limited inﬂation credibility will create inﬂation with
little eﬀect on real money balances and thereby on the expected return from hoarding
international liquidity. In order to see this, note that in all our derivations up to now we
have assumed there is long run inﬂation (price level) credibility, so that e2 remains at one
regardless of the monetary policy adopted at date 1. But suppose that whenever there is a
depreciation during a crisis, some of it is expected to pass through into e2 .
To be concrete, suppose that e2 (i.e. the date 2 price level) is an increasing function of
M
M,

with e2 (1) = 1. In a vertical crisis a distressed ﬁrm sells M units of money and ak of

domestic collateral to raise funds for salvaging production. The intact ﬁrms lend wn against
these assets. To an intact ﬁrm, the money is worth 1/e2 proportionately less than the ak
of domestic collateral. Thus, let us deﬁne the return on lending international liquidity as,
id1 =

M/e2 + ak
− 1.
wn

The return to an intact ﬁrm of purchasing money with international liquidity is just

e1
e2

− 1.

Since this return must equal the return to lending against the domestic collateral of ak, we
ﬁnd that the interest parity condition is:
e1
− 1 = id1 .
e2
For the case where e2 = 1, we previously showed that the date 0 level of investment,
k, is a decreasing function of e1 . We argued that supporting the currency at date 1 had
the consequence of exacerbating the date 0 over-investment problem of the private sector.
Likewise, allowing e1 to depreciate through an expansionary monetary policy, reduced the
over-investment problem.
When e2 is not ﬁxed at one, a similar argument to that of Section 4.1 establishes that
k is a decreasing function of

e1
e2 .

But since,
M/e2 + ak
e1
=
,
e2
wn
20

the important term for policy purposes is the term involving real money balances (i.e.
M/e2 ). An expansionary monetary policy raises real balances only to,
M
< M.
e2
Thus, a central bank with limited inﬂation credibility will have to resort to additional (and
possibly very costly) mechanisms to induce adequate private sector insurance decisions. We
turn to this discussion next.

6.2

Insurance Substitutes

The problem created by being unable to raise real balances is that the social-private spread,
∆ − (1 + id1 ), remains high. Thus the return to hoarding international liquidity until date
1 remains undervalued, and private insurance decisions are distorted. As we argued in
Section 4, these considerations are unique to the vertical environment, because the insurance
problem only arises if the aggregate international liquidity constraint binds.
There are two obvious ex-ante policy measures that can deal with the underinsurance
problem: taxation of capital inﬂows during normal times (date 0), and international liquidity
requirements at date 0. We now characterize the relationship between an ex-ante tax and
id1 .
The ﬁrst order condition in AGG is,
1
c (k AGG )(1 + i∗0 )∆ = (1 − π)A + π (A + a) ,
2
whereas for the private sector the condition sets (9) equal to (10) (with e1 replaced by
1 + id1 ).
Aligning the date 0 private and consumption-maximizing incentives is a matter of choosing a tax/transfer policy. Suppose that the central bank levies a tax τ per unit of k, which
is returned to ﬁrms in a lump sum fashion. Then the ﬁrst order condition for the private
sector becomes:



1
∆ + 1 + id1
∆
= (1 − π)A + π
A+a
c (k)(1 + i∗0 )
2
2
1 + id1



−τ

Choosing τ to align the private and central-bank incentives yields that for any equilibrium level of id1,τ , the optimal tax solves:
1
τ (id1,τ ) =
2





aπ
+ c (k AGG )(1 + i∗0 ) (∆ − (1 + id1,τ )).
1 + id1,τ

The tax is increasing in ∆ − (1 + id1,τ ). Thus, economies where the central bank cannot
follow counter-cyclical monetary policy, and therefore ∆ − (1 + id1 ) remains high, may need
21

to rely on capital controls to correct the underinsurance problem. Note that the same result
could be achieved via a contingent liquidity requirement. The tax solution gives the private
sector incentives to choose the eﬃcient k, thus resulting in the eﬃcient w−f b . Alternatively,
the central bank could mandate directly that each ﬁrm preserve international liquidity for
the date 1 crisis-state, so that the eﬃcient level of w − f b is realized.
In practice, taxes come with their own sets of distortions: deadweight costs of taxation,
costs of enforcement, evasion, etc. However, the important point to recognize is that, in
the vertical environment, the cost of losing monetary policy is not being unable to manage
aggregate demand or the extent of the domestic credit squeeze at date 1. Rather, the cost
is the underinsurance by the private sector at date 0. In this sense, the cost of having to
enforce capital controls may be seen as a direct cost of losing monetary policy.

7

Robustness: Peso Rates and Diagonal Supply

In this section we show that our main conclusions are robust to modiﬁcations in two of the
most stylized features of our model: The absence of a monetary friction and the absolute
price inelasticity of the supply of funds during crises.

7.1

Peso Rates and Interest Parity Condition

Up to now we have simpliﬁed our analysis by removing all monetary frictions from the
analysis, and therefore have set the domestic peso interest rate to zero. This simpliﬁes
exchange rate determination at date 1, but leaves us with an unusual model of money. Here
we sketch a more standard model of money, in which money is special because it provides a
transaction service.13 Our substantive results remain unchanged, although now we recover
the standard exchange rate eﬀect via the interest parity condition in addition to the excess
sensitivity result we discussed in the previous sections.
Let us return to the full inﬂation credibility case (e2 = 1) and let us focus on the vertical
region and the bad aggregate state.
At the end of date 1, the government has liabilities of B bonds and M units of money
per capita. Each bond is redeemed at date 2 for one unit of money, and the government
is credible in ensuring that the price level at date 2 is 1. At date 1, money is the only
domestically liquid asset. Neither claims against ak (corporate bonds) nor the government
bonds are liquid. Thus, at date 1 distressed ﬁrms sell M units of money to the intact ﬁrms
13

See Diamond and Rajan (2001, 2003) and Lorenzoni (2001) for alternative models of money in liquidity-

based frameworks.

22

in exchange for wn units of international liquidity, which means that
eb1 =

M
.
wn

It is instructive to go through the steps that take us to this equation in order to disentangle
the mechanisms through which money aﬀects the exchange rate during severe crises in this
economy.
We introduce a date 1− in order to study peso interest rates and the eﬀects of open
market operations. At date 1− the aggregate state of the world has been realized, but the
identity of agents receiving the shock (distressed or intact) has not. Because of the latter,
agents are all identical at 1− .
At date 1− both the bond market and the money market are open to all agents. Entering
date 1− , the government has outstanding B bonds and M money. The government does an
open market operation to purchase (B − B) bonds for (M − M ) money.
Let us consider the relative asset returns on bonds, money, and international liquidity
at date 1− .
One bond yields one unit of money at date 2 and costs 1/(1 + ip1 ) units of money at date
1− , where ip1 is the peso interest rate. One unit of money can be sold at date 1 to ﬁnance
the liquidity shock if the agent is distressed. Money is sold for international liquidity at a
price of 1/e1− . Each unit of international liquidity yields ∆ at date 2. Thus the expected
return on holding money from date 1− to date 2 is 0.5 (∆/e1− + 1). As before, ∆ ≥ e1− ,
which means that the net return is positive. It immediately follow that indiﬀerence between
holding money and bonds requires that,
1+

ip1

1
=
2





∆
+1 .
e1 −

(14)

One unit of money also can be converted in the foreign exchange market into one unit
of international liquidity, at the price of e1− . One unit of international liquidity either can
be used in production at date 1 or sold to a distressed ﬁrm at date 1. The expected beneﬁt
of the unit of international liquidity is 12 (∆ + e1− ). Thus the interest parity condition is,
1
(1 + ip1 )e1− = (∆ + e1− ).
2

(15)

In the standard interest parity condition, the right hand side of (15) is ﬁxed and a reduction
in ip1 must be oﬀset by a depreciation in e1− to keep the left hand side constant as well. But
the depreciation in our vertical environment raises the return to the dollar-lender in the
right hand side of (15), which means that the left hand side must rise, and this is achieved
by a further depreciation in e1− . The latter is the excess sensitivity result we have discussed
23

and it results from the relaxation of the domestic credit squeeze caused by the monetary
expansion.
Finally, combining (14) and (15) we can solve for the peso interest rate and the exchange
rate as a function of monetary policy:
1
2

1 + ip1 =



∆ n
w +1
M



M
.
wn
The latter is the expression we started this section with, and it summarizes the two channels
e1 − =

through which money aﬀects the exchange rate: interest parity and domestic credit squeeze.
Relative to our earlier model, it is the former (and standard) channel that is new. But
neither channel can change the fact that international liquidity is ﬁxed at date 1 and hence
output cannot be aﬀected by monetary policy:


CV =



A+a
k + wn ∆ + y c .
2

And for date 0 decisions, it is only the second channel that matters, which is common to
this and the model without monetary friction.

7.2

“Diagonal”Supply

Let us now return to the model without monetary frictions, and continue to assume e2 = 1.
But rather than an inelastic supply of funds at date 1, let us consider instead a supply curve
of the form ,
wn s(e1 )

where

s(1) = 1, s (·) > 0.

That is, the supply of international funds is “diagonal” as opposed to vertical.14
Equilibrium at date 1 is now:
ak + M
= wn s(e1 ).
1 + id1
As in the pure vertical model, e1 is increasing in M . However, consider the expression for
total consumption at date 2. This is,


CV =
14



A+a
k + wn s(e1 )∆ + y c ,
2

The diagonal supply also captures the idea that depreciating the exchange rate increases exports and, if

the export sector is an important part of international collateral, thereby expands supply. Christiano et al
(2004) oﬀer a related perspective on diagonal supply. In their model, imperfect liquidity substitution stems
from imperfect input-substitution, and from the fact that diﬀerent inputs are paid in diﬀerent currencies.
The “diagonal” aspect of their model arises from the (limited) possibility of substituting tradables and
nontradables inputs.

24

which is now an increasing function of e1 through the s(·) function. This implies that
increasing M does have a contemporaneous eﬀect on C V .
Thus, from a date 1 perspective, the diagonal model has elements of both the horizontal
model and the vertical model. As in the horizontal model, there is an aggregate demand
channel/credit squeeze channel through which expanding money increases aggregate consumption. As in the vertical model, the money expansion depreciates the exchange rate
beyond the standard interest parity eﬀect.
Now, let us shift back to date 0. At this date, the ﬁrm contemplates borrowing some
resources and increasing k, the size of the plant. As before, the shadow cost of the resources
is increasing in e1 . A higher expected e1 induces a ﬁrm to save some dollar resources until
date 1, at which point these resources can always be lent to return e1 − 1. Moreover, as
long as e1 < ∆, the private sector’s decisions will not be consumption maximizing. Thus,
as in the vertical model, there is an insurance channel for monetary policy in the diagonal
model. Expanding M at date 1 depreciates e1 . The anticipation of such depreciation makes
the private sector reduce investment at date 0 and increase its insurance against the date 1
shock.

8

Final Remarks

The past decade has witnessed several episodes in which the sudden reversals of capital
inﬂows triggers an emerging markets’ crisis. These events have placed the risk of “sudden
stops” as a central macroeconomic concern for emerging market economies. The main
contribution of our paper is to illustrate how monetary policy aﬀects ﬁnancial constraints
of ﬁrms during a sudden stop crisis, and to highlight an insurance eﬀect of monetary policy.
Domestic monetary expansion relaxes individual ﬁnancial constraints but is unable to relax
the aggregate ﬁnancial constraint faced by these economies during crises – it is the wrong
kind of liquidity for such a purpose. However, while monetary policy is largely futile once
the sudden stop has taken place, the anticipation of a particular reaction by the authority
is important for private sector insurance decisions. A ﬂexible exchange rate system coupled
with a countercyclical monetary policy, provides better insurance incentives to the private
sector than a policy of defending the exchange rate during sudden stops.
Our insurance mechanism is distinct (or in addition to) the standard moral-hazard/freeinsurance argument (see, e.g., Dooley 2000). In the latter argument, crises result from an
implicit commitment by a local government or foreign institution to transfer resources to the
imprudent borrower; a ﬁxed exchange rate transfers reserves at sub-market value (during
crises) to the dollar-borrower or peso-investor. In our model, there is no direct transfer from

25

the government. The monetary contraction implicit in the defense of the exchange rate
lowers the domestic liquidity that borrowers can oﬀer to dollar-lenders during the sudden
stop, and in so doing it lowers the eﬀective return from new local dollar lending. That
is, since domestic asset markets are illiquid and segmented during crises, monetary policy
aﬀects the allocation of the (dollar) return of investment between lenders and borrowers.
By doing so, it aﬀects the relative incentives to be one or the other, and thus the incentive
to hoard international liquidity for crises.
More generally, monetary policy and its constraints have (unintended) consequences
for the private sector’s insurance decisions with respect to sudden stops. Policies that
exacerbate the domestic credit squeeze during sudden stops, or constraints that limit the
authorities’ ability to relax domestic ﬁnancial constraints, lead to socially imprudent private
sector actions.
Our emphasis on dual-liquidity and insurance has relevance for evaluation of other government policies. Pro-actively managing international reserves may result in beneﬁts in
our framework (see Caballero and Krishnamurthy 2004). Since international reserves are a
form of international liquidity and the private sector carries too little international liquidity
into crises, the central bank has a role to play by carrying reserves in place of the private
sector. Injecting reserves during a crisis relaxes the international ﬁnancial constraint faced
by the private sector and stabilizes the exchange rate. Relaxing the constraint is beneﬁcial
but the eﬀect on the private sector’s own insurance incentives is not, for reasons akin to
those we discussed in the context of monetary policy. Reserves management and monetary
policy become complementary policy tools in this context. At the very least, the central
bank ought to sterilize the forex intervention, and possibly go beyond that in the monetary
expansion in order to oﬀset the perverse incentive eﬀect of the reserves injection.
Of course, the insurance dimension we highlight in our analysis is not a substitute for
conventional inﬂation credibility concerns. Quite the contrary, without inﬂation credibility
the central bank will be unable to let the exchange rate ﬂoat and expand monetary policy
during sudden stops, and may well be forced into tightening monetary policy. The anticipation of this behavior is very costly in our setting, precisely because it exacerbates the
private sectors’ underinsurance problem. In other words, our insurance consideration raises
the value of achieving medium-term inﬂation credibility.
Our stylized model is subject to many caveats. One worth mentioning in concluding is
the lack of true dynamics. In reality, crises build up, going ﬁrst through a horizontal phase
in which domestic ﬁnancial conditions tighten and external borrowing becomes gradually
more expensive, then falling into a sharp vertical sudden-stop phase. A central question

26

for policymakers in this context is how to conduct monetary policy at the early stages
of the crisis, when supply is still horizontal but there is a concern that events may lead
to a binding international liquidity constraint. At this stage, tightening monetary policy
will destroy ﬁnancially constrained projects but save international liquidity for the vertical
event. We conjecture that this trade-oﬀ can be analyzed in terms similar to those we have
used throughout: If the commitment to an aggressive countercyclical monetary policy in
case of a vertical event is credible, then there is little need to tighten during the horizontal
phase. But if the commitment is not credible or feasible, then the appropriate response
is to tighten during the early phase in order to protect international liquidity, very much
as taxing capital ﬂows at date 0 was advisable in our simpliﬁed model when there were
constraints on monetary policy during crises. In fact, the costs in terms of the additional
ﬁnancial distress imposed on the domestic private sector are, to a large extent, comparable
to the costs of the ex-ante measures we already discussed.
Finally, while our analysis has focused on emerging markets, the underlying structure
may be a starting point for other applications. Our model illustrates how a bottleneck may
segment ﬁnancial markets and create liquidity premia on assets. It shows how monetary
policy aﬀects and is aﬀected by these bottlenecks. There are many other scenarios, such
as liquidity traps and post-bubble-collapses, where similar ingredients appear worthy of
consideration. We are currently exploring these applications.

27

References
[1] Aghion, Philippe, Philippe Bacchetta, and Abhijit Banerjee, “Currency Crises and
Monetary Policy with Credit Constraints, mimeo Harvard 2000.
[2] Bernanke, B. and M. Gertler, “Inside the Black Box: The Credit Channel of Monetary
Policy Transmission,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 9, Fall, pp. 27-48, 1995.
[3] Bernanke, B., M. Gertler, and S. Gilchrist, “The Financial Accelerator in a Quantitative Business Cycle Framework,” Handbook of Macroeconomics, Taylor and Woodford,
eds., 1999.
[4] Bleakley, H. and K. Cowan., “Corporate Dollar Debt and Depreciations: Much Ado
About Nothing?” Wp 02-05, Boston FED, 2002.
[5] Broner, Fernando, Guido Lorenzoni, and Sergio Schmukler, “Why do Emerging Markets Borrow Short term?” mimeo, July 2003.
[6] Bulow, Jeremy and Rogoﬀ, Kenneth, “A Constant Recontracting Model of Sovereign
Debt”, Journal of Political Economy 97-1, February 1989, pp. 155-78.
[7] Caballero, R.J. and A. Krishnamurthy, “International and Domestic Collateral Constraints in a Model of Emerging Market Crises,” Journal of Monetary Economics 48,
513-548, 2001.
[8] Caballero, R.J. and A. Krishnamurthy, “Excessive Dollar Debt: Underinsurance and
Domestic Financial Underdevelopment,” Journal of Finance. April, 58 (2), pp. 867-893,
2003.
[9] Caballero, R.J. and A. Krishnamurthy, “Inﬂation Targeting and Sudden Stops,” forthcoming in Inﬂation Targeting, ed. by Michael Woodford, 2004.
[10] Calvo, G.A., and C.M. Reinhart, “Fear of Floating,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
2003.
[11] Cespedes, L.F., R. Chang, and A. Velasco, “Balance Sheets and Exchange Rate Policy,”
NBER Working Paper No. W7840, August 2000.
[12] Christiano, L.J., C. Gust, and J. Roldos, “Monetary Policy in a Financial Crisis,”
forthcoming in Journal of Economic Theory, 2004.
[13] Diamond, D.W. and R.G. Rajan, “Liquidity Shortages and Financial Crises,”
U.Chicago mimeo, June 2001.
28

[14] Diamond, D.W. and R.G. Rajan, “Money in a Theory of Banking,” NBER Wp #
10070, October 2003.
[15] Dooley, M., “Responses to Volatile Capital Flows: Controls, Asset-Liability Management and Architecture,” World Bank Conference on Capital Flows, Financial Crises
and Policies, April 1999. [CHANGE FOR 2000]
[16] Dornbusch, R. “Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics,” Journal of Political
Economy 84, December, pp. 1176-76, 1976.
[17] Dornbusch, R. “Fewer Monies, Better Monies,” NBER Wp #8324, June 2001.
[18] Eaton, J., and M. Gersovitz, “Debt with Potential Repudiation: Theory and Estimation,” Review of Economic Studies 48, pp. 289-309. 1981.
[19] Edwards, S. and E. Levy-Yeyati, “Flexible Exchange Rates as Shock Absorbers,”
NBER Wp #9867, June 2003.
[20] Furman, J. and J. E. Stiglitz, “Economic Crises: Evidence and Insights from East
Asia,” Brookings Papers of Economic Activity 2, 1998.
[21] Gertler, M., S. Gilchrist and F.M.Natalucci, “External Constraints on Monetary Policy
and the Financial Accelerator,” NYU working paper, Feb 2001.
[22] Hausmann, R., U. Panizza and E. Stein, ”Why do countries ﬂoat the way they ﬂoat?”
Journal of Development Economics December 2001.
[23] Holmstrom, B. and J. Tirole, “Private and Public Supply of Liquidity,” Journal of
Political Economy 106-1, February 1998, pp. 1-40.
[24] Kiyotaki, N. and J. Moore (1997): “Credit Cyles,” Journal of Political Economy, 105
(2), 211-248.
[25] Lorenzoni, G., “Interest Rate Stabilization and Monetary Control: A Reconciliation.”
Mimeo, Princeton University, 2001.
[26] Woodford, M., “Public Debt as Private Liquidity,” American Economic Review, Papers
and Proceedings 80, May 1990, pp. 382-88.

29

A

Appendix

A.1

Financing Assumptions

The ﬁnancial frictions of the model are embodied in the following two assumptions:
Assumption 1 (International Collateral)
Foreigners lend to domestic ﬁrms only against the backing of w. Domestic agents lend against w,
M and ak.
Assumption 2 (Domestic Collateral)
A domestic lender can only be sure that a ﬁrm will produce ak units of goods at date 2. Any excess
production based on physical reinvestment at date 1 is neither observable nor veriﬁable.
One last assumption is required to rule out date 0 insurance arrangments that transfer resources
from distressed ﬁrms to intact ﬁrms.
Assumption 3 (Non-observability of Production Shock)
The production shock at date 1 is idiosyncratic. The identity of ﬁrms receiving the shock is private
information.
The mechanism design problem associated with these ﬁnancing and informational constraints
corresponds to the one in AGG. There is also a banking arrangement that in principle may get
around the private information constraint, but this is very fragile.

A.2

Technical Assumptions

Consider next the technical assumptions on parameters that we have used. The program in AGG
is,
AGG:
maxk,f g ,f b

(1 − π)(Ak + w − f g ) + π

s.t.

f g, f b ≤ w
c(k) ≤

1
b
∗ (πf
(1+i∗
0 )(1+i1 )



w−f b
∆
1+i∗
1

+

A+a
2 k



+ (1 − π)f g ).

First, we require that w = f g in this program, or that the return to investing domestically
exceeds that of investing abroad:
Assumption 4 (High Investment Return)
(1 − π)A + π

A+a
≥ c
2



w
∗
(1 + i0 )(1 + i∗1 )



(1 + i∗0 )(1 + i∗1 ).

Second, we require that the solution features some insurance against the b-state, so that f b < w.

30

Assumption 5 (High Return to Insuring)
c



w
(1 + i∗0 )(1 + i∗1 )



(1 + i∗0 )∆ ≥ (1 − π)A + π

A+a
.
2

These last two assumption can be jointly met by choosing ∆ large enough
We require that equilibrium, with no central bank intervention, places us in the vertical region,
or,
1 + i∗1 < e1 < ∆.
The ﬁrst order condition for the program in PRIV is,


c (k)(1 +

∆
i∗0 )

+ e1
1
= (1 − π)A + π
2
2



∆
.
A+a
e1

Denote the solution to this equation as k(e1 ). Then the largest value of k is attained when e1 = 1+i∗1 ,
and the smallest value when e1 = ∆. Using this knowledge as well as the market clearing condition
leads to:
Assumption 6 (Equilibrium in Vertical Region)
π(M + ak(i∗1 ))
w − (1 + i∗0 )(1 + i∗1 )c(k(i∗1 ))
π(M ak(∆ − 1))
w − (1 + i∗0 )(1 + i∗1 )c(k(∆ − 1))

<

∆
1 + i1 ∗

> 1

Finally, we have implicitly assumed that the maximum reinvestment constraint does not bind
in the vertical equilibrium:
w − fb
k
w − c(k)(1 + i∗0 )(1 + i∗1 )
>
=
∗
2
1 + i1
π(1 + i∗1 )
This can be rewritten as,
e1 =

π(M + ak)
> 2a.
w − (1 + i∗0 )(1 + i∗1 )c(k)

This leads to:
Assumption 7 (Reinvestment constraint does not bind in V )

a<

A.3

1 + i∗1
2

Dollarization of Domestic Liabilities

We sketch an extension to the model of Section 7 in order to address dollarization of liabilities. As
mentioned in Section 6.2, this is one of the primary reasons that policy-makers give for being unable
to lower interest rates during a crisis.

31

Suppose that ﬁrm have debts of D dollars that have to be settled at date 1− . These debts are
owed to domestic consumers, so that they do not aﬀect the international liquidity of the country.
Then the total peso net worth of agents at date 1− , before any open market operations, is,
NW =

ak
B
− De1−
p +M +
1 + i1
1 + ip1

(16)

Now suppose that the government does an open market operation where it purchases bonds with
money. Since this is transaction is done at market prices, the net worth remains as in (16).
The open market operation has two eﬀects. First it lowers ip1 and thereby raises

ak

