NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE ROLE OF PUBLIC HEALTH IMPROVEMENTS
IN HEALTH ADVANCES:
THE 20th CENTURY UNITED STATES
David Cutler
Grant Miller
Working Paper 10511
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10511
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2004

We thank Joe Harrington as well as participants of the Harvard-MIT labor/development economics seminar
and the Harvard Center for Population and Development Studies seminar for helpful comments; Kurt Keeley
at the American Water Works Association for help in navigating historical data sources; municipal water and
sanitation department employees too numerous to name for clarification of historical information; and Mireya
Almazan and John Indellicate for capable research assistance. Research support from National Institute on
Aging grant number T32 AG00186 through the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) is gratefully
acknowledged. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by David Cutler and Grant Miller. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

The Role of Public Health Improvements in Health Advances: The 20th Century United States
David Cutler and Grant Miller
NBER Working Paper No. 10511
May 2004
JEL No. H4, I1
ABSTRACT
Mortality rates in the US fell more rapidly during the late 19th and early 20th Centuries than any
other period in American history. This decline coincided with an epidemiological transition and the
disappearance of a mortality “penalty” associated with living in urban areas. There is little empirical
evidence and much unresolved debate about what caused these improvements, however. This paper
investigates the causal influence of clean water technologies n filtration and chlorination n on
mortality in major cities during the early 20th Century. Plausibly exogenous variation in the timing
and location of technology adoption is used to identify these effects, and the validity of this
identifying assumption is examined in detail. We find that clean water was responsible for nearly
half of the total mortality reduction in major cities, three-quarters of the infant mortality reduction,
and nearly two-thirds of the child mortality reduction. Rough calculations suggest that the social rate
of return to these technologies was greater than 23 to 1 with a cost per life-year saved by clean water
of about $500 in 2003 dollars. Implications for developing countries are briefly considered.
David M. Cutler
Department of Economics
Harvard University
1875 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
dcutler@harvard.edu
Grant Miller
NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
nmiller@fas.harvard.edu

Cartoon by Zim, 1919
“The present water closet system, with all its boasted advantages, is the worst that
can generally be adopted, briefly because it is a most extravagant method of
converting a mole-hill into a mountain. It merely removes the bulk of our excreta
from our houses to choke our rivers with foul deposits and rot at our neighbors’
door. It introduces into our houses a most deadly enemy…”
–chemist quoted in the Scientific American, 1869

Introduction
In the early 20th Century, mortality in the United States declined dramatically.
Mortality rates fell by 40% from 1900 to 1940, an average decline of about 1% per year.
Life expectancy at birth rose from 47 to 63. Together with the late 19th Century, no other
documented period in American history witnessed such rapidly falling mortality rates.
This decline in mortality was part of the ‘epidemiological transition.’ Nearly all of the
mortality decline is accounted for by reductions in infectious disease, which today is only
a small share of total mortality. It also coincides with the disappearance of the ‘urban
penalty’ – the higher mortality rates observed in urban areas throughout the 19th
Century.1 Clearly potent forces outside of medical care were at work. But what were
these forces?
Several explanations have been put forward. One posits that economic innovation
and nutritional gains drove this change. (Fogel, 1994; McKeown, 1976) Fogel shows that
mortality declines track reductions in chronic malnutrition as reflected by body-mass
index (BMI).2 McKeown argues for the importance of nutrition and living standard
improvements in reducing mortality by ruling out other explanations.3 A second
explanation is that private actions taken by individuals and households to improve
hygiene were a dominant factor explaining lower mortality. Health behavior campaigns
were born in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, often targeting hand and food washing,
the boiling of milk, and breastfeeding. (Ewbank and Preston, 1990) There is considerable
variation in infant and child health related to mothers’ education (Deaton and Paxson,
2001; Elo and Preston, 1996) – a relationship commonly thought to operate through
health behaviors – and there is evidence of an effect of education on own mortality later
in life. (Lleras-Muney, 2002) A third view stresses large-scale public health innovations
– including clean water technologies, sanitation, refuse management, milk pasteurization,
1

As late as 1900, life expectancy at birth for white males was 10 years greater in rural areas than in urban
areas.
2
Chronic malnutrition can be due either to a shortage of nutrients or excessive demands on them (often by
either work or disease) and is commonly linked to immune system resilience.
3
McKeown'
s evidence has been contested by numerous critics such as Simon Sretzer. (Szreter, 1988)
There is also some evidence that the British mortality decline analyzed by McKeown was not unique when
conpared to pre-industrial mortality fluctuations in Britain (Wrigley and Schofield, 1989), refuting his
central thesis.

1

and meat inspection – as the source of health improvement. (Meeker, 1972; Condran and
Crimmins-Gardner, 1978; Preston and Haines, 1991) These explanations are not
mutually exclusive, but it is important to discriminate amongst them. In formulating
strategies to improve health in developing countries, it is essential to know the relative
importance of nutritional gains, education campaigns, and major public health initiatives.
Empirical research on these topics can aid development institutions in selecting
interventions to improve health that have the greatest social returns.
Unlike the other two explanations, relatively little empirical work has examined
major historical public health interventions. Existing evidence draws upon the link
between municipal sanitation spending and mortality (Cain and Rotella, 2001), mortality
decline in three 19th century French départments as water and sanitation infrastructure
was built (Preston and van de Walle, 1978), concomitant changes in waterborne disease
deaths and urban infrastructure (Condran and Crimmins-Gardner, 1978), racial
differences in typhoid fever mortality following water filtration (Troesken, 2002), and the
expansion of water and sewer infrasturcture across wards of Chicago (Ferrie and
Troesken, 2004). All of this research shares common problems: it is difficult to rule out
the influence of confounding factors,4 and often the interventions themselves are difficult
to pinpoint.5
Our paper responds to these problems by examining the introduction of a major
class of discrete public health interventions – clean water technologies – in large
American cities in the early 20th Century. Clean water technologies are likely the most
important public health intervention of the 20th Century. In 1900, waterborne diseases
accounted for nearly one quarter of reported infectious disease deaths in major cities. In
the next few decades, waterborne disease mortality fell dramatically. The only disease
killing more people at the turn of the century – tuberculosis – had already declined
enormously by the time drugs to combat it were developed and widely distributed. We
examine the importance of clean water using a difference-in-difference approach that
exploits plausibly exogenous variation in the timing of water filtration and chlorination
adoption across cities. Importantly, we provide historical evidence and conduct several
4

Major urban infrastructure projects were often bundled with other municipal reforms, and they were often
introduced in particular times of need.

2

specification tests to support our identifying assumption of jointly exogenous variation in
intervention timing and location.
We first estimate the impact of clean water on cause-specific and total mortality.
We show that the introduction of water filtration and chlorination systems led to major
reductions in mortality, explaining nearly half of the overall reduction in mortality
between 1900 and 1936. Our results also suggest that clean water was responsible for
three-quarters of the decline in infant mortality and nearly two-thirds of the decline in
child mortality. The magnitude of these effects is striking. Clean water also appears to
have led to the near eradication of typhoid fever, a waterborne scourge of the 19th and
early 20th Centuries.
We next investigate behavioral responses to clean water. Our analyses lend some
support to the notion of a multiplier effect of public health interventions: by increasing
the returns to private health behaviors, public health interventions induce an increase in
these private behaviors. We then approximate the rate of return to clean water
investments. Water systems were expensive, but their benefits appear to have been
substantially greater. Under conservative assumptions, we estimate the rate of return to
clean water technologies to have been about 23 to 1 and the cost per life year saved to
have been about $500 in 2003 dollars. Finally, we conclude by considering broad
implications for developing countries today.

Public Health Advances in the Early 20th Century United States
Disease Environment and Theories of Illness
At the turn of the 20th Century, infectious diseases accounted for a large share of
deaths in American cities. As Table 1 shows for the major cities studied in this paper
(defined later), 44% of deaths were due to infectious diseases in 1900. By 1936,
however, only about 18% of deaths were due to infectious disease. Although our analysis
begins in 1900 with the start of reliable annual mortality statistics, decennial census
5

Municipal water and sewer projects often spanned many decades.

3

statistics clearly show that the striking mortality declines began before the turn of the
century. The crude death rate during the 1850s has been estimated to have been about 22
per 1,000. (Meeker, 1972) This rate had fallen to about 18 by 1900 and declined to about
11 by 1940. (United States Census Office, 1902; United States Bureau of the Census,
1941)
Before the bacteriology revolution of the 1870s, the dominant view of contagious
illnesses was the miasma theory of disease. This view essentially maintains that a variety
of illnesses are the result of poisonous, malevolent vapors or “miasmas” that are
offensive to the smell. (Duffy, 1990) The widespread acceptance of the miasma theory
appears to have been based on Pavlovian learning. People exposed to foul odors were
more likely to get sick, foul-smelling areas tended to have more sick people, and more
people seemed to get sick during the summer seasons during which offensive odors were
more common. This leap of logic from correlation to causation led to both successful and
misdirected sanitary interventions. John Snow’s famous discovery of London’s
contaminated well uncovered a direct causal relationship between dirty water and disease
despite ignorance about the underlying disease mechanism. Consequently, concerns
about the health effects of contaminated water and sewage solidified even before the
underlying basis of disease was fully understood.
This understanding was not perfect, however. Many resources were also
squandered on widespread ventilation campaigns and relatively ineffective quarantine
initiatives. Even following the bacteriology revolution, a scientific understanding of
infectious disease was slow to replace the miasma theory in public opinion. The largescale provision of water to urban populations illustrates the mixed results of early
understandings of disease.
Early Water Systems and Their Degradation
Municipal water supplies pre-dated a correct understanding of waterborne disease.
The first large-scale municipal water system in the United States was built in
Philadelphia at the dawn of the 19th Century. Benjamin Latrobe and colleagues
completed the bulk of Philadelphia’s water system in 1801, drawing water primarily from

4

the Schuylkill River with supplemental water from Spring Mill. Many large cities
subsequently followed in Philadelphia’s footsteps, often after years or even decades of
squabbling over water sources and the best means for tapping them. The tremendous
Croton Aqueduct began serving New York in 1842, and in 1848, Boston celebrated the
long-awaited arrival of water from Lake Cochituate (Long Pond).
Early municipal water systems did not prevent significant outbreaks of
waterborne and related infectious diseases. During the 1870s and 1880s, many cities
expanded or built new water and sewer systems, instituted systematic garbage collection,
and began paving cobblestone roads with smoother materials to facilitate cleaning.
However, a considerable amount of waste continued to be dumped into city streets; these
wastes were generally swept or washed down drains and into sewers that ultimately
emptied back into municipal water supplies. Water systems generally provided
inadequate water or inadequate water pressure to wash streets and flush sewers on a
regular basis. Moreover, because most sewer systems were only designed to carry storm
water, they often became clogged because they lacked sufficient capacity (many were not
more than 2.5 or 3 feet in diameter). (Duffy, 1990) Rapid population growth during the
19th Century greatly exacerbated these capacity problems. In addition to a large amount
of waste introduced into sewers from city streets, the advent of water closets in the US in
the 1870s added considerable strain to already overburdened sewers. The end result was
often backflow from sewers into streets and gutters; some observers began referring to
sewers as “elongated cesspools.” (Duffy, 1990)
Perhaps the worst sort of backflow was the emptying of sewer systems directly
into drinking water supplies. In the late 19th Century, the primary sewer outfalls of many
American cities emptied upstream of river water intakes or directly into large water
bodies (like the Great Lakes) in close proximity to water intakes. It is ironic that the
cities with the most extensive sewer systems were often the ones with greatest potential
to pollute their water sources. The few cities that addressed this problem early on also
suffered from the dumping of untreated sewage by upstream communities. This
phenomenon essentially reproduced “circular water systems” (a term referring to the
common mixing of household privy vault and drinking well contents through the
groundwater) on the municipal level. (Duffy, 1990)

5

A substantial mortality “penalty” to living in urban places therefore developed as
American cities grew during the 19th Century.6 (Haines, 2001) This can be seen in
historical mortality statistics. In seven states with good data before 1900, urban mortality
was 30% higher in cities than in rural areas in 1890. The gradient was much steeper for
infants and children. In 1880, infant mortality was 140% higher in cities, and in 1890,
mortality among children 1-4 was 94% higher. (Haines, 2001; United States Census
Office, 1888)
Clean Water Technologies: Filtration and Chlorination
As city water quality deteriorated, new technologies to combat dirty water also
emerged. Originally developed to combat turbidity, discoloration, and bad taste rather
than disease, water filtration was first introduced into the United States in Poughkeepsie,
New York in 1872.7 However, historians report that it wasn’t until the 1890s that truly
effective filters began being used; the largest cities generally did not build filtration
plants until after the turn of the 20th Century. In general, there were two major methods
of filtration: slow sand filtration and rapid (or mechanical) filtration. Slow sand filtration
is simply the large-scale pouring of untreated water into vats full of sand, gravel, and
other porous matter. Gravity causes the water to settle through the filter. Particulate
matter is strained out of the water, and bacteria is removed both by the sticky film of mud
(called a “Schultsdeck” or “dirt cover” by the German scientists that espoused its
benefits) that forms on the surface of the sand and by the oxidization that occurs as water
passing through the filter comes into contact with air trapped between the particles of
sand. (source: The Quest for Pure Water) Rapid filtration employs the same basic
process but forces water into the sand using jets and passes it through the filter under
pressure rather than letting gravity do the work. Additionally, rapid filters commonly
employed aluminum sulfate as a coagulant to aid in the forming of the protective film on
the sand surface.

6

Historical data limitations make it difficult to pinpoint precisely when this mortality "penalty" first
emerged.
7
The first public water supply to be filtered was in Paisley, Scotland in 1804. (Melosi, 2000)

6

Although discovered to effectively remove bacteria from drinking water during
the bacteriology revolution, filtration technologies did not remove all bacteria.
Experiments with a large variety of disinfection techniques were seen as complements to
filtration (or substitutes for them in some cases, depending on the clarity and amount of
vegetable and particulate matter in a water source8). These techniques included exposure
to ultraviolet rays, boiling, and treatment with ozone and compounds of copper, silver,
and chlorine. (Baker, 1948). However, cost considerations and ease of use produced a
clear winner: chlorine. The first large scale adoption of water chlorination occurred at
the Boonton Reservoir of the Jersey City water works in 1908, and many cities quickly
followed in subsequent years. Hypochlorite compounds were initially used, but they
were shortly replaced at many water supplies with liquid chlorine, which was easier to
administer and monitor.
In addition to the principal clean water technologies examined by this paper, some
cities sought clean water through other means as well. In 1896, Jersey City abandoned
the Passaic River as its water supply, instead turning to cleaner upland sources whose
watersheds it could protect. (Blake, 1956) In 1900, Chicago completed its construction
of the Chicago drainage canal, with which it successfully reversed the flow of the
Chicago River, sending its wastewater down the Illinois and Mississippi Rivers rather
than back into Lake Michigan – its water supply.9 (Blake, 1956) In 1907, Chicago also
shut-off its remaining sewer outfalls that emptied directly into Lake Michigan. (Melosi,
2000) In 1904, Cleveland extended its water intake tunnel four miles out into Lake Eerie
to distance the intake from its sewer outfalls. (Melosi, 2000) Memphis chose never to
take large quantities of water from the Mississippi River, instead drawing on deep
groundwater for its population.
Sewage treatment technologies are of course also important for the provision of
clean water. These range from early practices of dilution, straining, and oxidation to
more modern biological and chemical processes such as the “activated sludge process”
and chlorination, respectively. However, modern technologies were not generally in
8

Some saw an intermediate process like filtration as necessary for preventing other irregularities such as
fish being delivered through infrastructure pipes into bathtubs.

7

widespread use in the United States until the 1930s and 1940s, so we cannot examine
them in a meaningful way using the data we employ in our analyses. For the cities we
examine, however, we do have knowledge of when basic sewage treatment technologies
were introduced, so we can account for this in our empirical analyses.
Adoption of Clean Water Technologies
There was considerable variation in when cities adopted clean water technologies.
Although some major cities such as Cincinnati, Philadelphia, and Pittsburgh began
building large filtration plants around the turn of the century, others such as Chicago and
Milwaukee waited many decades to do so. There was somewhat less variation in when
water chlorination was adopted, however. Following the demonstration of chlorine’s use
for disinfection in 1908, most major cities began water chlorination within the next
decade. Primary sewage treatment and sewage chlorination technologies were generally
not used until later in the Century, which is why our analyses do not focus on them more.
Figure 1 shows the cumulative number of our sample cities adopting clean water and
sanitation technologies from 1900 to 1936.
Although probably not complete historical accidents, there was a large random
component to the timing of clean water technology adoption in American cities. In
general, early sanitarians fought uphill battles to persuade city councils to take action
against poor water quality for many years or decades before such actions were finally
taken. (Cutler and Miller, 2004) Matters were further complicated by differences in
beliefs about the precise cause of disease despite the scientific advances of bacteriology
and about the appropriateness of government involvement in water purification.
Moreover, even as consensus about the need to begin filtering or disinfecting municipal
water supplies emerged, partisan bickering about how it should be done (by the city
directly or by private contract) and what specific technology would be adopted (slow or
rapid sand filtration, for example) introduced additional hurdles to be cleared. Historical

9

St. Louis filed a historic suit against Chicago in federal court to block this action, but the suit failed after
the discovery that water from further up the Mississippi River was dirtier than water entering from the
Illinois River. (Melosi, 2000)

8

accounts therefore generally suggest that the precise year in which cities ultimately
adopted clean water technologies was quite arbitrary.
The case of Philadelphia provides an illustrative example. (McCarthy, 1987) In
1885, the Philadelphia city council paid a prominent chemist from the University of
Virginia to conduct a study of the quality of the city’s water supplies. The study found
Philadelphia’s water quality to be good, but scrutiny by other scientists suggested that it
actually varied enormously week to week, ranging from good to unfit for human
consumption. Subsequent debate focused on moving the city’s primary sewer outfalls
from above water intake points to below them. Needless to say, this action did little to
address upstream water contamination. Several famous experiments on filtration and
water quality were conducted in subsequent years at Lawrence, MA by a group of
scientists from MIT. Beginning in 1887, they demonstrated a causal effect of filtration
on water quality. This did not simplify the choices facing Philadelphia, however, leaving
it to decide between better confronting the sources of water pollution, abandoning its
water supply and seeking a cleaner one via a long aqueduct, or purifying its water by
filtration. Following a major cholera outbreak in Europe, the Philadelphia city council
authorized the construction of an experimental filtration plant on the Schuylkill River in
1892. However, with the passing of the outbreak, the project was halted. In 1896, the
director of the city’s water bureau together with the health department’s bacteriology
department again pressed the city council to construct an experimental filtration plant. A
bond issue to support its construction was eventually approved, but revised cost estimates
much larger than the original ones again led to delay.
Consequently, the council again considered alternatives other than filtration of the
existing water supply. A consortium calling itself the Schuylkill Valley Water Company
proposed to develop a new water supply from the upper Schuylkill – complete with
filtration plants – with a series of dams from Reading to Norristown. The city would pay
the company for service over the next fifty years (an attractive time horizon for
politicians in office at the time), at which point it would own the supply infrastructure.
This plan was very nearly approved until a junior council member announced during a
council session in 1898 that he and other representatives had been offered bribes to vote

9

in favor of the plan. This revelation was of course scandalous and resulted in an
investigation that effectively ended the plan.
Following the demise of the Schuylkill Valley Water Company proposal, the
director of the water bureau again submitted a report to the city council recommending
slow sand filtration for most of the city’s pumping stations and a mechanical filter for the
remainder. By this time the city was on the verge of the 1900 elections, and political
considerations were at the forefront. One of the former insiders of the Schuylkill
Company deal introduced a bill supporting a new proposal by the Quaker City Water
Company to increase the share of the city’s water obtained from the Delaware River –
and to filter this water. The proposal was naturally met with skepticism in light of the
recent scandal, and the leading mayoral candidate opposed it. An alternative bill
approving municipal construction of a new filtration system was then proposed but was
subsequently defeated by Quaker Company supporters and other skeptics on a special
council committee later dubbed “the typhoid thirteen.” In the end, passage and
implementation of a new plan for filtration ultimately had to wait until after the election
of a new mayor in 1900. Because of the lengthy construction period, major population
centers in Philadelphia didn’t start receiving filtered water until late in decade.
The story of water politics in Philadelphia mirrors what occurred in most
American cities. (Cutler and Miller, 2004) As a result, we take the precise timing of
clean water technology adoption across cities to be largely exogenous. We turn next to
the data that allow us to estimate the impact of these interventions on mortality.

Data and Sample Selection
To understand how clean water affected mortality, we need data on sanitary
interventions matched to deaths by cause. There was no national system of death records
in the United States prior to 1933, however. (Haines, 2001) Instead, we make use of the
substantial data that was collected beginning in 1900 from an official “death registration
area” comprised of ten states together with a number of “registration cities” outside of
these states. (Haines, 2001) Annual mortality statistics collected in these areas by city,

10

cause, and age were obtained from the Census Bureau’s Mortality Statistics from 19001936.10 We do not include years later than 1936 because a new data series begins in
1937. This is also a convenient end-point in time for our analysis because it immediately
precedes the development of major antibiotics and more modern health care. The precise
cause of all waterborne and diarrheal disease deaths is difficult to ascertain in the Census
Bureau’s statistics, and diarrheal disease categories are unfortunately reported
inconsistently throughout the 1900-1936 series. However, typhoid fever, a marker for
waterborne disease and important cause of death in its own right, is reported consistently
throughout the series. In 1900, the ratio of diarrheal disease deaths to typhoid fever
deaths in the cities studied was about 3:1. Summary statistics for total mortality, typhoid
fever mortality, infant mortality, and child mortality are shown in Table 2.
We match these municipal-level mortality statistics to knowledge of where and
when clean water technologies were in use according to historical engineering and urban
planning periodicals. The most comprehensive sources are water system censuses
published in the municipal engineering periodicals: two in the Journal of the American
Water Works Association (in 1924 and 1932) and one in Water Works Engineering in
1943. Articles in these as well as other relevant periodicals including American City and
Engineering News contain additional information. Several prominent historical texts on
clean water also provide intervention dates. (Baker, 1948; Blake, 1956; Melosi, 2000)
Our selection of cities began with all municipalities of at least 100,000 population
in 1900; more detail on these cities is available in the decennial censuses. A few smaller
cities for which unusually good historical information is available were also included.
We then sought four clean water intervention dates for each city: water filtration, water
chlorination, primary sewage treatment, and sewage chlorination.11 Because our
empirical strategy relies heavily on the accuracy of intervention dates, we chose only to
include those cities for which readily available published materials provide all four dates.
Our final sample is comprised of thirteen cities: Baltimore, Chicago, Cincinnati,
10

Available from authors upon request
In many cases, readily available printed materials did not provide all four intervention dates for each city.
Therefore, a number of phone calls requesting these dates were made directly to municipal water and
sewage authorities. However, we ultimately question the precision of intervention dates obtained by
telephone. In some cases, dates provided by municipal agencies conflicted with published dates; in other
cases, the best answers given were of the “circa 1910” sort.

11

11

Cleveland, Detroit, Jersey City, Louisville, Memphis, Milwaukee, New Orleans,
Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, and St. Louis. Even by restricting our analyses to these cities,
some measurement error undoubtedly remains. Cities did not always begin clean water
interventions in an “all or nothing” manner from one year to the next. However, the dates
we use correspond to the year in which the majority of municipal populations were first
served by these interventions. Table 3 shows each intervention date for each city. It also
makes plain why we cannot examine the impact of sewage treatment technologies – very
few of the 13 cities had adopted these technologies by 1936.
Finally, data on demographic characteristics and literacy for these populations
were obtained from the Census Bureau’s decennial censuses, 1900-1940. Table 4
summarizes these demographic statistics. For years between decennial census years,
values for these variables were estimated by linear interpolation.

Empirical Strategy
Given the importance of cumbersome political processes in determining the
precise timing of clean water interventions in cities, our basic empirical strategy is to
exploit this plausibly exogenous variation in intervention timing to identify the effects of
clean water. We use a difference-in-difference approach to estimate the impact of clean
water interventions. Specifically, we estimate equations for mortality in cities c and
years t of the general form:
ln(mc,t) =

+ β1Filterc,t + β2Chlorinec,t + β3(Filterc,t*Chlorinec,t) +
c

+

t

(1)

+ clc,t + φddd,c,t + λkln(mc,t-k) + εc,t

Mortality rates (m) are assumed to depend on indicators for water filtration and
chlorination and their interaction, city and year fixed effects, city-specific linear time
trends (l), demographic characteristics (d), and an error term (ε). Demographic
characteristics specified are population age structure, sex, racial composition, and share

12

of immigrants. We incorporate an interaction term between filtration and chlorination to
test if the two technologies are substitutes (β3>0) or complements (β3<0).
Our dependent variables are variety of mortality measures including total
mortality, infant mortality, child mortality, and cause-specific mortality due to a variety
of diseases and conditions. It is difficult to determine which infectious diseases should
respond to clean water technologies, however. Hiram Mills, a member of the
Massachusetts state board of health, and J. J. Reincke, a health officer in Hamburg,
Germany, independently observed a marked reduction in overall mortality, not just
waterborne disease mortality, upon introduction of water filtration more than a century
ago. (Sedgwick and MacNutt, 1910; Ewbank and Preston, 1990) The biological
mechanism underpinning the so-called “Mills-Reincke phenomenon” would presumably
be that contaminated water weakens the immune system, making one more susceptible to
other contagions. The scope of the Mills-Reincke phenomenon should at least be limited
to infectious diseases other than those directly transmitted by dirty water; chronic
diseases such as cardiovascular disease and cancer should be less affected (at least
initially). We therefore focus on water-borne causes of death and infectious diseases as a
whole.
Our intervention variables capture the effect of clean water technologies on some,
but not all, people in a city. While little good historical information is available, there is
some suggestion that minority neighborhoods in urban areas to received piped water later
than white neighborhoods. (Troesken, 2002) Our ignorance about the precise share of
municipal populations receiving piped water in each year should not bias our results
unless large-scale infrastructure improvement projects or a large number of citizeninitiated new household connections were timed to coincide precisely with the
introduction of clean water technologies. This seems unlikely, and additional large and
expensive infrastructure projects would have likely appeared in the municipal
engineering periodicals that we searched for relevant intervention dates. Less than
universal access to piped water suggests that we might have an underestimate of
treatment effects.
Despite suggestive evidence from historical texts, a central concern with this
approach is that cities may have begun filtering or chlorinating their water in response to

13

specific events or factors such as a severe disease environment. Along these lines,
relatively high mortality rates just before the introduction of clean water technologies
could cause our estimates to capture a simple process of regression toward the mean.
Alternatively, declining mortality rates in the years just prior to the adoption of clean
water technologies might suggest that our estimates are confounded by secular mortality
declines. We address these concerns in several ways. First, we include lags of mortality
(mc,t-k) as independent variables to account for differences pre-intervention mortality
trends. Our results are not sensitive to this. In addition, we include leads of the
intervention variables in some of our specifications. If the timing of these interventions
is truly exogenous, mortality rates should not be higher or lower just before their
introduction. Our results hold up to this test.

Results
We begin by illustrating our results with simple time trends. The charts in Figure
2 show typhoid fever mortality trends in each city in our sample, depicting the years in
which clean water interventions were introduced. Despite considerable year-to-year
volatility in typhoid mortality rates, these charts generally show that the adoption of clean
water technologies were not preceded by increases in death rates. Particularly striking
cases are Baltimore, Cincinnati, Philadelphia, and Pittsburgh. There does, however,
appear to have been a slight pre-intervention dip in typhoid fever mortality in some cities
shortly before clean water technologies were adopted. We pay careful attention to
distinguishing pre-intervention declines in mortality from true program effects in our
subsequent analyses. It is also possible that pre-program drops capture program effects
resulting from the phase-in of technologies that occurred over several years in some
cities.
Table 5 shows the results of estimating equation (1). Each column corresponds to
a separate specification, with the dependent variable at the head of the column. Because
the dependent variable is in logarithmic form, the coefficient estimates can be interpreted
roughly as percent changes. The first row shows estimates of the effects of filtration on

14

mortality. On average, filtration reduced typhoid fever mortality by 46%, total mortality
by 16%, infant mortality (ages 0-1) by 43%, and child mortality (ages 1-4) by 46%.
These are very large effects. The second row shows estimates of the chlorination effects,
suggesting that chlorination alone had no detectable effect on mortality. The third row
shows coefficient estimates for the interaction between filtration and chlorination. These
coefficients are positive for typhoid fever mortality and total mortality, suggesting that
filtration and chlorination were substitute technologies. We discuss the other coefficients
below.
Taken together, Table 5 also suggests that filtration and chlorination were jointly
important in reducing mortality. Their combined effects are shown in the third row from
the bottom, and the corresponding F-statistic is shown immediately below. On average,
filtration and chlorination together reduced typhoid fever mortality by 25%, total
mortality by 13%, infant mortality by 46%, and child mortality by 50%.The result that
filtration was more effective than chlorination is in some ways an artifact of the time
period. Filtration technologies were developed before the health benefits of chlorination
were first discovered in the United States, so major cities generally adopted filtration
before chlorination. As a result, we have little mortality variation with which to identify
the chlorination effect if the two technologies are largely substitutable. Another possible
explanation for the results is that because it is so cheap, chlorination diffused very rapidly
across cities after its first large-scale use, leaving less time variation with which to detect
an effect.
The magnitude of these estimated effects is striking. In our sample of major
cities, the reduction in mortality from 1900 to 1936 was about 30%. Our results suggest
clean water technologies reduced mortality by 13% during this period, accounting for
about 43% (13/30) of the total reduction.Infant and child mortality fell by 62% and 81%
respectively in these cities during this period. Clean water appears to be responsible for
74% (46/62) of the infant mortality reduction and 62% (50/81) of the child mortality
reduction. Similarly, clean water led to the near-eradication of typhoid fever.
The effect of clean water on total mortality is much larger than what can be
accounted for by typhoid fever effects alone. Declines in typhoid fever due to clean
water technologies account for only about 2% of the total mortality reduction during this

15

period . Although total waterborne disease deaths are not reported consistently from
1900-1936, we suspect that they are roughly three times as large as typhoid fever
mortality.12 As a result, reductions in all waterborne diseases account for about 8% of the
total mortality reduction. What of the remaining 35% attributable to clean water?
Table 6 presents regression results using the same specification with other causes
of death as the dependent variable. Among the causes of death that are reported
consistently from 1900-1936, the other diseases that respond to clean water are infectious
diseases: pneumonia, tuberculosis, meningitis, and diphtheria/croup. As shown in the last
column of Table 6, reductions in pneumonia, meningitis, tuberculosis, and
diphtheria/croup account for 9%, 6%, 5%, and 4% of the total mortality reduction.
Together with typhoid fever and an assumption about unobserved reductions in diarrhea
and enteritis, we can identify specific causes of death for 32 percentage points of the 43%
decline in total mortality attributable to clean water.
Importantly, clean water technologies have no effect on non-infectious disease
mortality - in this case, cancer and diabetes (the last two rows of Table 6).13 In both cases
the coefficient estimates are substantially smaller than for infectious disease mortality,
and the estimates are not statistically significant.
Specification Test
One test of our identifying assumption is if the coefficients on intervention lead
dummy variables are different from zero. If we found positive coefficients on the lead
dummy variables, we might worry that cities began purifying their water supplies in
response to relatively high disease rates or that our estimates mistake a simple process of
regression toward the mean for intervention effects. Negative coefficients might suggest
that our estimates are confusing secular declines with clean water effects.

12

Using data from 1900 we calculate that the ratio of diarrhea and enteritis deaths to typhoid fever deaths is
slightly less than 3:1. Given some assumptions, this ratio can be used to approximate changes in diarrhea
and enteritis deaths from 1900 to 1936 despite the lack of consistent data.
13
These are the only two chronic diseases reported consistently from 1900 to 1936.

16

The coefficients on the five-year lead dummy variables for filtration and
chlorination are also shown in Table 5.14 The coefficient estimates on the intervention
lead dummy variables are either insignificantly different from zero or negative. The
charts in Figure 2 depict why this is the case. In some of the cities there is evidence of
mortality reductions a few years before the interventions. Nevertheless, there is an
enormous decline in mortality in the year of the intervention. Furthermore, we coded
intervention years to be the year in which the majority of city populations began
benefiting although in many cases interventions were introduced over a period of several
years.
Table 7 shows this result more formally. We parameterize the interventions by
particular years on either side of the true year of introduction. There is a large abrupt
drop in mortality in precisely the year of the intervention (time 0), even relative to one
year prior to the true intervention (time -1). We thus do not believe that the results are
simply capturing pre-existing trends.

The Effects of Clean Water over Time and Behavioral Responses
A central issue is whether the effects of clean water technologies increase or
decrease over time. One might imagine an increasing effect if improvements in the
disease environment take time to have a sustained impact on mortality or if there is
learning over time in how to best use disinfection technologies. Growing effects over
time could also be due to increases in complementary private health behaviors. Falling
mortality rates increase the expected return to other health investments, possibly resulting
in a multiplier effect due to intensified personal health practices. (Dow, Holmes,
Philipson, and Sala-i-Martin, 1999; Murphy and Topel, 2003) Alternatively, the effects
might become smaller over time if major public health interventions are substitutes for
private preventive measures, effectively resulting in '
crowd out.'As the benefits of costly
private prevention such as water-boiling or hand-washing fall, individuals might do them
14

The qualitative results are not sensitive to the choice of length of time before the onset of filtration and
chlorination.

17

less. (Philipson, 2000) The mortality effects of clean water over time might also fall if
those initially saved by interventions are weaker than the average member of the
population. Because these weak '
marginal survivors'are more susceptible to other
diseases, their mortality rate in subsequent years will be higher than that of the rest of the
population.
To evaluate these competing explanations, we first estimate variants of the basic
specification that include intervention dummy variables tracing out intervention effects 5
years and 9 years after filtration and chlorination were introduced.15 Estimates for
typhoid fever mortality and total mortality over time are shown in Table 8. The first
column estimates a variant of our base regressions that includes 5 year intervention lag
dummy variables. Separate estimates are shown for each intervention and its lag in the
first rows, and joint intervention effects and their 5 year lag are shown at the bottom.
Our results suggest that the effects of typhoid fever mortality grew over time and
perhaps resulted in the near-eradication of the disease observed by 1936. Clean water
technologies jointly reduced typhoid fever by 26% initially and by another 65% after five
years. Taken together, this is a reduction in typhoid mortality of more than 90%. The
second column shows similar results that include both 5 year and 9 year intervention lags.
Although more complicated intervention lag structures place greater demands on the data,
the basic result of growing effects is similar with effects peaking after about 5 years. The
third and fourth columns of Table 8 show the same results using total mortality as the
dependent variable. Clean water initially reduced total mortality by 9%, with some small
additional reduction in subsequent years. The general result of greater mortality declines
over time is consistent with delayed intervention effects or learning over time, a personal
health practice multiplier - and not with crowd-out or weak marginal survivors.
A second test of these theories is to look at intervention effects in different disease
environments. The personal health practice multiplier theory predicts that private
prevention will increase less - and mortality will therefore fall less - in more severe
disease environments over time because their expected benefits are less than in healthier
areas. The marginal survivor theory also predicts less clean water impact over time in
harsher disease environments. Alternatively, the crowd-out theory predicts that mortality
15

The estimates presented are not sensitive to specific lag structure choices.

18

will fall more over time in harsh disease environments: costly private prevention should
be crowded-out less in sicker areas because the benefits of private preventive behaviors
fall less. Neither delayed intervention effects nor learning over time should result in
heterogeneous clean water effects by disease environment.
To evaluate the predictions of these theories further, we constructed a dummy
variable for high infectious disease cities in 1900 - cities in the top half of our distribution
of infectious disease mortality rates. We then interact this dummy variable with
interventions and their lags. The results are shown in Table 9. The bottom of the table
shows that the interactions between clean water interventions and severe disease
environments are jointly positive over time. The estimate of 0.12 in this first column
implies that mortality rates in cities with more infectious disease rose by 12% over time
relative to cities with less infectious disease. This finding does not support the
predictions of the crowd-out theory – or at least does not support the notion that a crowdout effect is dominant – nor is it consistent with delayed intervention effects or learning
over time.
Together with more tenuous evidence that total mortality continued to decline
after clean water technologies were adopted, our results are most consistent with the
personal health practice multiplier theory: as public health interventions increased lifeexpectancy, the returns to personal health practices grew, inducing individuals to engage
in them more. Table 10 summarizes this evidence.
Distributional Effects of Clean Water
The benefits of clean water could differ across the socioeconomic spectrum for a
variety of different reasons. Because the poor are sicker than the rich on average, they
might enjoy greater health improvements due to clean water. Alternatively, if the poor
were less likely to have household connections to municipal water supplies, they might
have benefited less from water filtration and chlorination.
Examining the distributional consequences of clean water empirically is difficult
for several reasons. One is that good indicators of who was poor in historical census data
are scarce. Income, assets, and consumption are difficult to infer, and other measures

19

often used to identify the poor (such as occupation) are not comparable across decades
because of the rapid rate of technological change. Furthermore, the best measures of
socioeconomic status are only in decennial census data and are therefore not observed as
frequently as annual mortality. We settle for using a measure of illiteracy contained in
the decennial censuses at the municipal level through 1930.16,17 We examine the effect of
clean water technologies in cities that had varying degrees of literacy among their
residents.
Table 11 shows results of our base specification with the addition of illiteracy and
interaction terms between clean water interventions and illiteracy. Joint effects of
filtration and chlorination are shown in the bottom row together with corresponding Fstatistics. In general, the results are consistent with a steep illiteracy gradient in the
impact of clean water on mortality, with larger mortality reductions for cities with more
illiterate residents. This is consistent with a greater impact of clean water on the poor,
but endogeneity cannot be ruled out in interpreting these results. Mortality changes
might lead to changes in literacy, with greater mortality declines leading to more literacy.
Because we find the opposite, we suspect that reverse-causation is not problematic in our
analysis. We cannot distinguish between the possibility that the poor and illiterate
benefited more from clean water and the possibility that those in cities with more poor
and illiterate benefited more.

Social Rate of Return to Clean Water
Our estimates suggest that the benefits of clean water are quite large. Benefits
alone do not justify interventions, however. Costs are important, too.
By itself, water chlorination is relatively inexpensive. The fixed-cost component
of chlorination expenses is presumably not large (certainly not when compared to

16

More desirable measures such as years of schooling do not enter the decennial censuses until late in the
time period investigated by this paper.
17
We interpolate illiteracy between decennial census years.

20

filtration) because it does not require new facilities or infrastructure.18 Chlorine
disinfection does require careful monitoring, however, because of its highly toxic nature
when concentrated. A rough estimate of annual variable costs associated with
chlorination can be inferred from historical editions of the Census Bureau'
s General
Statistics of Cities. Among cities in 1915 that chlorinated their water but did not employ
other treatment processes, annual water treatment costs suggest the variable costs of
chlorination in big cities to have been approximately $150,000 to $200,000 per year in
2003 dollars.19 (United States Bureau of the Census, 1916) However, because our
estimates suggest that chlorination alone did not significantly reduce mortality (possible
because it was typically adopted shortly after filtration), we do not estimate a rate of
return to water chlorination by itself.
It is not easy to pinpoint the costs of filtration using historical municipal finance
statistics. To be conservative, we use the estimated value of entire municipal water
systems making the assumption that these systems exist only to reduce mortality. We
then need to determine how long a water system lasts. Again, we conservatively choose
a horizon of 10 years, assuming that cities must rebuild their entire systems every 10
years. Because cities introduced clean water technologies around 1915, we use 1915
values of water systems in our calculations. In 2003 dollars, available information
suggests that the mean big-city water system value in 1915 was just under $300 million.
(United States Bureau of the Census, 1916)
Using these rough cost figures together with our estimates of the mortality
benefits of clean water, Table 12 sketches some rough rate of return calculations to
investment in clean water.20 We first convert mortality reductions into life years saved
and then value these life years saved in dollars. This dollar value of the benefits of clean
water can then be compared to the costs incurred in producing them to yield a rough rate
of return. The first row of the table shows our regression results indicating that clean
water reduced mortality by an average of about 13% (with a 95% confidence interval
ranging from about 4% to about 23%). Using the mean population of our cities in 1915
18

Chlorination devices are rather small and can be employed at any reservoir or distribution point in a
water system.
19
BLS on-line resources used to inflate 1915 dollars (http://www.bls.gov/cpi/home.htm#data).

21

(the average year by which a clean water technology had been adopted), the third row
shows estimates of the mean number of lives saved by clean water per city each year; our
point estimate is 1,484 lives. We convert lives saved annually into life-years saved by
assuming that individuals saved by clean water would otherwise have died at age 27
(roughly half of life expectancy in 1915).21 This assumption seems reasonable given that
infectious diseases usually hit the very young and very old. Life expectancy at age 27 in
1915 was about 39 years, so we obtain average annual life years saved by multiplying the
number of people saved by that 39 years. These estimates are shown in the fourth row of
Table 12; on average, we calculate that clean water saved 57,922 life years per city each
year.
The next task is to calculate a dollar value of benefits by attaching a dollar value
to a year of life. Contemporary research on the value of life suggests that a reasonable
dollar value of a life year today is about $100,000 on average. (Viscusi and Aldy, 2003)
However, there is evidence that the value of life in the US has changed over time as
income has grown. (Costa and Kahn, 2002) The elasticity of the value of life with
respect to GNP per capita has been estimated to lie between 1.5 and 1.7. (Costa and
Kahn, 2002) In 2003 dollars, GDP per capita has grown from $7,496 in 1930 to $37,600
in 2003, a real increase of about 500%.22,23 The implied value of a life year in 1930 (in
2003 dollars) ranges from $11,723 to $13,280. We use the more conservative figure and
assume that the value of life does not vary with age.
The total annual benefits are therefore a little less than $700 million per city. This
is substantially greater than the $30 million amortized cost. As the second to last row of
Table 12 shows, the rate-of-return estimate is 23 to 1, with a 95% confidence interval
ranging from 7 to 40. Similarly, we obtain a point estimate for the cost per life year
saved in 2003 dollars of $500 and a confidence interval ranging from $1,775 to $291.

20

We clearly make a number of simplifying assumptions which are conservative whenever possible.
Specific details are available from the authors.
21
Life tables can be found at http://www.demog.berkeley.edu/wilmoth/mortality/states.html, reprinted from
life tables prepared by the Office of the Chief Actuary in the Social Security Administration.
22
Reliable GDP figures are not available much further back than 1930. This figure may reasonably
represent the period of interest because although taken from late in the period, GDP was of course low
during the Depression.
23
Numbers based on CPI data obtained from ftp://ftp.bls.gov/pub/special.requests/cpi/cpiai.txt, GDP data
obtained from http://www.census.gov/prod/99pubs/99statab/sec31.pdf, and authors'calculations.

22

Even these estimates, large as they are, exclude benefits such as morbidity
reductions and productivity gains. Nevertheless, they are tremendous.

Conclusion
Our results demonstrate the strikingly large and cost-beneficial role of clean water
technologies in reducing mortality in the historical United States. The period examined
was the era of most rapid mortality decline in documented American history, and clean
water appears to have played as large a role as any force responsible for this rapid
progress.
Although the historical United States surely differs from other contemporary
contexts in important ways, clean water and adequate sanitation continue to be high on
development agendas today.24 Worldwide, roughly 1.1 billion people lack access to
clean water and about 2.4 billion people do not have adequate sanitation. Cutting the
share of people without suitable water and sanitation in half by 2015 is one of the
ambitious objectives set by the Millennium Development Goals. The United Nations has
declared the years 2005 - 2015 as the international decade for action on water, "Water for
Life." The first international water decade, the 1980s, brought clean water to one billion
new people and delivered new sanitation services to 770 million people worldwide.
However, population growth and rapid urbanization have eroded these gains.
Much of the contemporary investment made in clean water has financed the
construction of new water supply infrastructure. A reason commonly cited for the partial
failure of these investments to achieve commensurate health returns is the relative neglect
of sanitation. Although certainly not a substitute for appropriate investment in sanitation,
our results from the historical United States suggest that inexpensive water disinfection
technologies can have enormous health returns - returns that reach beyond reductions in
waterborne disease - even in the absence of adequate sanitation services. In 2000, more
than one-fifth of drinking water samples taken from existing water systems failed to meet
24

Information in this paragraph can be found at the Water and Sanitation Program (WSP) homepage:
www.wsp.org

23

national quality standards for microbiological content and other pollutants.25 (WHO and
UNICEF, 2000) If the Mills-Reincke multiplier found in the historical United States26
holds and only 1% of the roughly 1.7 million annual diarrheal disease deaths worldwide
could be prevented by water disinfection, the corresponding social rate of return for one
year alone would be about $160 billion.27

25

The true number is presumably much larger given that countries voluntarily reported these statistics.
Ironically, developing countries also self-report that more than 90% of existing water supplies are
adequately disinfected. (WHO and UNICEF, 2000)
26
Our conservative estimate of the Mills-Reincke multiplier in the historical United States is about 3.
27
In 2002, there were an estimated 1,767,326 diarrheal disease deaths worldwide. (WHO, 2003) An
approximate social rate of return is calculated by taking 1% of these deaths, multiplying by 3 (the MillsReincke multiplier), assuming 30 life years lost per death, and valuing a life year at $100,000.

24

References
Baker, M. N. The Quest for Pure Water: The History of Water Purification from the
Earliest Records to the Twentieth Century. New York, NY: The American Water Works
Association, 1948.
Blake, Nelson Manfred. Water for the Cities: A History of the Urban Water Supply
Problem in the United States. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press, 1956.
Cain, Louis P., and Elyce J. Rotella. "Death and Spending: Urban Mortality and
Municipal Expenditure on Sanitation," Annales de Demographie Historique 1 (2001),
139-154.
Condran, Gretchen A., and Eileen Crimmins-Gardner. "Public Health Measures and
Mortality in U.S. Cities in the Late Nineteenth Century," Human Ecology 6(1) (1978),
27-54.
Costa, Dora L., and Matthew E. Kahn. "Changes in the Value of Life: 1940-1980,"
NBER Working Paper #9396 (2002).
Cutler, David, and Grant Miller. "Water, Water Everywhere: Water Reforms in
American Cities," mimeo, Harvard University, 2004.
Deaton, Angus, and Christina Paxson. "Mortality, Education, Income, and Inequality
among American Cohorts," in David A. Wise (ed.), Themes in the Economics of Aging.
Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press, 2003..
Dow, William H., Holmes, Jessica, Philipson, Tomas, and Xavier Sala-i-Martin.
"Disease Complementarities and the Evaluation of Public Health Interventions,"
American Economic Review 89(5) (1999), 1357-1372.
Duffy, John. The Sanitarians: A History of American Public Health. Urbana, IL:
University of Illinois Press, 1990.
Elo, Irma T., and Samuel H. Preston. "Educational Differentials in Mortality: United
States, 1979–1985," Social Science and Medicine 42(1) (1996), 47-57.
Ewbank, Douglas C., and Samuel H. Preston. "Personal Health Behaviour and the
Decline in Infant and Child Mortality: the Unites States, 1900-1930," in John Caldwell et.
al. (eds.), What We Know about Health Transition: The Culture, Social and Behavioural
Determinants of Health, Volume 1. Canberra: The Australian National University
Printing Service, 1990.
Ferrie, Joseph, and Werner Troesken. "Death in the City: Mortality and Access to Public
Water and Sewer in Chicago, 1880," mimeo, Northwestern University and University of
Pittsburgh (2004).
25

Fogel, Robert W. "Economic Growth, Population Theory, and Physiology: The Bearing
of Long-Term Processes on the Making of Economic Policy," American Economic
Review 84(3) (June 1994): 369-395.
Haines, Michael R. "The Urban Mortality Transition in the United States, 1800-1940,"
NBER Historical Paper #134 (2001).
Lleras-Muney, Adriana. "The Relationship Between Education and Adult Mortality in
the United States," NBER Working Paper #8986 (2002).
McCarthy, Michael P. Typhoid and the Politics of Public Health in Nineteenth Century
Philadelphia. Philadelphia, PA: American Philosophical Society, 1987.
McKeown, Thomas. The Modern Rise of Population. New York, NY: Academic Press,
1976.
Meeker, Edward. "The Improving Health of the United States, 1850-1915," Explorations
in Economic History 10 (1972), 353-373.
Melosi, Martin. The Sanitary City: Urban Infrastructure in America from Colonial
Times to the Present. Baltimore, MD: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 2000.
Murphy, Kevin M., and Robert H. Topel. "The Economic Value of Medical
Knowledge," in Kevin M. Murphy and Robert H. Topel (eds.), Exceptional Returns.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2003.
Philipson, Tomas. "Economic Epidemiology," in Joseph P. Newhouse and Anthony J.
Culyer (eds.), Handbook of Health Economics. New York, NY: North-Holland, 2000.
Preston, Samuel and Michael Haines. Fatal Years: Child Mortality in Late NineteenthCentury America. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1991.
Preston, Samuel H., and Etienne van de Walle. "Urban French Mortality in the
Nineteenth Century," Population Studies 32(2) (1978), 275-297.
Sedgwick, William T., and J. Scott MacNutt. "On the Mills-Reincke Phenomenon and
Hazen'
s Theorem Concerning the Decrease in Mortality from Diseases Other Than
Typhoid Fever Following the Purification of Public Water Supplies," The Journal of
Infectious Diseases 8(4) (1910), 489-564.
Szreter, Simon. "The Importance of Social Intervention in Britain'
s Mortality Decline
c.1850-1914: A Re-interpretation of the Role of Public Health," Social History of
Medicine 1(1) (1988), 1-37.

26

Troesken, Werner. "The Limits of Jim Crow: Race and the Provision of Water and
Sewerage Services in American Cities, 1880-1925," The Journal of Economic History
62(3) (2002), 734-772.
United States Bureau of the Census. General Statistics of Cities: 1915. Washington,
DC: United States Government Printing Office, 1916.
United States Bureau of the Census. Sixteenth Census of the United States, 1940.
Washington, DC: United States Government Printing Office, 1941.
United States Census Office. Tenth Census of the United States, 1880. Washington, DC:
United States Government Printing Office, 1888.
United States Census Office. Twelfth Census of the United States, 1900. Washington,
DC: United States Government Printing Office, 1902.
Viscusi, W. Kip, and Joseph E. Aldy. "The Value of a Statistical Life: A Critical Review
of Market Estimates throughout the World," NBER Working Paper #9487 (2003).
World Health Organization and United Nations Children'
s Fund. Global Water Supply
and Sanitation Assessment 2000 Report. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health
Organization, 2000.
World Health Organization. The World Health Report 2003: Shaping the Future.
Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization, 2003.
Wrigley, Edward A., and Roger S. Schofield. The Population History of England, 15411871: A Reconstruction. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989.

27

Figure 1: Cumulative Number of Cities
Adopting Technologies by Year
14

10

8

Filtration
Chlorination
Sewage Treatment
Sewage Chlorination

6

4

2

19
36

19
34

19
32

19
30

19
28

19
26

19
24

19
22

19
20

19
18

19
16

19
14

19
12

19
10

19
08

19
06

19
04

19
02

0
19
00

Number of Cities

12

Figure 2: Typhoid Fever trends and Sanitary Interventions, 1900-1936
Baltimore Typhoid Fever Mortality per 100,000
Chlorination

Filtration

45

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0
1900

1902

1904

1906

1908

1910

1912

1914

1916

1918

1920

1922

1924

1926

1928

1930

1932

1934

1936

Chicago Typhoid Fever Mortality per 100,000
Lake Michigan
sewer outfalls closed

50

Chlorination

45

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0
1900

1902

1904

1906

1908

1910

1912

1914

1916

1918

1920

1922

1924

1926

1928

1930

1932

1934

1936

Cincinnati Typhoid Fever Mortality per 100,000
Filtration

Chlorination

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0
1900

1902

1904

1906

1908

1910

1912

1914

1916

1918

1920

1922

1924

1926

1928

1930

1932

1934

1936

1932

1934

1936

Cleveland Typhoid Fever Mortality per 100,000
Extended Intake Tunnel

Chlorination

Filtration

120

100

80

60

40

20

0
1900

1902

1904

1906

1908

1910

1912

1914

1916

1918

1920

1922

1924

1926

1928

1930

Detroit Typhoid Fever Mortality per 100,000
Chlorination

35

Filtration

30

25

20

15

10

5

0
1900

1902

1904

1906

1908

1910

1912

1914

1916

1918

1920

1922

1924

1926

1928

1930

1932

1934

1936

1932

1934

1936

Jersey City Typhoid Fever Mortality per 100,000
Chlorination
25

20

15

10

5

0
1900

1902

1904

1906

1908

1910

1912

1914

1916

1918

1920

1922

1924

1926

1928

1930

Louisville Typhoid Fever Mortality per 100,000
Filtration

80

Chlorination

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0
1900

1902

1904

1906

1908

1910

1912

1914

1916

1918

1920

1922

1924

1926

1928

1930

1932

1934

1936

1932

1934

1936

Memphis Typhoid Fever Mortality per 100,000
70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0
1900

1902

1904

1906

1908

1910

1912

1914

1916

1918

1920

1922

1924

1926

1928

1930

Milwaukee Typhoid Fever Mortality per 100,000
Chlorination
50

45

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0
1900

1902

1904

1906

1908

1910

1912

1914

1916

1918

1920

1922

1924

1926

1928

1930

1932

1934

1936

1932

1934

1936

New Orleans Typhoid Fever Mortality per 100,000
Filtration

Chlorination

60

50

40

30

20

10

0
1900

1902

1904

1906

1908

1910

1912

1914

1916

1918

1920

1922

1924

1926

1928

1930

Philadelphia Typhoid Fever Mortality per 100,000
Filtration

Chlorination

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0
1900

1902

1904

1906

1908

1910

1912

1914

1916

1918

1920

1922

1924

1926

1928

1930

1932

1934

1936

1932

1934

1936

Pittsburgh Typhoid Fever Mortality per 100,000
Filtration

Chlorination

160

140

120

100

80

60

40

20

0
1900

1902

1904

1906

1908

1910

1912

1914

1916

1918

1920

1922

1924

1926

1928

1930

St. Louis Typhoid Fever Mortality per 100,000
Filtration

60

Chlorination

50

40

30

20

10

0
1900

1902

1904

1906

1908

1910

1912

1914

1916

1918

1920

1922

1924

1926

1928

1930

1932

1934

1936

Table 1: Proportion of Deaths by Cause in Major Cities
1900

1936

Major Infectious Diseases
Tuberculosis
Pneumonia
Diarrhea and Enteritis
Typhoid Fever
Meningitis
Malaria
Smallpox
Influenza

39.3%
11.1%
9.6%
7.0%
2.4%
2.4%
1.2%
0.7%
0.7%

17.9%
5.3%
9.3%
N/A
0.1%
0.3%
0.1%
0.0%
1.3%

Childhood Infectious Diseases
Measles
Scarlet Fever
Whooping Cough
Diphtheria and Croup

4.2%
0.7%
0.5%
0.6%
2.3%

0.5%
0.0%
0.1%
0.2%
0.1%

Note: All percentages are shares of total mortality
Source: United States Census Bureau’s Mortality Statistics, 1900-1936.

Table 2: The Evolution of Total, Infant, Child, and Typhoid Fever Mortality in Major Cities, 1900-1936
Deaths per 100,000
1900
1920
Mean
Std Dev
Mean
Std Dev

Mean

Total Mortality

1,935

316

1,492

222

1,354

287

Infant Mortality

18,931

2,921

11,953

1,752

7,130

2,435

Child Mortality

2,818

1,360

1,260

167

522

267

47

33

4

2

2

2

Typhoid Fever Mortality

Source: United States Census Bureau’s Mortality Statistics , 1900-1936.

1936
Std Dev

Table 3: Clean Water Intervention Dates
Water
Filtration

Water
Chlorination

Sewage
Treatment

Sewage
Chlorination

Baltimore, MD

1914

1911

1911

>1936

Chicago, IL

>1940

1916

1949

>1949

Cincinatti, OH

1907

1918

>1945

>1945

Cleveland, OH

1917

1911

1922

1922

Detroit, MI

1923

1913

1940

1940

Jersey City, NJ

1978

1908

>1945

>1945

Louisville, KY

1910

1915

1958

>1958

Memphis, TN

>1936

>1936

>1936

>1936

Milwaukee, WI

1939

1915

1925

1971

New Orleans, LA

1909

1915

>1945

>1945

Philadelphia, PA

1908

1913

>1945

>1945

Pittsburgh, PA

1908

1911

>1945

>1945

St. Louis, MO

1915

1919

>1945

>1945

Source: Water system censuses published in the Journal of the American Water Works
Association (1924 and 1932) and Water Works Engineering (1943); various articles
appearing in American City , Engineering News , Journal of the American Water Works
Association , and Water Works Engineering (available upon request)

Table 4: Summary Demographic Statistics in Major Cities, 1900 and 1940
1900

1940

Mean

Std Dev

Mean

Std Dev

Population

498,259

467,012

971,350

882,250

% Female

50.5%

1.3%

51.2%

1.1%

% Black

10.6%

14.1%

14.3%

10.8%

% Other Non-White

0.1%

0.0%

0.1%

0.0%

% Foreign Born

22.0%

10.0%

11.3%

7.1%

% Under 5

10.6%

1.0%

6.5%

0.4%

% Age 5-14

20.0%

1.1%

14.4%

0.8%

% Age 15-24

19.8%

1.0%

17.6%

1.0%

% Age 25-44

32.8%

1.4%

33.8%

1.4%

% Age 45-64

13.3%

0.9%

21.5%

1.4%

% Age 65+

3.2%

0.6%

6.3%

11.5%

Source: United States Census Office, Twelfth Census of the United States, 1900;
United States Bureau of the Census, Sixteenth Census of the United
States, 1940.

Table 5: Effect of Clean Water Technologies on Mortality
Dependent Variable (ln form)
Typhoid
Total
Infant
Child Mortality
Mortality Rate Mortality Rate Mortality Rate
Rate
Filter

-0.46**
(0.23)

-0.16***
(0.04)

-0.43***
(0.09)

-0.46***
(0.11)

Chlorinate

-0.11
(0.16)

-0.02
(0.03)

-0.08
(0.08)

-0.07
(0.10)

Chlorinate*Filter

0.32**
(0.14)

0.05**
(0.02)

0.06
(0.07)

0.03
(0.09)

ln(Population)

-0.19
(1.49)

-0.86***
(0.23)

2.78***
(0.66)

1.69**
(0.77)

Begin Chlorination w/in 5 years

0.13
(0.10)

0.02
(0.01)

-0.05
(0.06)

0.00
(0.07)

Begin Filtration w/in 5 years

0.17
(0.17)

-0.09***
(0.03)

-0.18***
(0.05)

-0.14**
(0.06)

ln(Mortality-1)

0.02
(0.03)

0.01*
(0.01)

0.04*
(0.02)

-0.02
(0.02)

ln(Mortality-2)

0.05*
(0.03)

0.02***
(0.01)

-0.01
(0.02)

-0.02
(0.02)

ln(Mortality-3)

-0.17***
(0.03)

-0.01
0.00

-0.04**
(0.02)

-0.06***
(0.02)

ln(Mortality-4)

0.06
(0.03)

-0.01*
0.00

-0.08***
(0.02)

-0.04***
(0.02)

ln(Mortality-5)

0.02
(0.03)

-0.01*
(0.01)

-0.07***
(0.02)

-0.05***
(0.02)

Joint Effect
(F-Statistic)

-0.25*
(2.55)

-0.13***
(7.75)

-0.46***
(10.31)

-0.50***
(7.97)

Total Mortality Change, 1900-1936
Share of Total Due to Clean Water

-96%
‡
26%

-30%
43%

-62%
74%

-81%
62%

411.00
0.94

415.00
0.96

415.00
0.83

415.00
0.88

N
R2

(Huber-White corrected standard errors in parentheses)
*p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01
‡

As shown in Table 9, clean water technologies explain almost all of the typhoid mortality decline
when effects are allowed to vary over time
All specifications include sewage treatment and chlorination dummies, year and city dummies,
city trends, and demographic characteristics including population share by gender, race, birth place, and age

Table 6: Other Cause-Specific Mortality Results
Filter

Chlorinate

Filter*Chlorinate

N

R2

Joint Share of Total
Mortality Decline‡‡

-0.25***
(0.08)

-0.19**
(0.08)

0.15**
(0.06)

415

0.90

9%

Influenza

0.09
(0.17)

-0.15
(0.14)

-0.03
(0.13)

415

0.93

0%

Malaria

-0.42
(0.29)

-0.35
(0.25)

0.64***
(0.22)

309‡

0.95

0%

Small Pox

2.57
(2.63)

-1.13
(2.79)

1.74
(3.30)

95‡

0.91

0%

Measles

-0.63
(0.56)

-0.11
(0.46)

-0.10
(0.33)

396‡

0.52

0%

Scarlet Fever

0.16
(0.37)

-0.24
(0.37)

-0.15
(0.29)

413

0.71

0%

Whooping Cough

-0.06
(0.29)

0.36
(0.27)

-0.42*
(0.22)

414

0.62

0%

Diphtheria

-0.64***
(0.21)

0.02
(0.19)

0.10
(0.15)

415

0.86

4%

Meningitis

-0.72***
(0.24)

0.02
(0.17)

0.00
(0.13)

415

0.89

6%

-0.09*
(0.05)

-0.08*
(0.04)

0.02
(0.03)

415

0.97

5%

Cancer/Tumor

-0.03
(0.04)

-0.01
(0.04)

-0.02
(0.03)

415

0.98

0%

Diabetes

-0.12
(0.09)

0.08
(0.08)

-0.06
(0.07)

415

0.90

0%

Dependent Variable (ln form)
Infectious Diseases:
Pneumonia

Tuberculosis
Chronic Diseases:

(Huber-White corrected standard errors in parentheses)
*p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01
‡

Small samples due to exclusion of observations with zero values; regressions using mortality and ln(mortality)
as the dependent variable yield similar results

‡‡

As determined by joint effect of filtration and chlorination and associated F-statistics

All specifications include 5 year intervention leads, sewage treatment and chlorination dummies,
year and city dummies, city trends, and demographic characteristics including population share by gender,
race, birth place, and age

Table 7: Timing of Intervention Effects

True Intervention: Time 0

Dependent Variable (ln form)
Total Mortality Rate
Typhoid Mortality Rate
Filter
Chlorinate
Filter
Chlorinate

-4

-0.05*
(0.03)

0.01
(0.02)

0.37***
(0.14)

0.07
(0.10)

-3

-0.07**
(0.03)

0.01
(0.01)

0.20
(0.14)

0.07
(0.10)

-2

-0.06**
(0.03)

0.01
(0.01)

0.08
(0.11)

-0.06
(0.09)

-1

-0.05**
(0.03)

0.01
(0.02)

-0.16
(0.12)

0.14
(0.12)

0

-0.17***
(0.04)

-0.02
(0.03)

-0.59***
(0.22)

-0.11
(0.16)

+1

-0.15***
(0.04)

-0.01
(0.03)

-0.58***
(0.21)

-0.15
(0.14)

+2

-0.13***
(0.04)

-0.01
(0.02)

-0.45**
(0.21)

-0.05
(0.15)

+3

-0.13***
(0.04)

0.01
(0.02)

-0.34
(0.21)

-0.09
(0.15)

+4

-0.12***
(0.04)

0.01
(0.03)

-0.16
(0.23)

-0.04
(0.15)

(Huber-White corrected standard errors in parentheses)
*p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01
All specifications include 5 year intervention leads, 5 year intervention lags,
sewage treatment and chlorination dummies, year and city dummies,
city trends, and demographic characteristics including population share by gender,
race, birth place, and age

Table 8: Mortality Results Over Time
Dependent Variable (ln form)
Typhoid Mortality Rate
Total Mortality Rate
Filter

-0.61***
(0.23)

-0.64
(0.21)

-0.14***
(0.03)

-0.12***
(0.04)

Filter +5

-0.48***
(0.12)

-0.50
(0.13)

-0.04*
(0.02)

-0.03
(0.02)

-0.25
(0.11)

Filter +9

0.03
(0.02)

Chlorinate

-0.11
(0.16)

-0.16
(0.16)

-0.02
(0.03)

-0.02
(0.03)

Chlorinate +5

-0.25**
(0.12)

-0.28
(0.14)

-0.05*
(0.03)

-0.05*
(0.03)

-0.24
(0.12)

Chlorinate +9

0.01
(0.02)

Chlorinate*Filter

0.47***
(0.14)

0.49
(0.14)

0.07***
(0.02)

0.07***
(0.02)

Chlorinate*Filter +5

0.08
(0.13)

0.15
(0.15)

0.08***
(0.03)

0.06**
(0.03)

0.30
(0.13)

Chlorinate*Filter +9

0.01
(0.02)

Joint Effect
(F-Statistic)

-0.26***
(5.16)

-0.31***
(5.90)

-0.09***
(6.65)

-0.08***
(5.17)

Joint Effect +5
(F-Statistic)

-0.65***
(6.95)

-0.63***
(6.32)

-0.01**
(3.09)

-0.02
(1.99)

-0.19*
(2.50)

Joint Effect +9
(F-Statistic)
N
R2

411.00
0.95

411.00
0.95

0.04
(1.25)
415.00
0.96

415.00
0.96

(Huber-White corrected standard errors in parentheses)
*p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01
All specifications include sewage treatment and chlorination dummies, year and city dummies,
city trends, and demographic characteristics including population share by gender, race, birth place, and age

Table 9: Impact of Clean Water Technologies and Initial Disease Environment on Total Mortality
Dependent Variable: ln(Total Mortality Rate)
High Infectious Disease
Filter
Filter*High Infect
Filter +5
Filter*High Infect +5

0.06

(0.23)

-0.10** (0.04)
-0.04

(0.04)

-0.01
0.00

Chlorinate +5
Chlorinate*High Infect +5

(0.04)

(0.04)

0.03

(0.04)

(0.03)

0.04

(0.05)

0.10*** (0.03)

0.06

(0.05)

(0.03)

0.01

(0.03)

-0.10** (0.05)

-0.06

(0.04)

0.00

Chlorinate*Filter+5
Chlorinate*Filter*High Infect +5

0.00

(0.03)

-0.06

(0.04)

-0.06*

(0.03)

-0.05

(0.04)

-0.02

(0.07)

-0.04

(0.07)

-0.03

(0.02)

0.11*

(0.06)

0.10*

(0.06)

0.03

(0.03)

0.06

(0.04)

0.01

(0.05)

0.09*

(0.05)

0.01

(0.05)

0.00

(0.03)

-0.02

(0.04)

0.14**

(0.07)

0.14**

(0.07)

Joint Effect

-0.04*

(2.30)

Joint Effect +5

-0.07

(1.53)

Joint Effect +9
-0.09

(1.02)

-0.03

(0.03)

-0.05*

(0.03)

-0.02

(0.06)

0.01

(0.06)

-0.06*** (4.52)

415
0.96

-0.04** (2.69)
-0.09

(0.77)

-0.06

(1.52)

-0.04*

(2.40)

-0.07

(1.77)

-0.09

(1.01)

0.13*

(2.29)

0.12*** (5.34)

Joint Effect*High Infect +9
N
R2

(0.02)

(0.04)

Chlorinate*Filter*High Infect +9

Joint Effect*High Infect +5

-0.03

0.06*

Chlorinate*Filter+9

Joint Effect*High Infect

0.03

(0.04)

-0.11** (0.05)

-0.02

Chlorinate*High Infect +9

Chlorinate*Filter*High Infect

-0.06

(0.25)

(0.04)

Chlorinate +9

Chlorinate*Filter

-0.12** (0.05)

-0.08

(0.04)

Filter*High Infect +9

Chlorinate*High Infect

(0.22)

-0.04

Filter +9

Chlorinate

0.06

0.20*** (6.90)

0.17*** (5.25)

415
0.96

415
0.96

(Huber-White corrected standard errors and F-statistics in parentheses)
*p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01
All specifications include sewage treatment and chlorination dummies, year and city dummies,
city trends, and demographic characteristics including population share by gender,
race, birth place, and age

Table 10: Clean Water Effects over Time - Hypotheses and Evidence Summary
Hypothesis:

Test 1: Lagged Time Effects

Test 2: Interactions with
Disease Environment Severity

Negative Effect
Negative Effect

Neither Positive nor Negative
Positive Effect

Negative Effect
Negative Effect

Positive Effect
Positive Effect

Positive Effect
Negative Effect

Negative Effect
Positive Effect

Positive Effect
Negative Effect

Positive Effect
Positive Effect

Learning over Time or
Delayed Impact
Prediction:
Empirical Result:
Increased Complementary
Private Health Behaviors
Prediction:
Empirical Result:
Substitution or Crowd-out of
Costly Private Prevention
Prediction:
Empirical Result:
Weak Marginal Survivors
Prediction:
Empirical Result:

Table 11: Distributional Effects of Clean Water
Dependent Variable (ln form)
Typhoid
Total
Infant
Child Mortality
Mortality Rate Mortality Rate Mortality Rate
Rate
% Illiterate

-18.24
(12.41)

1.16
(2.13)

35.85***
(7.00)

28.97***
(8.96)

Filter

-0.03
(0.43)

-0.18**
(0.08)

-0.16
(0.22)

-0.37
(0.28)

Filter*% Illiterate

-11.03
(8.24)

0.14
(1.22)

-4.84
(5.36)

-1.49
(5.53)

Chlorinate

1.13
(0.92)

-0.15
(0.13)

-0.36
(0.38)

-0.27
(0.47)

Chlorinate*% Illiterate

-29.52
(19.79)

3.14
(2.93)

6.51
(8.05)

4.00
(10.34)

Chlorinate*Filter

-0.07
(0.90)

0.32**
(0.14)

0.51
(0.37)

0.38
(0.47)

Chlorinate*Filter*% Illiterate

7.08
(19.46)

-6.67**
(3.00)

-10.37
(8.15)

-8.49
(10.27)

Joint Effect
(F-Statistic)

1.03***
(4.51)

-0.01*
(2.30)

-0.01
(0.88)

-0.26
(0.65)

-33.47***
-4.01

-3.39***
-4.20

-8.70**
-2.81

-5.98
-0.74

337
0.95

337
0.96

337
0.80

337
0.81

Joint Effect*% Illiterate
(F-Statistic)
N
R2

(Huber-White corrected standard errors and F-statistics in parentheses)
*p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01
All specifications include sewage treatment and chlorination dummies, year and city dummies,
city trends, and demographic characteristics including population share by gender,
race, birth place, and age

Table 12: Social Rate of Return Calculations
Point Estimate

95% CI Low

95% CI High

0.1326

0.0373

0.2280

208

58

357

1915 Deaths Averted

1,484

418

2,551

1915 Life Years Saved

57,922

16,301

99,543

1915 Annual Benefits in Millions of 2003 Dollars

$679

$191

$1,167

1915 Annual Costs in Millions of 2003 Dollars

$29

SOCIAL RATE OF RETURN

23:1

7:1

40:1

COST PER LIFE YEAR SAVED IN 2003 DOLLARS

$500

$1,775

$291

% Mortality Reduction Due to Clean Water
1915 Mortality Reduction per 100,000 Population

