                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                FIRM DYNAMICS, INVESTMENT, AND DEBT PORTFOLIO:
               BALANCE SHEET EFFECTS OF THE MEXICAN CRISIS OF 1994

                                             Sangeeta Pratap
                                              Carlos Urrutia

                                          Working Paper 10523
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10523


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2004




We are grateful to Beatrix Paal, Raimundo Soto, Tim Kehoe, Satyajit Chatterjee, and participants at the 2003
IASE Seminar and the 2004 Midwest Macroeconomics Meetings for helpful comments. We are also grateful
to Julio Burciaga and Jose Luis Negrin for help with the data and to Rainer Schwabe for excellent research
assistance. We acknowledge the financial help of the Interamerican Development Bank in acquiring the data.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2004 by Sangeeta Pratap and Carlos Urrutia. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Firm Dynamics, Investment, and Debt Portfolio:
Balance Sheet Effects of the Mexican Crisis of 1994
Sangeeta Pratap and Carlos Urrutia
NBER Working Paper No. 10523
May 2004
JEL No. C51, E22, E32, E5, G31
                                        ABSTRACT

We build a partial equilibrium model of firm dynamics under exchange rate uncertainty. Firms face

idiosyncratic productivity shocks and observe the current level of the real exchange rate each period.

Given their current level of capital stock, firms make their export decisions and choose how much

to invest. Investment is financed through one period loans from foreign lenders. The interest rate

charged by each lender is set to satisfy an expected zero-profit condition. The model delivers a

distribution of firms over productivity, capital stocks and debt portfolios, as well as an exit rule. We

calibrate the model using data from a panel of Mexican firms, from 1989 to 2000, and analyze the

effect of the 1994 crisis on these variables. As a result of the real exchange rate depreciation, the

model predicts: (i) an increase in the debt burden, (ii) an increase in exports, and (iii) a large decline

in investment. These real effects are consistent with the evidence for the Mexican crisis.

Sangeeta Pratap
Centro de Investigacion Economica
Instituto Tecnologico Autonomo de Mexico
Av. Camino Santa Teresa 930
10700, Mexico D.F.
Mexico
pratap@itam.mx

Carlos Urrutia
Centro de Investigacion Economica
Instituto Tecnologico Autonomo de Mexico
Av. Camino Santa Teresa 930
10700, Mexico D.F.
Mexico
currutia@itam.mx
1    Introduction
In the past decade, several Latin American and East Asian countries have undergone
currency crises that have been accompanied by substantial falls in investment and
output. For instance, Mexico experienced in December 1994 a sudden real exchange
rate depreciation of 55%. The economy-wide GDP fell by more than 6% in 1995 and
capital investment dropped by more than 29% in the same period.
    Previous quantitative structural models have explained the fall in output and
investment in terms of an exogenous drop in total factor productivity (see for example
Bergoeing et al. 2002). However, given the large change in the relative price of
domestic and foreign goods that was associated with these real eﬀects, it is reasonable
to expect that movements in the real exchange rate could have a role to play in
explaining movements in investment and output.
    The existing literature has identified two main channels through which exchange
rate depreciations may aﬀect investment. (See for example Krugman 1999). First,
depreciations increase the competitiveness of firms in export markets and lead to
higher export revenues. Second, firms that hold foreign currency denominated debt
face an increase in the value of their liabilities in domestic goods. The former eﬀect,
termed the “competitiveness eﬀect” increases profits and net worth, while the latter,
termed the “balance sheet eﬀect” reduces the net worth of firms. As the literature
on the financial accelerator (see for example Bernanke and Gertler 1989) shows, in
a world of imperfectly competitive capital markets, changes to the net worth aﬀect
firms’ access to external funds and hence do have real eﬀects. We could expect to find
a positive or a negative eﬀect of devaluation on investment and output, depending on
the relative strengths of the two eﬀects.
    In this paper, we visit the same question, namely, how do depreciations aﬀect firm
investment. We build a model in which the which we can observe balance sheet and
competitiveness eﬀects. In addition, exchange rate movements also aﬀect the cost of
credit to firms in our model through two additional (opposing) channels. The interest
rates charged to firms in foreign goods increase in the wake of a devaluation. This
eﬀect however, is mitigated by the fact that after a large depreciation, the expectation
of subsequent devaluations is substantially smaller. This reduces the value of future
expenditures (including debt repayments) in domestic goods. The net eﬀect of deval-
uations on the cost of credit then depends on which of these eﬀects dominate. We are
therefore able to examine the eﬀects of real exchange rate movements on firms’ net
worth and cost of credit in a unified framework and quantify their eﬀect on output,
investment and debt.
    The model is a partial equilibrium model of a small open economy with hetero-
geneous firms. There are two goods: a domestic and a foreign good. The relative
price of these two goods is the real exchange rate, that we assume follows an exoge-
nously given first order Markov process. Firms produce domestic output using capital
through a decreasing returns technology. Domestic output can be transformed into


                                           1
exports through a concave technology. In this way, we introduce in a simple way the
insight that firms cannot switch their production from domestic markets to exports
costlessly, due to, for example, an inelastic world demand for exports.
    Firms accumulate capital over time. However, investment can only be financed
through internal resources or by borrowing in the international capital market. Do-
mestic borrowing and equity issue are not important sources of funds for firms in
underdeveloped countries, because of participation constraints and/or high transac-
tion costs.1 Therefore, we abstract from these sources of financing. Foreign debt is
denominated in units of the foreign good. In case of default, the foreign lender seizes
the current value of firm’ resources. The interest rate is firm specific, and equal to
the exogenous risk free rate adjusted for a risk premium. Competition among lenders
drives expected profits to zero.2
    Firms are heterogenous in their productivity, capital stock, and foreign debt. In-
dividual firms’ productivity follows a first order Markov process. In the aggregate,
however, the only uncertainty is about the real exchange rate. Firms face an exoge-
nous death (turnover) probability each period which, together with firms defaulting
on their loans, generates exit in our model. Entry is exogenous, as new firms replace
those who exit. We focus on an invariant distribution of firms across states.
    To calibrate the model, we use a panel of Mexican firms participating in the
stock market, between 1989 and 1994. These firms accounted for 80% of private
borrowing before the 1994-95 crisis. In this sense, it is a special sample for which we
should expect strong eﬀects of the real exchange rate depreciation. We use individual
firm’s data on capital, sales, and exports to construct the idiosyncratic productivity
processes. We then calibrate the key parameters so that the invariant distribution
of our model replicates some aggregate moments (as capital to sales, investment to
sales, exports to sales, debt to exports ratios, and exit rate) for these firms averaging
the 1989-94 period.
    The model delivers some predictions which are supported by the data. The debt
contract implies that larger firms get better and cheaper access to foreign credit,
which was the case prior to the 1994-95 crisis. The model also predicts a positive
correlation between foreign debt and exports, and between capital and exports. At
least qualitatively, this is also what we observe in our sample of firms. The model
has also some limitations. We assume that investment and domestic output are the
same commodity, abstracting from imports of capital goods. Therefore, we omit a
potentially important channel through which a real depreciation aﬀects investment,
   1
      Dollar denominated debt as a proportion of total debt for our sample of Mexican firms has
ranged between 60% and 70% since 1993. In the same period, issuance of fresh equity for these firms
ranged between only 0.2% and 0.4% of the outstanding stock of bonds plus equity.
    2
      The model of firm dynamics that we use borrows from to Cooley and Quadrini (2001) and Pratap
and Rendon (2003). In both models firm dynamics are determined by a combination of financial
frictions and idiosyncratic productivity shocks. The present model diﬀers from these models in that
we also have an aggregate shock to exchange rates which aﬀects net worth through its eﬀect on
exports, debt liabilities and the cost of credit.


                                                2
this is, through changes in the relative price of investment.3 Unfortunately, our panel
data does not include information on imports at a firm level. Due to the same data
limitation, we do not include labor and intermediate goods in the production function.
    As an application, we use our quantitative model to analyze the eﬀects of the
1994-95 Mexican devaluation. We feed our calibrated model with the actual path
for real exchange rates between 1995-99 and analyze the response of firms to this
sequence of aggregate shocks. The results of our experiment are consistent with:
(i) an increase in the debt burden, (ii) an increase in exports, and (iii) a decline in
investment, immediately after the devaluation. In fact, we account for 85% of the
observed drop in investment in 1995 with our model. However, we are not able to
account for the sustained export boom in the second half of the 1990s, which can
probably be attributed to structural changes in the economy such as NAFTA, and
the fast recovery of investment.4
    A growing body of theoretical literature on currency crises stresses shocks to firm
balance sheets as propagation mechanisms, such as Caballero and Krishnamurthy
(2001), Aghion, Bacchetta and Banerjee (2000) and Schneider and Tornell (2001).
There is also some empirical literature on the evidence of a balance sheet eﬀect on
investment. Bleakley and Cowan (2002) find in a cross section of countries that
firms holding dollar denominated debt invest more than firms that do not, in other
words, competitiveness eﬀects outweigh the balance sheet eﬀect. The same panel
of Mexican firms participating in the stock market that we use in this paper has
been used previously to estimate balance sheet eﬀects on investment. Aguiar (2002)
looks at the immediate eﬀect of the crisis on investment and currency composition
of debt in 1995 in Mexico. He finds that investment was positively related to net
worth, which in turn was adversely aﬀected by the holding of dollar debt in this year.
Tornell, Westerman and Martinez (2004) find a positive relation between cash flow and
investment after the 1994-95 crisis, suggesting the existence of liquidity constraints.
They also report a larger decline in investment for non-tradable firms. Pratap et.
al. (2003) find that after 1994, exporters invested more than non exporters, and that
firms that held debt in dollars invested less than firms that did not hold dollar debt
from 1994 to 1996. However, to the extent that investment, export and borrowing
decisions are all made simultaneously, it is not clear that the eﬀects identified in these
papers can be considered causal.
   3
      A rough estimate using aggregate data suggests that imports account for only 30% of total
investment. Moreover, the relative price of investment increased by only 13% after the 1994-95
devaluation, compared to a 54% depreciation of the real exchange rate. This suggests that the eﬀect
of the real exchange rate depreciation on the relative price of investment is small.
    4
      Another reason why the export boom is transitory in our model is because the decision rule
for exports is static. Since firms decide period by period how to allocate production between the
domestic and the foreign market, the appreciation of the real exchange rate after 1995 implies a
sharp decline in exports. Adding a fixed cost of accessing foreign markets, or an export specific
production factor which can be accumulated over time, would allow the model to generate a more
persistent increase in exports. This is an interesting extension for future research.


                                                3
    The paper is organized as follows: The next section sets out some features of the
data that we seek to understand. Section 3 describes the model economy. In Section
4, we characterize some properties of the solution. In particular, we show how the
interest rate charged by foreign lenders depends on firm’s characteristics. In Section
5 we calibrate the model to match some features of the Mexican economy between
1989 and 1994. Section 6 shows the results of the 1994-95 devaluation experiment.
The last section concludes.


2     Data
The data used in this study consists of the balance sheets and income statements of all
firms listed in the Mexican stock market (Bolsa Mexicana de Valores or BMV). The
data is at a yearly frequency and covers the period 1989 to 2000. While the sample
is restricted to publicly traded firms and firms that issue market debt, this does not
represent a serious limitation for our study. First, this is the only data set of its kind
available in Mexico and provides detailed information on the currency composition
and maturity structure of debt. Second, while small firms that are not listed on the
stock market could be exporters, they are not likely to have access to international
capital markets. Our sample therefore, contains the firms where we are most likely
to observe balance sheet eﬀects of devaluations.
    Each firm in the sample has an identifier, which allows us to link it across time.
The panel is not balanced and we do observe entry and exit. Exit can take place if a
firm is de-listed from the stock exchange, or if it merges with another one. In either
case, the BMV removes the firm from the panel. However, we retain firms, which are
de-listed in the panel for the entire period for which data is available.
    Although the full sample includes 378 firms, only 339 firms were considered in the
empirical analysis. This follows from the following adjustments. First, we removed
firms with zero capital for one or more years. Second, we eliminated firms where the
capital stock was beyond the mean +/- 3 standard deviations for any one year.
    Table 1 presents the sectorial composition of the firms in our sample. Roughly
half the firms are from the manufacturing sector and about 10% from construction.
A third of the firms are in the service sector, which mainly comprises of trading and
retail activities. There is also a handful of firms in transport and mining. About 15%
of the firms are not classified by sector and are grouped under the category “other”.

The Pre-Crisis Scenario Table 2 shows some summary statistics from 1989 to
1994 and illustrates the properties of the sample in the years preceding the exchange
rate crisis. The real exchange rate (pesos to dollar) is a series constructed by the
Central Bank of Mexico. Firm level data is expressed in real terms, and measured in
pesos, deflated by the annual average producer price index (base year=1994) before
the ratios were constructed. Capital stock was constructed by the perpetual inventory


                                            4
method using data on yearly investment expenditures. The book value of capital stock
in the first period the firm appears was used to initialize the series. Short term debt
refers to dollar denominated debt liabilities with a maturity period of up to a year.
Total debt includes both short term and long term debt liabilities denominated in
foreign currencies. The last column of the table shows the ratio of total interest
payments to total short and long term liabilities, and is a measure of the cost of
credit.
    The real exchange rate appreciated steadily through this period as inflation in-
creased and the nominal exchange rate remained stable. From a level of about 4.6
pesos to the dollar in 1990, it moved to 3.9 pesos in 1992 and stood at a high of 3.5
pesos to the dollar in 1994 before the devaluation in December. The capital-sales was
relatively stable between 1990 and 1993 between 1.2 and 1.3, although it declined
slightly in 1994. Exports were relatively modest in this period, and accounted for
about 10% of total sales. The average investment to sales ratio in this period was
about 13 per cent, however there was a 3% increase in 1994, perhaps reflecting the
positive expectations engendered by NAFTA.
    Firms also undertook increasing amounts of debt in this period. The short term
debt to exports ratio, which measures the ratio of foreign currency denominated
outflows to inflows,5 increased dramatically through this period. From relatively
moderate values of 0.7 in 1989, short term debt increased faster than exports and was
more than 1.5 times the value of exports by 1993. Total liabilities in foreign currency
were substantially more than double the level of exports in this period. This was
paralleled by relatively low costs of credit, which are shown in the last column of
Table 2. The ratio of interest payments to total liabilities was around 10 per cent
up to 1992 and further declined to 7.6 percent by 1994. On the eve of the 1994
crisis therefore, these firms were experiencing a modest boom. Investment was rising,
financed by increasing amounts of relatively cheap dollar debt. The strong exchange
rate implied that exports accounted for a small proportion of sales and firms were
very imperfectly hedged against exchange rate risk.
    What were the characteristics of the firms that contracted these large and increas-
ing amounts of debt? Tables 3 and 4 present some joint distributions for 1989 to 1994.
Both short and long term debt were strongly correlated with the amount of capital
stock the firm owned. We also see that controlling for debt, larger firms also had
lower financing costs. Similarly, controlling for capital, debt was positively related
to financing costs. This suggests that large firms had cheaper and easier access to
credit.
    Exports and debt were also correlated positively. In fact, we see that firms that
   5
    Of course firms may have other foreign currency inflows such as income from financial assets
held abroad or other hedging devices. Information on the currency composition of financial assets is
not available from the balance sheet. We also do not have information on any other foreign currency
denominated outflows, such as imports of intermediate and capital goods. For the economy as a
whole, expenditures on imported capital goods were about 30% of total expenditure on capital goods.


                                                 5
borrowed more than the 75th percentile accounted for almost 90 per cent of exports
and 74 percent of capital stock. Firms with zero debt tended to be very small both
in terms of capital and sales. They also exported negligible amounts.6

The Eﬀects of the 1994-95 Devaluation The exchange rate devalued sharply in
December 1994. The real exchange rate of 1995 was 5.41 pesos to the dollar, almost
55 per cent higher than that of 1994, and remained well above 1994 levels up to for
the next four years. This had large eﬀects on firm behavior, as Table 5 shows. The
value of foreign currency denominated debt in domestic goods shot up, and the short
term debt to exports ratio increased from 1.5 to almost 1.8. This was accompanied
by a substantial increase in the financing costs of liabilities, from 7 to 16 percent of
the value of total liabilities, implying that even if firms had other investments for
hedging exchange rate risk, the cost of credit increased substantially. These shocks to
the balance sheet and to the cost of credit were reflected in the investment decisions
of firm. The average investment to sales ratio fell by 5 percentage points by 1995.
Exports boomed, and doubled as a proportion of sales in the immediate aftermath of
the devaluation. Despite this boom however, the debt to exports ratio declined only
to 1.2.
    By 1996, firms made some eﬀorts to align short term foreign currency denominated
debt with exports. This ratio fell marginally below 1 in 1996, for the first time since
1989. In subsequent years the amount of short term debt undertaken by firms fell
steadily till it was about 70 percent of total exports. This was accompanied by a
corresponding decline in interest payments. Investment suﬀered from this lack of
finance and did not recover till 1998.
    Table 6 presents the changes in the absolute magnitudes of capital stock, debt,
investment, exports and sales relative to 1994 values, which have been set to 100. As
was also shown in the previous table, the value of exports in real pesos doubled in
1995 and has remained at roughly that level since. Total sales in 1995 were practically
stagnant, suggesting a large decline in domestic sales. Thereafter, total sales grew
slower than exports. Domestic sales therefore, took a long time to recover. Short
term debt in real pesos increased by 33 per cent in 1995, however it subsequently fell
by about 20 percent in 1996 and a further 10 percent in the following year. Total debt
liabilities also increased by 17 percent in the immediate aftermath of the exchange
rate shock, and declined the following year.
    Average investment declined by 40 percent in 1995 and remained below 1994 levels
levels for four years. Table 7 shows how this decline in investment was distributed
among firms with varying debt to exports ratios. It is striking that the largest fall in
investment between 1989-1994 and 1995-2000 was for the firms that had low exports
and high levels of debt. These firms reduced investment by 50 per cent. For firms
with high levels of debt and exports, the fall was much more modest at about 11 per
   6
    The reverse is not however true. Firms with zero exports accounted for more than 13% of total
debt in the sample between 1989 and 1994.

                                               6
cent. It therefore seems that the fall in investment was related to the degree to which
the firm could insulate itself against exchange rate shocks.
    Finally Table 8 shows the relation between our sample and some macro aggregates.
The firms in our sample accounted for about 12 to 15% of total investment in the
economy (including government investment) in the years up to 1994. The total debt
in foreign currency contracted by the firms in our sample was more than 80 % of the
total borrowing abroad by the private sector in the years around the exchange rate
devaluation. Their exports however were just 18% of non-petroleum exports. The
balance sheet eﬀects for these firms can be expected to be more pronounced than for
the economy as a whole. In fact, the total investment in the economy declined by
29%, in 1994, however, these firms saw a substantially larger decline of about 38%,
since they were much more vulnerable to exchange rate risk.
    We therefore need to build a model which captures the properties of our data
described above. First, we need that larger firms are able to borrow more cheaply
and in bigger amounts than smaller firms. We also need a model where firms whose
exports are low relative to debt are the most vulnerable to large real depreciations.
Finally our model must also capture the fact that interest rates are an increasing
function of loan size and that devaluations increase the interest rate. In the next
section we describe our model which exhibits all these features.


3    The Model
We build a partial equilibrium model of a small open economy with heterogeneous
firms. There are two goods: a domestic and a foreign good. We denote the relative
price of foreign over domestic goods (i.e., the real exchange rate) by e. This price
is a random variable which follows a first order Markov process with support [e, e]
and conditional density dF (e0 |e). A real depreciation of the domestic currency is
equivalent to a high realization of e.
    We model the domestic production sector as a continuum of firms heterogeneous
in their level of capital K, their productivity, and their outstanding foreign debt B.
We assume that firms face idiosyncratic productivity shocks θ each period, which
also follow a first order Markov process with support [θ, θ] and conditional density
dP (θ0 |θ).

Production and Exports At the beginning of each period, the real exchange rate
e and the idiosyncratic shock θ are realized. Given these realizations and the current
values of K firms produce θf (K) units of domestic good, where f is a concave
production function. Firms also choose the fraction of their output x devoted to
exports given a concave technology to produce the foreign good out of the domestic




                                          7
good ηg [xθf (k)], where η is a firm-specific export-type 7 . The export decision is
static and independent of capital accumulation and its financing. The value of a
firm’s production in domestic goods (or total value of sales) is given by

                   Y (K, e, θ, η) ≡ max {eηg [xθf (K)] + (1 − x) θf (K)}                                   (1)
                                        x∈[0,1]

   The dynamics of the firm is governed by the investment decision and its financing.
Given their capital K, outstanding foreign debt B, the real exchange rate e and the
current productivity θ, firms choose their level of investment I, given the law of
motion for firm’s capital K 0 = (1 − δ) K + I and a depreciation rate δ. Investment
must be financed out of firms current resources (or net worth)

                    W (K, RB, e, θ, η) ≡ Y (K, e, θ, η) + (1 − δ) K − eRB

and new foreign borrowing B 0 , subject to the non negative dividend constraint:

                       Y (K, e, θ, η) + (1 − δ) K − eRB + eB 0 − K 0 ≥ 0                                   (2)

where R is the gross, firm specific interest rate measured in foreign goods.

Interest Rate on Loans The interest rates of loans are set before uncertainty at
the period of repayment is realized. In case of default, foreign lenders have the right
to seize all the firms resources and the firm must exit. Foreign lenders have access
to an international credit market, with a risk-free interest rate ρ given. Competition
among lenders ensures that the firm specific interest rate would be equal to the risk
free rate, adjusted for a risk premium, so as to satisfy a expected zero profit condition.
    Consider the problem of the representative foreign lender. A loan of size B 0 will
be repaid only if W (K 0 , R0 B 0 , e0 , θ0 , η 0 ) ≥ 0, that is, if the value of the firm’s net worth
tomorrow is non-negative. Otherwise, the firm is liquidated and the foreign lender
seizes the value of firm’s collateral

                             Π (K, e, θ, η) ≡ Y (K, e, θ, η) + (1 − δ) K

measured in units of domestic output. For simplicity, we rule out the possibility of
renegotiating loans, i.e., the possibility to pay back current debt with new borrowing.
                                                                                      0
   Competitive lending implies that the interest rate in foreign goods R must satisfy
the following zero-profit condition
                         Z
                             Π (K 0 , e0 , θ0 , η)
                  0 0
              πR B +                   0
                                                   dP (θ0 |θ) dF (e0 |e) = (1 + ρ)B 0   (3)
                           Ω         e
   7
     To have a well defined problem, we impose the following conditions on the production function f :
(i) f (0) = 0; (ii) f strictly increasing; (iii) f strictly concave, and (iv) f satisfies the Inada conditions:
limK→0 f 0 (K) = +∞ and limK→+∞ f 0 (K) = 0. Similarly, we assume: (i) g (0) = 0; (ii) g strictly
increasing; (iii) g strictly concave, and (iv) g satisfies the Inada conditions: limy→0 g 0 (y) = +∞ and
limy→+∞ g 0 (y) = 0.

                                                      8
where π ≡ Pr [Π (K 0 , e0 , θ0 , η) ≥ e0 R0 B 0 ] is the probability of repayment and Ω ≡
{e0 , θ0 | Π (K 0 , e0 , θ0 , η) < e0 R0 B 0 }. This condition implicitly defines a firm specific
interest rate R0 (K 0 , B 0 , e, θ, η) as a function of the firm’s type, the real exchange rate,
the size of the loan and the amount of capital accumulated for next period.

Bellman Equation for the Firm Let ρd be the domestic interest rate used by
firms to discount profits, and λ an exogenous death (or turnover) probability. Define
also the indicator function
                                       ½
                                         1, if Π (K, e, θ, η) ≥ eRB
                  Υ (K, RB, e, θ, η) =
                                         0, otherwise
which takes the value 1 whenever the firm is in a state in which the debt is repaid.
The firm’s dynamic optimization problem can now be written in recursive form as
         Vη (K, RB, e, θ) = max
                             0 0
                                 {Y (K, e, θ, η) + (1 − δ) K − eRB + eB 0 − K 0
                                    {K ,B }


     µ         ¶ Z ē Z                                                                                         )
                          θ
    1−λ
  +                           Υ (K 0 , R0 B 0 , e0 , θ0 , η) Vη (K 0 , R0 B 0 , e0 , θ0 ) dP (θ0 | θ) dF (e0 | e)
    1 + ρd        e   θ



                                                                                          0
subject to the conditions (1), (2), and (3). We also require B ≥ 0, i.e., the firm
cannot accumulate resources other than capital stock.

Aggregate Dynamics Each period, a fraction λ of firms exit the economy, together
with firms which default on their loans. We assume that these firms are replaced next
period by a similar mass of firms with: (i) the minimum level of capital, (ii) a level
of debt equal to a fixed cost of entry φ, (iii) a random productivity draw, and (iv)
same export-type.
     Let the measure µ (K, RB, θ, η) to represent the distribution of firms in the econ-
omy, so that the aggregate state for the economy is (µ, e). Given a current value for
the real exchange rate e, the distribution of firms µ evolves according to the operator
Te , defined as µ0 ≡ Te µ where
                                              µ0 (K 0 , R0 B 0 , θ0 , η) =

                              Z
                (1 − λ)             {P (θ0 | θ) Υ (K, RB, e, θ, η)} dµ (K, RB, θ, η)
                               Θe

using Υ as the indicator function defined above and
                          ½           ¯ 0                       ¾
                                      ¯ K (K, B, e, θ, η) = K 0
                                      ¯
                    Θe = K, B, θ, η ¯ 0
                                        B (K, B, e, θ, η) = B 0

                                                           9
The entry/exit rule implies

                                        µ0 (Kmin , eφ, θ0 , η) =

    Z
         {P (θ0 | θ) [λΥ (K, RB, e, θ, η) + (1 − Υ (K, RB, e, θ, η))]} dµ (K, RB, θ, η)
    Θe
                                       R
By construction, it is the case that K,RB,θ,η dµ (K, RB, θ, η) = 1, so µ is indeed a
probability distribution function.
    The distribution of firms allow us to compute aggregate statistics for the economy,
given a real exchange rate e. For instance, aggregate output (or total value of sales)
is given by
                               Z
                   Ȳ (µ, e) =          Y (K, e, θ, η) dµ (K, RB, θ, η)
                                      K,RB,θ,η

investment, by
                          Z
            I¯ (µ, e) =              [K 0 (K, B, e, θ, η) − (1 − δ) K] dµ (K, RB, θ, η)
                          K,RB,θ,η

and exports, in units of domestic output,by
                         Z
           X̄ (µ, e) = e         ηg [x (K, e, θ, η) θf (K)] dµ (K, RB, θ, η)
                               K,RB,θ,η

    An invariant distribution for a constant real exchange rate e is a distribution of
firms µ∗ satisfying µ∗ = Te µ∗ . In our benchmark economy, we focus on an invariant
distribution in which e takes its mean value. This is, we look for the asymptotic
distribution of firms shutting down the aggregate uncertainty in the economy.


4       Characterizing Optimal Firm’s Decisions
We begin our analysis characterizing some properties of the firm’s optimal decisions
and the interest rates for loans. We explain these properties intuitively in the text
and present a series of formal propositions with proofs in the Appendix.

4.1      The Export Decision and Firm’s Collateral
The firm faces an export decision, i.e., has to decide the fraction of output x devoted
to the export market. This decision is static, since output is determined . The optimal
export decision can be represented by a function x (K, e, θ, η) ∈ [0, 1].
    The optimal choice of x can be understood from Figure 1, which shows the trade
oﬀ between domestic and export production. Given K, θ and η, domestic goods can

                                                  10
be transformed into exports through the concave technology g (.) . A unit decline in
domestic output increases export output by ηg 0 (xθf (K)) For an interior solution,
the relative price line, with slope 1/e, must be tangent to this production possibility
frontier, i.e.
                                   1
                                     = ηg 0 (xθf (K))
                                   e
The solution to this equation gives us x (K, e, θ, η) . As e increases, exports become
more profitable and x increases. It is also easy to see that given θ, K and e, a firm with
a higher η will export a higher share of its output compared to a firm with a lower η.
For the tangency condition to hold, a higher η will require a lower g 0 (xθf (K)) which
can only be achieved with a higher x, given the concavity of g (xθf (K)) . Similarly
an increase in K will increase domestic production more than it will increase exports,
since domestic goods require a transformation of capital through the function f (.)
whereas the production of exports necessitates a transformation of capital through
f (.) and g (.) . Hence an increase in K will reduce the share of exports in total
production. A similar argument implies that, given η, higher θ firms will export a
smaller share of their output.
    Replacing the optimal export decision in the definition of firm´s total resources
today we obtain the indirect function

  Π (K, e, θ, η) ≡ eηg [x (K, e, θ, η) θf (K)] + (1 − x (K, e, θ, η)) θf (K) + (1 − δ) K


which represents the current value of firm´s collateral in units of domestic output.
This collateral function is increasing in K and θ. It is also increasing in e and in
the firm’s export productivity η. These results are all proved in Proposition 2 in the
appendix.
   Π (K, e, θ, η) /e represents the value of firm’s collateral in units of foreign output
and can be written as
  Π (K, e, θ, η)                                                     θf (K) (1 − δ) K
                 ≡ ηg [x (K, e, θ, η) θf (K)] + (1 − x (K, e, θ, η))       +
       e                                                                e       e


As e increases, we know that exports increase and domestic production declines. How-
ever, we saw earlier, that the increase in exports is less than the decline in domestic
production, given the concave export technology g (.), so that Π (K, e, θ, η) /e is de-
clining in e. This is an important feature of our model since the value of resources
in foreign goods is collateral for borrowing. A depreciation in the real exchange rate
reduces the value of this collateral and reduces the capacity of firms to borrow. Given
the financial market imperfections, this has real eﬀects on investment.



                                           11
4.2     The Equilibrium Interest Rate
Consider a representative foreign intermediary lending B 0 units of foreign output at
an interest rate R0 to a firm with productivity θ and export-type η. The proba-
bility of repayment π is defined as π ≡ Pr [Π (K 0 , e0 , θ0 , η) ≥ e0 R0 B 0 ] where e0 and
θ0 are the realizations of the real exchange rate and the productivity shock tomor-
row and K 0 is the firm´s capital tomorrow. K 0 of course is the result of an op-
timal decision rule implemented today as a function of the state (K, RB, e, θ, η),
which we take for now as given. We also define the conditional probability π θ0 ≡
                                                                 R θ̄
Pr [Π (K 0 , e0 , θ0 , η) ≥ e0 R0 B 0 | θ0 ], such that π = θ πθ0 dP (θ0 | θ).
    The probability of repayment depends on the interest rate charged by the foreign
lender, the optimal decisions K 0 , B 0 , and the realizations of e0 and θ0 . For this, let us
define the cut-oﬀ value ê (K 0 , R0 , B 0 , θ0 , η) by
                                          
                                           e, if Π (K 0 , e, θ0 , η) ≥ eR0 B 0
          ê (K 0 , R0 , B 0 , θ0 , η) ≡       e, if Π (K 0 , e, θ0 , η) ≤ eR0 B 0
                                           0
                                               {e | Π (K 0 , e0 , θ0 , η) = e0 R0 B 0 } , otherwise
The cut-oﬀ level ê represents the maximum real exchange level for which the firm
can honor the foreign debt contract. This level depends on the firm capital, debt,
and productivity tomorrow. Above this level, the firm defaults and the foreign lender
seizes all current collateral.
    The probability of repayment, conditional on firm´s productivity tomorrow, is
given by
                                 
                                  1, if b
                                         e=e
                          π θ0 =   0, if b
                                         e=e
                                 
                                   F ( ê| e) ∈ (0, 1) , otherwise

We can restate now the zero profit condition for the foreign lender (3) as

                                         Γ (K 0 , R0 , B 0 , e, θ, η) ≡

       Z θ̄ ½           Z                                           ¾
                                e
                                    Π (K 0 , e0 , θ0 , η)
                   0 0
             π θ0 R B +                                   dF (e | e) dP (θ0 | θ) − (1 + ρ)B 0 = 0
                                                               0
                                                                                                    (4)
         θ                 eb               e0

noting that both π θ0 and b e are functions of K 0 , θ0 , R0 , B 0 , and e. This condition
implicitly defines R0 as a function of K 0 , B 0 , e, θ, and η.
   Firms with higher capital stock tomorrow will obtain loans at a lower interest
rate. The intuition for this is simple: A higher value of K 0 will imply that the firm
has higher collateral tomorrow. Hence the cut oﬀ value of e0 up to which it is able
to pay its loans is higher, and the probability of default is lower, all other things
remaining constant. Similarly, a high value of η, by increasing the value of collateral
and reducing the risk of default, implies a lower interest rate.

                                                      12
     We can also show that for a given level of K 0 , the interest rate is increasing in B 0 .
A higher B 0 , all other things constant, will imply that the largest realization of the
exchange rate eb at which the firm is able to pay its debt, is lower. This increases the
probability of default and the lender charges a higher premium over the interest rate.
Proposition 5 in the appendix formalizes these arguments.
     The eﬀect of the current interest rate e on the interest rate works in two ways.
Given K 0 and B 0 (which are themselves functions of e),8 a high value of e today implies
that the value of e0 tomorrow will also be high, given the persistence of the process
for the exchange rate. This will reduce the expected value of collateral tomorrow
and therefore raise the probability of default. Second, a high value of e will shift the
density f (e0 |e) to the right. For inverted U shaped densities (including the normal
and the log normal), this will increase the density for high realizations of e0 and reduce
it for low realizations of e0 .This implies that the probability of e0 being below a cutoﬀ b
                                                                                           e
is reduced, i.e there is a smaller probability of repayment. In Proposition 6 we provide
conditions under which a depreciation of the real exchange rate increases/decreases
the interest rate.

4.3     Net Worth and Cost of Capital Eﬀects
We now summarize the results obtained so far, focusing on the diﬀerent eﬀects of a
real depreciation aﬀecting investment decisions. We divide these eﬀects in two groups:
net worth and cost of credit eﬀects.

Net Worth Eﬀects Firms’ net worth is defined as total assets minus liabilities. In
a given period, this is

                  W (K, RB, e, θ, η) ≡ Y (K, e, θ, η) + (1 − δ) K − eRB

From this definition, it is clear that the real exchange rate aﬀects firms’ net worth
through two opposite channels. As we have seen earlier, a real depreciation (e ↑)
increases exports, and hence Π (K, e, θ, η) and net worth. We call this the competi-
tiveness eﬀect. On the other hand, the depreciation increases the burden of foreign
debt in units of domestic output (eRB), for a given interest rate decided in the pre-
vious period, reducing net worth. This is the balance sheet eﬀect which has been
stressed in the literature.
    Since net worth determines the internal resources available to a firm, the impact
of a depreciation on investment depends (everything else equal) on the relative im-
portance of these two eﬀects. A strong competitiveness eﬀect would imply a positive
relation between the real exchange rate and investment, while a strong balance sheet
eﬀect would have the opposite implication.
   8
    In this sense we are concerned with the direct eﬀect of e on the interest rate, not the indirect
eﬀects through changes in K 0 and B 0 .


                                                13
    The relative strengths of these two eﬀects are illustrated in Figure 2. The solid
line shows Π (K, e, θ, η) as a function of e and the various dashed lines denote diﬀer-
ent levels of eRB. The solid line is convex in e until the point x = 1. The intuition
for this is the same as the intuition for the convexity of a profit function in prices.
As e increases, if the firm does not change its export decision, x, Π (K, e, θ, η) would
increase linearly. However, since the firm will re-optimize its export decision follow-
ing a change in e, the increase in Π (K, e, θ, η) is larger, leading to the convex shape
that we observe. When e is high enough and x = 1, the firm cannot increase ex-
ports any more, and the value of its resources can only increase linearly with further
increases in e. The net eﬀects of devaluation depend on the relative magnitudes of
Π (K, e, θ, η) + (1 − δ) K and eRB. For highly indebted firms, the balance sheet ef-
fect always dominates, whereas for firms with low debt, the competitiveness eﬀect
is stronger. For firms with debt levels between these two extremes, the eﬀect of de-
valuations depends on their magnitude. Moderate devaluations increase the value
of resources, but very small or very large devaluations have a negative eﬀect on net
worth.

Cost of Credit Eﬀects Firms finance their investment through their internal re-
sources and borrowing abroad. Consider a firm borrowing B 0 units of the foreign
good today. This operation provides the firm with eB 0 units of domestic output,
which can be devoted to investment in capital goods. Tomorrow, the firm expects to
repay E [e0 ] R0 B 0 units of domestic output. The expected cost of this operation for
the firm is
                                                 · 0¸
                                          0       e
                                   κ (e, R ) ≡ E      R0
                                                  e
          £ 0¤
where E ee is the expected devaluation rate. The cost of credit κ (e, R0 ) is aﬀected
by the real exchange rate through its eﬀect on (i) the expected devaluation, and
(ii) the interest rate in foreign goods. With a mean reverting process for e, a high
realization today implies a low expected devaluation rate. Hence, a real depreciation
decreases the cost of credit through this channel (Fisher eﬀect). On the other hand,
Proposition 6(i) in the appendix states conditions under which a high realization of e
increases the interest rate in foreign goods, increasing the cost of credit (interest rate
eﬀect).9
    Again, the impact of a depreciation on the cost of credit and investment depends
on the relative importance of these two eﬀects. Keeping net worth fixed, a higher
cost of credit (due to a strong interest rate eﬀect) decreases investment, while a lower
cost of credit (due to a strong Fisher eﬀect) increases it.
   9
    As discussed in the introduction, we abstract from changes in the relative price of investment,
which also aﬀects the cost of credit faced by firms.




                                                14
5      A Quantitative Model Economy
We calibrate the model in order to match some statistics from our sample of Mexican
firms. For this, we make a strong assumption about stationarity, that is, we try to
reproduce the properties of the 1989-94 panel of firms as if this panel was extracted
from the invariant distribution of our model. As seen in Table 2, some key ratios
remained relatively constant during the pre-devaluation period. However, the 1989-
94 featured an appreciation of the real exchange rate, which is inconsistent with our
stationarity assumption. We see this exercise as a first step in order to assess the
eﬀects of the 1994-95 devaluation.

5.1     Calibration Strategy
The main parameters of the model to be calibrated are α, the technology parameter,
ξ, the parameter for the transformation of domestic output into foreign output, δ,
the depreciation rate of capital, ρd , the domestic interest rate (or firm’s discount
factor), ρ, the risk free rate abroad, φ, the fixed cost of entry, and λ, the exogenous
turnover probability. In addition, we need to calibrate the process for θ, the firm
specific technology shock, the process for e, the exchange rate, and η which is the
idiosyncratic export-type of firms.
    We choose an international risk free rate of 5%, consistent with the average post-
war US treasury bills rate, and a domestic interest rate of 13%, equal to the average
real return of Mexican treasury bonds (CETES) in the 1989-94 period. Given our
partial equilibrium setup, the stochastic process for the real exchange rate is also
calibrated outside the model. We restrict this process to follow the AR(1) process in
logs

                                 log et+1 = µ̄ + γ log et + εt+1

where εt is a white noise with variance σ 2ε . Using annual data on the real exchange
rate for Mexico between 1989-2002, we estimate µ̄ = 0.35, γ = 0.72, and σ ε = 0.145.
We then transformed it into a first order discrete Markov process using the Tauchen
(1986) procedure, with a grid of 7 possible realization values.10
   The calibration strategy for the remaining parameters implies a complicated fixed
point problem. First, given initial values for α and ξ, we estimate the process for θ
and η using our sample of firms (the details are explained next). Second, given these
processes, we choose the values of α, ξ, δ, φ and λ so that the invariant distribution
reproduces the 1989-94 averages of the capital to sales ratio, the investment to sales
  10
    We use a CPI-based measure of the real multilateral (111 countries) exchange rate for Mexico.
As a robustness check, we estimate the stochastic process for log et using a PPI-based real exchange
rate for Mexico, which is only reported as a bilateral exchange rate with respect to the US. The
resulting process features slightly less persistence and variabilty than using our original measure.
However, the results of the numerical experiment do not change significantly.


                                                15
ratio, the exports to sales ratio, the foreign debt to exports ratio, and the exit rate
observed in our sample of firms 11 . If the initial values of α and ξ are diﬀerent form
those obtained at the second stage, we update them and start again.

5.2     The Stochastic Process for Productivity and Export-types
Our panel of firms provides the data for the capital to sales and exports to sale
ratios, as well as the capital stock, for each firm and year between 1989-94. Given the
(initial) values of α and ξ, and the real exchange rate for each year, we estimate the
parameters θit and η it , for each firm in each year solving simultaneously the system
of equations
                            Capital              K
                                    =          ξ
                             Sales    eη (xθK ) + (1 − x)θK α
                                             α


and

                            Exports          eη (xθK α )ξ
                                    =
                             Sales    eη (xθK α )ξ + (1 − x)θK α

where
                                        Ã         Ã           1
                                                                  !!
                                               (eηξ) 1−ξ
                             x = max 0, min 1,
                                                 θK α

is the optimal exports decision in the theoretical model.
    Next, we take average values for θ and η for each firm across the period 1989-94,
and discretize these values into an equally log-spaced 5 point grid. The transition
matrix for θ is calculated using the empirical distribution of the estimated values of
θ. In other words we counted the relative frequency of particular pair of (θ, θ0 ) in two
consecutive time periods, for all 25 possible combinations of (θ, θ0 ) and for all time
periods.

5.3     Calibration Targets
Given the stochastic processes, we choose the values of α, ξ, δ, φ and λ so that the
invariant distribution reproduces some 1989-94 statistics. To construct this invariant
distribution, we solve the model by value function iteration. The steps are:
  11
     These ratios are reported in Table 2 and discussed in the data section. Notice that, since debt
in the data is reported at the end of the period, the calibration target consistent with our model
is the average debt to exports ratio up to 1993 (or beginning of 1994), which is only 2.19. With
respect to the exit rate, we compute the fraction of firms which exit our sample of firms between
1989-94, which is roughly 11%. We are aware that this measure of turnover is problematic, since
firms de-listed form the stock market might still be active.

                                                16
   1. For each value of (K 0 , B 0 , e, θ, η) in the grids, we solve for the interest rate R0
      which satisfies the zero-profit condition for foreign lenders.

   2. Given R0 , we solve the dynamic programming problem at each point in the grid
      for (K, RB, e, θ, η) using value function iteration. This gives us the policy rules
      K 0 and B 0 .

   3. Given these policy rules and the transition function for the distribution µ, we
      fix the real exchange rate e to its average level and iterate until obtaining an
      invariant distribution µ∗ (e).

    Table 9 presents the results of the exercise. We obtain a value for the capital share
in the production function of 0.36, which is close to the standard value obtained
form calibration exercises using aggregate production functions (see, for instance,
Bergoeing et. al., (2002)). We also obtain a depreciation rate of 11%, which is
similar to the depreciation rate constructed using estimates of capital stocks and
depreciation for a sample of Mexican firms, mostly manufacturing.12 The implied
                                                                  1
value for the elasticity of exports to the real exchange rate ( 1−ξ  ) is about 2.5. We
don’t have independent estimates for this elasticity, although we believe our number
is not unreasonable. Finally, we obtain a fixed cost of 55 and an exogenous turnover
probability of 6%, from which we do not have independent estimates either. Under
this parametrization, the benchmark economy reproduces fairly well the statistics
observed in the 1989-94 data. If anything, we slightly underpredict the amount of
foreign debt in the model.

5.4     Other Statistics
In Table 10, we compare some additional properties of the invariant distribution of
firms generated by the model to the 1989-94 data. In our benchmark economy capital,
debt, exports and productivity (θ) are all positively correlated, which is also true in
the data. However, we generate a smaller correlation between debt and capital than
the one observed. This is because our exogenous exit rate dilutes these correlations by
adding a mass of firms with low capital and moderate debt. On the other hand, the
correlation between capital and productivity is too high, since the optimal amount of
capital to which firms converge is closely related to the productivity shock. Finally,
the correlation between capital and exports, and debt and exports, is also too low in
the model. This is probably coming out of our assumption of stationarity of the real
exchange rate in the pre-devaluation period.
  12
    The data was obtained from the Survey of Stocks, Capital Formation, and Productivity, con-
ducted by Banco de Mexico. This survey includes 934 firms, from which 726 belong to the manu-
facturing sector. The ratio of total depreciation and total net capital stock for the firms surveyed
ranges from 11% to 12% between 1989 and 2000.



                                                17
    Table 10 also compares the average characteristics of firms which exit in the model
and in the data (i.e., firms delisted from our sample), relative to the total number
of firms. As in the data, firms which exit in our model are on average small and
have lower debt. Contrary to the data, however, low productivity firms exit in our
model, following a standard selection argument. We are surprised not to observe such
selection in the data. Exporters are also less likely to exit in the data than in the
model.
    Summarizing, the calibration exercise provides us with a quantitative model that
reproduces some important features of the 1989-94 Mexican economy, or at least of
the sample of firms that we are using. A richer model will be necessary to fully
reproduce the statistical properties of the panel of firms.


6      Experiment: The 1994-95 Devaluation
Using our calibrated model, we perform the following experiment. Starting from
the invariant distribution, which was assumed to represent the pre-1995 economy,
we simulate the evolution of the economy from 1995-99 feeding the model with the
observed path for the real exchange rate. This is, we start with a large depreciation
of the real exchange rate followed by a progressive appreciation. Given the optimal
decision rules for firm, we compute new distributions for each year, as well as aggregate
statistics.

6.1     Results
Short run Eﬀects Table 11 reports the aggregate levels of investment, sales, ex-
ports an foreign debt generated by the model for 1995 (normalizing their 1989-94
levels to 100) and compares them to the data 13 . All magnitudes are computed in
units of domestic output. We reproduce fairly well the export boom and the increase
in the burden of foreign debt, which gives us some confidence to assess the compet-
itiveness and balance sheet eﬀects on investment. The model predicts an immediate
fall on investment of 21%, short of the 24% drop observed in the 1995 data compared
to the averages of 1989-94.
    We conclude that the drop of investment in the model is largely due to a strong
balance sheet eﬀect, as the debt burden (in domestic units) increases after the real
depreciation, both in the data and in our model. This eﬀect dominates the competi-
tiveness eﬀect of the increase in exports, so that firms net worth decreases and, given
capital market imperfections, they have to adjust decreasing investment expenditures.
  13
    Notice that we are not using as a starting point for this comparison the actual values in the
data for 1994. Given the characteristics of the experiment, we prefer to interpret the pre-devaluation
situation as described by the averages of 1989-94 variables in the data, and compare the evolution
of the relevant variables after the devaluation to these initial averages.



                                                 18
Our explanation is able to account for about 85% of the drop in investment in the
short run.

Medium run Eﬀects In the medium run, the time series obtained using the bench-
mark model for 1995-98 are plotted in Figure 3, which also shows the evolution of
the corresponding variables in the data. A simple inspection shows that the model
cannot account for the sustained high levels of exports between 1996-98, when the
real exchange rate appreciates, nor for the increase in domestic sales. The positive
net worth eﬀects generated by these two eﬀects are consistent with a rapid recovery
and further increase of investment in the data, which does not occur in the model.
    We think that to some extent (from which we do not have a quantitative as-
sessment, unfortunately) the actual 1995-98 path of the Mexican economy cannot
be attributed to a recovery from the devaluation shock, only. This period featured
other important shocks as well, as some structural reforms were implemented. One of
such structural changes is the opening of the US market to Mexican imports through
NAFTA, which might be responsible for the sustained export boom even after an
important appreciation of the real exchange rate after 1995. Since our experiment
only captures the impulse response function of the model to one large real exchange
rate increase, abstracting from other shocks to the economy, we are unable to account
for the path of investment in the years after the crisis.


7    Conclusions
We have built a model in which movements of the real exchange rate have important
eﬀects on firms’ dynamics, productivity, and investment. The key channels seem to
be the competitiveness eﬀect, aﬀecting exports, and the balance sheet eﬀect, aﬀecting
foreign debt burden. We use the model to analyze the eﬀects of the 1994-95 Mexican
devaluation and obtain consistent results in terms of: (i) an increase in the debt
burden, (ii) an increase in exports, and (iii) a decline in investment, immediately
after the devaluation.
    The experiment, however, has some shortcomings, especially in its ability to pre-
dict the medium term eﬀects of the devaluation. First, we do not account for the
sustained export boom in Mexico following the 1995 crisis, which are likely to be a
by-product of structural reforms (as NAFTA). This boom had echoes in investment
and sales in the economy, which are also underpredicted by our model. Including
these reforms in the analysis is an interesting topic for future research.




                                         19
References
 [1] Aguiar, M. (2002). “Devaluation, Foreign Currency Exposure and Investment:
     The Case of Mexico,” mimeo, University of Chicago.

 [2] Aghion, P., Bacchetta P., and Banerjee, A., (2000) “A Simple Model of Monetary
     Policy and Currency Crises”, European Economic Review, 44, pp. 728-738.

 [3] Bergoeing, R., Kehoe, P., Kehoe, T., Soto, R. (2002) ”Decades Lost and Found:
     Mexico and Chile Since 1980”. Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly
     Review, Winter.

 [4] Bleakley, H. and Cowan, K. (2002). “Corporate Dollar Debt and Devaluations:
     Much Ado About Nothing,” mimeo, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

 [5] Bernanke, B. and Gertler, M. (1989). “Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business
     Fluctuations,” American Economic Review 79, 14-31.

 [6] Caballero, R. and Krishnamurthy A. (2001). “International and Domestic Col-
     lateral Constraints in a Model of Emerging Market Crises,” Journal of Monetary
     Economics, 48(3), 513-548.

 [7] Cooley, T.F. and Quadrini, V. (2001). “Financial Markets and Firm Dynamics,”
     American Economic Review 91, 1286-1310.

 [8] Krugman, P. (1999). “Balance Sheets, The Transfer Problem and Financial Cri-
     sis” in P. Isard, A. Razin, and A. Rose eds. International Finance and Financial
     Crises, Essays in Honor of Robert P. Flood, Bosoton, Kluwer Academic.

 [9] Pratap, S., Lobato I.N., and Somuano, A. (2003). “Debt Composition and Bal-
     ance Sheet Eﬀects of Exchange Rate Volatility in Mexico: A Firm Level Analy-
     sis”, Emerging Markets Review, 450-471.

[10] Pratap, S and Rendon, S. (2003). “Firm Investment in Imperfect Capital Mar-
     kets: A Structural Estimation,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 513-545.

[11] Schneider, M., and A. Tornell (2001). ”Balance Sheet Eﬀects, Bailout Guaran-
     tees, and Financial Crisis”. Forthcoming in Review of Economic Studies.

[12] Tauchen„ G.. (1986). “Finite State Markov Chain Approximations to Univariate
     and Vector Autoregressions”. Economic Letters, 20, 177-181.

[13] Tornell, A., Westerman, F., and L. Martinez (2004). “NAFTA and Mexico’s Less
     than Stellar Performance”. NBER Working Paper No. 10289.




                                         20
A      Appendix
Proposition 1 The optimal export decision can be represented by a function x (K, e, θ, η).
Moreover,        n       n       ³ ´              oo
  (i) x = max 0, min (g 0 )−1 ηe   1
                                       /θf (K) , 1 ;
  (ii) x is strictly decreasing in K and θ, if x < 1;
  (iii) x is strictly increasing in η and e, if x < 1; and
  (iv) lime→0 x (K, e, θ, η) = 0 and lime→+∞ x (K, e, θ, η) = 1.
     Proof. The first order condition for an interior solution   ³ to´ the maximization
               0                                            0 −1  1
in (1) is eηg (xθf (K)) = 1, implicitly defining x = (g )         ηe
                                                                       /θf (K). Since g
is strictly increasing, this interior solution always satisfies the non-negativity con-
straint
      n on x. ³ To  ´ ensure that
                                o the upper bound on x is satisfied, we impose x =
         0 −1    1
min (g )         ηe
                     /θf (K) , 1 , which gives us (i). Next, it is clear that the inte-
                       ³ ´
rior solution (g0 )−1 ηe 1
                           /θf (K) is strictly decreasing in K and θ, as stated in (ii).
Since g is strictly concave, it is also strictly increasing in η and e,³ which ´   proves
                                                                      0 −1  1
(iii). Finally, the Inada conditions on g imply that lime→0 (g )            ηe
                                                                                 = 0 and
                   ³ ´
lime→+∞ (g0 )−1 ηe   1
                        = +∞. The limits in (iv) are then immediate from (i).

Proposition 2 The collateral function Π (K, e, θ, η):
  (i) is strictly increasing in K and θ,
  (ii) is strictly increasing in η and e. Moreover,
  (iii) Π (K, e, θ, η) /e is strictly decreasing in e; and
  (iv) lime→0 Π (K, e, θ, η) /e = +∞ and lime→+∞ Π (K, e, θ, η) /e = ηg [θf (K)].
    Proof. Using Proposition 1(i), we can write
        Π = eηg [x (K, e, θ, η) θf (K)] + (1 − x (K, e, θ, η)) θf (K) + (1 − δ) K
                           n        ³ ´             o
with x (K, e, θ, η) = min (g0 )−1 ηe 1
                                         /θf (K) , 1 . To prove (i), (ii) and (iii), we
analyze separately the cases in which the export decision is interior and the corner
solution x = 1. First, consider the case in which x < 1, then
                     ·        µ ¶¸              µ ¶
                         0 −1    1         0 −1  1
            Π = eηg (g )             − (g )           + θf (K) + (1 − δ) K.
                                ηe               ηe
so (i) is immediate. To show (ii), we compute
                                            ³ ´
                   ·        µ ¶¸ ∂ (g 0 )−1 1           ·       µ ¶¸             ¡ ¢
    ∂Π           0     0 −1    1             ηe            0 −1   1    ∂ (g 0 )−1 1e
           = eηg (g )                             + ηg (g )          −
     ∂e                       ηe         ∂e                      ηe           ∂e
                ·         µ ¶¸
                      −1     1
           = ηg (g 0 )           = ηg [x (K, e, θ, η) θf (K)] > 0
                            ηe

                                           21
since g is strictly increasing; similarly,
                               ∂Π
                                  = eg [x (K, e, θ, η) θf (K)] > 0
                               ∂η
We also compute
                                                ³ ´                   ³ ´
                       ·        µ ¶¸ ∂ (g 0 )−1 1      µ ¶ ∂ (g 0 )−1 1
            ∂Π/e             −1   1               ηe     1             ηe
                 = ηg 0 (g0 )                        −
             ∂e                  ηe          ∂e          e         ∂e
                     µ ¶·                      µ ¶               ¸
                         1                  −1   1
                   − 2        θf (K) − (g0 )         + (1 − δ) K
                        e                        ηe
                     µ ¶
                         1
                 = − 2 [(1 − x (K, e, θ, η)) θf (K) + (1 − δ) K] < 0
                        e
which proves (iii). Second, at the corner x = 1,
                                   Π = eηg [θf (K)] + (1 − δ) K
clearly satisfies (i) and (ii). Moreover
                                   Π                         K
                                     = ηg [θf (K)] + (1 − δ)
                                   e                         e
also satisfies (iii). Finally, to prove (iv), Proposition 1(iv) implies
                                  Π       θf (K) + (1 − δ) K
                            lim     = lim                    = +∞
                            e→0   e   e→0         e
and
                                          Π
                                       lim   = ηg [θf (K)]
                                      e→+∞ e

This completes the proof.
                                           ¡         ¢
Proposition 3 (i) If (1 + ρ) B 0 ≥ Π K 0 , e, θ̄, η /e, any debt contract implies π = 0
and a return for the foreign lender below the risk free rate.
   (ii) If (1 + ρ) B 0 ≤ Π (K 0 , e, θ, η) /e, the debt contract with R0 = 1 + ρ implies
π = 1. This contract satisfies the zero profit condition for the foreign lender.

    Proof. (i) Proposition 2(iii) implies Π (K 0 , e0 , θ0 , η) /e0 < (1 + ρ) B 0 for all re-
alizations of (e0 , θ0 ) ∈ (e, e] × [θ, θ]. Hence, if R0 ≥ 1 + ρ, π f = 0. The lender
obtains the value of the collateral Π (K 0 , e0 , θ0 , η) /e0 , which is less than the risk free
rate. Of course, if R0 < 1 + ρ the lender will also get less than the risk-free rate,
independently of the probability of repayment. (ii) Proposition 2(iii) implies that
Π (K 0 , e0 , θ0 , η) /e0 ≥ (1 + ρ) B 0 for all realizations of (e0 , θ0 ) ∈ [e, e] × [θ, θ]. Hence, if
R0 = 1 + ρ, π f = 1. The lender obtains with probability one (1 + ρ) B 0 , satisfying the
zero profit condition (3).

                                                  22
Proposition 4 Let θ0 ∈ [θ, θ] be such that Π (K 0 , e, θ0 , η) < eR0 B 0 < Π (K 0 , e, θ0 , η)
and define ê (K 0 , R0 , B 0 , θ0 , η) as the solution to Π (K 0 , e0 , θ0 , η) = e0 R0 B 0 . Then
   (i) there exists a unique e < ê < e;
   (ii) Π (K 0 , e0 , θ0 , η) > e0 R0 B 0 , ∀e0 < ê and Π (K 0 , e0 , θ0 , η) < e0 R0 B 0 , ∀e0 > ê;
   (iii) ê is strictly increasing in K 0 , θ0 , and η, and strictly decreasing in R0 and B 0 ;
   (iv) π θ0 = F ( ê| e) ∈ (0, 1); and
   (v) π θ0 is strictly increasing in K 0 , θ0 , and η, and strictly decreasing in R0 and B 0 .
    Proof. Consider the condition Π (K 0 , ê, θ0 , η) = êR0 B 0 , which can be written
                                      Π (K 0 , ê, θ0 , η)
                                                           = R0 B 0
                                              ê
Proposition 2 establishes that the left hand side of the previous expression is decreas-
ing in e0 , with lime0 →0 Π (K 0 , e0 , θ0 , η) /e0 = +∞. Moreover, Π (K 0 , e, θ, η) /e < R0 B 0 ,
since from the zero profit condition (3) it is clear that R0 ≥ 1 + ρ. Therefore, there
exists a unique value 0 < ê < e that equates the left hand side and the right hand
side. To show that ê > e , note that otherwise the probability of repayment would be
zero, therefore the lender would lower R0 until making zero-profits. This completes
the proof of (i) and (ii). Proposition 2(ii) implies that as K 0 , θ0 , or η increase, the
left hand side shifts up, so ê increases. With a similar argument, as R0 or B 0 increase,
the right hand side shifts up, so ê decreases, as stated in (iii). The result in (iv) only
restates (ii), given the definition of π θ0 , and implies using (iii):
                    ∂π θ0               ∂ê             ∂π θ0             ∂ê
                          = f ( ê| e)      >0             0 = f ( ê| e)     >0
                    ∂K  0              ∂K 0             ∂θ                ∂θ0

                                      ∂π θ0              ∂ê
                                            = f ( ê| e)     >0
                                       ∂η                ∂η

                    ∂πθ0              ∂ê              ∂π θ0               ∂ê
                       0
                         = f ( ê| e)     <0                 = f ( ê| e)      <0
                    ∂R                ∂R0              ∂B  0              ∂B 0
which proves (v).
                          ¡           ¢
Proposition 5 Let Π K 0 , e, θ̄, η /e > (1 + ρ) B 0 > Π (K 0 , e, θ, η) /e and let the equi-
librium interest rate be R0 (K 0 , B 0 , e, θ, η). Then, R0 is:
    (i) strictly decreasing in K 0 ;
    (ii) strictly increasing in B 0 ;
    (iii) strictly decreasing in η.
   Proof. To get the derivatives of R0 with respect to K 0 and B 0 we use the implicit
function theorem
                      dR0      ΓK 0         dR0      ΓB0              dR0    Γη
                           = −                   = −                      =−
                      dK 0     ΓR0          dB 0     ΓR0              dη     ΓR0

                                                  23
where Γ is defined as in (4). Notice that
            Z θ̄ ½                              Z e                                      ¾
                   ∂π θ0 0 0                ∂        Π (K 0 , e0 , θ0 , η)
  ΓR0 =                0
                         R B + π θ0 B +0
                                              0                  0
                                                                           dF (e | e) dP (θ0 | θ)
                                                                                    0
             θ     ∂R                     ∂R     eb             e
            Z θ̄ ½                                                                         ¾
                             ∂b
                              e 0 0                 Π (K 0 , eb, θ0 , η)              ∂b
                                                                                       e
       =          f ( ê| e)                  0
                                  R B + π θ0 B −                         f ( ê| e)          dP (θ0 | θ)
             θ               ∂R 0                             b
                                                              e                     ∂R   0
            Z θ̄ ½                µ                             ¶               ¾
                             ∂b
                              e            Π (K 0 , eb, θ0 , η)
       =          f ( ê| e)         0 0
                                    RB −                           + πθ0 B dP (θ0 | θ)
                                                                              0
             θ               ∂R 0                   b
                                                    e
The first term in the brackets is zero by definition of eb, so
                                Z θ̄
                         ΓR0 =       π θ0 B 0 dP (θ0 | θ) = πB 0 > 0
                                         θ

since, under the conditions of the proposition, π ∈ (0, 1). Similarly,
                  Z θ̄ ½                               Z e                                   ¾
                          ∂π θ0 0 0              ∂           Π (K 0 , e0 , θ0 , η)
        ΓK 0 =                  0
                                  RB +               0                 0
                                                                                   dF (e | e) dP (θ0 | θ)
                                                                                        0
                   θ      ∂K                    ∂K      eb            e
                  Z θ̄ ½                                   Z e
                                         ∂be 0 0                 ∂ Π (K 0 , e0 , θ0 , η)
              =           f ( ê| e)         0
                                               R  B    +            0             0
                                                                                          dF (e0 | e)
                   θ                    ∂K                  eb ∂K                e
                            0         0                        ¾
                     Π (K , eb, θ , η)                    ∂be
                  −                          f ( ê| e)          dP (θ0 | θ)
                              b
                              e                         ∂K 0
                  Z θ̄ Z e 0 0 0
                            θ f (K )
              =                      0
                                             dF (e0 | e) dP (θ0 | θ)
                   θ    eb         e
                  Z θ̄ µ ¶
              =        b 1 θ0 f 0 (K 0 ) dP (θ0 | θ) > 0
                       E
                   θ         e0
         £ ¯ ¤                    R ¡ ¢
where E b 10 ¯ e represents e 10 dF (e0 | e). Combining the previous results and using
            e                      eb e
the implicit function theorem,
                                         R θ̄ £ 1 ¯ ¤ 0 0 0
                        dR0                  E b 0 ¯ e θ f (K ) dP (θ0 | θ)
                                          θ        e
                                =−                                                    <0
                        dK 0                                  πB 0
This proves (i). Next, we compute
         Z θ̄ ½                               Z e                                      ¾
                ∂π θ0 0 0                 ∂        Π (K 0 , e0 , θ0 , η)
ΓBf0 =               0
                                    0
                       R B + π θ0 R +       0                0
                                                                         dF (e | e) dP (θ0 | θ) − (1 + ρ)
                                                                                 0
          θ     ∂B                      ∂B     eb           e
         Z θ̄ ½                                                                        ¾
                          ∂be 0 0                 Π (K 0 , b
                                                           e, θ, η)               ∂b
                                                                                   e
     =         f ( ê| e)                   0
                                R B + π θ0 R −                        f ( ê| e)         dP (θ0 | θ) − (1 + ρ)
          θ               ∂B  0                           b
                                                          e                      ∂B  0
         Z θ̄
     =        πθ0 R0 dP (θ0 | θ) − (1 + ρ) = πR0 − (1 + ρ) < 0
             θ


                                                    24
since otherwise Γ > 0. Using again the implicit function theorem

                                       dR0      πR0 − (1 + ρ)
                                            = −               >0
                                       dB 0         πB 0
which completes the proof of (ii). Finally, we compute
                   Z θ̄ ½                        Z                                          ¾
                            ∂π θ0 0 0 ∂                 e
                                                            Π (K 0 , e0 , θ0 , η)
        Γη =                     RB +                                 0
                                                                                  dF (e | e) dP (θ0 | θ)
                                                                                       0
                    θ        ∂η       ∂η           eb               e
               Z θ̄ ½                           Z e
                                 ∂b
                                  e 0 0                ∂ Π (K 0 , e0 , θ0 , η)
             =       f ( ê| e) R B +                              0
                                                                               dF (e0 | e)
                θ                ∂η               eb ∂η           e
                        0      0                      ¾
                  Π (K , eb, θ , η)              ∂b e
               −                    f ( ê| e)          dP (θ0 | θ)
                          b
                          e                      ∂η
               Z θ̄ Z e
             =          g [x (K 0 , e0 , θ0 , η) θf (K)] dF (e0 | e) dP (θ0 | θ) > 0
                    θ    eb

from which
                        R θ̄ R e
             dR0         θ    eb
                                   g [x (K 0 , e0 , θ0 , η) θf (K)] dF (e0 | e) dP (θ0 | θ)
                 =−                                                                             >0
             dη                                               πB 0

completing the proof of (iii)
                        ¡            ¢
Proposition 6 Let Π K 0 , e, θ̄, η /e > (1 + ρ) B 0 > Π (K 0 , e, θ, η) /e and let the equi-
librium interest rate be R0 (K 0 , B 0 , e, θ). Define
                              Z θ̄ ½Z e µ                             ¶                 ¾
                                              Π (K 0 , e0 , θ0 , η)       ∂f (e0 | e) 0
               0
         ϕ (K e, θ, η) ≡                                                             de dP (θ0 | θ)
                                   θ     eb           e0                     ∂e

Then, R0 is:
   (i) strictly increasing in e if ϕ (K 0 e, θ, η) < 0;
   (i) strictly decreasing in e if ϕ (K 0 e, θ, η) > 0; and
   (iii) independent of e for ϕ (K 0 e, θ, η) = 0.
   Proof. To get the derivatives of R0 with respect to e we use the implicit function
theorem
                                                dR0    Γe
                                                    =−
                                                 de    ΓR0




                                                            25
where Γ is defined as in (4). We already showed that ΓR0 = πB 0 > 0. Now,
                 Z θ̄ ½                          Z                                ¾
                          ∂πθ0 0 0 ∂              Π (K 0 , e0 , θ0 , η)
                                                     e
        Γe   =                RB +                          0
                                                                        dF (e | e) dP (θ0 | θ)
                                                                             0
                θ          ∂e      ∂e        eb           e
               Z θ̄ ½                           Z e     ·                               ¸
                                 ∂b
                                  e 0 0               ∂ Π (K 0 , e0 , θ0 , η)
             =       f ( ê| e) R B +                                  0
                                                                               f (e | e) de0
                                                                                   0
                θ                ∂e              eb  ∂e               e
                        0      0                     ¾
                  Π (K , eb, θ , η)             ∂b e
               −                    f ( ê| e)         dP (θ0 | θ)
                          eb                    ∂e
               Z θ̄ ½Z e µ          0 0 0
                                                   ¶                     ¾
                              Π (K , e , θ , η) ∂f (e0 | e) 0
             =                        0
                                                                     de dP (θ0 | θ)
                θ     eb             e                    ∂e

hence
                                R θ̄ nR e ³ Π(K 0 ,e0 ,θ0 ,η) ´ ∂f ( e0 |e)      o
                  dR  0     −    θ      eb           e0               ∂e
                                                                              de0 dP (θ0 | θ)
                      =
                   de                                          πB 0
which proves (i), (ii), and (iii).




                                                          26
                 Table 1: Industry Distribution of Firms




Year   Firms   Mfg.   Transport   Services   Construction   Mining   Other
1989   98      0.64   0.01        0.07       0.09           0.02     0.16
1990   200     0.61   0.01        0.11       0.09           0.02     0.17
1991   224     0.58   0.01        0.15       0.08           0.01     0.17
1992   226     0.54   0.01        0.17       0.10           0.02     0.16
1993   221     0.49   0.03        0.18       0.12           0.02     0.16
1994   199     0.48   0.03        0.20       0.13           0.02     0.14
1995   182     0.47   0.03        0.21       0.13           0.02     0.14
1996   177     0.46   0.04        0.24       0.12           0.02     0.13
1997   168     0.42   0.04        0.26       0.11           0.02     0.15
1998   155     0.41   0.05        0.27       0.12           0.02     0.14
1999   137     0.41   0.05        0.28       0.12           0.02     0.12
2000   113     0.45   0.04        0.27       0.12           0.02     0.10




                                    27
                     Table 2: Averages of Key Ratios 1989-1994



                         Capital   Investment    Exports     ST Debt   T otalDebt    FC
        Year        e     Sales       Sales       Sales      Exports    Exports      Liab
        1989    4.644     1.512        0.124         0.136    0.740        1.421    0.192
        1990    4.612     1.293        0.140         0.126    1.125        1.824    0.150
        1991    4.220     1.315        0.108         0.104    1.552        2.479    0.120
        1992    3.961     1.243        0.144         0.085    1.492        2.867    0.105
        1993    3.437     1.262        0.127         0.081    1.563        3.792    0.105
        1994    3.503     1.167        0.158         0.103    1.769        4.163    0.076
        Avg.              1.277        0.135         0.103    1.403        2.812    0.113

       FC
Note: Liab  is the ratio of total interest payments to total liabilities. ST Debt refers
to short term debt.




               Table 3: Correlations Between Key Variables, 1989-1994

                        Correlation Between
                        Capital and Short Term Debt               0.664
                        Capital and Total Debt                    0.748
                        Capital and Exports                       0.641
                        Capital and Financing Costs∗              -0.349
                        Short Term Debt and Exports               0.659
                        Total Debt and Exports                    0.641
                        Total Debt and Financing Costs†           0.513

∗
  Refers to partial correlation, keeping total debt Constant. † refers to partial corre-
lation keeping total capital constant. In both cases financing costs are defined as the
ratio of total interest paid to total liabilities.




                                                28
    Table 4: Joint Distributions of Total Debt, Capital and Exports, 1989-1994

                 Total Debt              Capital Exports Sales
                 0                        0.014   0.001  0.032
                 0 to 25th percentile     0.012   0.002  0.012
                 25th to 50th percentile 0.082    0.019  0.137
                 50th to 75th percentile 0.154    0.103  0.174
                 Above 75th percentile    0.739   0.875  0.645

Figures represent proportions of capital, exports and sales of each category of firms
in total capital, exports and sales respectively for the period 1989 to 1994.




                     Table 5: Averages of Key Ratios 1994-2000



                        Capital   Investment    Exports     ST Debt   T otalDebt    FC
        Year        e    Sales       Sales       Sales      Exports    Exports      Liab
        1994    3.503   1.167         0.158         0.103    1.769       4.163     0.076
        1995    5.409   1.355         0.100         0.202    1.229       2.527     0.165
        1996    4.754   1.219         0.119         0.197    0.966       2.059     0.138
        1997    3.964   1.112         0.073         0.199    0.697       2.059     0.103
        1998    3.909   1.106         0.132         0.204    0.741       1.853     0.096
        1999    3.588   1.129         0.072         0.184    0.710       1.881     0.085
        2000    3.180   0.880         0.069         0.245    0.570       1.323     0.078

       FC
Note: Liab  is the ratio of total interest payments to total liabilities. ST Debt refers
to short term debt.




                                               29
                Table 6: Changes in Average Magnitudes, 1994=100




      Year   Capital Investment   Sales Exports ST Debt Total Debt
      1994   100.000    100.000 100.000 100.000 100.000    100.000
      1995   111.683     61.842 98.239 192.244 133.523     116.693
      1996   110.380     78.449 104.699 199.858 109.146     98.850
      1997   114.496     55.352 119.031 229.985   90.619   113.721
      1998   124.469    106.283 127.716 253.283 106.048    112.743
      1999   125.251     58.891 130.103 219.336   88.041    99.109
      2000   122.672     76.509 175.388 354.541 113.449    111.794




                           Table 7: Balance Sheet Eﬀects

                        Exports Below Median Exports Above Median
      Debt Below Median 17.592               7.146
                        (16.267)             (5.535)
      Debt Above Median 217.979              226.709
                        (108.943)            (201.616)

The top figure in each cell represents the average investment of firms in each category
between 1989 and 1994. The lower figure represents the average investment between
1995 and 2000. All figures are in millions of 1994 pesos. Debt refers to total debt.




                                          30
         Table 8: Sample Statistics as a Percentage of Macro Aggregates

                  Year Investment Dollar Debt Exports
                  1989         8.1       53.0    13.0
                  1990        14.0       67.0    20.4
                  1991        10.3       68.0    18.2
                  1992        13.4       69.0    15.6
                  1993        12.9       83.0    15.3
                  1994        15.9       87.0    17.6
                  1995        12.0       69.0    18.3
                  1996        12.5       60.0    15.8
                  1997         6.5       71.0    16.9
                  1998        10.6       43.0    14.6
                  1999         5.0       31.0    11.9
                  2000         5.0       32.0    17.0

Source: Banco de Mexico. Exports do not include petroleum. Dollar debt refers to
total private sector dollar debt.




                    Table 9: Calibration of Benchmark Model

         Target              Data (89-94) Model Parameter Value
         1. Capital/Sales        1.27      1.31     α      0.36
         2. Investment/Sales     0.14      0.14     δ      0.11
         3. Exports/Sales        0.10      0.09     ξ      0.63
         4. Debt/Exports         2.25      2.19     φ     55.00
         5. Exit rate            0.11      0.11     λ      0.06




                                      31
      Table 10: Other Statistics for Benchmark Model

Statistic                                  Data (89-94) Model
1. Correlation betweeen Capital and:
     - Foreign debt                           0.75       0.44
     - Productivity (θ)                       0.49       0.87
     - Exports                                0.64       0.12
2. Correlation betweeen debt and:
     - Productivity (θ)                       0.36       0.14
     - Exports                                0.64       0.24
3. Statistics for exits relative to total:
     - Avg. capital                           0.51       0.52
     - Avg. debt                              0.22       0.59
     - Avg. productivity (θ)                  1.60       0.54
     - Avg. export type (η)                   0.10       0.72




        Table 11: Results of Devaluation Experiment

                      89-94       1995
                      Data Model Data Model
       Investment     100.0 100.0 86.0  88.7
       Total Sales    100.0 100.0 116.0 105.7
       Domestic Sales 100.0 100.0 104.0 94.0
       Exports        100.0 100.0 229.0 222.5
       Foreign Debt   100.0 100.0 163.0 151.1




                             32
           Figure 1: Optimal Export Decision




       ηg(θf(K))




      Exports                                             Slope 1/e
      ηg(xθf(K))




                                                       θf(K)
                   Domestic Production
                   (1-x)θf(K)




Figure 2: Balance Sheet Eﬀects of a Real Depreciation



                      eRB


                                                        eRB


                     High RB           Moderate RB



                               x=1




                               Π(K,e,θ,η)



                                                                      eRB
                                              Low RB




                            Exchange Rate e




                                     33
Figure 3: Medium-run Results of the Devaluation Experiment
    160                                   140
           Model
    140    Data                           130

    120                                   120

    100                                   110

     80                                   100

     60                                   90
      94   95      96      97   98         94    95       96       97    98
                Investment                            Domestic Sales

    350                                   450
                                          400
    300
                                          350
    250                                   300

    200                                   250
                                          200
    150
                                          150
    100                                   100
      94   95      96      97   98          94   95        96       97   98
                 Exports                               Foreign Debt




                                     34
