NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CONSUMPTION COMMITMENTS AND PREFERENCES FOR RISK
Andrew Postlewaite
Larry Samuelson
Dan Silverman
Working Paper 10527
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10527
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2004

We thank Andy Abel and Jesus Fernandez-Villaverde for helpful conversations, and thank the National
Science Foundation for financial support. Correspondence should be sent to Andrew Postlewaite
(apostlew@econ.sas.upenn.edu). The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Andrew Postlewaite, Larry Samuelson, and Dan Silverman. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Consumption Commitments and Preferences for Risk
Andrew Postlewaite, Larry Samuelson, and Dan Silverman
NBER Working Paper No. 10527
May 2004
JEL No. D21, D31, D81, J34
ABSTRACT
We examine an economy in which the cost of consuming some goods can be reduced by making
commitments to consumption levels independent of the state. For example, it is cheaper to produce
housing services via owner-occupied than rented housing, but the transactions costs associated with
the former prompt relatively inflexible housing consumption paths. We show that consumption
commitments can cause risk-neutral consumers to care about risk, creating incentives to both insure
risks and bunch uninsured risks together. For example, workers may prefer to avoid wage risk while
bearing an unemployment risk that is concentrated in as few states as possible.
Andrew Postlewaite
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6297
apostlew@econ.sas.upenn.edu
Larry Samuelson
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706-1393
larrysam@ssc.wisc.edu
Dan Silverman
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706-1393
dansilv@umich.edu

Consumption Commitments and
Preferences for Risk
1

Introduction

Purchasing a house typically commits one to a mortgage. Negative income
shocks can then have serious financial consequences, perhaps even inducing
foreclosure. The alternative of renting provides some insulation from income
shocks: failing to make the rent may force one to move, but with substantially lower transactions costs and without the risk of a capital loss. One
could achieve even more flexibility by living in hotels, adjusting the quality
as needed in response to income fluctuations. The salient point is that an
individual who purchases housing, or makes any other purchase involving future financial obligations, is likely to have a diﬀerent attitude toward income
risk than one who chooses more flexible arrangements. Analogous eﬀects can
arise even without explicit future financial obligations. The expected utility
from the use of a vacation home may be jeopardized by negative income
shocks, even if there are no further payments to make and the home itself is
not at risk. Having a child is similar to committing to a long-term mortgage,
but without the default option.
We refer to choices that give rise to rigidities in consumption as consumption commitments. This paper suggests an alternative to the standard
ways of thinking about consumption and risk, centering on incentives for
consumers to make consumption commitments.
Individuals whose consumption commitments make them more vulnerable to negative income shocks are not necessarily foolish; there are benefits
to making these choices. Purchasing a house typically gives greater benefit per dollar spent than does renting an apartment.1 Hotels are yet more
expensive than apartments. Owning a car is cheaper than renting one, and
owning a vacation home near a ski resort can be cheaper than regularly
renting. The rental market for children is thin, if it exists at all, with a
long-term commitment being the norm.
By themselves, consumption commitments simply point to one more reason why people might prefer less risky income streams. What is important
for this paper is that the degree to which an individual is risk averse is
endogenous: the vulnerability to future income shocks is a consequence of
1

Not only are there tax benefits associated with home ownership, but purchasing allows
one to make idiosyncratic capital improvements that increase the utility of the housing,
while renting typically entails a premium because of moral hazard concerns.

1

his or her consumption decisions. As a result, there are utility gains to individuals from coordinating their consumption and labor market decisions,
matching those times that their consumption would be especially vulnerable
to income fluctuations with the times that their income is secure.2
This coordination can induce “economies of scale” in risk bearing. Once
an individual whose income is relatively risky has chosen not to commit to
consumption expenditures, the welfare cost of bearing additional risk may
be relatively low. An individual faced with a given amount of lifetime income uncertainty then may rationally choose to concentrate as much risk
as possible into his or her early years, accommodating the consequent insecure income stream by remaining single, renting an apartment, and buying
a cheap used car. If laid oﬀ, the individual moves back to her parents’
home to await recall while watching daytime television. The flip side of this
concentrated employment income risk in early years is a relatively secure
income in later years that permits the individual to enjoy the benefits of
consumption commitments.
Section 2 presents some evidence consistent with the idea that individuals
with less secure incomes are less likely to make consumption commitments.
Section 3 presents a simple model of consumption commitments. Section
4 examines the resulting endogeneity of risk aversion. An individual who
would be risk neutral in the absence of consumption commitments may
be eﬀectively risk averse once such commitments are made, and may face
economies of scale in bearing risk.
Section 5 puts these ideas to work, examining the implications of consumption commitments for optimal labor contracts. Wages typically remain relatively rigid, even as firms endure shocks that force them to dismiss
workers. An adverse productivity or demand shock to a firm presumably
decreases the marginal revenue product of its labor. Why doesn’t the firm
respond by reducing wages? We suggest that consumption commitments
provide part of the answer. The risk aversion induced by inflexible consumption plans induces workers to prefer relatively smooth wage profiles. At the
2

There are several papers that make a similar point. Ellingsen and Holden ([10]) analyze a model in which workers make purchases of durable goods based on expectations
about future wages. When those expectations are high, workers will make large purchases,
and will resist lower wages more than they would had they had more pessimistic expectations (and consequently purchased fewer durables). In a related paper ([11]), the authors
analyze a model in which worker indebtedness worsens their bargaining position vis a
vis employers. In work independent of the current paper, Chetty ([7]) and Chetty and
Szeidl ([8]) investigate the connection between consumption commitments and risk attitudes. Chetty demonstrates empirically the importance of commitments in estimating risk
aversion, while Chetty and Szeidl show that home ownership aﬀects portfolio composition.

2

same time, if workers must endure some risk, then the induced economies
of scale in risk bearing can prompt them to prefer the risk be concentrated
in the form of layoﬀs.
Section 6 argues that the possibility of consumption commitments may
naturally give rise to multiple equilibria. In one equilibrium, individuals
concentrate their risk so that they are subject to high risk when young
and low risk when older, allowing consumption commitments in the latter
case. In another, employment contracts do not concentrate risk and workers
avoid consumption commitments. If there are economies of scale in providing consumption commitments, such as owner-occupied housing requiring a
suﬃciently large mortgage market to allow risk-pooling, then no single firm
or individual can break out of this latter equilibrium.
We discuss the results and the related literature in Section 7.

2

Consumption Commitments

We begin with some evidence suggestive of a link between the security of
one’s income stream, captured by the risk of unemployment, and the propensity to make consumption commitments, captured by home ownership. Figure 1 presents the average civilian unemployment rate for the years 1990 to
2000 by age group (measured on the scale on the left), and average home
ownership rate for the same period (measured on the right).3 The average
unemployment rate over this period declines with age, from just under 13%
for the under 25 group to about 3.5% for the 55 and over group. Home
ownership increases from 17% to 79% for these two groups respectively.
It is no surprise that those facing higher unemployment rates are less
likely to buy houses–they presumably have lower expected incomes. Our
emphasis on the potential costs of commitments suggests that in addition to
the importance of income levels, income volatility should deter consumption
commitments. Figure 2 shows the variance of unemployment rates by age
(shown on the left axis) along with home ownership rates. The lower incidence of home ownership among the young is associated with more variable
as well as higher unemployment rates (and hence, presumably, incomes).
At the aggregate level, and across age groups, there is thus a relationship
between employment, employment certainty, and home ownership. How3

Unemployment data is from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and the home ownership
rates are from the HUD website, taken from the Census Bureau. In order to make the age
groups the same the group “Under 25” is the average of the numbers for the two groups
“16 to 19” and “21 to 24”years in the BLS data, and the group “25 to 34” is the average
of the two groups “25 to 29” and “30 to 34” in the HUD data.

3

Figure 1: Unemployment rates and home ownership rates by age
14%

90%
80%

12%

70%
60%
8%

50%

6%

40%
30%

Home ownership rate

Unemployment rate

10%
Average unemployment
rate, 1990-2000
Average home ownership
rate, 1990-2000

4%
20%
2%

10%

0%

0%
Under 25

25-34

35-44

45-54

55 and over

Age

ever, there are many reasons why employment and home ownership patterns
might systematically covary across ages, without suggesting any particular
link between the two. The Panel Survey of Income Dynamics (PSID) includes information on income volatility and home ownership, allowing us
to come closer to our target with a disaggregated analysis that controls for
age. Restricting attention to white males ages 30-62 in 1993 with at least
three years of income observations, we measure both the degree of income
volatility4 and the average income of each individual.5 Figure 3 presents
the results of a probit estimating the probability of home ownership conditional on income volatility, average and current income, number of income
4

Income volatility is represented by the deviations from one-year-ahead expectations
of constant income growth. Specifically, if we let ∆yti denote individual i’s growth in real
income between periods t and t − 1, our measure of income volatility is given by
y
x
Ti
x 1 [
[∆yti − ∆yti−1 ]2
Vi = w
Ti − 2 t=3
where Ti is the number of income observations for individual i. Several alternative measures
of volatility yielded similar results.
5
The sample is on average 43 years old in 1993, and we observe an average of 18 years
of past income for each respondent.

4

4.5

90%

4.0

80%

3.5

70%

3.0

60%

2.5

50%

2.0

40%

1.5

30%

1.0

20%

0.5

10%

0.0

Home ownership rate

Variance in
unemployment rate

Figure 2: Variance in unemployment rates and home ownership rates by age

Variance in unemployment
rate, 1990-2000
Average home ownership
rate, 1990-2000

0%
Under 25

25-34

35-44

45-54

55 and over

Age

observations, and demographics. This figure shows the change in the predicted probability of home ownership associated with varying levels of income volatility and average income, for an otherwise average respondent.
Conditional on age, years of schooling, current and average income, and
other demographic variables, increased income volatility is associated with
significantly lower probabilities of home ownership. Starting from mean levels of all the variables, a standard deviation increase in conditional income
volatility is associated with a 5.8% decrease in the probability of home ownership. This change should be compared with a similar increase in the level
of average income, which is associated with a 17.4% increase in the probability of home ownership. Roughly speaking, changes in income volatility,
conditional on average and current income, are associated with changes in
the probability of home ownership on the same order of magnitude as those
associated with changes in the level of income.
Though the purchase of a house is one of the most obvious consumption
commitments that many families make, we stress that the commitment concept goes well beyond home ownership. For example, the decision to have
children entails substantial future expenditures. We can use the PSID to
examine the relationship between income volatility and the timing of the

5

Figure 3: Predicted probability of home ownership, by income volatility and
average income, average white male age 30-62 in the PSID
0.95

0.9

Predicted Pr (Home Ownership

0.85

0.8

0.75

income volatility

0.7

average income

0.65

0.6

0.55

0.5

0.45
-1

-0.8

-0.6

-0.4

-0.2

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

Standard Deviations from Means of Income Volatility and Average Income

Predicted probabilities based on a probit of home ownership in 1993 on age, education, average income,
current income, past income volatility, marital status, number of children, and number of income
observations. Predictions condition on sample averages of the other variables.

decision to start a family. We again restrict attention to white males ages
30-62 in 1993 with at least three years of income observations, this time
restricting attention to those who have fathered at least one child. We find
that, conditional on age, years of schooling, current and average income,
years in the sample, number of income observations, and demographic variables including the number of children in 1993, increased income volatility
is associated with small but statistically significant delays in the decision
to start a family. Figure 4 presents the change in the predicted age at the
birth of the first child associated with varying levels of income volatility and
average income, for an otherwise average respondent. Starting from mean
levels of all the variables, a standard deviation increase in conditional income
volatility is associated with a 0.28 year (1.1%) delay in the decision to have
started a family. This change should be compared with a similar increase
in the level of average income, which is associated with a 0.31 year (1.3%)
6

acceleration of the decision to have started a family. Thus, as with the home
purchase decision, changes in income volatility, conditional on average and
current income, are associated with changes in the timing of the decision to
have children comparable to those associated with changes in the level of
income.
Figure 4: Predicted conditional age at birth of first child, by income volatility
and average income, average white male age 30-62 in the PSID
24.8
24.7
24.6

age

24.5
income volatility

24.4

average income
24.3
24.2
24.1
24
-1

-0.8

-0.6

-0.4

-0.2

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

Standard Deviations from Means of Income Volatility and Average Income

Predicted ages based on a regression of age at birth of first child on current age, education, average income,
current income, past income volatility, marital status, number of children and number of income observations.
Predictions condtion on sample averages of other variables.

This evidence is still at best suggestive, all the more so because home
ownership, the decision to start a family and income patterns are simultaneously shaped by a variety of life decisions. A more systematic empirical investigation of the importance of consumption commitments is clearly needed
to determine the importance of consumption commitments. Such work is
beyond the scope of this paper, but is the subject of subsequent work.

3

The Model

We are interested in the incentives to smooth the consumption of some goods
in order to take advantage of consumption commitments. We examine a
model in which all other incentives to smooth consumption are absent, and
7

in which there are no other opportunities to smooth. Hence, our consumer
will be risk neutral and will be stripped of intertemporal considerations.
The consumer will be unable to save, borrow, or purchase insurance. Consumption commitments will last for only one period. We claim not that the
excluded considerations are unimportant, but that it is easier to study the
commitments in which we are interested in their absence.
There are three goods, including
• a non-commitment consumption good, denoted by x and with a price
that is normalized to unity;
• labor, whose price is denoted by w;
• a consumption good, denoted by z.
We think of z as a composite of those goods whose cost can be reduced by
making consumption commitments, with good x a composite of the remaining consumption goods. In particular, we will consider some cases in which
consumption commitments are quite important, in the sense that utility depends heavily (or, in the limit, exclusively) on good z. In doing so, we do
not have in mind a consumer who sits doing nothing in an empty house (to
which the consumer has a mortgage commitment), but rather a consumer
who has a broad array of opportunities to reduce the cost of consumption
via purchasing patterns that involve inflexibilities. The lack of flexibility
may arise from long-term contracts, advance-purchase discounts, buying in
bulk, and so on.
The consumer lives for N periods and is endowed with one unit of labor in
each period, which the consumer inelastically supplies to the market. Letting
U (x(t), z(t)) be a utility function defined over the period-t consumption
levels x(t) and z(t), the consumer maximizes
N
X

U (x(t), z(t)),

t=1

subject to a budget constraint. We assume that the utility function has
strictly negative own-second derivatives and is homogeneous of degree one,
so that consumers are risk neutral (cf. Kihlstrom and Mirman [14]). Common examples, such as Cobb-Douglas utility functions, satisfy these assumptions. Given the finite lifetime, we adopt the convenience of assuming there
is no discounting. The consumer can neither save nor borrow, and hence
must balance the budget within each period.
8

In each period t, one of two states is independently (across periods)
drawn, state 1 or “good” and state 2 or “bad,” with probabilities p ∈ (0, 1)
and 1 − p. The consumer receives a wage w1 (t) in state 1. In state 2,
the consumer receives a wage w2 (t) if employed, but is unemployed with
probability ρ(t) in period t. An unemployed consumer has no income and
consumes nothing.
A consumption plan specifies quantities x1 (t) and x2 (t) as well as z1 (t)
and z2 (t) to be consumed in each state and in each period, if employed. The
plan also specifies whether commitments are involved in the consumption of
the latter good. In each period t and regardless of whether commitments
were made in other periods, good z can be obtained with no commitments
at price cN , with diﬀerent quantities purchased in diﬀerent states, so that
z1 (t) need not equal z2 (t). If good z is consumed via commitments in period
t, then the price is cC < cN , but the consumption of good z in that period
cannot depend upon the state, i.e., z1 (t) must equal z2 (t).6 This restriction
reflects a high cost of adjusting the quantity of consumption commitments
that can arise for a number of reasons.7 The potential advantage of consumption commitments spring from this cost diﬀerence.8
6

One could imagine a consumer who is not at risk of being laid oﬀ committing to a
quantity of z, and then supplementing this consumption in state 1 with additional units
of z purchased at the non-commitment price cN . For some commitment goods, this brings
relatively little flexibility. Once one has chosen to obtain a particular advanced education,
for example, there is only a limited opportunity to enhance its quality by supplementing
with private tutoring and music lessons. Other cases appear to provide more flexibility.
Having purchased a house, one can still rent weekends at the local Hilton. However, the
latter might better be viewed as the consumption of vacation services rather than housing,
and hence to be captured by the increased consumption of good x. We assume throughout
that any increased consumption made possible by the good state of nature is captured by
the non-commitment good x.
7
In the case of housing, there may be transactions costs, including realtors’ fees. There
may also be capital losses associated either with idiosyncratic features of a home or with
moral hazard and adverse selection considerations arising out of past maintenance and
unobservable problems with the property. The logic underlying our results would not
be qualitatively changed if we substituted a less extreme rigidity in consumption levels,
though the analysis would be less transparent.
8
In the case of housing, the advantage of owning rather than renting reflects (at least)
two factors. The first is that owners have an incentive to care for housing that renters
do not, reflected in construction costs (with rented housing requiring features designed
to ensure durability that would be unnecessary in the presence of proper care) and in
the form of higher maintenance costs for rented housing. Second, there are cost savings
in being able to match the characteristics of the housing to the tastes of the buyer. We
would have evidence for this latter motivation if we asked the owner of a newly-constructed
custom home, “What would you have to spend to buy a speculation-built home that you
like at least as well as your custom home?”, and obtained a price higher than the cost of

9

A consumer who faces a risk of unemployment in period t, in the form of
a positive probability of a layoﬀ, cannot make consumption commitments in
period t. Our interpretation is that unemployment would trigger adjustment
costs, including possibly default, that are suﬃciently onerous as to make
commitments suboptimal when facing a layoﬀ risk.
In each period, consumption (and, in Section 5, employment) plans are
first set, including the choice of whether to make consumption commitments.
Shocks are then realized, specifying whether the state is the good or bad
state and whether the consumer is laid oﬀ in the latter case. Consumption
then occurs.

4
4.1

Endogenous Risk Aversion
Risk aversion

In this section, we examine the sense in which consumption commitments
cause risk attitudes to be endogenously determined. None of the temporal
structure of the model is required for this argument. It suﬃces to consider
a single period in the consumer’s lifetime, or a consumer who lives only for
one period, and hence to dispense with the time subscript t. To concentrate
on consumption decisions, we assume that the consumer faces no layoﬀ risk,
receiving wages w1 and w2 in states 1 and 2.
If the consumer makes no consumption commitments, then the consumer’s problem is:
max

x1 ,z1 ,x2 ,z2

[pU (x1 , z1 ) + (1 − p)U (x2 , z2 )]

(1)

subject to
x1 + cN z1 = w1
x2 + cN z2 = w2 .
This maximization problem can be decoupled into two problems, one for
each state. The solution to both problems can be described by an indirect
utility function that is linear in the wage, and that we can therefore take to
simply equal the wage. Hence, units of measurement can be chosen so that
the utility of receiving wage w1 in the good state is
U (w1 ) = w1
the current home.

10

and the utility of receiving wage w2 in the bad state is
U (w2 ) = w2 .
This consumer is risk neutral.
The problem facing a consumer who chooses to make consumption commitments is
(2)
max [pU (x1 , z) + (1 − p)U (x2 , z)],
x1 ,x2 ,z

subject to
x1 + cC z = w1

(3)

x2 + cC z = w2 .

(4)

We cannot decompose this problem into two state-specific maximizations.
Instead, this maximization problem leads to a pair of indirect utility functions U1 (w1 , w2 ) and U2 (w1 , w2 ) giving utility in states 1 and 2, as a function
of the wage in each state. We have the following proposition, the proof of
which is left to Section 8.9
Proposition 1 Let
w = pw1 + (1 − p)w2 .

(5)

Then for (w1 , w2 ) inducing interior optima and with w1 6= w2 ,
pU1 (w, w) + (1 − p)U2 (w, w) > pU1 (w1 , w2 ) + (1 − p)U2 (w1 , w2 ).

(6)

This result indicates that a consumer who makes consumption commitments
will strictly prefer to smooth wages across states, making the consumer
eﬀectively risk averse in wages. Fluctuating wages induce variations in the
consumption of the noncommitment good x across states, while the quantity
of the commitment good z is necessarily held fixed. However, the utility
function U (x, z) is concave in x for a fixed quantity of z. The consumer would
accordingly prefer to smooth the consumption of x by smoothing wages
across states. Risk aversion is thus not solely a property of preferences, but
emerges from the interplay of preferences and the consumption technology.
The following (proven in Section 8) illustrates the eﬀects of consumption
commitments:
9
Intuitively, when facing wage w, the consumer has the option of purchasing the same
quantity of good z as when facing wage profile (w1 , w2 ), and hence consuming an amount
x in each state equal to the expected value of such consumption under (w1 , w2 ). This
increases utility, since U (x, z) is strictly concave in x for a fixed z.

11

Lemma 1 If the consumer makes consumption commitments, then
w1 > w2

⇒

λ1
p
,
<
λ2
(1 − p)

(7)

where λ1 and λ2 are the multipliers attached to the constraints (3)—(4).
The multipliers λ1 and λ2 can be interpreted as the marginal utility of
income in states 1 and 2, in the sense that λi gives the rate at which the
maximum expected utility [pU (x1 , z)+(1−p)U (x2 , z)] changes as wi changes.
If the consumer made no consumption commitments, then the consequent
in (7) would hold with equality. The marginal eﬀect on expected utility
of a variation in the state-i wage would be proportional to the probability
of an outcome in which state i occurs. If instead good z is consumed via
commitments, then condition (7) indicates that if wages are higher in state
1, then the ratio of the marginal utilities of the incomes w1 and w2 fall
short of the ratio of the probabilities with which these incomes are received.
Hence, the rigidities introduced by commitments cause extra income in the
high-wage state to have a relatively smaller eﬀect on expected utility.

4.2

Risk Bunching

We now bring the temporal structure of the model into the picture, asking
how a consumer who faces a given lifetime layoﬀ risk would like to have that
risk distributed across periods. The following section shows why the consumer might face such layoﬀs. Here, we show that the result is a preference
for risk bunching.
Consider a consumer who lives for N > 1 periods. Assume that the
consumer receives a wage of w1 in the good state and w2 < w1 in the bad
state, the latter conditional on being employed. Suppose over the course
of the consumer’s working lifetime, the consumer is constrained to face an
average layoﬀ risk, conditional on the bad state, of ρ. Hence, it must be the
case that
N
X
ρ(t) = ρN.
t=1

We are interested in which values ρ(1), . . . , ρ(N ) the consumer would
prefer, subject to the constraint on their sum. Let τ be an integer satisfying
τ ≤ ρN < τ + 1.

Then we have:
12

Proposition 2 The consumer’s expected utility is maximized by choosing
τ + 1 values from {1, . . . , N }, denoted t1 , . . . , tτ +1 , and letting the layoﬀ
risks be:
ρ(tk ) = 1

k = 1, . . . , τ

ρ(tτ +1 ) = ρN − τ
ρ(tk ) = 0

k = τ + 2, . . . , N.

Hence, the consumer concentrates the layoﬀ risk in as few periods as possible, enduring a unitary probability of layoﬀ (modulo integer problems)
in such periods (conditional on the bad state), in return for facing no layoﬀ risk in the other states.10 We provide a sketch of the proof, which is
straightforward (and hence omitted). The consumer can make consumption commitments in period t if and only if the consumer faces no layoﬀ
threat. Conditional on facing the threat of layoﬀ, the consumer is risk neutral, implying that the consumer is indiﬀerent about how the layoﬀ threat is
distributed among those periods for which it is positive. Maximizing utility
then requires minimizing the number of periods in which the consumer is
liable to layoﬀs.
This preference for risk bunching is another feature of the consumer’s
eﬀective risk aversion. The consumer’s first choice would be to bear no
employment risk. Given that some such risk is to be borne, the consumer’s
preferences is to eliminate this risk from as many periods as possible.

5

Employment Contracts

We turn next to the interaction between consumption and earnings decisions.
We begin by embedding the consumer in a simple economy.

5.1

The Labor Market

The economy operates for a countably infinite number of periods. The economy contains a unit continuum of infinitely-lived firms that produce good
10
There are other optimal arrangements, but none of them features a layoﬀ risk in more
than τ + 1 periods. For example, any permutation of the probabilities of layoﬀ in the
proposition would also maximize the consumer’s expected utility. In a richer model one
would expect that the particular sequence of layoﬀs would be strictly better than some
permutation under a variety of plausible circumstances: (i) if there were intertemporal
rigidities, the consumer would prefer that the periods of security be consecutive, or, (ii) if
there was firm-specific human capital that increased over the worker’s tenure, firms would
prefer laying oﬀ younger workers.

13

x. The owners of these firms are risk neutral and consume only good x, and
hence maximize expected profits. There is a continuum of producers of the
commitment good who have access to a constant-returns-to-scale production
process that uses only good x as an input. As a result, these producers will
earn no profits (and will occupy very little of our attention, with a reference
to “firms” always being a reference to producers of good x). At any instant,
there is a mass of size 1/N of consumers (or, interchangeably, “workers”) of
age t, t = 1, . . . , N , of their N -period lives.
Each firm in each period can be in one of two states, state 1 or “good”
or state 2 or “bad,” with probabilities p ∈ (0, 1) and 1 − p, independently
across periods. There is no aggregate uncertainty, so precisely proportion
p of the firms are in the good state in each period.11 Output in period t
is determined by the number of workers the firm employs in that period,
n(t), and the state. The production function in state 1 is given by f and in
state 2 by g, where f (n) > g(n) and f 0 (n) > g 0 (n) > 0 for all quantities of
employment n. We interpret state 2 as an adverse productivity shock.12
At the beginning of each period t, firms post labor contracts, which
workers either accept or reject to remain idle (at reservation utility U ). A
labor contract specifies wages w1 (t) and w2 (t) to be paid in the good (w1 (t))
and bad (w2 (t)) states as well as the proportion ρ(t) of employees that will
be laid oﬀ in the bad state. In addition, the contract must specify how the
risk of unemployment is to be distributed across employees.
The firm faces four constraints in setting these contracts. First,
ρ(t) =

n1 (t)
,
n1 (t) + n2 (t)

where n2 (t) is the amount of labor hired in state 2 and n1 (t) + n2 (t) is the
amount of labor hired in state 1. Hence, n1 (t) is the extra amount of labor
hired in state 1. In principle, n1 (t) could be negative, but it will never be
optimal to hire more labor in the bad state than in the good state. The case
of n1 (t) = 0 corresponds to no unemployment risk.
The next two constraints we impose are that the firm cannot make payments to unemployed workers, and that firms cannot pay a wage in state
i that exceeds the marginal product of labor in state i. These restrictions
11

Because we do not require draws to be independent across firms, it is straightforward
to construct a probability space with these features.
12
What is important in our model is that shocks aﬀect the marginal profitability of
workers; nothing in our analysis would be substantively diﬀerent had we instead modeled
firms as being subject to demand shocks that decreased the marginal revenue product.

14

might be interpreted as reflecting moral hazard considerations. Making payments in excess of marginal products makes it too tempting for the firm to
fire workers for alleged nonperformance, while unemployment compensation
provides insuﬃcient incentives to undertake home production or seek alternatives. Additionally, firms may face a limit on their ability to borrow money
to pay workers above their marginal product, with the constraint that firms
never pay above the marginal product viewed as the limiting case.
The constraint that wages not exceed marginal products is essential to
our analysis. In its absence, an argument analogous to the “wage bill” argument of Akerlof and Miyazaki [1] would ensure that the optimal labor
contract completely insures the worker against risk, featuring no wage fluctuations and no unemployment. Our interest is in studying how optimal
contracts balance wage and unemployment risk, in the presence of some imperfection that potentially forces the contract to contain some risk. There
are likely to be other frictions under which optimal contracts feature some
risk, which we expect would interact with consumption commitments in
similar ways.
We consider two possible ways that layoﬀs could be allocated among
workers in the event of a bad state. The employment contract may specify
that each worker is laid oﬀ with probability ρ(t) in the bad state. We refer to this as the random-layoﬀ contract. Alternatively, the contract may
specify that the youngest n1 /(n1 + n2 ) proportion of workers is laid oﬀ with
probability one, while others retain employment. We refer to this as a concentrated layoﬀ contract.13 Given that workers who make no consumption
commitments are indiﬀerent as to the timing of layoﬀs, while those who
make commitments prefer to bunch them (cf. Proposition 5.2), it suﬃces to
consider these two possibilities. We say the workers who will be laid oﬀ in
the bad state are “at risk” of a layoﬀ, while the others are immune. Notice
that “youngest” is unambiguous in our model, where there is perfect correlation between a worker’s age and her tenure with the firm. When turning
the empirical work in Section 5.3, we interpret youngest in terms of tenure
with the firm.
Finally, we assume that in each period, all workers who remain employed
13

Let n be the largest integer smaller than Nn1 /(n1 +n2 ). Then all workers of age n and
younger are laid oﬀ, as well as Nn1 /(n1 + n2 ) − n of the next youngest age. It simplifies
the calculations considerably to assume that the latter workers take a random draw at the
beginning of the period, indicting with probability n1 /(n1 + n2 ) − n/N that they will be
laid oﬀ if the state is bad (and hence that they cannot make consumption commitments),
and with the complementary probability that they are immune from layoﬀs and can make
commitments.

15

at the firm after the state of nature is realized receive the same wage. In
particular, wages do not vary with workers’ ages. When layoﬀs are random,
this is not a binding constraint. When layoﬀs are concentrated, we are
constraining the good-state wage w1 to not depend upon whether a worker
is at risk of being laid oﬀ. This simplifies the calculations, but does not play
an important role in the results.
We examine a steady state of this economy, and assume that firms evaluate their payoﬀs via a limit-of-the-means criterion. As a result, firms oﬀer
the same employment contract to new workers in each period, maximizing
the profit obtained from a representative period. This employment contract
oﬀers wages that are state contingent but do not vary across periods, with
layoﬀ probabilities that may vary with workers’ ages (i.e., tenure), but again
do not vary across periods. The contract is subject to the constraint that
each cohort of workers receive an expected utility, over their lifetime, equal
to the reservation utility level.
Each worker’s consumption plan specifies quantities that are state contingent but that again do not depend on the time period, including quantities
x1 and x2 as well as z1 and z2 to be consumed in each state, if employed.
The plan also specifies whether commitments are involved in the consumption of the latter good, bearing in mind the constraint that commitments
cannot be made by those at risk of being laid oﬀ.

5.2

Risk Bunching

We now demonstrate how optimal employment contracts can exploit economies
of scale in bearing risk.
No consumption commitments. Suppose first that consumers make no
consumption commitments. They are then risk neutral, and will be indiﬀerent between concentrated and random layoﬀs. We can assume that in each
period, each worker faces the layoﬀ risk ρ, which must equal n1 /(n1 + n2 ).
Risk neutrality also allows us to initially ignore the constraints that wages
not exceed marginal products in our derivation of an optimal employment

16

contract.14 In a steady state, we can express the firm’s problem as
max

n1 ,n2 ,w1 ,w2

p[f (n1 + n2 ) − w1 (n1 + n2 )] + (1 − p)[g(n2 ) − w2 n2 ]

subject to
pw1 + (1 − p)

n2
w2 ≥ U .
n1 + n2

The maximand gives the firm’s expected profit in each period. The constraint is similarly the worker’s expected utility in each period.15 The constraint requires that the worker’s expected utility of the labor contract be
at least U , the reservation utility level that clears the labor market.
The next proposition, the proof of which is in Section 8, characterizes the
equilibrium employment contract when workers do not make consumption
commitments.
Proposition 3 The equilibrium employment contract oﬀered to workers who
do not make consumption commitments features no layoﬀs, and w1 > w2 ,
where each wage equals the marginal product of labor in the corresponding
state.
The intuition for this result is straightforward. Consider a candidate contract in which n1 > 0, so that some employees are laid oﬀ in the bad state.
We can exploit workers’ risk neutrality to adjust w1 and w2 , preserving expected utility and expected wage payments (and hence profits), until the
wage in state 1 equals its marginal product. Now consider a reduction in
n1 , the extra labor employed in the good state. Since the marginal product
of labor equals the wage rate in the good state, this marginal reduction has
only a second-order eﬀect on profits. However, it reduces the probability
of unemployment in the bad state, yielding a first-order increase in utility.
14

Given any optimal contract in which neither wage equals the corresponding marginal
product, one wage must exceed and one fall short of the relevant marginal product, since
otherwise hiring either more or less labor would increase profits. We can then smooth
wages, preserving expected wage payments, until one wage hits the relevant marginal
product. If the other wage exceeds its marginal product, then we have too much labor.
If it falls short, then we can smooth employment somewhat less, causing both wages
to fall short of their marginal products and allowing us to optimally hire more labor.
Hence, for any optimal contract, we can find an equivalent contract in which wages equal
marginal products, allowing us to dispense with the explicit provision of this equality in
our derivation.
15
Recall that n2 /(n1 + n2 ) is the probability of being employed in the bad state and
that w1 and w2 can be viewed as indirect utility functions, giving the utility of receiving
a wage of wi in state i when consuming rental housing.

17

This first-order increase in utility can be exploited by reducing wages and
hence increasing profits. A candidate contract involving layoﬀs thus cannot
be optimal.
Consumption commitments. We now examine the optimal employment contract when workers make commitments. This is possible only if
there are some ages at which workers do not face layoﬀs, in which case it is
optimal to concentrate layoﬀs. Workers who face no layoﬀ risk make consumption commitments, while workers facing a risk of layoﬀ purchase good
z on the spot market, without commitments, at price cN .
The firm’s optimal strategy must solve
max

n1 ,n2 ,w1 ,w2

p[f (n1 + n2 ) − w1 (n1 + n2 )] + (1 − p)[g(n2 ) − w2 n2 )]

(8)

subject to
n2
n1
(pU1 (w1 , w2 ) + (1 − p)U2 (w1 , w2 )) +
pw1 ≥ U (9)
n1 + n2
n1 + n2
gn0 2 − w2 ≥ 0. (10)
The second constraint embodies the restriction that the wage in state 2 not
exceed the marginal product of labor in that state. A similar constraint
applies to state 1 but does not bind in equilibrium.16 We then have the
following proposition, the proof of which is left to Section 8:
Proposition 4 If workers make consumption commitments and are subject
to concentrated layoﬀ risks, then the equilibrium employment contract features a wage rate w2 that equals the marginal product of labor in state 2 and
a wage w1 ≥ w2 that is below the marginal product in state 1.
Again, we see that workers who make consumption commitments are
eﬀectively risk averse. As a result, the firm smooths the wages across states.
For example, suppose that consumers make commitments and that wages
equal marginal products in both states. Consider a marginal reduction in
the quantity of labor hired, while retaining the ratio of state-1 to state-2
employment. Because wage rates and the layoﬀ risk (of zero) are retained,
the workers’ utilities are unaﬀected. Because wages equal marginal products, this reduction in employment has only a second-order eﬀect on profits.
16

Consumption commitments have the eﬀect of making consumers risk averse, introducing an incentive for the firm to smooth wages. The constraint that wages not exceed
marginal products will then bind in the relatively low-marginal-product state 2.

18

However, the employment reduction increases marginal products, relaxing
the constraints on wages. This allows the firm to engage in wage smoothing that preserves expected wage payments but increases the utility of the
eﬀectively risk averse workers. This in turn relaxes the workers’ participation constraint, allowing the firm to make profit-enhancing adjustments in
the employment contract. Thus, it cannot be the case that an optimal fullemployment contract sets both wages equal to the corresponding marginal
product. The premium on smoothing wage rates ensures instead that the
marginal-product constraint binds in state 2 but not state 1.
Optimal layoﬀs. We next combine the firms’ and workers’ decisions to
determine the circumstances under which the equilibrium calls for layoﬀs.
The intuition is that layoﬀs allow workers to make better use of consumption
commitments when they are not at risk of being laid oﬀ, by smoothing
wages and hence making it less burdensome that the same quantity of the
commitment good be consumed in the good and bad state.
Layoﬀs are likely to be optimal when consumption commitments are important. To get an idea of what this involves, return to the motivation for
our model. For some components of consumption, such as food and clothing, one can modify consumption plans relatively cheaply. There are other
components of consumption for which adjustments are quite costly. An individual whose consumption plan includes listening to rock music will likely
have purchased a stereo and a number of compact disks. These purchases
might be quite sensible when considering the average cost per song played
over the expected lifetime of the disks. However, given the relatively low
resale value of such items, a shock that requires the individual to reduce his
expenditure on such music by $10 might entail selling the machine and all
the compact disks on eBay.
More generally, services derived from durable goods carry higher adjustment costs than nondurable goods. To the extent that durable goods
constitute a large or increasing portion of expenditures, consumption commitments will be important. In our model, this is captured by the relative
importance of the goods x and z in the utility function. It will be convenient
to focus on the polar case in which all goods involve commitment. We say
that a consumer is fully vulnerable to risk if there is a constant k such that17
U1 (w1 , w2 ) = U2 (w1 , w2 ) = kw2 .
17
We assume that w1 ≥ w2 . At this point, this is simply a naming convention, though
we will subsequently derive this inequality as an equilibrium condition.

19

In this case, only good z matters: any income above w2 received in state 1
provides no additional utility. Such a consumer spends the entire eﬀective
income of w2 in each state on purchasing good z, ensuring that the consumer’s utility can be written as kw2 for some k > 1.18 Our interpretation
of a consumer who spends all of his income on good z is not necessarily that
there are no other consumption goods, but rather that virtually everything
the agent does consume is purchased via a commitment.19
We now work with this extreme case in which workers are fully vulnerable
to risk. We also assume a particular relationship between the production
function in the good and bad states, namely that there exists a constant
α > 1 such that
f (n) = αg(n).
To consolidate notation, let θ(n) = −g 00 (n)n/g 0 (n) be the elasticity of the
marginal product of labor in the bad state. Then we have:
Proposition 5 Let workers be fully vulnerable to risk (i.e., all consumption
involves commitments) and let f (n) = αg(n) for some α > 1. Then optimal
contracts will feature layoﬀs if
p(α − 1)θ(n∗ )k > (k − p)(α − 1 + θ(n∗ )),

(11)

where n∗ is the optimal quantity of labor hired to a contract with no layoﬀs.
To interpret this condition, notice first it is more likely to hold as p is close to
1. This is expected, as the more likely is the good state, the more valuable
will it be to trade the possibility of bad-state layoﬀs for more desirable
good-state wages. Hence, consider the limiting case of p = 1:
(α − 1)θ(n∗ )k > (k − 1)(α − 1 + θ(n∗ )).

(12)

This condition holds for all values of k > 1 whenever (α − 1)θ > α − 1 + θ,
which we can rearrange to give
(α − 2)(θ(n∗ ) − 1) > 1.
18

(13)

Notice that k > 1, given the normalization that we have adopted for the utility
function in the case in which the consumer makes no commitments and our assumption
that commitments reduce the cost of consumption.
19
Even quite ordinary purchases might involve commitments. For example, commitments arise when items are purchased rarely, but in large quantities, to take advantage of
fluctuating prices. Completely committed consumption is unrealistic, but is analytically
convenient. The results will continue to hold in less extreme cases, though with somewhat more cumbersome statements, as long as consumption commitments are suﬃciently
important.

20

A large value of θ indicates that the marginal product of labor is relatively
elastic. Hence, a small reduction in bad-state employment (and hence layoﬀ
risk) yields a relatively large relaxation in the wage constraint, again allowing
a relatively favorable trade-oﬀ between layoﬀ risk and increased good-state
wages. A large value of α indicates that the marginal product of labor is
much higher in the good than in the bad state, making it valuable for the
firm to incur the costs of layoﬀs in order to shift employment from the bad
to the good state and ensuring that only modest layoﬀs need be introduced
in order to compensate for the higher wage costs.20
The potential optimality of layoﬀs arises from an interplay between the
worker’s preferences and the firm’s technology. First, a worker who makes
consumption commitments is eﬀectively risk averse, preferring to smooth
wages across states. We see this in Proposition 4, indicating that the firm
optimally oﬀers a wage that varies less than does the worker’s marginal
revenue product, even without layoﬀs. The potential advantage of layoﬀs is
that they relax the upper bound on the wage in state 2, allowing further wage
smoothing. If consumption commitments are very important, the enhanced
smoothing when not at risk of a layoﬀ can compensate for the additional
layoﬀ risk.
Proposition 5 explores this possibility by assuming that consumption
commitments are of paramount importance, in the sense that all consumption is subject to commitment. But in this case, the firm optimally sets a
wage that does not vary across states. This is as smooth as one can get.
What additional benefits do layoﬀs bring? Once again, the constraints on
wages posed by the firm’s technology come into play. Introducing layoﬀs
allows the firm to decrease employment in state 2 and hence increase the
wage, which binds against the state-2 marginal revenue product of labor.
The worker and the firm may both be willing to trade the layoﬀ risk for this
increased wage. The worker would not be willing to do so if the firm did
not capture some eﬃciency gains in the process.21 Nor would the firm be
Condition (12) involves the endogenous quantity n∗ , though some production functions will yield bounds on θ(n) ensuring (12) for all n. If (α − 2)(θ − 1) > 1 fails, (12) will
still hold as long as k is not too large. The latter requirement may appear paradoxical,
but if (α − 1)θ > α − 1 + θ fails, then increasing the good-stage wage requires a substantial
layoﬀ risk which, for large values of k, is quite costly.
21
Suppose the firm’s revenue were to remain constant, and hence so must its total
expected payment to the worker if its profits are not to decrease. Would the worker
then be willing to reduce the probability of a payment in order to increase the wage
rate? A worker who makes no consumption commitments would be indiﬀerent over any
such adjustment. For a worker who makes such commitments, such an adjustment holds
expected payments constant, while decreasing the proportion of those payments that can
20

21

willing to simply decrease employment in both states, increasing the wage
rate without incurring layoﬀs, since the worker’s expected marginal revenue
product exceeds the wage rate, ensuring that such an adjustment decreases
profits. However, introducing layoﬀs allows eﬃciency gains by transferring
workers from the low-marginal-product state 2 to state 1. This opens the
possibility that the firm may be able to trade layoﬀs for higher wages at a
rate that consumers find beneficial.
To summarize, if consumption commitments are important, there are
economies of scale in bearing risk. If some risk is inevitable, then consumers
prefer to concentrate the risk in as few periods as possible, cushioning its
eﬀects by making no commitments. The payoﬀ from doing so is the relative freedom from risk in other periods, enabling consumers to commit to
consumption. If the implicit exchange rate is favorable, workers may prefer
employment contracts that feature layoﬀ risks early in their tenure, in return for an enhanced ability to make consumption commitments later. In
response to the question raised in the introduction, workers for whom consumption commitments are important may prefer relatively rigid wages and
concentrated layoﬀ risk to guaranteed employment at flexible wages.
Lurking behind this result is the observation that layoﬀs are more likely
to be optimal the less likely is state 2 (the larger is p). The less likely is
the bad state, the less costly is the trade-oﬀ between bad-state layoﬀs and
higher wages, and hence the more likely are the former to be optimal.
Pursuing this intuition, we expect the magnitude of the optimal layoﬀ
risk, conditional on the bad state occurring, to decline as state 2 becomes
more likely. A more likely adverse productivity shock can thus make it more
likely that the firm will impose some layoﬀs, but also that these layoﬀs will
be concentrated among a smaller group of workers when they occur. Those
workers young enough to be laid oﬀ in the bad state face a higher layoﬀ risk
when the bad state is more likely, but there will be fewer such workers at
risk. With the help of some additional structure, we verify this relationship
in the following proposition, the proof of which is in Section 8.
Proposition 6 Let workers be fully vulnerable to risk, let f (n) = αg(n)
for some α > 1, let g(n) = ln(n), and suppose that the optimal contract
features a positive layoﬀ risk. Then the optimal contract corresponding to
a larger value of p (less likely adverse productivity shock) features a larger
layoﬀ probability conditional on the bad state occurring.
be used to make commitments (since commitments cannot be made when one is subject
to layoﬀ risk), decreasing expected utility.

22

5.3

Evidence of Optimal Risk Bunching

Proposition 6 suggests a distinctive influence of consumption commitments
on the structure of optimal layoﬀs: in sectors with a higher incidence of
layoﬀs, those layoﬀs should be more concentrated among younger (lower
tenure) workers. In this section, we argue that US data on layoﬀs and job
tenure are consistent with this relationship. Using the Current Population
Survey (CPS) biannual Displaced Workers and Job Tenure supplements, we
find that in industry-occupation cells with higher rates of layoﬀ, those layoﬀs
are more concentrated among lower tenure workers.
Dividing workers into 22 industries, 8 occupations and 4 geographic regions, we examine data from three of the CPS supplements (1996, 1998, and
2000). We calculate the sample average probability of having been laid oﬀ in
the calendar year prior to the survey for each of these industry-occupationgeography cells.22 We also determine each respondent’s tenure at the last
job he held or lost in the calendar year prior to the survey. We then estimate
the following probit model:
Pr(Layoﬀ i ) = Φ [β 0 + β 1 Pi + β 2 Ti + β 3 (Pi × Ti ) + β 4 Xi ]
where Pr(Layoﬀ i ) is the probability an individual was laid oﬀ during the
response period23 and:
Pi

= sample probability of layoﬀ for all other workers in i ’s cell

Ti = i’s tenure at the job
Xi = a vector of other covariates
Translated into marginal eﬀects the coeﬃcient β 1 will determine the vertical
intercept of the tenure-probability of layoﬀ profile for a cell with aggregate
probability of layoﬀ Pi . The coeﬃcients β 2 and β 3 will, in turn, determine
the slope of the tenure-probability of layoﬀ profile. We expect β 2 < 0,
which is to say that workers with greater tenure are less likely to be laid
22

To avoid regressing a variable on itself, for an individual, the aggregate probability
of layoﬀ in his cell represents the sample probability of layoﬀ among other workers in his
cell.
23
The supplemental surveys each collect data on occupation and job tenure from the
workers in approximately 50,000 households. The surveys also ask workers at least 20
years old “During the last 3 calendar years ... did you lose a job, or leave one because:
your plant or company closed or moved, your position or shift was abolished, insuﬃcient
work or another similar reason?” We consider as laid oﬀ all workers who answer yes to
this question, except those who indicated that they lost or left their job because it was
seasonal work. We exclude all occupations in private households, or on farms.

23

oﬀ. Our primary hypothesis is that β 3 < 0, indicating that layoﬀs are more
concentrated among low-tenure workers when the probability of a layoﬀ is
relatively high.
Restricting attention to the 1035 cells in which we have at least 25 observations, Table [1] presents the estimated marginal eﬀects from this probit.24 Standard errors are clustered at the level of the cell. The first row
Table 1: Marginal Eﬀects from Probit Model of the Probability of Layoﬀ in
the Previous Calendar Year, CPS 1996, 1998, 2000

Aggregate probability of layoﬀ in cell
Tenure
(Prob. of layoﬀ) × (Tenure)

(1)
0.331
(0.0244)
-0.0020
(0.0002)
-0.0080
(0.0038)

(2)
0.333
(0.0243)
-0.0021
(0.0002)
-0.0080
(0.0038)
0.00013
(0.00006)

108456
0.030
0.042

108456
0.030
0.042

Age
High school grad.
College grad.
N
Average of dependent variable
Pseudo R2

(3)
0.305
(0.0251)
-0.0021
(0.0002)
-0.0082
(0.0038)
0.00014
(0.00006)
-0.0050
(0.0020)
-0.0077
(0.0012)
108456
0.030
0.045

indicates that an individual’s probability of layoﬀ is, of course, positively
correlated with the aggregate probability of layoﬀ in his job. On average, a
10% increase in the aggregate probability of layoﬀ is associated with a 3.13.3 percent increase in an average member of the cell’s probability of layoﬀ.
An aggregate increase in the probability of layoﬀ does not translate into the
same increase in average probabilities of layoﬀ for two reasons: first, our
measure of risk is that for all other workers in i’s cell25 and, second, the risk
24

Results are qualitatively and quantitatively similar when we estimate linear probability models and logits.
25
When we increase the minimum number of respondents in a cell, or when we make

24

0

.05

.1

.15

is distributed unevenly across workers. In particular, the results indicate
the typical negative relationship between job tenure and layoﬀ risk.
The second row of Table 1 confirms that layoﬀs tend to fall on workers
with low tenure. Consistent with the predicted influence of consumption
commitments, Row 3 of Table 1 shows that the estimated relationship between tenure and probability of layoﬀ varies depending on the aggregate
probability of layoﬀ in the cell: jobs with higher aggregate probabilities of
layoﬀ also have steeper tenure-layoﬀ probability profiles.26
The estimated relationships between tenure and the probability of layoﬀ
from specification (3), which conditions on the age and education of the
worker, are illustrated in Figure (5) for jobs with varying aggregate probabilities of layoﬀ.

0

5
10
15
20
Tenure at last job held or lost in year previous to sample year
Predicted Probability, High
Predicted Probability, Low

25

Predicted Probability, Mid

a coarser partition of workers, the coeﬃcient on Pi increases as the diﬀerence between
the sample probability of layoﬀ for all workers and for all other workers decreases. With
higher minimums or coarser partitions, the interaction term of interest (described in the
subsequent paragraph) increases in absolute magnitude and p-values decrease.
26
This basic relationship is robust to the replacement of tenure with age. It is also robust
to an alternative specification in which we replace our basic measure of the aggregate
probability of layoﬀ in a cell with an adjusted measure that takes into account the tenure
distribution in the cell. This tenure-adjusted measure is the residual from a regression of
the aggregate probability of layoﬀ in a cell on the deciles of the tenure distribution in that
cell.

25

Comparing the estimates for jobs with 1% and 8% aggregate probabilities of
layoﬀ, we see that those with less than one year of tenure are at substantially
higher risk of layoﬀ in the 8% aggregate risk jobs than in the 1% aggregate
risk jobs.27 This gap declines, however, with tenure. Among those with six
years of tenure, the gap in the layoﬀ probabilities between the 1% and 8%
aggregate risk jobs is approximately half as large. The functional form of
our estimate implies that the estimated rate at which the gap closes is same
for all similar diﬀerences in aggregate layoﬀ risk. For example, the diﬀerence
between the layoﬀ probabilities for workers with virtually no tenure in 15%
aggregate risk jobs and 8% aggregate risk jobs is also cut in half after six
years. Finally, at very high levels of tenure, there is almost no diﬀerence in
the risk of layoﬀ between workers at very low and very high layoﬀ risk jobs.
We interpret these findings as evidence of greater employment risk bunching
in higher aggregate layoﬀ risk jobs.

6

Equilibrium

We turn now to the possibility of multiple equilibria. In doing so, it is helpful
to refer to consumption commitments as housing purchases.
The intuition we wish to capture is that there may be two qualitatively
diﬀerent kinds of equilibria. First, there may be equilibria with an established housing (or, more generally, consumption commitment) market that
enables workers to make consumption commitments if they have suﬃciently
secure incomes. In some cases, this equilibrium will not feature layoﬀs,
though wages will be smoother than marginal products in such an equilibrium. However, if conditions are as covered by Proposition 5, optimal labor
contracts will entail concentrated layoﬀs, with the increased utility associated with consumption commitments and a smoother income stream (when
employed) than in the no layoﬀ contract. The second type of equilibrium
is characterized by employment contracts with no layoﬀs, but with greater
wage risk, in which workers consequently only rent housing. We refer to
these as the ownership and the rental equilibria.
Given the no-commitment equilibrium, why doesn’t some worker purchase housing? Our expectation is that purchased housing must be supported by a mortgage market that will operate only if the market for housing
is suﬃciently active. That is, we think of this equilibrium as a coordination failure: the absence of workers seeking to purchase housing inhibits the
27
If aggregate risk is 8% in a job, then the area under the curve, weighted by the
distribution tenures in the job, must sum to 0.08.

26

emergence of a mortgage market, and the absence of a mortgage market
deters workers from purchasing housing. Notice, however, that creating a
market for owned housing then requires not only the advent of lenders, but
an overhaul of employment contracts. One might well imagine the spontaneous creation of a mortgage market if its mere existence suﬃces for workers
to purchase housing, but may also imagine its appearance to be less likely
if workers will purchase housing only after an innovation in employment
contracts.28
The possibility of multiple equilibria hinges upon the value of cC < cN .
If cC is suﬃciently close to cN , then the cost advantage of owning housing
will not compensate for the rigidity imposed by ownership. Consumers will
then prefer to rent rather than own housing, and the only equilibrium will be
the rental equilibrium. As cC falls, owning housing becomes more attractive
relative to renting housing, eventually becoming suﬃciently attractive as to
make consumers prefer home ownership to renting. The rental equilibrium
still persists, since the deviation of a single firm and its employees to an
employment/consumption package featuring home ownership cannot create
the necessary mortgage insurance market. However, an equilibrium in which
housing is owned will also exist.
These arguments immediately give:
Proposition 7 (7.1) A rental equilibrium exists for all values of cC .
(7.2) There exists a value c∗C such that an equilibrium in which consumers
purchase housing exists (in addition to the rental equilibrium) if and only if
cC ≤ c∗C .
In the latter equilibrium, firms will oﬀer wages that are smoother than
28

Even without these considerations, transitions between the no layoﬀ equilibrium and
the concentrated layoﬀ equilibrium may be quite diﬃcult. If the ownership equilibrium
prevails, older workers who face no layoﬀ risk have every reason to oppose a switch to
the rental equilibrium and its accompanying layoﬀ risk. Conversely, imagine a more elaborate model allowing for a variety of consumption commitments. Suppose, for example
commitments can be made to both children and housing. In the ownership equilibrium,
the possibility of layoﬀs may force workers to avoid both children and ownership when
young, with workers beyond the risk of layoﬀ making both commitments. In the rental
equilibrium, workers might have children, even when young, but avoid housing altogether,
with the wage risk deterring workers from making both commitments but the immunity
from layoﬀ supporting the optimality of a commitment to children. Suppose now that the
rental equilibrium prevails and a new mortgage market opens the possibility of a switch
to the ownership equilibrium. Workers and firms may agree that the latter is superior ex
ante. However, young workers who have already made commitments to children may be
quite opposed to the switch to the ownership equilibrium.

27

marginal products, and may optimally impose a layoﬀ risk (if, for example,
consumption is fully committed and (11) holds).

7

Discussion

Endogenous risk aversion. A glance at their linearly homogeneous utility functions would suggest that the consumers in our model are risk neutral.
However, an inspection of the behavior of those who make consumption commitments would suggest that they are risk averse. These consumers strictly
prefer to smooth their wages across the good and bad states, thereby lowering the inflexibility costs of consumption commitments.
More generally, the utility functions we can hope to observe are inferred
from behavior that is the product of an interaction between preferences and
the technology for converting income into consumption. Diﬀerent technologies may lead us to diﬀerent and potentially misleading inferences concerning
risk aversion. For example, we may observe that consumers are risk neutral,
concluding that insurance has no value, while the opening of an insurance
market may give rise to both risk-averse behavior and active demand for
insurance.29
Concentrated risks. In one respect, workers in our economy seek risk.
Conditional on facing a risk of being laid oﬀ, the worker would prefer to
concentrate this risk in as few states as possible. In essence, there are
economies of scale in bearing risk, inducing workers to lump risks together
rather than disperse them.
Multiple equilibria. This interaction between preferences and technology can give rise to multiple equilibria. In our model, equilibrium layoﬀs
arise if and only if consumption commitments are made, in which case workers are eﬀectively risk averse. Suppose further that consumption commitments are easiest to make if many people make them, perhaps (for example)
because a market for owned housing functions best in the presence of a secondary mortgage insurance market. Multiple equilibria then arise out of the
fact that an insurance market may not open because agents are risk neutral
and hence demand no insurance (while renting housing), while the opening
29

Chetty ([7]) and Chetty and Szeidl ([8]) have independently made this point. Chetty
demonstrated empirically the importance of commitments in estimating risk aversion,
while Chetty and Szeidl show that home ownership aﬀects portfolio composition.

28

of the market leads to home ownership and risk averse behavior that confirms the need for the market. The interplay between an insurance market
for idiosyncratic mortgage risk and widespread home ownership appears to
be consistent with the housing market history reported by Fishback, Horace
and Kantor [12].
Habit formation. Our model generates behavior that is similar to that
of many habit formation models.30 Attanasio [2] discusses a typical habit
formation model which in essence decreases an individual’s eﬀective current
consumption by a constant times the individual’s depreciated aggregate previous consumption. This is sometimes motivated by psychological considerations that emphasize the diﬀerence of the current consumption level from
previous levels. Modeling habit formation in this way makes an individual
averse to downward adjustments in consumption in a manner similar to the
adjustment costs in our model. There are diﬀerences, however. First, our
model would suggest nontrivial heterogeneity, linked to observable characteristics, across individuals in their aversion to downward adjustments in
consumption. An individual who has made consumption commitments will
be highly averse to income shocks compared to individual who has avoided
commitments. Second, there is an asymmetry in the way in which adjustments aﬀect individuals in our model that does not appear in the typical
habit formation model. Negative shocks to an individual’s income in our
model will qualitatively diﬀer from positive shocks: there is no analogue
to the adjustment costs that a negative shock necessitates when a positive
shock occurs.
Though they lead to some similar results, there are potential advantages
to incorporating adjustment costs in the standard consumer model rather
than adding habit-formation parameters to the utility function. First, adjustment costs of the type we consider are, in theory, more easily quantifiable. There exist data on probabilities of default on mortgages, losses incurred should one default on a mortgage, and so on. Second, the adjustment
costs captured by our model likely vary across time and across people. New
financial instruments can change the risk associated with making consumption commitments, as do changes in industry employment policies. This
additional structure, provided by the more detailed modeling of the aversion to income shocks, generates testable implications that adding utility
parameters does not.
30

See Deaton [9] and Attanasio [2] for surveys of the habit formation literature.

29

Imperfect wage insurance. The risk aversion induced by consumption
commitments causes the workers in our model to prefer wages that do not
fluctuate across states, a common implication of risk aversion (Azariadis [3],
Baily [4], and Gordon [13]). In the absence of some constraint, the optimal
labor market contract would ensure all risk, both wage and employment
(Akerlof and Miyazaki [1]). A variety of market imperfections can give rise
to optimal employment contracts that do not eliminate all risk, with this
role in our model played by the assumption that wages cannot exceed marginal products. While firms may, in fact, be able to provide some insurance
to workers by paying wages above marginal product temporarily, there are
obvious limits to their ability to do this.31 The qualitative properties shown
above–workers’ preference for contracts that include layoﬀs and the possibility of multiple equilibria–are driven by the fact that workers cannot be
completely insured.
Voluntary or involuntary unemployment? There is a long-standing
debate in economics about whether unemployment is voluntary or involuntary. Lucas and Rapping [15] set out a model in which negative shocks
may decrease marginal productivity to the point that workers prefer leisure
time (or home production) to working at what would be the market wage.
If this is the case, workers are voluntarily unemployed and unemployment
is Pareto eﬃcient; any policy aimed at reducing unemployment cannot be
welfare-improving. Keynesians, on the other hand, argue that unemployment is involuntary, in the sense that unemployed workers would be willing
to work at the prevailing wage (given their relevant attributes), but cannot
find work. Unemployment in this sense typically leaves open the possibility
of welfare-improving policies.
Taking the perspective of the model in this paper, the question of whether
unemployment is voluntary or involuntary is more complicated. Workers accept a dynamic contract, knowing that under the contract, there is positive
probability that they will be unemployed. That contract is the optimal
feasible contract, given the constraints that prevent full insurance. Having
accepted that contract, one might say that if a state of the world arises in
which a worker finds himself unemployed, that unemployment is voluntary,
since he voluntarily chose the contract from all feasible contracts. Rather
than take this “ex ante viewpoint”, however, one could take an interim
31
Bewley [5, Table 13.1] states that of the reasons given by firms for laying oﬀ workers,
over half gave financial distress, and nearly two thirds gave reduced sales. Our assumption
is that a contract committing such a firm to maintaining employment would eventually
be eroded by eﬀorts on the part of the firm to reduce its labor force.

30

viewpoint; at the time he finds himself unemployed, a worker would prefer to work at the wage paid those workers not laid oﬀ (or even less) to
unemployment. It is not particularly fruitful to debate the proper notion
of “voluntary”; the relevant question is whether a planner with the same
information available to the firms and workers can improve on the contract.
We assumed that firms could not perfectly insure the workers by continuing
their employment at the same wage when subjected to negative productivity
shocks. A planner who was constrained in the same way could not improve
upon the contracts we analyze. If, however, the planner can provide the insurance, welfare improvements are possible. For example, the planner might
provide loans to firms subjected to negative productivity shocks, enabling
them to fully insure workers. While it is beyond the scope of this paper to
investigate the plausibility of various such schemes, they would seem to give
rise to serious incentive problems on the part of the firms.
Morale. Bewley [5, 6] discusses the tendency of employers to insure wage
but not layoﬀ risk. His suggestion is that wage reductions give rise to detrimental morale eﬀects that do not accompany layoﬀs. This diﬀerential eﬀect
on morale is in turn traced to a convention that wage reductions, but not
layoﬀs, are a violation of fairness or social norms. Our analysis suggests
one reason why norms of behavior might arise that stress wage smoothing
coupled with concentrated layoﬀs. If firms face constraints of the type in our
model, profit maximization and worker choice may lead naturally to contracts of the type identified here: concentrated layoﬀs with wage stability
for retained workers. If such contracts prevail over time and workers come
to expect them, their optimal behavior will be such that they will bear large
costs if firms behave otherwise; having made consumption commitments in
anticipation of wage stability, they face large adjustment costs if their wages
are reduced. And if the standard presumption is that such wage reductions do not occur, then a firm that flouts the convention by reducing wages
may not only impose substantial economic hardship on its workers, but may
destroy their morale as well.
We thus find nothing to disagree with in Bewley’s suggestion that adverse
morale eﬀects may pose significant barriers to wage reductions. But why are
wage reductions devastating for morale, reductions in overtime for hourly
employees less so, and layoﬀs conducted within prescribed priority guidelines
much less so? One possibility is that morale eﬀects reinforce practices that
are customary, with these practices having become customary because they
are economically advantageous.

31

8

Appendix: Proofs

Proof of Proposition 1. Let (x1 , z) and (x2 , z) be the optimal consumption bundles given wage profile (w1 , w2 ), so that
x = w − cC z

= pw1 + (1 − p)w2 − cC z
= px1 + (1 − p)x2 ,

using (5) for the second inequality and (3)—(4) for the third. Then we have
pU1 (w̄, w̄) + (1 − p)U2 (w̄, w̄) ≥ pU (x, z) + (1 − p)U (x, z)
= U (x, z)

= U (px1 + (1 − p)x2 , z)

> pU (x1 , z) + (1 − p)U (x2 , z)

= pU1 (w1 , w2 ) + (1 − p)U2 (w1 , w2 ),
where the first (weak) inequality holds because it is feasible to consume
(x, z) in both states given wage profile (w, w), and the second inequality
holds because U (x, z) is strictly concave in x for fixed z. Eliminating the
middle terms gives (6).
Proof of Lemma 1. The first-order conditions for the consumer’s utility
maximization, attaching multipliers λ1 and λ2 to the two constraints, are
given by32
pUx0 1 (x1 , z) + λ1 = 0
(1 − p)Ux0 2 (x2 , z) + λ2 = 0

pUz0 (x1 , z) + (1 − p)Uz0 (x2 , z) + (λ1 + λ2 )cC = 0.
>From the first two conditions, we have
pUx0 1
λ1
=
.
λ2
(1 − p)Ux0 2

(14)

However, we also have the constraints

x1 = w1 − zcC

x2 = w2 − zcC .

If w1 > w2 , then these constraints give x1 > x2 and hence Ux0 1 < Ux0 2 , which
with (14) implies (7).
32

Throughout, primes denote derivatives, with the subscript identifying the variable
with respect to which the derivative is taken.

32

Proof of Proposition 3. Attaching multiplier λ to the constraint and
multiplier β to the participation constraint that n1 ≥ 0 (one easily verifies
that workers will not optimally be laid oﬀ in the good state), the first-order
conditions are:33
n1 : p(fn0 1 − w1 ) − λ(1 − p)

n2
w2 + β = 0
(n1 + n2 )2

n2 : p(fn0 2 − w1 ) + (1 − p)(gn0 2 − w2 ) + λ(1 − p)
w1 : −p(n1 + n2 ) + λp = 0
w2 : −(1 − p)n2 + λ(1 − p)

(15)

n1
w2 = 0(16)
(n1 + n2 )2
(17)

n2
= 0.
n1 + n2

(18)

Assume that n1 > 0, so that there are layoﬀs, and hence β = 0. Coupling
this with the equality λ = n1 + n2 , which we can derive from either of (17)
or (18), we can rewrite (15)—(16) as
n2
w2 = 0
n1 + n2
n1
− w2 ) + (1 − p)
w2 = 0.
n1 + n2

p(fn0 1 − w1 ) − (1 − p)
p(fn0 2 − w1 ) + (1 − p)(gn0 2

Substituting the first of these into the second, we have
(1 − p)

n1
n2
w2 + (1 − p)(gn0 2 − w2 ) + (1 − p)
w2 = 0,
n1 + n2
n1 + n2

or
gn0 2 = 0,
a contradiction. Hence, there must be no layoﬀs. Intuitively, this last condition indicates that layoﬀs will occur in the bad state only if the marginal
product of labor in that state is zero. We can also conclude, from (16), that
||
w1 = f 0 (n2 ) and w2 = g 0 (n2 ) which in turn implies that w1 > w2 .
Proof of Proposition 4. First, if both wages fall short of the corresponding marginal products, then the firm could increase profits by hiring more
labor at the existing wage rate while preserving the existing probability of a
layoﬀ (and hence preserving worker utility). If w1 equals its marginal product and w2 falls short of its marginal product, then either (1) w2 < w1 , in
Notice that the notation here is somewhat awkward, in that fn0 1 = fn0 2 (since f is a
function of n1 + n2 ), but seems a reasonable compromise between clutter and informativeness.
33

33

which case the firm can increase w2 and decrease w1 , preserving expected
wage payments while increasing worker utility and leading to a state at
which both wages fall short of their marginal products, at which point the
firm can increase profits by hiring more labor; or (2) w2 ≥ w1 , then there
must be layoﬀs in the bad state and the firm can increase profits and consumer utility by hiring more labor in the bad state (and hence reducing the
layoﬀ probability). Hence, we must have w2 = g 0 . If w2 > w1 , smoothing wages again increases consumer utility while preserving expected wage
payments, allowing the firm to increase profits by increasing employment.
Thus, we must have:
(19)
f 0 ≥ w1 ≥ w2 = g 0 .

Attaching multipliers λ and γ to the constraints 9 and 10 and multiplier
β to the constraint n1 ≥ 0, the first-order conditions for the firm’s profit
maximization problem are:
n2
n1 : p(fn0 1 − w1 ) − λ
(pU1 + (1 − p)U2 )
(n1 + n2 )2
n2
+λp
w1 + β = 0
(20)
(n1 + n2 )2
n2 : p(fn0 2 − w1 ) + (1 − p)(gn0 2 − w2 ) + λ

n1
(pU1 + (1 − p)U2 )
(n1 + n2 )2

n1
w1 + γgn002 n2 = 0
(n1 + n2 )2
µ
¶
dU1
n2
dU2
p
+ (1 − p)
w1 : −p(n1 + n2 ) + λ
(n1 + n2 )
dw1
dw1
n1
+λp
w1 = 0
(n1 + n2 )2
µ
¶
dU1
n2
dU2
p
+ (1 − p)
− γ = 0.
w2 : −(1 − p)n2 + λ
(n1 + n2 )
dw2
dw2
−λp

Now suppose first that there are no layoﬀs, so that n1 = 0. Then (21)
becomes:
(24)
p(fn0 2 − w1 ) + (1 − p)(gn0 2 − w2 ) + γgn002 n2 = 0.
Now suppose that both wages equal marginal products. Then (24) can be
satisfied only if γ = 0. Using γ = 0, we can write (22)—(23) as
¶
µ
dU1
dU2
= 0
+ (1 − p)
−pn2 + λ p
dw1
dw1
¶
µ
dU1
dU2
−(1 − p)n2 + λ p
= 0,
+ (1 − p)
dw2
dw2
34

(21)

(22)
(23)

giving
p
1−p

=

dU1
dU2
p dw
+ (1 − p) dw
1
1
dU1
dU2
p dw
+ (1 − p) dw
2
2

.

(25)

We now note that the terms in the numerator and denominator on the right
side are the marginal (maximized) utilities of wages w1 and w2 . A standard
argument shows that these marginal utilities are equal to the multipliers
λ1 and λ2 from the consumer’s utility maximization problem with owned
housing, giving
λ1
p
=
.
(26)
1−p
λ2

But this contradicts (7), given our assumption that there are no layoﬀs, and
w1 > w2 because workers are paid their marginal products). Hence, it must
not be that both wages equal their respective marginal product. From (19),
we then have f 0 > w1 ≥ w2 = g 0 .
Now suppose that the optimal employment contract features layoﬀs in
state 2. (It is straightforward to exclude the optimality of layoﬀs in state
1.) Suppose the first weak inequality in (19) an equality. Since n1 > 0, we
have β = 0. From (20), we then have
−λ

n2
n2
(pU1 + (1 − p)U2 ) + λp
w1 = 0.
2
(n1 + n2 )
(n1 + n2 )2

As a result, we have
pw1 = pU1 + (1 − p)U2 .
This is a contradiction. The maximum utility achieved when renting housing
and faced with wages w1 in state 1 and 0 in state 2 is pw1 . A consumer who
has income w2 > 0 in state 2 and rents must then receive a higher utility,
and a consumer with income w2 who chooses to own housing must receive
a utility at least as high as the latter, giving the contradiction. Hence, we
||
must have f 0 > w1 ≥ w2 = g 0 .
Proof of Proposition 5. We assume that the optimal contract features
no layoﬀs and seek a contradiction. Because consumption is entirely committed, the optimal no-layoﬀ contract must feature n∗ = n2 , n1 = 0, and
w1 = w2 = g 0 (n2 ). Beginning with this contract, consider an adjustment
that decreases n2 , increases w1 = w2 ≡ w so as to preserve the equality of
the state-2 wage and the marginal product of labor (i.e., dw/dn2 = g 00 (n2 )),
and increases n1 so as to preserve the firm’s expected profits. It is a contradiction to show that this adjustment increases consumer utility.
35

The firm’s profits from the putative equilibrium contract are
p[f (n1 + n2 ) − w(n1 + n2 )] + (1 − p)[g(n2 ) − wn2 ],
where the assumption that there are no layoﬀs gives n1 = 0. We now take
a derivative with respect to n2 , adjusting w so as to preserve equality with
the marginal product of labor in the bad state and adjusting n1 so as to
preserve expected profits, giving:
·
¸
¢ dn1
¡ 0
dw
dw
+ 1 +(1−p)[g 0 (n2 )−w]−p
(n1 +n2 )−(1−p)
n2 = 0.
p f (n1 + n2 ) − w
dn2
dn2
dn2
Because g 0 (n2 ) = w, dw/dn2 = g 00 (n2 ), and n1 = 0 by assumption, we can
rearrange to obtain
dn1
p[f 0 (n2 ) − g 0 (n2 )] − g 00 (n2 )n2
.
=−
dn2
p[f 0 (n2 ) − g 0 (n2 )]

(27)

The consumer’s utility, given that housing is owned, is given by
n1
n2
kw +
pw.
n1 + n2
n1 + n2
Diﬀerentiating gives:
dw
dn2

·

³
³
´
´

dn1
dn1
dn1
¸
+
n
−
n
+
1
(n
+
n
)
−
n
+
1
n
1
2
2
1
2
1
dn2
dn2
dn2
kn2 + pn1
.
+p
+w k
n1 + n2
(n1 + n2 )2
(n1 + n2 )2

Using the facts that w = g 0 (n2 ), n1 = 0 and dw/dn2 = g 00 (n2 ), we have a
contradiction if
dn1
,
g 00 (n2 )kn2 < g 0 (n2 )(k − p)
dn2
or
dn1
.
−θk < (k − p)
dn2
Using (27), this is
p(f 0 (n2 ) − g 0 (n2 ))θk > (k − p)(p(f 0 (n2 ) − g 0 (n2 )) − g 00 (n2 )n2 ),
or, using the fact that f 0 (n2 ) − g 0 (n2 ) = (α − 1)g 0 (n2 ),
p(α − 1)θk > (k − p)(p(α − 1) + θ).

||
36

Proof of Proposition 6. [Step 1] We begin by collecting some preliminary observations. First, given that g(n) = ln n, we have
θ(n) = −

ng 00 (n)
= 1.
g 0 (n)

The important feature here is that this elasticity is constant, simplifying the
calculations, which do not depend upon its particular value. We will find it
convenient to denote the ratio nn12 by N .
Second, because f (n) = αg(n), we have
f 0 (n1 + n2 ) = αg 0 (n1 + n2 ) =

α
α
α
=
g 0 (n2 ).
=
n1 + n2
n2 (1 + N )
1+N

We now write the firm’s profit maximization problem solely as a function of
n2 , recognizing that in equilibrium the firm will pay the same wage in both
states (because consumption is fully vulnerable to risk), where this wage
will be given by g 0 (n2 ), and that n1 will be given by a function n1 (n2 ) that
causes the consumer’s participation constraint to hold with equality. The
consumer’s participation constraint is given by
n1
n2
kw +
pw ≥ U
n1 + n2
n1 + n2

(28)

Hence, for n2 with kg 0 (n2 ) = U , we have n1 = 0. This is the optimal
contract without layoﬀs. The firm will never find it optimal to hire more
than n2 workers in state 2. As n2 declines, the wage g 0 (n2 ) increases, and in
response, so does n1 and hence the unemployment risk. The firm’s profits
are then given by
π(n2 ) = p[f (n2 + n1 (n2 )) − g 0 (n2 )(n2 + n1 (n2 ))] + (1 − p)[g(n2 ) − g 0 (n2 )n2 ].
Diﬀerentiating gives, suppressing the arguments of some functions,
µ
¶
dn1
dπ(dn2 )
0
0
= p[f − g ]
+ 1 + (1 − p)[g 0 − g 0 ] − g 00 [n2 + pn1 ]
dn2
dn2
¸ µ
·
¶
α
dn1
− 1 g0
= p
+ 1 − g 00 n2 [1 + pN ].
1+N
dn2
Hence, we have a first-order condition (for interior solutions) of
µ
¶
dn1
1 dπ(n2 )
α
− 1]
= p[
+ 1 + θ[1 + pN ] = 0.
g 0 dn2
1+N
dn2
37

(29)

The second term on the right side is positive, and hence in equilibrium the
first must be negative, which is consistent with dn1 /dn2 < 0.
[Step 2] Now suppose that p is replaced by a new, higher probability
0
p , making the good state more likely. It suﬃces to argue that the resulting
adjustments increase the value n1 /n2 .
If n1 , n2 , w and (counterfactually) dn1 /dn2 remain unchanged, then the
firm’s first-order condition is now negative. (The first-order condition was
zero at price p, and the increase to p0 increases proportionately every term in
the first-order condition except θ, which is positive and remains unchanged,
so the condition must now be negative). However, the consumer has also
been pushed above the participation constraint, now finding the employment
contract strictly better than the alternative. The negative firm derivative is
thus not informative, since we no longer satisfy the constraints supposedly
built into this derivative. Let us then consider the following adjustment.
The ratio N = nn12 is held constant while n2 is increased and w decreased
(to satisfy w = g 0 (n2 )) until a value n02 is reached at which the consumer’s
participation constraint binds. Since we can rewrite (28) as
1
N
kw +
pw ≥ U ,
1+N
1+N
there must be a value of n02 which induces a value of w (given the fixed
N ) at which this binds. At this point, the consumer’s participation constraint is satisfied with equality and hence the firm’s first-order condition is
informative.
We now argue that this increase of n2 to n02 , while holding fixed n1 /n2
and (hypothetically) dn1 /dn2 , preserves the negative value of the right side
of (29) (evaluated at p0 ). We have seen that the right side is negative when
evaluated at p0 , before the increase in n2 . Since N has been held constant
while increasing n2 to n02 , it suﬃces to show that the combination of an
increase from p to p0 and from n2 to n02 has decreased (increased the absolute
value, since dn1 /dn2 < 0) the term dn1 /dn2 . We implicitly diﬀerentiate the
consumer’s participation constraint to find this derivative:
´
´
³
³
dn1
dn1
1
+
1
(n
+
n
)
−
n
+
1
n1 + n2 − n2 dn
1
2
1 dn2
dn2
dn2
kn2 + pn1 dw
kw +
pw +
0 =
2
2
(n1 + n2 )
(n1 + n2 )
n1 + n2 dn2
=
=

1
n1 − n2 dn
dn2

n1 + n2

dn1
n2 − n1 0
kg 0 + n2 dn2
pg + (kn2 + pn2 )g 00
n1 + n2

n1
dn1 p − k 0
(k − p)g 0 +
g + (kn2 + pn1 )g 00 .
n1 + n2
dn2 n1 + n2
38

We can then solve for
dn1
dn2

=
=
=

µ

n1 (k − p)
g 00
+ (kn2 + pn1 ) 0
n1 + n2
g

¶

n1 + n2 1
k − p n2

n1 (kn2 + pn1 )(n1 + n2 ) 1 g 00
+
n2
k−p
n g0
´³
´ 2
³
1 + nn12
k + p nn12
n1
−θ
n2
k−p

= N −θ

(k + pN )(1 + N )
< 0,
k−p

where we can infer the inequality from the firm’s first-order condition.
We now see that the increase from n2 to n02 has no eﬀect on dn1 /dn2 ,
given that N is held fixed. An individual worker cares only about her wage
and layoﬀ probability, not the aggregate amount of labor hired. The increase
from p to p0 increases the absolute value of the second term, which enters
with a negative sign, and hence dn1 /dn2 becomes smaller.
[Step 3] We have shown that increasing the probability of a good state
from p to p0 , while holding the layoﬀ risk constant and adjusting the wage
and total employment to preserve the participation constraint, yields a situation in which dπ 2 (n02 )/dn2 < 0. The firm’s profits are thus increasing
as n2 decreases (and w increases, to preserve equality with the marginal
product of labor, and so n1 /n2 increases, to preserve the participation constraint). This establishes the result, if we can verify that the firm’s profit
maximization problem is suﬃciently well behaved, meaning that a negative
value of dπ(n02 )/dn2 ensures that the profit maximizing value of n2 is indeed
lower than n02 . For this, we must return to the firm’s first-order condition.
Substituting for dn1 /dn2 , we can write this as:
¶µ
¶
µ
(k + pN )(1 + N )
α
dπ(n2 )
−1
(1 + N ) − θ
+ θ(1 + pN )
=p
dn2
1+N
k−p
¶
µ
(k + pN )(1 + N )
k + pN
− (1 + N ) + θ
+ θ(1 + pN ). (30)
= p α − αθ
k−p
k−p

Viewed as a function of N, this expression is quadratic, becoming arbitrarily large as N becomes either arbitrarily small or arbitrarily large. It is
straightforward to verify that the function is positive at N = −1. Noting
that only positive values of N are relevant, and that N and n2 are inversely
related, we then have two possibilities. First, the function π(n2 ) may have
39

only one interior extreme point on [0, n2 ], which is a maximum. (This case
obtains if (30) is negative when N = 0.) In this case, finding dπ(n02 )/n2 < 0
suﬃces to conclude that the optimal value of n2 lies below n02 . Second,
there may be two interior extreme points, with dπ(n2 )/dn2 > 0 and with
the interior maximum at a value of n2 less than n02 . (This case obtains if
(30) is positive when N = 0.) In this case, it remains only to argue that
the interior maximum dominates the boundary maximum at n2 . However,
for the original value of p, our assumption was that the optimal contract
involved layoﬀs. If this layoﬀ contract dominates the no-layoﬀ contract for
probability p, then it must also do so for probability p0 . This ensures that
the interior maximum, corresponding to an optimal contract with layoﬀs,
||
dominates the no-layoﬀ boundary maximum at n2 .

References
[1] George A. Akerlof and Hajime Miyazaki. The implicit contract theory
of unemployment meets the wage bill argument. Review of Economic
Studies, 67:321—338, 1980.
[2] Oratzio Attanasio. Consumption. In John Taylor and Michael Woodford, editors, Handbook of Macroeconomics, chapter 11, pages 741—812.
Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1999.
[3] Costas Azariadis. Implicit contracts and underemployment equilibria.
Journal of Political Economy, 83:1183—1202, 1975.
[4] Martin Neil Baily. Wages and unemployment under uncertain demand.
Review of Economic Studies, 41:37—50, 1974.
[5] Truman F. Bewley. Why Wages Don’t Fall During a Recession. Harvard
University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1999.
[6] Truman F. Bewley. Fairness, reciprocity and wage rigidity. Discussion
paper no. 1383, Cowles Foundation for Research in Economics at Yale
University, 2002.
[7] Raj Chetty. Consumption commitments, unemployment durations, and
local risk aversion. Technical report, Harvard University, 2002.
[8] Raj Chetty and Adam Szeidl. Consumption Commitments and Asset
Prices. Technical report, Harvard University, 2004.

40

[9] Angus Deaton. Understanding Consumption. Clarendon Press, Oxford,
1992.
[10] Tore Ellingsen and Steinar Holden. Sticky Consumption and Rigid
Wages. In Market Behavior and macroeconomic Modelling, eds. Steven
Brakman, Hans van Ees, and Simon K. Kuipers, Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1998.
[11] Tore Ellingsen and Steinar Holden. A Durable Relationship. Mimeo,
Department of Economics, Stockholm School of Economics, 2002.
[12] Price V. Fishback, William C. Horrace, and Shawn Kantor. The origins
of modern housing finance: The impact of federal housing programs
during the great depression. Mimeo, University of Arizona, 2001.
[13] Donald F. Gordon. A neoclassical theory of Keynesian unemployment.
Economic Inquiry, 12:431—459, 1974.
[14] Richard E. Kihlstrom and Leonard J. Mirman. Constant, increasing and
decreasing risk aversion with many commodities. Review of Economic
Studies, 68:271—280, 1981.
[15] Robert E. Lucas and Leonard A. Rapping. Real wages, employment
and inflation. Journal of Political Economy, 77:721—754, 1969.

41

