                        NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    ON THE MONETIZATION OF DEFICITS




                            Alan S. Blinder




                        Working Paper No. 1052



                 NATIONAL BUREAJJ OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                       1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                          Cambridge MA 02138



                            December 1982




 Revised version of a paper presented at the conference
                                                          on "The
 Econoj,jc Consequences of Government Deficits" at Washington
 University, st. Louis, Missouri,
 Leonard Nakamura for              October 29—30, 1982. I thank
                      research assistance, the National Science
 Foundation for research
                         support, and Scott Hem, Dwight Jaffee,
Michael Levy, Jorge de Macedo, Hyman Minsky, Franco
                                                      Modigliani,
Joseph Stiglitz, John Taylor, and Burton Zwiclc for helpful
and suggestions on an earlier draft. The research             comments
part of the NBER's research                          reported here is
                             program in Economic Fluctuations.
Opinions expressed are those of the                                Any
National Bureau of Economic Research.author  and not those of  the
                                                  NBER Working Paper #1052
                                                       December 1982



                        On the Monetization of Deficits



                                   ABSTRACT



      Whether or not a deficit is
                                  monetized is often thought to have important
 macroeconomic ramifications. This
                                    paper is organized around two questions.
 The first is: Does
                    monetization matter?, or more specifically, For a given
 budget deficit, do nominal or real variables behave differently
                                                                      depending
 on whether deficits are monetized
                                     or not? Virtually all macro models give
 an affirmative answer. After
                                 sorting out some theoretical issues that
 arise in a dynamic
                      context, i present some new time series evidence which
 suggests that monetization matters
                                      mostly for nominal variables.
     The second question is: What factors determine how much
                                                             monetization
the Federal Reserve will do?
                              After discussing some normative rules, I
offer a game—theort
                       argument to explain why a central bank may choose not
to monetize deficits at all and may even contract bank
                                                       reserves when the
government raises its deficit. The
                                      empirical work turns up a
                                                                  surprisingly
systematic link between budget deficits
                                          and growth in reserves. This
relationship suggests that the Federal
                                         Reserve monetizes deficits less when
inflation is high and when
                             government purchases are growing
                                                                rapidly.


                                     Alan S. Blinder
                                     Department of Economics
                                     Princeton University
                                     Princeton, NJ 08544

                                     (609) 452—4010
                                                              PAGE 1

      A government deficit is said to be 'moneti-ed" when the
 central bank purchases the bonds that the government issues to
 cover its deficit.     Because of the central bank's balance sheet
 identity, such p urchases increase bank reserves unless offset
by other transac tions. By contrast, new government debt

purchased by pri vate parties does not increase bank reserves.
Because of this difference, whether or not a deficit is

monetized is o-ft en thought to have important macro— economi c

ramifications.    And there is considerable evidence that thi 5
                               -
supposition is c orrect.

     This paper   is   organized around two questions; Does
monetization mat ter? and, What factors determine how much

monetization the Federal Reserve will do? Both of these

questions have b een asked before, and my answers will be less
than startling.   My aims are more modest: to bring a bit more
evidence to bear on the issues and to add a few new thoughts to
the discu ssi on.

     Sect ion I takes up the first question: For a given
                                                         budget
deficit, will nominal or real variables behave differently

depending on whether the new bonds are purchased by the central
bank or by the public? Notice that this is basically the same

as asking; Do open—market operations matter? Virtually all
macro models give an affirmative answer. But some recent
theoretical developments, which I review, suggest that the
issue is a good deal more complicated than indicated by simple

models like the quantity theory or IS—LM. After sorting out
                                                           PAGE 2


some theoretical issues that arise in a dynamic context,   I



present some new time series evidence which supports the old

idea that monetization matters.
     Section II addresses the second issue: How does the Fed

decide   how much of each deficit to monetize?   First, some

normative rules dictating how the Fed should make this decision

are presented and brie-fly evaluated. Then a gametheoretic
argument is offered to explain why a central bank with
discretionary authority may choose not to monetize deficits at

all and mayinstead do the opposite, i.e., contract bank
reserves when the government raises its deficit! Finally,      I


offer some empirical evidence suggesting that there is a
systematic link between budget deficits and growth in reserves.
This relationship suggests that the Federal Reserve moneti:es
deficits less when inflation is high and when government

purchases are growing rapidly.
                                                            PAGE 3



I. DOES MONETIZATION MATTER?


      Elementary macro models, including both the quantity
theory and IS—LM, suggest that budget deficits have a greater
effect on aggregate demand if they are monetized.
      This difference is extreme under the crude quantity
theory. Obviously, if Py=MV and V is a constant, then deficits
increase nominal demand if and only if they are monetized. <1>

A slightly more sophisticated quantity theory, which recognizes
that nonmonetized deficits raise velocity by raising interest
rates, allows for an effect of deficits on aggregate demand.
But the supposition that the effect of money is greater is
maintained.

      Essentially the same conclusion emerges from the fix—
price IS—LM model. Figure 1 shows an initial IS—LM equilibrium
at point A. Higher government spending or a cut in taxes
raises the IS curve to IiSi.   If the deficit is not monetized,
the LM curve is unchanged and equilibrium moves to point B;
output rises. But if the deficit is monetized, the LM curve
shifts as well (to L1M1) and output increases even more (point
C).

      This is all very simple, but it leaves out much. Among
the important omissions are:
  -
           (1) wealth effects on the IS and/or LM curves and the
resulting dynamics that are implied by the government budget
                          -1




C
-C,                   7

                  /
      Lc   GLA(
                                                                           PAGE 4

constraint;
             (2) changes on the supply side of the economy as
higher or lower interest rates affect investment;

             (3) expectation al effects set up by the government's
financing decision (which , among other things, intervene
between the real interest rate and the nominal interest rate).



        The next three subsections take up each of these in turn.



1. WEALTH EFFECTS AND THE GOVERNMENT BUDGET CONSTRAINT

        The government budget constraint states that any excess of
total expenditures      over total receipts must be financed by

selling   bonds either to the Federal Reserve (and hence creating
high—   p owered   money) or to the pUblic
               C   1) dH/dt + dB/dt =   B   + rB   —   T(V)
where H is hi gh— powered money,     Bi s publicly—held bonds (here
taken to have zero maturity), 6 is nominal government

purchases, r is the nominal mt erest          rate,     and T is nominal
receipts. wri tten as a function     o-f nominal        income.
     As Solow and I (1973) showed almost a decade ago ,               i+   there
are wealth ef fects on the IS and LII curves, then the dyn ami Cs

set up by (1)      lead to results that seem par adoxical f rom          the
viewpoint of static macro models.           In parti cular, i    f the model
remains stabl e under bond financing        of defi cits      (wh ich i s by no
means a sure thing), then the long—run effects of a deficit on
                                                            PAGE 5


aggregate demand are greater if   it   is not monetizeth

     How can this be true in view of Figure 1? Suppose we add
wealth effects to the analysis and assume that government bonds
are net wealth. <2> Start with the case of bond financing
(point B). The additional wealth represented by the new bonds
augments consumer spending and pushes the IS curve further to
the right. At the same time. however, the LM curve shifts
leftward if there is a wealth effect on the demand for money
<3> The net result of these two wealth effects is clearly to
increase r. But the net effect on V seems to be ambiguous.
However, Solow and I showed (as is obvious) that in a stable
system the net impact of the two wealth effects must increase
income.

     The    dynamic adjustment proceeds as follows. Each
injection   of bonds increases income, and the process continues
(in a stable system) until the induced tax receipts bring the
budget into balance. The dynamics are similar under money
financing, except that each dollar of newly— created money has
an additional liquidity effect on the LM curve which malr:es Y

rise even faster.
     Why, then, do bond—financed deficits have larger effects
in the long run? The reason, loosely speaking, is that bond—
financed    deficits "last longer." More precisely, bond—
financed deficits raise the government's interest expenses
whereas money— financed deficits reduce them. Thus, while each
$1 billion bond issue expands V by less than a $1 billion issue
                                                                       PAGE 6

 of high—powered money, the total amount of new paper assets
that must be created before the deficit is closed is greater
under bond fi nancing.

        How do we know that the net result is that V expands more
under bond -financing? Set         1) eqL(al to zero and take the
 (1 ong—run) total derivative with respect to 6, including the

wealth effe cts of the cr eation of new paper assets. Under bond
+ i rianci ng,   a rise in 6 1 eads to a rise in B so:
                  (2) dY/dG =   (l/T' (Y)) (1 +   d(rB   /dG).
Under money -financing, a rise in 6 leaves B unchanged but
raises M, so:

                  (3) dY/dG =   (l/T' CV)) (1 +   B(dr/dG)).
In (2). both      r and B are driven up by the increase in B.           In

(3), r    is driven down by the increase in M.           It fol 1 ows that
the   mul tiplier in (2) ex ceeds the multiplier in (3)

        Of course, all this assumes that the ec onomy is stable
under   b 0th methods of •fi nancing,   a matter tu which I will
return.     It also ignores e<pectati ons, the be havior of prices,
and changes in the capital stock, items which I take up next.


2. CAPITAL CCUf1ULTION IND THE LONG RUN

      The original paper by Solow and myself allowed -For capital

accumulation and showed that, apart from modifications in the
stability conditions, this wrinkle did not affect the basic
results. However, the model we used maintained the
(inappropriate) assumption of a fixed price level.
                                                                        PAGE 7

 Fortunately, subsequent work established very similar
 conclusions in models which deal more satisfactorily with the
 price level. <4>        -




       If   the labor force and technology are more or less
 exogenous, then the long—run effects of monetization depend on
 how the capital stock reacts. Neoclassical growth models lead
 to the supposition that money financing of deficits is better
 for capital formation than bond financing, <5> but adding even
 a minimal amount of complexity to standard macro models
 introduces enough ambiguity so that even this intuitive
 conclusion cannot be derived.

       The ambiguities arise from the interaction of wealth
 effects and interest elasticities, neither one of which can be

 ignored without assuming away the problem. Consider, as an
 example, the following simple IS—LM model augmented to include
 wealth effects:

               (4) y =       c(y—t(y).   a) +    i(r—ir,K)    + g

               (5) M/P =       L(r,   y, a)
               (6) a = K + M/P + B/P
   -           (7)   dtl/dt +    dB/dt   = P(g —    t(y))     +   rB
               (8) (1/P)(dP/dt)               u + h(y   —   F(K))
               (9) dK/dt =       i(r—n,K)
 Equations (4) and (5) are IS and LM curves augmented to include
-real wealth, a, which is defined in (6). Here r denotes the
 nominal interest rate and iT            the   expected rate of inflation.
 The difference between M and H is ignored. Equations (7)—(9)
                                                                 PAGE 8

 give the dynamics of the three state variables: P. K, and
 either M or B. Equation (7) is the government budget
 constraint; equation (8) is an expectational Phillips curve;
 and equation (9) updates the capital stock.
       The signs of most of the short— run comparative static
 multipliers implicit in (4)—(6) can be determined with only the
 usual qualitative assumptions. An important exception.
 however, is dr/dM which., even ignoring possible effects of M on
 expected inflation (about which more later), has the sign of:

                        CaLy -   (1_L.a)[1_c(1._tI')]
 an expression which is negative in the absence of wealth

 effects, but ambiguous in their presence. The economics behind
 this ambiguity is quite simple. Normally, an increase in II
 lowers interest rates by shifting the LM curve to the right.
 But the wealth effects of an injection of money shift the UI
 curve to the left and the IS curve to the right, thereby

 pushing up interest rates. These wealth effects could
 conceivably be strong enough to offset the original effect of .M
 on the LM curve.
   -
       As might be surmised, this ambiguity is devastating to

 long—run analysis where primary attention focuses on the
 behavior of the capital stock. If we do not know in which
 direction II pushes r, then we certainly will not be able to
• tell in which direction it pushes K,        In fact, none of the
 long—run comparative static derivatives (obtained from

 equations (4>—() and from equations (7)—(9) set equal to zero)
                                                           PAGE 9

are of determinate sign unless wealth effects are assumed away.

But this is not a legitimate way out of the indeterminacy
because Solow and I (1973) showed years ago that wealth effects
are intimately involved in the stability conditions. <6>
    The conclusion, unfortunately, seems to be that theory
will tell us little about the long—run consequences of the
monetization decision. Econometric estimation arid simulation

of quantitative models seem to be the only ways out.


3. THE GOVERNMENT BUDGET CONSTRAINT AND EXPECTATIONS
     The dynamic constraints across choices of policy mixes set

up by the government budget constraint bring expectaticDnal
issues to the fore.. The identity points out that today's
deficit and monetization decisions have implications for the
feasible set of fiscal—monetary combinations in future periods.

     For example, suppose an expansionary -Fiscal policy today
leads to a large deficit that is not monetized. Future
government budgets will therefore inherit a larger burden of
interest payments, so the same time paths of 6, M, and tax
rates will lead to larger deficits. What will the government
do about this? That depends on its reaction function. For
example, large deficits and high interest rates might induce
greater monetary expansion in the future (the possibility
emphasized by Sargent and Wallace (1961)).    Alternatively, it
might induce future tax increases (the case stressed by Barro
                                                                 PAGE 10

 (1974)), or cuts in government spending (the apparent hope of
Reaganomics).        Yet another possibility is that the government

will simply finance the burgeoning deficits by issuing more and
more bonds. <7>

        All of these are live options, and have different

implications for the long—run evolution of the economy. In
fact, under rational expectations, they may have different
implications for the state of the economy today.
        As an example of a nor-imonetized deficit, consider   a tax
cut financed by issuing new bonds. Such a tax cut today
enlarges current and prospective future budget deficits,
thereby requiring some combination of the following policy
adjustments:
             (1) increases in future taxes;
             (2) decreases in future government expenditures;
             (3) increases in future money creation;

             (4) increases in future issues of interest— bearing

national    debt.
To the extent that the current decisions made by individuals
and firms are       influenced by their expectations about the
fUture,    each of these alternatives may have different
implications for the effects o-f the tax cut today.

        For example, if people believe that a tax cut financed by
bonds simply reduces today's taxes and raises future taxes         in
order   to pay the interest on the bonds, then consumption may
not   be affected. This is essentially Darro's (1974) argument.
                                                                         PAGE 11


        Alternatively, people may believe that the policy will

eventually lead to greater money creation.            If   so   the

inflationary expectations thereby engendered may affect their
current decisions in ways that are not captured by standard
behavioral functions. This is essentially the point made by
Sargent and Wallace (1981) in arguing that tight money may be

inflationary.
        Still different reactions would be expected if people
thought the current deficit would lead to lower government
spending or to more bond issues in the future. The theoretical

possibilities are numerous, limited only by the imagination of
the theorist. <8>
      Rational expectations interact with the government budget
constraint in an obvious way. Feople's beliefs about the
future consequences of current monetary and fiscal decisions
ar-b conditioned by their views of the policy rules that the
authorities will follow. To the extent that these beliefs
affect their current behavior, different perceived policy rules

actually imply different short—run policy multipliers under
rational expectations.
        This is easily illustrated in the context o-f the preceding

IS—UI model. Consider the short—run multiplier dy/dg allowing
for a possible effect of g on inflationary expectations via the
mechanisms just discussed.          It follows directly from (4)—(6)

that:

  •
                              1
                                        E   ;   and                 =   —lu   ,

      ••• ,r   const.   1_C(1_t)÷.1 L                 g    const.
                                                                 PAGE 12



 and from the chain rule that:


                dy/dg =              +C   dvr/dg) C
                          3g                          h
                                ¶                         g
The first term is the standard (positive) government
                                                     spending
multiplier in IS—LM analysis. The second term is the product
of a positive effect of inflationary expectations on output and
an effect of g on i which depends on the factors enumerated
above.   If it is positive, as seems likely, then expectational

effects make the short—run multiplier larger. But it is
conceivable that dir/dg could be zero or even negative.

     A key question for policy formulation is: how important
are these expectational effects in practice? This seems to
depend principally on how forward—looking urrent economic
decisions really are.

     Take the tax cut example again. Under the pure permanent

income hypothesis (PIH) only the present discounted value of
lifetime alter—tax income flows affects current consumption.
<9> So expectations about future budget policy should have

iniportant effects on current       consumption. But if short-
sightedness, extremely high discount rates, or capital market
imperfections effectively break many of the links between the
future and the present, then current consumption may be rather

insensitive to these expectations and rather sensitive to

current income. Even under fully rational expectations and the
                                                          PAGE 13


pure PIH, consumption may depend largely on current income if
the stochastic process generating income is highly serially
correlated. These are issues about which knowledge is
accumulating; but much remains to be learned. The evidence to
date does not lead to the conclusion that long—term
expectations rule the roost. <10>
     The other two places where expectations about future

fiscal and monetary policies might have significant effects on
current behavior are wage and price setting and investment.

     Investment, of course, is the quintessential example of an
economic decision which is strongly conditioned by expectations
about the future.. Even Keynes knew this! Eut, once again,
there are some real—world considerations that interfere with
the strictly neoclassical view of investment as the
unconstrained solution to an intertemporal optimization
problem. One is that capital rationing may interfere with a
firm's ability to run current losses on the expectation of
future profits. A second is that management may use ad hoc
rules such as the payback period criterion in appraising
investment projects. A third is the emerging "business school'
view that managers are more shortsighted than they "should be"
because they face the wrong incentives. A fourth is that there
may be a strong accelerator element in investment spending,
which ties the current investment decision much more tightly to
the current state of the economy than neoclassical economics

recognizes. As in the consumption example, each of these
                                                             PAGE 14

things diminishes the Importance of the future to current

decision making and thereby renders expectational effects less

important.
     Wage and price setting is another important example. Ad
hoc rules which adjust wages or prices in accordance     with "the
law of supply and demand," or which are mainly backward
looking, render expectational effects rather unimportant.       But
rules which are based on forward— looking consi derations    (such
as expected future excess demand) make expectational    effects
crucial. Aain, this is an area where we must learn much more
before we can make any definitive Judgments. <11>
     A word on uncerta inty seems appropriate before leavi ng

this topic.   It seems to me that people probably attach gr eat

uncertainty to their bel iefs   about what future government
policies will be.   If   so, the means of their subjective
probability distributi ons may have far less influence   on their
current decisions than thecontemporary preoccupation with
rational expectations would suggest. For example, how much
influence does the two—week—ahead weather forecast have on your
decision about whether or not to plan a picnic on a given

date?
    Similarly, the importance of expectations for macroeconomic
aggregates is diminished by the likelihood that different
people hold different expectations about what future government
policies are likely to be. <12> If some people believe today's

tax cuts signal higher future taxes, some believe they signal
                                                            PAGE 15


higher future money creation, and some believe they signal
lower future government spending, then expectations about the
future may have meager current effects in the aggregate.
     The conclusion seems to be that, while we should not

forget about expectational effects operating through the
government budget constraint, neither should we get carried
away by them. There is no reason to believe that they are the
whole show.


4. NEW TIME SERIES EVIDENCE
     The two preceding sec tions showed that capital

accumulation and expectati ons considerably complicate
theoretical discussion of the monetization issue. The former

creates complexities that can be handled in principle, but not
in practice. The latter opens up so many possibilities that it
may be intractable even i n principle. Can we let the dat    a

speak for themselves? Th is is hazardous in the absence of a
reliable structural model embodying many of the effects     it
enumerated. What I offer in this section is far less
ambitious: some simple t ime series evidence on whether or not
knowledge of the monetiza tion decision helps predict movements
in nominal GNP, real GNP, and the price level.

     The framework for suc h an analysis has been well

established by Granger (1969) and Sims (1972 ), and will not be
repeated here.     Two points are worth making, however:

          (1)    Granger—causation has nothing to do with
causation in the    usual sense.   Since it is quite possible,
especially once expectational influences are accounted for.
that the "effect" might precede the "cause," learning that X
Granger—causes V tells us nothing about whether or not V moved
"because of" X.     It means that X adds to the ability to
predict Y, no more and no less.

             (2) Whether or not X contributes to the ability to
predict Y may depend on what other information is considered.

Thus, for example, it is perfectly possible that X might
Granger— cause V when some other variable, Z, is excluded from

the regression, but fail to Granger—cause V when Z is
included.     In this context, I will interpret the question
"Does monetization matter?" as asking whether or not changes

in bank reserves Granger—cause nominal GNF growth (or
inflation) once we control for growth of the national debt.
        Letting V denote nominal GNP. R denote bank reserves, D
denote the outstanding stock o-f government bonds (including
the portion owned by the Fed), and              denote the first—
difference operator, regressions of the following form were
run I
          (13) ,Y/Y = a(L)(AV/Y)   + b CL) (AR/R> +     c(L)   (tD/D).
These were estimated on anni.tal fi scal year data, with the

maximum lag extending back either two or three years. <13>
        Monetization "does not matter     I'
                                               that is, fails to help
Predict growth in Y, if   the   b coef   fic ients   are Jointly
                  Analogously, debt pol icy "does not matter"
                                                         PAGE 17

(given monetary policy) if the c coefficients are Jointly

insignificant. Notice that the crude quantity theory suggests
a unitary long—run elasticity for bank reserves and a zero
long—run elasticity for the non—monetized debt, that is:
           Sa + Sb     =   1   and   Sc   =0
These hypotheses are all testable by standard F tests.
     In estimating (13), D was defined as the increase in
government indebtedness to the public during fiscal year t.
Fiscal, rather than calendar, years were used so as to get a
more accurate measure of the deficit. Budget numbers in the
national income and product accounts (NIPA) differ in several
ways from those in the unified budget, and the deficit series
I used differs further from the unified budget owing to the
activities of off—budget agencies. This suggests a

potentially large slippage between, say, quarterly NIPA
deficit numbers and the true government borrowing

requirement.
     In order to use the fiscal year as the unit of time,
quarterly data on adjusted bank reserves, P, <14> and nominal
GNP. V, were put on a fiscal year basis. <15> Results from
estimating equation (13) by ordinary least squares over the
period 1952—1981 appear as regressions (1) and (2) in Table 1.
Roughly speaking, the regressions make it look as if only the
first lag of each variable matters. But, in keeping with the
spirit of this sort of work, the "insignificant" variables
were not dropped.
                         Table 1

Regressions for Nominal GNP Growth, Fiscal Years 1952-1981



      Variable                   (1)               (2)

      Constant                  .068               .052
                               (.015)             (.012)

                           —.536                  —.515
                           (.196)                 (.187)

                           —.082                   .093
                           (.203)                 (.125)

                           —    17't
                           (.133)

                            .675                   .715
                           (.150)                 (.1146)

                            .186                   .116
      (AR/R)2
                           (.212)                 (.199)

                            .lL9
                           (.197)

                               .3149               .328
                           (.091)                 (.080)
      (D/D)2                   .125
                           (.1114)
                                              .    .177
                                                  (.1oL)

                            .161
      (AD/D)3
                           (.108)


      R2                    .80                    .78
      DW                   2.16                   2.25
      Eb.
                            .56                    .58
      1-Ea.
                ]
      Ec.
                            .35                    .36
     1-Ea.
            )
                                     (].)               (2)
F Test for

1) AU b1            0               6.93**         9.18**

2)     Eb. = 0                      7.92*
         2.



3)     All c1 =     0              1o.8**         lLl    58**

Li.)   Ec.      0                  23.02**        2'4.33
         1
5)     Za + Eb = 1                 l2.lL**        12.Ol**

6) Za + Eb = 1          and         12.0l**       l3.l6
       Zc=0


Notes: Standard errors in parentheses.

              *denotes significant at 5% level.

         **denotes significant at 1% level.
                                                                         PAGE 18

       The first question to be addressed is:                  Once growth of
national debt is controlled for . does growth of reserves    help
to   predi ct nom inal GNP growth? The point estimates cert ai ni y

suggest an aff irmative answer, since in each regression the

lagged change in reserves has a large and significant
coeffi ci ent.    More formally, F test number 1, reported at the
bottom of the table, decisively rejects the null hypothesis
that A R/R does not Granger—cause AY/V.

       A weaker h ypothesisis that the sum of the b coeffi ci en t 5
is zer a, that s, that reserves have no lon g—run effect. Once
                   1.




again, the po mt es timates are un favorable to th is hypothesis
since the est i ma ted           elasticity of
                                        with respect to R.
                                                  V

contr oiling + or D, is about .57. And, as can be seen in the
table (F test n u mb er 2), the appr opriate F—test confirms that

this elastici ty        is     significantly different from zero. Thus
mon etization    doe 5 matter.
       We can, of c 0        LI r 5   turn the tables and ask whether growth
in national      debt helps to predict nominal GNP growth once we
control for growth in bank reserves.                     Hard—core monetarism

suggest s a negative answer.               However, as can be seen in F—test
number 3,     the null hypothesi s that all               the c coefficients are
Zero i s decisively rejected.                 Even the weaker hypothesis that.
whi 1 e   deficits matter in the short run                 they do not matter in
the long run, to wit:

                                         Xc      = C),
)i easily rejected by the data.                  Deficits certainly seem to
                                                                PAGE 19

.tiMtter.

        What about the characteristic quantity—theory implication


j
thatthe long—run
      the

that this elastici ty
                       elasticity of V with respect to R 1S unity?
            table shows (in F test number 5), the null hypothesis
                          is unity, i.e. that Za +        Eb     1, is
clearly rejected.       The quantity theory fares no better if it
ss extended to md ude the implication Xc c) (F test number
6).

        The overal 1 conclusion from these regressions is clear:

both monetized and nonmonetized deficits are significant

predi ctors of ubseqLtent C'NP growth.

       An ob vious question is whether the debt and reserves
variables L(sed in Table 1 are mainly predicting movements of

.prices or movements of real output.        To address this question,
Table   2 r eports   the results from regressions analogous to
equation (13), but using the GNP deflator in place of nominal
GNP.

       The results differ from those obtained with nominal GNP
in a number of ways, and are far more favorable to the

quantity—theoretic approach. Unfortunately, in contrast to
the case of nominal GF'IP, some of the results depend on whether

we use the regression with three lags (column 1) or the
regression with two lags (column 2).

       First, the null hypothesis that growth in reserves does
Contribute to the explanation of inflation can be rejected in
the equation using three lags ——      but   only at   the. 57. level of
                    Table 2


Regressions for Inflation, Fiscal Years 1952-1981


Variable                     (1)          (2)

Constant                    —.005        —.000
                            (.006)       (.006)

 (P/P)i                      32           .508
                            (.179)       (.173)

                            —.009         .318
                            (.207)       (.182)

                             .209
                            (.178)


                            (.096)       (.107)

                        -.009            —.099
(R/R)2
                        (.102)           (.100)
            -           - .189
(R/R)3                  (.096)
                        —
                             .071       — .087
(D/D)i                  (.077)           (.075)

                             .135         .182
(D/D)2                  (.069)           (.063)

                            .086
(AD/D)3                 (.06L1.)




                            .87           .81

DW                      1.50             1.5L1

Eb.
                        1.08              .81
1_Ea
Ec.
  :
                             79           .55
1_Ea
                                        (1)    (2)


F Test for


1) All b. = 0                          3L7*    2.82
                 1
2)     Eb. = 0                         6.55*   102
         1
3) All c =                     0       3L7*    L.23*

I.')   Ec.1. =       0                 2.10    1.57

5)     Za+Eb1                           .02

6) Ea + Eb                = 1          3.25    1.08

        and          Ec    =       0




Notes: Standard errors in parentheses.

           *denotes significant at 5% level.
                                                                                  PAGE 20


significance, not           at    the   17.   level.   In   the equation using two

lags,    it cannot be rejected at all.                  (See F test number            1   at

the bottom of Table              2..)


        Second, in the two—lag                equation we cannot even reject the
hypothesis that the long—run elasticity of P with respect to R
is zero    ——   an hypothesis that almost rto on e would seriously
entertain.       However, we can easily reject it in th e three—lag

equation        (See F test number             2..)

        Fort un atel   y,   the other results do not depend on whether
we use two      or    thre e lags of the variab 1           es.   For ex ample,

growth in national debt helps to predi ct                     i nf l.ation    (once

growth in reserves are contro1 led for) a t th e                    57..     but not the
17., level.      (F    test   number 3.) However, the null hypOthesis
that the long—run elasticity of P with respect to D is zero
cannot be rejected.               (F test number 4.) The implications that
we associate with the strict quantity theory (see F tests 5
and 6) also cannot be rejected.

        Table 3 reports the analogous regressions and F tests
using real GNP in place of nominal GNP. Naturally, the

explanatory      power is much lower since we are                  using nominal
reserves and nominal debt to explain a real variable.                             In
general, very few significant effects are found.
        For e<ample, the           hypothesis that growth in reserves does
not help predict real GNP growth can be rejected at the 57.
level in the regression using two lags of each variable. But
it cannot be rejected at the 17. level; and it cannot be
                            Table 3

___Regressions for Real GNP Growth, Fiscal Years 1952-1981

          Variable                (1)             (2)
          Constant               .033            .022
                                (.015)          (.013)

                                —.019            .147
                                (.209)          (.184)

                                 .427    -   --.296
                                (.256)          (.213)
                                —.120
                                (.227)
                                 .262            .258
          (R/R)i
          -                     (.187)          (.188)
                                —.393           —.450
          (RfR)_2               (.169)          (.172)
                                —.198
          (R/R)_3               (.208)

                                 .374            .291
                                (.152)          (.138)
                                —.203           —.218
                                (.156)          (.124)

                                —.126
                                (.135)



                                                 .36
          DW                    2.35            2.24
          Eb.
                                —.146           —•35
          1-Za.
                )

          Ec.
                                 .06              .13
          1 -Ea.
                    J
                                 (1)               (2)


F Test for


1) All b. = 0                   2.56              11.01*
               1
2)    Eb. = 0
         1
                                1.11              0.611


3) All c.1 =        0           2.57              2.35

11)   Ec.1.   = 0               0.11              0.113




Notes:        Standard errors in parentheses.

              *denotes significant at 5% level.
                                                              PAGE 21


rejected at all in the regression using three lags of each

var i ab 1 e.

       The hypothesis that growth in debt does not help predict
real GNP growth cannot be rejected in either regression
       While the point estimates of the long—run elastici ty of y
with respect to R are sizeable and negative (—.46 and — ..35 in

the two versions). neither differs     significantly   -from t he

quantity—theoretic value of zero      see F text number 2).      The

estimated long—run elasticity of y with respect to D is a
small positive number (.06 and .13 in the two versions), but

is nowhere near significant (see F test number 4).

        In sum, neither growth in bank reser yes nor growth in
national debt carries much information th at iS useful in
predicting future real GNF growth accordi ng to these

equations..     The -fact that both variables were significant

predictors o-f future growth in nominal GNF seems to stem
mainly -from their value in predicting inflation.
                                                                              PAGE 22

                     == = = == = = === = = = = = = = == = ==

    II.   THE DETERMINANTS OF MONETIZATION


          The government budget constraint. by pointing out that
there are two ways to finance a deficit, creates a presumption
    that a blend of the two will normally be used; that is. it
creates a presumption that some fraction of the deficit will be
monetized.. Let               denote the nominal deficit in fiscal year t
and write (1) as:
•
      -
                       (14) dH/dt + dB/dt =
Define           as the fraction         of    the deficit that is monetized and
             t
write (14) as:

                       (15) dH/dt =

This      is nothing but an identity; it carries no behavioral
    implications ——     not    even that                  typically positive.. Our
    interest is in the factors determining B.
          First note that high—powered money is the sum                  of reserves
plus currency, so:
                     (16) dH/dt =          dR/dt     +   dC/dt.
    It is well known that the Fed supplies currency passively to

meet deman d so as to insulate the money stock, N, from

short—term gyrations in the currency ratio. Remembering that M
    is the sum of deposits plus currency, a linear money—

multiplier model would be:
                              M =   mR +      sC,
with m approximately equal tQ the reciprocal of the required
                                                                             PAGE 23


reserve ratio.p       and s approximately equal to unity.                  If M -:
t& be insulated from fluctuations in C, <16> then P                   will    have

to react to changes in C according to dR/dC                    —(s/rn),    which is

approximately equal to —p.              By (16) this means that H will have
to react to C approx i matel y accordi ng to dH/dC = 1 —               p

Emodying this idea i n (15)         1   eads to:
                                    =
                          d H/d t
                                          tt + (l—p) (dC/dt)
and then using (16) gives:
            -
                 (17)    dR/dt
                                    = It 6t        p(dC/dt).
In this expr essi on, the fi rst term includes all the things in
which we are    mt erested    while the second term represents the
Feds effort S    to   offset curren cy fluctua tions. Neverthel ess,
this second term does offer an informal test of the
reasonableness of the empirical results: the coefficient of
dC/dt should resemble a weighted average of required reserve
rat i os.


1    SOME SUGGESTED MONETIZ½TION RULES
      Before estimating (17) let us consi der some specific rules
that have been suggested for the monetiz ation decision.
                          MONETARISM
      The most famous and most widely—discussed suggestion for a
monetary rule can be attributed, more or less accurately, to
Milton Friedman. Under Friedman's suggested regime, the Fed
would keep the money supply growing at some constant rate
regardless of budget policy and would refuse to deviate from
                                                                            PAGE 24

the rule for cyclical reasons. Here I interpret this policy as
a constant growth rul e for bank reserves (or for the monetary
base)   •    Under such a rule the marginal monetizat ion rate,                 in

equat ion (17), wou ld presumably be zero.
        This    is not t he place to offer a comprehensi ye review of

the pros and con S            of   the k—percent rule, but one new element
that has entered the debate in recent years is worth

ment ioning. Some yea rs ago. Solow and I (1 97-:) showed that a

Dl i cy o-F    holding        the money supply constant   arid   financing all
defi cits by 1SSL(i ng b qnds could destabilize           the    economy,
whereas      + i nanci   ng def icits by money creation    pr obably led to a
stable      syst em.      This finding, while derived i n a very simple

and spec ial case with fixed prices, proved to b e remarkably
robust.        Tobin and Bu iter (1976) established a parallel result

for a fu 11 —empi oymen t economy with perfectly fl exible prices.

Pyle    and Turnovsky (1976) and others showed that analogous

results obtain           in   models intermediate between these two
extremes       SUCh as models with an expectations— augmented

Phillips curve.
        Recently, McCallum (1981, 1982), Smith (1982) and Sargent
and Wallace (1981) have re—emphasized the importance of this
result for the monetari st policy rule. Though using rather
different models, each has made the same point: that the system
is liable to be dynamically unstable under a policy that holds
both fiscal policy (def med in various ways by the different
authors) and the money supply (or its growth rate) constant.
                                                                  PAGE 25

     The mechanism behind these results is not hard to
understand. Suppose some shock (such as an autonomous decline
iii demand in a Keynesian model) opens up a deficit in the
government budget, and the monetarist regime is in force.
Bonds will be issued to finance the deficit. With both
interest rates and the number of bonds increasing, interest
payments on the national debt will be increasing. But            this
increases the deficit still further, requiring even larger
issues of bonds in subsequent periods, and the process repeats.
if the    real rate o-F interest   exceeds the rate of population
growth, then the real supply       of   bonds   per capita will grow
without    limit   Consequently, unless bonds are totally
irrelevant to other economic variables (as in the non—
Ricardian view of Barro (1974)). the whole economy will

explode. <17>
     So the stabilizing properties of the monetarist rule are
open to serious question, to say the least. What about its
longer—run effects?
     As a long—run defense against inflation, the monetarist
rule seems to be very effective. Although academic scribblers
can, and have, constructed examples of continuous in-flaton

without growth in reserves, my feeling is that policy makers
can justifiably treat these models as intellectual curiosa and
proceed on the assumption that a maintained growth rate of
reserves will eventually control the rate of inflation.
     But what about capital formation and real economic growth?
                                                                                 PAGE 26

When a recession comes,                 the k—percent rule takes no remedial
action.     If       there is an important accelerator aspect to
investment       spending, the      slack demand will retard               capital
format ions          At th e sa me time, the issuance of new               government
bonds to fi nance the               budget deficits that rec ession          brings will

push up mt erest rate s.                 An d this, too, will retard invesment

spending.        The ii Ic:   ely    r esu 1   t is that ri gid monetarism will not

create a ci i mate cond uci ye to investmen t unless long—run

predictabi 1 ity of the price               level is a       more important
determinant of in vestment                than I think       it is. <18>
      It seems to me that much                   of   the c urrent fuss over lack of

fiscal— monetary coordination and the concommitant pressures
for monetization derives from concern over the implications of
the policy mix for investment.                        If so, then hard—core

monetarism, which eliminates t he coord ination issue by

eliminating policy, does not look like a very good solution.
                                    BONDISM
     As McCa llum (1981) pointed out, a potentially better
moneti zati   on rule was actually suggested by Friedman in his

earlier "A M onetary and Fiscai.Framework for Economic

Stability"       C   1948), but subsequently abandoned. For lack of a
better name, Gary Smith (1982) suggested that we call the
policy "bondism" because it treats bonds in much the same way
as monetarism         treats    money.
    Under the         old   Fr iedman policy, the marginal monetization

rate would be unity, not zero. Speci4ically, Friedman
                                                                PAGE 27


suggested that government spending and tax rates be set
according to allocative considerati ons so as to balance the
budget on average, and that all def icits be financed by
creation of money. <19> Both McCall urn (1981. 1982> and Smith
(1982) observed that this policy regime is equival ent to the
"money financing" scenario in Blinder and Solow (1 973), and
hence probably leads to a stable system. On this score alone,
it has much to recommend it over monetarism.
     But there is more to the story. Consider what         WCL(l d


happen when, for example, a deficiency of aggregate demand
brought on a recession. Falling incomes would open up a budget
deficit, and this would aL(tomatically induce the Fed         to turn on
the monetary spigot. The economy would get      a strong
anti—recessionary stimulus from monetary pol icy.        Thus the old

Friedman rule would seem to be a powerful Stabi     1 izer.

     How does it score on the more long—run criteri a?          The fact

that recessions would   automatically   engender easy money un d er
the "bondist" policy augurs well for capital formati on. So does
the notion that cyclic al disturbances would probably be quite
muted. The one poteriti al worry is over infi ation. The rule can
cancel vabi y lead to a 1 ot of money creation in a hurry, with

subsequent inf 1 ati onary consequences.   But i f the   fisca 1 part
of the rul e keeps the hi gh—employment budget balanced, and if

the econorny fluctuates around its high— employment norm, this

should   not be a major worry.   Monetary expansions should
subsequent ly be reversed by monetary contractions. <20> If the
                                                          PAGE 28

rule is believed, even large injections of money should not
raise the spectre of secular inflation.
     While I have never been an advocate of rigid rules,, it

seems to me that all this adds up to a clear conclusion: the
old Friedman rule ought to get more serious quantitative
attention and the new Friedman rule ought to get less.


2. GAME THEORY AND MONETIZATION
     We have seen that it has been suggested that the optimal
marginal monetization rate is zero and that the optimal
marginal monetization rate is one. These suggestions would
seem to bracket the relevant alternatives. ut such is not
necessarily the case once we remember that stabilization policy
in the United States is in the hands of two independent
authorities, one in charge of fiscal policy and the other in
charge of monetary policy, with neither one dominating the
other. <21>

     When the two policy makers are at loggerheads, a policy
mix of tight money and loose fiscal policy frequently results,
with deleterious effects on interest rates and investment. <22>
What outcome does theory lead us to expect when fiscal and
monetary policy are in different hands and the two parties have
different ideas about what is best for the economy?
     A natural way to conceptualize this situation is as a
twb—person non—zero—sum game. And a natural candidate for what
will emerge, it seems to me, is the Nash equilibrium. Why the
                                                                        PAGE 29


Nash equilibrium? Both policy makers understand that they do
not operate in a vacuum. Each—presumably understands that he
is facing an intelligent adversary with a decision making
problem qualitatively- similar to-his own. Furthermore, this is

a repeated      game; each policy      maker has been here before and

assumes      that   he will be here again.         It seems natural that each

would assume that the other will make the optimal response to

whatever strategy he plays.            If so, each will probably play his
                                              -.
Nash strategy.
       tet   us see how the Nash equilibrium works out in a

moderately real istic exampl e.          (See the payoff matrix in Figure

2. )    I assume t hat     each pol icy maker has two avail able

strategies: the         government can raise or lower the deficit, and
the central bank         can raise or lower bank reser yes.        I also

assume that they         order the outcomes di fferen tly, but know each

other's preferen ce ordering            Speci-F ical ly,   the fiscal

authority (whose pref erence         ordering appears below the diagonal
in each box) is assumed to favor exp ansi onar y policy. From its

point of view,        the case of a    monetized defic it is best (rank 1)

and the case        where both pla y   contractionary strategies is worst
(rank  4). The monetary authority (whose ord ering appears above
the diagonal) wants to contract the economy to fight inflation,
and so orders these alternatives in the opposite way. However,
as between the two outcomes          which combine expansi on and

contraction,        I   as su me that the two players agree that society
is better served by easy money and a tight budget rather than
                           :M0ta1Y Policy


                 lower reserves        raise reserves


       lower
       deficit


 0
.r-4
 0
 p.'


 C)


       raise
       deficit




                            Figure 2
                                                                  PAGE 30


tight money and a loose budget.
       This explains the entries in the payoff matrix (Figure 2).
Now where is the Nash equilibrium? The example is a case of
the Prisoners' Dilemma since each player has a dominant
strategy. Specifically, if the Fed raises bank reserves, the
administration will plan for a higher deficit and the Fed will

wind up        with   its least— preferred outcome (the lower righthand
box). So the Fed will reduce bank reserves, Knowing this, the
administration's best strategy is to raise the deficit, so the
outcOme will be the lower lefthand box. Clearly, this is the
only Nash equilibrium for this game. It also seems to be the
most plausible outcome of uncoordinated but intelligent
behavior.

       But notice two interesting aspects of this outcome.
First, the deficit goes up and bank reserves go down; looked
at from the perspective of equation (17), the marginal
monetization rate is negative
          Second, both the Fed and the fiscal authority agree that
the upper riqhthand box —— easy money plus tight fiscal policy
——   is    superior to the Nash equilibrium. Under full monetary—
fiscal coordination, they might well select this policy mix.
But, if they cannot reach an agreement, then the Nash
equilibrium —— a Pareto— inferior outcome ——          is   likely to

ar i se.

          If   this   example is typical, then switching from a system
of two uncoordinated policy makers to one with a single,
                                                                  PAGE 31


unified policy maker might yield substantial gains.             And there

is good reason to think that it is typical, because it has long
been known that there is no reason to expect Nash equilibria in

two—person non— zero— sum games to be Pareto optimal.
     The problem • of course, is that achievi ng greater
coordination is more easily said than done.           The two

authorities have reasons for disagreei ng —— reasons which may
not be easily ir oned out. <23> However        this   example

illustrates that full coordination (wh ich is probably
impossible in an y event> may not be cri tical. What we need in

this case is no more than an agr eement to consult         with   one

another enough t o avoid outcomes that b oth parties view as

inferior. Maybe this is not too much to ask.
     However, th ings become far less clear if one policy maker

lacks knowledge of either the preferences or the economic model
of the other.    Then there is no particLilar reason to think the

Nash aquilibri urn wi 11 result, and other solutions become

equally plausi ble.     For e>a.mp le, each player may simply pursue

his global optimum, ignoring the decision of the other. There
are other   possibi 1 i ties   as well. <24>



3. EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE ON MONETIZATION
     Econometric study of the Fed's "reaction function" began
some years ago and has generated some interesting papers.               In

recent years, several authors have investigated whether or not
Federal deficits per se increase the growth of money
                                                            PAGE 32


(presumably via monetization).    The evidence obtained so far is

decidedly mixed.
                   PREVIOUS LITERATURE
     The first papers to focus on the monetization issue, by

Barro (1978) and Niskanen (1978>, reached more or less the same
conclusion: that the size of the federal deficit has rather

little to do with money growth.
     Barro studied the period 1941—1976,   using an   equation he

had developed elsewhere to divide money growth into anticipated

and unanticipated components. He found that the federal
deficit (NIFA basis), when added to his annual regression

(which included a federal expenditure variable), obtained the

"wrong" sign. suggesting that deficits actually deter money
growth. However, when the expenditure variable was omitted,
the coefficient of the deficit was corr ectly signed. In view

of the literature that followed, it is also worth mentioning
that the estimated coefficients of the deficit in Barro's
regressions changed dramatically when the war years (1941—1945)

were excluded from the sample.
 -    Niskanen's specification looked more like a traditional
reaction function. Using annual data covering 1948— 1976, he

sought to explain money growth by the lagged growth rates of
real GNP and prices (reflecting stabilization objectives) and
the federal deficit. His regression fit the data rather poorly

but, unlike Barra's, yielded a correctly signed and
statistically significant coeflicient on the deficit. However,
                                                          PAGE 33


Niskanen found that the coefficient of the deficit became small
and insignificant when he included a dummy variable for the

years 1967—1976.
    Hamburger and Zwick (1981) changed Barro's money growth and
government spending variables to make them more comparable to
his measure of the deficit and also to align them better in

time; they also shortened the period to 194—1976.      Consistent

with Barro, they obtained a coefficient of 1..C)9 (with a t—ratio

of 2.2) on spending and a coefficient of —0.26 (with a t—ratio

of 0.6) on the deficit. However, when they further shortened
the period to 1961—1976 (leaving Just 16 observations) the
results changed dramatically. The coefficient of the spending

variable fell to 0.18 (and became insignificant) while the
coefficient of the deficit rose to 0.92 (with a t—ratia of

1.9).
        These results appear to tell us as much about the extreme

sensitivity of the estimates to the choice of sample period as

they do about whether or not the Fed monetizes deficits.

However, in a very recent paper Hamburger and Zwick (1982)
extend their results through 1981 with very little change in

the estimates.
        These studies lead to no firm conclusions about the
determinants of monetization. <2> However, they do create a
skeptical attitude about facile assertions that deficits induce
faster money growth. More importantly, the studies teach us
some valuable lessons about the formulation c-F. an approprate
                                                            PAI3E 34


research strategy. Specifically:
     (1) Results are extremely sensitive to the choice of time

period, suggesting that the Fed's behavior pattern may have
changed over time. This led me to do considerable testing of
the estimated relationships for temporal stability.
      (2> Results are also rather sensitive to the particular

time series that are used, suggesting a relationship that is
far from robust. This led me to pay careful attention to the
measurement of certain variables ——   especially   "money" and "the
deficit" —— and their alignment in time. <26>

                A FIRST LOOK AT THE DATA

     My point of departure is equation (17), which can be
thought of as a modified version of the government budget
constraint. Until we specify the nature of         more fully, all

this equation does is remind US that (a) "monetization" means
creation of high—powered money, not of any of the standard M's,
and (b) currency changes ought to be controlled for in
analyzing the determinants of changes in bank reserves.
     Figure 3 plots the change in adjusted bank reserves
against the increase in the outstanding stock of government
interest—bearing debt. As in the regressions in Section L4,
the fiscal year is the unit for measuring time. The scatter
diagram covers fiscal years 1949 through 1981.
     Though the measure of "money" is quite different from that
used in earlier studies, <27> we see immediately that more
subtle techniques will be required to unearth a relationship
                                                                           '50



    .005   L__

           4-

                                                                           '59
..00a4




    .003
                                                                     '53

                                                                                 71
                       '51
•   .002         --—-4—----
                                                              '65
                                              '61                                      '.73
                              '56,                                                 S   '62       '68
                                               7Lj                                                      78
                                                  '66                        '58                 77.
                                           '67&'69.
                                    I.—.         .                                     I   5L
                                              '52
                                                              '7
                                                                                                '81
                                                        '60


                              '57                                    Deficit
                                                                       GNP
    —.0014-..
                                                                                 .02              .03        .   .05   .07
                      —.02      —.0].               0          .01
                                                                          PAGE 35


        between deficits and growth in reserves. The eyeball, with its
        inability to do multiple regression analysis, is unable to

    discérn any such relationship.
                                         takes the next step.        It
_______ Regression (1) in Table
        controls for changes in currency as suggested by equation (17),
        but maintains the null hypo.thesis that        is constant through

        time. <28> Once again, there is no apparent relationship
        between the deficit and growth in reserves; the adjusted
•
    -
        the regression, for example, is —.01! Note, however, that the
        coefficient of changes in currency, while insignificant, turns
        out more or less as expected (perhaps a bit too high>.
             Breaking the sample into smaller subperiods as suggested
        by the previous literature, does not improve the relationship
        between deficits and growth in reserves. The data show no
        obvious correlation between the two variables.
                         —---—RE6RESSION ANALYSIS
            Uf course, a lack of zero—order correlation does not
        necessarily imply that there i.s no relationship once other

        pertinent influences are controlled for. Among the variables
        that might be expected to influence       ,   the   fraction c-f the

        deficit that is monetized, are
                 (a) the size of the deficit (if there is a nonlinear

        relationship>;
                  (b) the lagged dependent variable (if there is inertia

        in the Fed's behavior); <29>
                  Cc) interest rates (if   the   Fed wants to limit the
                                            Table 4

                              Determinants of Mbnetizationa

                    (1)          (2)             (3)          (4)      (.5)       (6)
./-Time Period.   .19.49SI :l9k98]V..I9496O 196181•i9688i :1954—81
 Coefficient (s.e. of:
 Constant          .0014        .0010            .0005         .0013    .0006    .0006
                  (.0003)      (.0003)          (.0005)       (.0003) (.00O8) (.0002)

 6t /Y             :013         .076             .151          .064     .070     .039
                  (015)        (.023)           (.061).       (.019)   (.022) (.019)
                                        •
                                              —5Ol5       .


                                                                733    .-.833 • —.550
                               (.303)          (2.262)        (.194)   (.226) (.228)
                               —.455           —.645          —.398    —.367    —.230
                               (.161)          (.297)         (.137)   (.154) (.171)
                  —.140       —.061              .093         —.099     .110     .153
                  (.118)       (.107)           (307)         (.108)   (.222) (:089)
                   .05          .36              .58           .56      .67      .27

 DW               1.78         1.78            2.94           2.16     2.53     2.60



 aDependent variable        change in adjusted bank reserves, divided
                            by nominal GNP.
                                                                    PAGE 36


    extent to which deficits raise the rate of interest);
              (d) real output (or unemployment) and/or inflation

    (reflecting traditional stabilization motives);
              Ce) the composi tion of federal spending (reflecting

    cetain "optimal public finance" consider ations ra ised by 8arro
    (1979) in considering the choice between debt and taxes)
              (f) growth in the money stock, if the Fed was pursuing

    a monetarist—style money growtb rule.
         These variables were all tried, singly and in combination,
    as linear determinants of         With so many plausible

    hypotheses, and so little data, some data—rn ining was

    inevitable.   My procedure was as follows.       First, variables

    were tried one at a time. to see which had some explanatory

•   power. Then other variabi es were added, to see which factors
    survived the inclusion of other variables (and hence had some
    claim to rob ustness) .   Fi nally,   equations that had been
    estimated on the ful 1 sample (1949—1981) were esti mated on

    subsamples to see wh ich empirical relationships survi ved.
         The expl anatory variables that seemed to perf orm best on
    these cri ten a were the rate of inflation (lagged, to mini mi ze
    least squares bias) and the rate o-F growth of real federal

    purcha ses (whi ch is dominated by national defense purchases),
    hencef orth denoted by        Hence, I model the marginal

    monet i zation rate as:



                      Yt = 10 +       +
                                                          PAGE 37




    Regression (2) In Table    gives the result for the whole

period. According to this regression, 7.67. of any deficit
would be monetized if there were no inflation last year and
real purchases were unchanged. Both inflation and growth of
purchases tend to decrease the fraction of the deficit that is
monetized. The coefficient of currency is reasonable. The

explanatory power of the equation (R2..36) is moderate, at
best. <30>
     Regressions (3) and (4) break the sample into two
subperiods, 1949—1960 and 1961—1981.   This break point was

prompted both by the Hamburger—Zwick results and by the
observation that several of the residuals for years prior to

1960 were quite large. Although Levy placed the break in his
regression after 1969, a series of regressions confirmed that
the 1960/1961 break created a local minimum in the combined sum

of squared residuals of the two equations.
     Substantial differences emerge between the two equations.
The effect of inflation on the rate of monetization is only

about one—seventh as large in the later period, suggesting a
greater tolerance of inflation. The coefficient of currency is
reasonable in the later period, but unreasonable in the earlier
period. The Durbin—Watson statistic is also far better in the

later period.   In general, the equation performs much better in

1961—1981 than it does in 1949—1960.
     It is tempting to conclude that a stable relationship has
                                                          PAGE 38


existed since 1961, but not before, which would help explain
some of the earlier results. To test this notion further, the
time period for the 1961—1981 regression was changed by
alternatively adding or subtracting a year from the start of

the sample.    I found a remarkably stable relationship as the
period was shortened to begin later than 1961. For example,
the regression over 1968—1981 (which has only 14 observations)

is reported as regression (5) in Table t.    Except for the
currency coefficient, it looks amazingly similar to regression
(4). There was considerably less stability as the sample was
lengthened by beginning earlier than 1961, however. As an
illustration, regression (6) reports the results for the

1954—1981 period.
       Two further tests for equation stability were performed.
First, the equation for 1961—1981 was differenced, a procedure
suggested by Plosser and Schwert (1978) as a test for
specification error. The estimates changed little, which
provides further support for the specification.    (Changes were
greater for the 1949—1960 regression, where we are a bit short
on degrees of freedom.) Second, a Chow test was performed to
look       for evidence of a structural shift starting in 1973,
the period of floating exchange rates. The F statistic for
this test was nearly zero.
       The implied marginal monetization rates for the two
periods, based on regressions (3) and (4) in Table L1,   are as
follows:
                                                                               PAGE 39


                                 'ft =                          —
          For 1949—1960:                 15 — 5.02                  . 65x;
                                                         !t_1
          For 1961—1981:              = 06 — 0.73       —
                                  'ft              pt-i    40xt .   .



The major difference i S         in the react ion to inf lation.               At the

inflation rates near 2             =.02) that wer e typi cal in the

1949—1960 period, the      1   mplied monetization rates are quite

close (around 47.   of   t he defici t).     At.higher infl ation rates,
the more recent rule      1 eads    to more monetization.                 For example,
at 107. inflation (and     27.    growt h in real purchases ),              the
1949 —1960 rule would monetize —367. of the deficit                        whereas the
1961 —1981 rule would monetize —2%.

       A more important point. h owever, is this:                       no conceivable
combination of the i ndependent          var i ab 1 es   leads to very much

monetization of defi cits. Bot h estimated rules                        for Axample.
                                                   = 0 than to the bondist ''
tome much closer to the monetarist
                                                                                         t
= 1.   Negative monetization rates, such as suggested by                          the
game—theoretic analysis in Section 11.2, seem more 1 i kel y than
high monetization rates.
       If defici ts are mainly inflationary to the extent that

they are monet ized, then budget deficits should kindle little
in t h e way of inflationary fears.

                          OTHER RESULTS
       The measure of the Federal deficit used in the empirical

work violates elementary princi pies of i nflation accounting
because it fails to net out the decrease in the real value of
the outstanding debt caused by i nflation.                 Putting the same
                                                           PAGE 40

point somewhat differently, it fails to include the implicit
receipts from the inflation tax. Should the deficit be
corrected for inflation?

     If we want to model the Fed as a rational government
bureau free of inflation illusion, then it is hard to argue
against making the correction. True, it is the entire
(uncorrected) deficit that must be financed by selling bonds.
But some of these "new" bonds merely replace existing bonds
whose real values are eroded b' inflation. Since we do not
count rollover as part of the government's borrowing

requirement., neither should we count the portion of the
putative deficit that merely maintains the real value of the
existing debt.

     On the other hand, casual empiricism suggests that it is
only a minority of economists and accountants who are free o-f
this particular form of inflation illusion. If we are
interested in describing how the Fed actually behaved, rather
than how it should have behaved, then perhaps the uncorrected
deficit is the appropriate variable to use.
     In fact, when I ran regressions like those in Table
using the inflation— corrected deficit, the fits of the

regressions deterioriated enormously. The adjusted R2 for the
new version of regression (2) actually became negative! In
other words, whatever success we have in explaining
monetization of the uncorrected deficit completely disappears
when we seek to explain monetization of the corrected deficits
                                                           PAGE 41


This leaves two possibilities. Either we have a passable model
of the monetization decision of a Federal Reserve which suffers
from inflation illusion, or the Fed is free of inflation

illusion but its behavior is unpredictable.     I am personally

inclined toward the former view, but the data admit of both

interpretations.
     A second issue is raided by Barro's non—Ricardian

equivalence theorem.   I have tacitly accepted the view that

taxes are something quite distinct from debt by taking debt and

money as alternative ways of financing the excess of
expenditures over tax receipts. But, if debt and taxes are
equivalent,.then the true decision is among current taxes,
future taxes (i.e., debt), and money as alternative ways of
financing government expenditures. On this view, expenditures,
not the deficit, should be the independent variable in a

regression explaining money creation.
     To study this issue, I disaggregated the deficit into

three additive components ——   outlays,   tax receipts, and net

off—budget borrowing —— and re—ran the regressions in order to
test the following two constraints:

 -
      U)   that outlays and the off—budget deficit have the same

coefficient;
      (ii) that the coefficient of tax receipts is equal and

opposite to that of outlays.
Both constraints are imposed by the regressions in Table i, and
the results strongly supported them. Not only did an F test
                                                               PAGE 44




III. SUMMARY



    - Simple- "old—fashioned K:eynesian" macro models suggest that
budget deficits always expand aggregate demand., but that their

effects are stronger if   they   are monetized; that is., monetary

policy matters.
     The time series evidence on nominal GNF' growth offered

here, though incapable of giving structural information, is
consistent with these ideas.      In-Formation on changes in bank

reserves helps predict nominal I3NP changes, even when changes

in government debt are controlled for. Symmetrically, changes
in outstanding debt are a significant predictor of nominal GNF

changes even after controlling for changes in reserves.
     If we focus on inflation rather than nominal BNP growth,
however, more surprising results are obtained. Growth in
government debt is a significant predictor of inflation, even
after growth in bank reserves are controlled -For.      But,

surprisingly enough, the evidence that bank reserves
contributes anything to the prediction of inflation that is not

already supplied by debt is decidedly mixed.
     The received theory gives us far less guidance on long—
run issues. Some ambiguities arise from interest elasticities
and wealth effects; others arise from complexities stemming
from the reaction of expectations. A believable empirical
model for addressing these issues is sorely needed, but has yet
                                                        PAGE .43


hihëfr inflation or increased growth of real federal purchases
by slowing the expansion of reserves. Then our regression, by
                                                might make the
rorcingp?nd x.to enter interactively with
deficit appear to be a significant factor in the Fed's behavior

When, in fact, it was not.
     To examine this possibility, I re—ran regressions (2),

(3), and (4) in Table 3 replacing the interaction variables x6
and p6 by x and p alone. For the             period
locus, this substitution caused the fit of the regression to
deteriorate enormously; F? fell to .10 and all the righthand
variables were insignificant. For the 1949—1981 period as a

whole, the    deteriorated only slightly, but the Durbin—Watson

statistic fell to 1.18, giving strong evidence of
misspecilication. Only for the short 1949— 1960 period did the
                                                                           PAGE 42


fail (by a large margin) to reject them, but the point
estimates conformed reasonably well to the constraints. By
contrast, the non—Ricardian equivalence hypothesis would seem
to call for a coefficient of zero on taxes, a restriction that

was easily rejected.
       As indicated earlier, other plausible ri ghthand variables
were tried, but did not contri bute              to the ex planation of
monetization. These inc luded               both nominal i nterest rates     and

unemployment, variables often               thought   to be stabilization

targets       of the Fed. Th e       find ings here are consistent with

those    of    Levy   (1981).   If    the   Fed monetizes a larger fraction

of   small deficits than        of lar ge     deficits, then the deficit

itself should help expl am                    However, I had little success

with either the deficit          or    it s absolute val ue.     I-f   the Fed   was

targetting money growth , then it should hay e reduced reserves
whenever M grew too rap idly.               Tests of this hypothesis using

(what we now call) Ml t o measu re money turned up no evidence                     in
its favor. Whenever Ml had a                sig nificant   effect on

monetization, its coeffi cient had the wrong sign (from the
point of view of this hypothes is) Finally, the lagged
dependent var iable was totally in significant when added to the
regressi on. This stands jfl st ark contrast to the regressions
using money growth as the dependent variable. (See footnote
29).
        There is still one further possibility. Perhaps the Fed
really ignored deficits, but systematically reacted to either
                                                                 PAGE 45


    to be developed.     If the coefficients of the time series

    regressions are interpreted as reduced form multipliers, they

    imply that both monetized and nonmonetized deficits have

    sizable, though not always statistically significant, long—run
    effects on nominal GNP and prices. But this "evidence" is no

    more than suggestive, if that, given the non— structural
    approach that has been followed.       I regard the question as

    open.
            While the Fed has not followed any rigid monetization
    rule, its postwar behavior comes far closer to the "new
    Friedman" monetarist rule (no monetization at the margin> than

    it does to the "old Friedman" bondist rule (complete
    monetization at the margin>. But when inflation has been high,
    the Fed typically has reduced bank reserves despite government
    deficits; that is, monetization has been negative —— an
.

    outcome "predicted" by the game—theoretic analysis of monetary
    and fiscal policy presented here.
            In general, the empirical relationship between budget
    deficits and the creation or destruction of bank reserves seems

    far more stable and systematic than previous research would
    lead us to believe. However, the relationship appears to date
    only from 1961 or so.

            This paper has focused on two empi rical questions. The
    tentative answer s suggested here are:       Yes, monetization does

    matter ——    certai nly   for real variables, and maybe for nominal

    variables as wel 1. nd: the Fed seems to look chiefly at the
                                                                  PAGE 46

inflation rate and the growth rate of real government purchases
in deciding what fracti on of the deficit to monetize.            I would

like to close, however, by posing a theoret ical question:
Exactly why does the monetization decision matter?
     The question is both deep and vexing.          The usual story ——
that easy (tight> money creates a surplus (shortage> of the
medium of exchange which, in turn, spurs (retards) economic
activity ——   strains   the credulity of many observers. Vet money
creation does seem to have real effects in practice. Why?

     One possibility, raised first by Tobi n (1970) and recently
by King and Plosser (1982), is that money simply reacts
passively to real activity. On this view. money has no causal

role; real activity simply pulls money al or-ig,       creating   a
statistical correlation with no causal mterpretation.             I have
some sympathy with this view.. However most economists,, and

virtually all businessmen, seem to thi nk they can identify
periods in which tight money led to a downturn in economic
activity.
     A second possibility, which Joseph Stiçljtz and I (1982)
are developing in a     f or thcoming   paper, is that creation of new
bank reserves leads to an expansion of credit which loosens

quantitative constra in ts that were previously binding. On this
view, the statistica 1 correlation between money and real
economic activity is no accident, but it merely reflects their
mutual connection to the same important phenomenon ——        the      ebb
and flow of credit.
                                                         PAGE 47


    Neither of these views has yet been fully worked out and

subjected to empirical testing.   It may be that neither will

prove correct. But little progress can be made in resolving
the theoretical issues pertaining to monetization until we have

a more convincing story of why monetary policy has real effects
in the first place.
                                                             PAGE 1




                           FOOTNOTES




1. The only possible slippage is between expansion of bank
reserves (which is the direct consequence of monetization) and
expansion of the money stock.       In practice, the money
multiplier is stable enough so that this is not a major worry.




2.   As is well—known, Barro (1974) has argued against this
assumption. For a critique o-f Barro's argument, see Buiter and
Tobin (1979). For an analysis of the dynamics of       the
government budget    constraint   under the assumption that Barro
was right, see McCallum (1982)..



3. The existence of a wealth effect on the demand for money,
though often assumed (see, for example, Tobin (1982)), is by no

means gL(aranteed.    It could be absent, for example, under a
strict transactionist point of view.


4.    See, among others. Tobin and Buiter (1976), Pyle and
Turnovsky (1976), and Turnovsky (1979).


5. See, for example, Diamond (1965) or Phelps and Shell (1969).
The latter shows that it is just a suggestion, not a clean
                                                                    PAGE 2

deduction.


6. If P is somehow fixed, as it was in the original

1inder—Solow article, then these difficulties do not arise.
But   such a model makes        little sense   for long—run analysis.


7. The stability of the economy under this            last policy has been
cal led into question. More on this later.


8. For a mbre detailed discussion of this issue. see Feldstein
(1982).



9. Indeed       under the hypothesis advanced      by Barro (1974) ——
that each       generation   an operative bequest moti ye
                             has                                based on
the next    generation's lifetime utility —— the pen od         from now
to   the en d   of   time   is relevant.



10. See, for example. Blinder (1981), Hall and Mishkin (1982),
Hayashi (1982), or Mankiw (1981). Bernanke (1981) is more
optimist ic about      the PIH.


11. For an interesting discussion o-f forward—looking versus

backward—looking wage contracts, and how we might distinguish
between them empirically, see Taylor (1982>.



12. Divergent expectations have been emphasized recently by,
                                                            PAGE 3


among others, Phelps (1981) and Frydman (1981).


13. Nothing in the Granger—Sims methodology, which is
atheoretic, tells us in what form to enter the variables. The
form of equation (13) is suggestive of a theoretical model in
which asset stocks influence income flows, like the quantity

theory. By contrast, in Keynesian models the flow of income
depends on the stock of reserves, but on the flow of additions
to the national debt (i.e., on the deficit ).   This   motivated me

to experiment with a reformulation of equation (13) in which

  replaced AD. However, this alternative version had less
explanatory power than equation (13) in al most every regression

I ran.



14.   The series comes from the Federal Reserve Bank of St.

Loui s, and is adjusted both for interbank shifts of deposits

and changes in required reserves.



15. The transition quarter was omitted. In aggregating

quarterl y data into fiscal years, I used seasonally adjusted
GNP data due to their presumed greater accuracy than the
seasonal 1 y unadjusted data.



16. Insulating the rate of interest from currency shifts
amounts to the same thing. It is the schedule relating money

supply to r that is presumed to be insulated by the Fed.
                                                          PAGE 4




17. In a complex system, many more things are going on than I
can describe in a single paragraph. For example, income and
prices are changing, with important consequences for the budget
deficit. Vet the basic mechanism described here seems to come
shining through in all the models.


18. Or unless inflation itself is sufficiently damaging to
investment via, for example, the deterioration of the real
value of depreciation allowances. This last factor has been

stressed in a number of places by Feldstein. See, among
others, Feldstein (1980).


19. There is no distinction between money and high—powered
money under Friedman's plan, since part of his plan was the
elimination of fractional reserve banking.


20. This statement is predicated on defining high employment as
approximately the natural rate. With a Humphrey—Hawkins type
definition of high employment, the old Friedman rule can lead

to inflationary- disaster.



21. In reality, things are more complicated still because the
President and Congress often disagree over national economic
policy. A model with three stabilization authorities may be
better.
                                                            PAGE 5




22. Theopposite policy mix ——    tight   budgets and easy money ——

ihile   conceivable, seems'to be rarely encountered.


23. For a lull discussion of the reasons for     these
disagreements. and why it is not obvious what to do about them.

see Blinder (1982).


24. In the simple example of Figure 2, "going it alone" also
leads to the Nash equilibrium. But this is not generally true.

A fuller discussion of some alternatives appears in Blinder
(1982).



25. McMillan and Beard (1982) study the same issue, reaching
conclusions opposite from those of Hamburger and Zwick (1981).

But Hamburger and Zwick (1982) argue that this is because
McMillan and Beard fail to align the data correctly in time.         A

fifth study, far similar in spirit to my own, is that of Levy

(1981).    I will comment on Levy's work as I present my own

results.



26. Hamburger and Zwick (1981, 1982) obtain stronger results
when they use a better measure of the deficit, a measure which
is similar to my own. They also stress the importance of
properly aligning the data in time.
                                                              PAGE 6


27. Except for Levy (1981). His dependent variable is si milar
to my own   The main dilference is that he uses (quarterl y)

changes i n the adjusted base, whereas I use (annual) changes in

adjusted bank reserves. Viewed from the perspective of

equation (17), Levy's choice imposes a coefficient of —1 on
dC/dt.   As will be seen below, the estimated coefficient is
closer to zero.



28. To correct for potentially severe heteroskedasticity, all

variables were divided by nominal GNP.     Also, to allow for some

"trend" prcvisi on of reserves even in the absence o-f deficits,
a constant was added to the regression.


29. Barro (1978). Hamburger—Zwick (1 981), and McFlillan— Beard
(1982) all found the lagged value of money (not reserves) to be

important. Levy's (1981) study of changes in reserves also
found a significant lagged dependent variable, but he worked
with quarterly data.


30. Levy (1981 ) estimated a (constant) marginal monetization
rate o-f 6.47. f or the period 1952—1978, quite close to my

estimate. The two equations cannot be compared in terms of
goodness of fi t because Levy did not make the correction for

heteroskedast i city mentioned in footnote 2, used quarterly
data, and got much of his explanatory power from the lagged
dependent van able and seasonal dummies.     I presume the fits
                                                        PAGE 7

are comparable, and so cannot agree with his conclusion that

"any implication that the largest portion of monetary policy is
random (should) be rejected" (p.!65).
                                                         Page 1


                           REFERENCES



Robert J. Barro, "Are Government Bonds Net WEalth?", Journal

    of Political Economy, November/December 19Th, pp. 1095-1117.
Robert J. Barro, "Comment from an Unreconstructed Ricardian,"

    Journal of Monetary Economics, August 1978, pp. 569-581.
Robert J. Barro, "On the Determination of the Public Debt,"

    Journal of Political Economy, 1979, pp. gLi-0-971.

Ben S. Bernanke, "Permanent Income, Liquidity, and Exenditir
    on Automobiles: Evidence from Panel Data," mimeo,
    Stanford University, September 1981.

Alan S. Blinder, "Issues in the Coordination of Monetary and

     Fiscal Policy," NBER Working Paper No. 982, September 1982
     (forthcoming in a Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City

     conference volume).

Alan S. Blinder, "Temporary Income Taxes and Consumer Spending,"

     Journal of Political Economy, February 1981, pp. 26-53.
Alan S. Blinder and Robert M. Solow, "Does Fiscal Policy

     Matter?'t, Journal of Public Economics, 1973, pp. 319-337.

Alan S. Blinder and Joseph E. Stiglitz, "Money, Credit Constraints,

     and Economic Activity," paper presented
     -at the December 1982 meetings of the American Economic
     Association.
Willem H. Buiter and James Tobin, "Debt Neutrality: A Brief
     Review of Doctrine and Evidence," in G. M. von Furstenburg
     (ed.) Social Security versus Private Saving, Ballinger, 1979.
                                                          Page 2



Peter Diamond, "National. Debt in a :0c Model ," American
     Economic Revie;, 1965, pp. 1126—1150.
Martin S. Feldstein, "Fiscal Policies. Inflation, and Capital

     Formation," Arnrican                       v. 71, Setebor
     ]980, pp.. 636—650.         .                           .




Martin   S. Feldstein, "Government Deficits and Aggregate
      Demand," Journal: of Public Economics, V.     9, 1982, ppl20:
Milton Friedman, "AMonetaryand Fisa1 Framework for.Econornic:
.......:.Stability,"..American_EconomicReview,..v....38,•June l9'f8..•.:

      pp. 25_26Ll..

Roman Frydman, "Individual Rationality, Decentralization and
      the Rational Expectations Hypothesis," mimeo, New York

     Uriiversity, Novemb,er 1981.
 Clive W. Granger, "Investigating Causal Relations by Econometric

      Models and Cross—Spectral Methods," Econometrica,

      1969, pp. tt2L_L38.
Robert E. Hall and Frederic S. Mishkin, "The Sensitivity of
      Consumption to Transitory Income: Estimates from Panel

      Data on Households," Econometrica, 1982, pp. t6l_t82.
Michael J. Hamburger and Burton Zwick, "Deficits, Money, and

      Inflation," Journal of Monetary Economics, January 1981,
      pp. l'l—150.
Michael J. Hamburger and Burton Zwick, "Deficits, Money, and

      Inflation: Reply, Journal of Monetary Economics,

      1982, forthcoming.
                                                              Page 3



 Fumio Hayashi, "The Effect of Liquidity Constraints on
       Consumption: A Cross-Sectional Analysis," NBER Working

       Paper No. 882, April 1982.

 Robert C. King and Charles I. Plosser, "The Behavior of Money,
           Credit and Prices in a Real Business Cycle," NBER Working

           Paper No. 853, February 1982.
 Mickey D. Levy, "Factors Affeèting Monetary Policy in an Era
           of Inflation," Journal of Monetary Economics, November

           1981, pp. 351—373.

 N. Gregory Mankiw, "Hall's Consumption Hypothesis and Durable

           Goods," rnimeo, MIT, January1981.
 Bennett T. McCallum, "Monetarist Principles and the Money
           Stock   ;Growth.Ruie,' American Economic Review, :v.. 71.,
           May   1981,   pp. 134—138.
 Bennett     T. McCallum, "Are Bond-Financed Deficits Inflationary?
       -
           ARicardian Analysis," mimeo, Carnegie—Mellon University,
                               .




           May 1982.
.-W   D. McMillan and T. R.. Beard, .!'Deficits, Money, and

           Inflation: Comment," Journal of Monetary Economics,
           1982, forthcoming.
 William A. Niskanen, "Deficits, Government Spending, and
           Inflation: What is the Evidence?" Journal of Monetary

           Economics, August 1978, pp. 591—602.
 Edmund S. Phelps, "The Trouble with 'Rational Expectations'
  -
           and the Problem of Inflation Stabilization," mimeo,
           Columbia University, October 1981.
Edmund S. Phelps and Karl Shell, "Public Debt, Taxation, and

     Capital Intensiveness," Journal of Economic Theory,

     1969, pp. 330_3146.

Charles I. Plosser and G. W. Schwert, "Money, Income and

      Sunspots: Measuring Economic Relationships and the
      Effects of Differencing," Journal of Monetary Economics,

      Vo1.L., 1978, pp. 637-660.

David H. Pyle and Stephen J. Turnovsky, "The Dynamics of
     Government Policy in an Inflationary Economy: An
     1lntermediate Run' Analysis," Journal of Money, Credit,

     and Banking, v. 8, November 1976, po. Lll_37.
Thomas J. Sargent arid Neil Wallace," Some Unpleasant Monetarist

     Arithmetic," Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly

     Review, v. 5, Fall 1981, pp. 1—17.
Christopher A. Sims, ttMoney, Income, and Causality," American

     Economic Review, 1972, pp. 5L1.0_552.

Gary Smith, "Monetarism, Bondism, and Inflation," Journal of
    Money, Credit, and Banking, v. 14, May 1982, pp. 278-286.
John B. Taylor, "Rational Expectations and the Invisible
    Handshake," J. Tobin (ed.) Macroeconomics, Prices, and
    Quantities, in volume in honor of Arthur Okun, forthcoming
    1982.
                                                       Page 5




James Tobin, "Money and Finance in the Macroeconomic Process,"
    Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, May 1982,

    pp. l7l20Li.

James Tobin, "Money and Income: Post Hoc Ergo   Propter   Hoc?"

     Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1970.


James Tobin and Willem Buiter, "Long-Run Effects of Fiscal
     and Monetary Policy on Aggregate Demand," in J. L. Stein
     (ed.), Monetarism, North-Holland, 1976, PP. 273—309.

Stephen J. Turnovsky, "Macroeconomic Dynamics and Growth in .a
     Monetary Economy," Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking,

     1978, pp. 1—26.
