NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOW FAST DO PERSONAL COMPUTERS DEPRECIATE?
CONCEPTS AND NEW ESTIMATES
Wendy E. Dunn
Mark E. Doms
Stephen D. Oliner
Daniel E. Sichel
Working Paper 10521
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10521
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2004

Forthcoming in Tax Policy and the Economy, edited by James Poterba, MIT Press. We wish to thank Ana
Aizcorbe, Barbara Fraumeni, Jane Gravelle, Michael Kiley, Brent Moulton, Jim Poterba, and Brian Sliker
for helpful comments on an earlier draft of the paper. We also thank Chuck Hulten, Dale Jorgenson, and Nick
Oulton for useful discussions concerning the measurement of capital. Michael Hurlbut, Robert Little, and
Brian Rowe provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed in the paper are those of the authors
and should not be attributed to the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, or
other staff at either institution. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Wendy E. Dunn, Mark E. Doms, Stephen D. Oliner, and Daniel E. Sichel. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

How Fast Do Personal Computers Depreciate? Concepts and New Estimates
Wendy E. Dunn, Mark E. Doms, Stephen D. Oliner, and Daniel E. Sichel
NBER Working Paper No. 10521
May 2004
JEL No. O47
ABSTRACT
This paper provides new estimates of depreciation rates for personal computers using an extensive
database of prices of used PCs. Our results show that PCs lose roughly half their remaining value,
on average, with each additional year of use. We decompose that decline into age-related
depreciation and a revaluation effect, where the latter effect is driven by the steep ongoing drop in
the constant-quality prices of newly-introduced PCs. Our results are directly applicable for
measuring the depreciation of PCs in the National Income and Product Accounts (NIPAs) and were
incorporated into the December 2003 comprehensive NIPA revision. Regarding tax policy, our
estimates suggest that the current tax depreciation schedule for PCs closely tracks the actual loss of
value in a zero-inflation environment. However, because the tax code is not indexed for inflation,
the tax allowances would be too small in present value for inflation rates above the very low level
now prevailing.
Mark E. Doms
San Francisco Federal Reserve Bank
101 Market Street, MS #1130
San Francisco, CA 94105-1530
Wendy E. Dunn
Federal Reserve Board, MS #82
20th and Constitution Ave., NW
Washington, DC 20551

Stephen D. Oliner
Federal Reserve Board, MS #66
20th and Constitution Ave., NW
Washington, DC 20551
stephen.d.oliner@frb.gov
Daniel E. Sichel
Federal Reserve Board, MS #89
20th and Constitution Ave., NW
Washington, DC 20551
dan.sichel@frb.gov

1. INTRODUCTION
The measurement of depreciation is a complex – and, to some, obscure – area of
economics. However, getting the numbers right is critical for important issues in tax policy and
capital measurement. This is particularly true for computers and other high-tech capital goods,
which have assumed an increasingly central role in U.S. business activity over the past decade.
In this regard, the recent debate about the contribution of information technology to economic
growth has focused attention on the measurement of high-tech capital goods and, consequently,
on the rate at which they depreciate.
Over the years, economists have devoted considerable attention to the measurement of
depreciation. Notable early studies include Griliches (1960) – who estimated depreciation rates
for farm tractors – and Hall’s (1971) work on pickup trucks.1 Somewhat later, Hulten and
Wykoff (1981a, 1981b) estimated depreciation rates for many different types of equipment and
structures, and the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) has adopted their figures for use in the
U.S. National Income and Product Accounts (NIPAs).
For high-tech assets, however, the literature on depreciation is remarkably thin given
their importance in the economy. Hulten and Wykoff’s pioneering research predated the
explosion in demand for information technology capital; thus, their studies did not include
computing equipment, and they treated quality change in a relatively limited way. Oliner (1993,
1994) estimated depreciation rates for mainframe computers and computer peripheral equipment,
but these results are somewhat dated at this point, and there has been no follow-up research for
these assets. To our knowledge, only two prior studies – Geske, Ramey, and Shapiro (2003) and
1

See Jorgenson (1974) for an excellent overview of this early literature, along with Fraumeni (1997) and Jorgenson
(1996) for more recent surveys of the literature.

-1-

Wykoff (2003) – have estimated depreciation for personal computers. Wykoff’s paper, though,
mainly concerns methodology, and his empirical work uses a very small sample of computer
prices merely to illustrate his approach. Geske, Ramey, and Shapiro have a richer dataset, which
they employ to estimate depreciation for PCs and to highlight the role of obsolescence in driving
depreciation for these assets.
Our paper builds on the work of Geske, Ramey, and Shapiro to further narrow the
knowledge gap surrounding depreciation rates for PCs. Like their work – and most of the earlier
literature – we rely on prices of used assets to estimate depreciation. We construct a large
dataset of prices and model characteristics for used PCs listed in bluebooks. This dataset
includes nearly 13,000 observations and spans the period from 1985 to 2002, covering almost the
entire era of personal computers.
With these data in hand, we followed the empirical approach in Oliner (1993, 1994),
which regressed used asset prices on product characteristics and functions of age and time. This
approach – which relates closely to Hall’s (1971) framework – effectively adds age to a standard
hedonic price regression. This framework allows us to decompose the total decline in PC prices
into two parts. The first is the revaluation of existing units over time as new models are
introduced at lower constant-quality prices. The second part is the decline in a PC’s value as it
ages because of reduced efficiency and eventual scrappage; although PCs suffer some wear-andtear, we believe that this aging effect mainly arises because older PCs become unable to run the
latest software or lack features (like a CD-ROM drive) that come to be considered standard. As
discussed in the next section, these two components of price change – depreciation and
revaluation – have direct applications to tax policy and capital measurement.

-2-

Not surprisingly, our empirical results indicate that PCs lose value at a rapid pace. Over
our full sample period, the value of a PC declines roughly 50 percent, on average, with each year
of use, implying that a newly-installed PC can be expected to be nearly worthless after five or six
years of service. In addition, our results suggest that both depreciation and revaluation
contribute to the sharp drop in the value of installed PCs, though revaluation plays the dominant
role, especially in the early years of a PC’s life.
Our results have important implications for tax policy and for the measurement of
depreciation and capital stocks in the NIPAs. Regarding tax policy, we show that in a world
with changing relative prices, firms should be permitted to deduct both the age-related decline in
an asset’s value (i.e., depreciation) and the revaluation of that asset relative to the general price
level. The combined effect of depreciation and real revaluation measures the asset’s real loss of
value. Allowing firms to deduct this loss of value equalizes the effective tax rate across assets, a
standard prescription for capital taxation. We then evaluate the current tax rules for depreciating
PCs against this benchmark. The Internal Revenue Code permits firms to depreciate PCs and
other computing equipment over a five-year service life, with annual deductions that equal or
exceed 40 percent of the undepreciated value. Our results indicate that these tax allowances
closely approximate the real loss of value that PCs experience when general price inflation is
very low; however, because the tax code is not indexed for inflation, higher rates of inflation
induce some distortions.
Turning to capital measurement, our preferred specification generates a non-geometric
schedule of depreciation that averages about 22 percent annually over the first five years of a
PC’s service life. However, this schedule cannot be applied directly to the NIPAs. The

-3-

difficulty arises because the constant-quality PC prices generated by our dataset trend down
more rapidly than the corresponding NIPA price series, which relies on the producer price index
for PCs. As we will show, the combined effect of depreciation and constant-quality price change
is tightly pinned down in our dataset, which means that altering the rate of constant-quality price
decline implies an opposite change in the measured rate of depreciation. To generate a
depreciation schedule that is suitable for use in the NIPAs, we estimate a version of our
regression that constrains the path for constant-quality prices to conform with the NIPA series.
When we do this, the estimated depreciation rate rises to an average annual pace slightly above
34 percent.
This paper is organized as follows. The next section provides a conceptual discussion of
depreciation. We highlight the concepts that are appropriate for tax policy and for capital
accounting and then link these concepts to our empirical framework. Section 3 describes our
data, and section 4 presents the empirical results, including a comparison to those in Geske,
Ramey, and Shapiro (2003). Section 5 draws out the implications of our results for tax policy
and for capital measurement. Conclusions are presented in the final section.

2. MEASUREMENT OF DEPRECIATION, USER COST, AND CAPITAL STOCKS
The literature on measuring capital is vast, complex, and often confusing. This section
summarizes – with a minimum of technical detail – the concepts that guide our empirical work.
We discuss the measures of depreciation that are relevant for tax policy, for constructing the user
cost of capital, and for calculating capital stocks and capital consumption allowances in the

-4-

NIPAs. For broader overviews of the literature on capital measurement, see Diewert (2002) and
OECD (2001).
Background
k

As the starting point for our discussion, let p z ,t ,a denote the price of a capital good of
type k that has the set of embodied characteristics z. For a personal computer, z would specify
the speed of the processor, the size of the hard drive, the amount of memory, and so on. The
other subscripts on p indicate that the price is observed at time t for a unit that is a years old.
One year later, when time has moved forward to t+1 and the unit is a+1 years old, the price
k

becomes p z ,t +1,a + 1 , and the percentage decline in the asset’s price over the year can be written
as:

(1)

1−

pzk, t + 1, a + 1
pzk, t , a

 pzk, t + 1, a + 1 pzk, t + 1, a 
 .
= 1 −  k
× k
p
p
 z , t + 1, a
z ,t ,a 

The first term in parenthesis compares the price of an (a+1)-year-old unit with an a-year-old unit
at a fixed point in time. We denote this price ratio by 1-* k, where * k is the depreciation in asset
value from an additional year of age. The second term compares the price of an a-year-old unit
at times t and t+1. We denote this second price ratio by 1+B k, where B k represents the

-5-

percentage change in asset value between t and t+1, with age held fixed.2 If we substitute 1-* k
and 1+B k into equation 1, we obtain

(2)

1−

pzk, t + 1, a + 1
pzk, t , a

= 1 − (1 − δ k )(1 + π k ) ≈ δ k − π k ,

where the final expression omits the cross-product, * kB k, which is small compared to * k and B k.
It is important to note that the two components of price change in equation 2, * k and B k,
are measured conditional on a fixed set of performance characteristics, z. This is evident from
the notation on the left side of equation 2, which shows that z does not vary as time and age each
move forward by one year. Thus, the time-related element of the price change, Bk, represents the
change in price holding quality fixed, which makes Bk a constant-quality price measure. For
personal computers, constant-quality prices have trended down at a rapid rate, owing in large
part to advances in semiconductor chip technology. Under standard assumptions of competitive
equilibrium, each introduction of a more powerful model at a lower constant-quality price forces
down the prices of older models. Bk captures this ongoing revaluation. The age-related element
in the equation, * k, measures the additional decline in asset value that stems from wear-and-tear,
reductions in the efficiency of older models, and the approach of the asset’s retirement. To avoid
double-counting, * k cannot include the revaluation effect as well.

2

By writing *k and Bk without subscripts we have implicitly assumed that both dimensions of price change are
constant. We have done this only to simplify the notation; the entire discussion would remain valid if we allowed *k
and Bk to vary with age and time.

-6-

To illustrate these points, consider the following example involving PCs. Assume that
the price of a new PC is $1000 every year and that the value of a PC drops 45 percent over the
course of a year (the value is $550 after one year, $302.50 after two years, and so on). The
combined effect of depreciation and revaluation, *k - Bk, is 45 percent in this example. Now, to
allocate this loss of value between *k and Bk, assume that the quality of new PCs increases 25
percent each year. Given the fixed $1000 price of a new PC, the 25 percent annual increase in
quality implies that new PC prices drop 25 percent per year in constant-quality terms; in a
competitive equilibrium, the prices of existing models will be pushed down by the same amount.
Thus, Bk (which captures this revaluation effect) would equal negative 25 percent, while *k
(which represents the annual loss of value over and above the revaluation effect) would be 20
percent. For personal computers, *k largely reflects the influence of obsolescence rather than
physical decay. Even units that continue to function like new will lose value as they age because
they become too slow to perform some tasks efficiently, can no longer run the latest software, or
lack features that come to be considered essential.
The literature on capital measurement has used a variety of terms to describe *k and Bk, as
shown in table 1. Consistent with our discussion, Fraumeni (1997) labeled *k as depreciation, Bk
as the revaluation term, and *k - Bk as the combined effect of depreciation and revaluation. A
number of other terms can be found in the literature for each of these concepts. One could make
a case for each of these differing sets of terms, but we will use “depreciation” and “revaluation,”
which strike us as the most intuitive among the alternatives.

-7-

User Cost of Capital
Depreciation and revaluation are important elements of the user cost of capital, which
measures the implicit cost of using a capital good for a given period of time. The user cost is the
equivalent of the “wage rate” for capital, and as such, it plays a key role in a wide range of
economic analyses, including studies of business investment, tax policy, and productivity
growth.3 Using a capital good for a given period generates two types of costs. The first is the
cost of financing the acquisition of the capital good. Assuming that the purchase is debt
financed (a very similar analysis would hold for equity financing), this cost equals the prevailing
interest rate (i) multiplied by the purchase price of the capital good. The second cost is the
change in the value of the capital good over the period of use, which – as discussed above –
equals the combined effect of depreciation and revaluation [pk(*k - Bk)].
The user cost of capital also reflects several key features of the tax code. As described by
Hall and Jorgenson (1967), these tax parameters include the statutory tax rate on corporate
profits (which we denote by J), the present value of the depreciation deductions for capital goods
of type k (denoted by xk), and any investment tax credit for such capital goods (denoted by 2k).
Given these tax parameters, we show in the appendix that the user cost of capital can be written
as:

(3)

c zk, t , a

[

1−θ k − τxk k
1−θ k − τxk k
k
k
=
pz ,t , a i + δ − π =
p z , t , a (i − π ) + δ k − π k − π
1− τ
1− τ

(

)

3

See Hall and Jorgenson (1967) for the classic discussion of the user cost of capital.

-8-

(

)] ,

where the final part of the equation adds and subtracts the aggregate rate of inflation, B, to
express the interest rate and the revaluation effect in real terms. As would be expected, equation
3 indicates that a larger investment tax credit and more accelerated depreciation allowances act
to reduce the cost of capital. Equation 3 will prove useful in our discussion of the appropriate
tax allowances for depreciation, to which we now turn.
Tax Deductions for Depreciation
The U.S. tax code allows businesses to deduct depreciation expenses when figuring their
taxable income. These deductions influence the after-tax cost of investing in plant and
equipment, and thus affect both the overall size and composition of the business capital stock.
When designing tax rules for depreciation, a standard prescription is to equalize the effective tax
rate across assets, so as to avoid distorting the composition of the capital stock.
Numerous studies have shown that effective tax rates can be equalized by setting tax
allowances for depreciation to match the actual decline in the asset’s value.4 In the appendix, we
derive the implications of this rule when we allow for price inflation in the economy’s aggregate
basket of goods and services (B) and asset revaluation relative to this aggregate price index (Bk B). As we show, the implied tax allowance is:

(4)

[ (

)]

(

)

DTAX zk, t , a = pzk, t , a δ k − π k − π = pzk, t , a δ k − π k + pzk, t , aπ .

4

See Gravelle (1982, 1994) for a derivation of this result, Bradford and Fullerton (1981) for an in-depth treatment of
effective tax rates, and Auerbach (1982) for a discussion of the connection between effective tax rates and neutral
business taxation.

-9-

In words, the firm would be allowed to deduct [*k - (Bk - B)] percent of the asset’s remaining
value in each period. This deduction would cover the actual loss of value in nominal terms
[pk(*k - Bk)] plus the amount needed to maintain the asset’s real value in the face of aggregate
price inflation (pkB). The total deduction in equation 4 is exactly the sum of depreciation and
(real) revaluation in the user cost of capital (see equation 3). If this depreciation policy were
paired with a deduction for real interest expenses, the combination would grant a deduction for
the full user cost of capital. Because the user cost represents the one-period charge that would
prevail in a competitive rental market, allowing firms that own (rather than rent) capital to
deduct the equivalent of the full user cost means that tax policy would be neutral with respect to
the choice of renting versus purchasing capital.5
An example may help clarify how the allowances specified by equation 4 would work in
practice. Assume, as in the previous example, that a new PC costs $1000 and that its value
declines 45 percent with each year of service. In addition, assume that the overall inflation rate
is five percent annually. With these assumptions, *k - Bk is 45 percent and *k - (Bk - B) is 50
percent. As shown in the first line of table 2, the PC’s initial value (column 1) falls to $550 at
the end of the first year (column 2). With an inflation rate of five percent, the firm would need
$1050 of PC capital at the end of the first year (column 3) to maintain the real value of its initial
$1000 stock in terms of other goods and services in the economy; the difference between $1050
and $550 gives rise to the $500 tax deduction (column 4). This $500 deduction equals

5

This statement assumes that all firms face the same tax rate. If not, a firm with a low tax rate would still have an
incentive to lease capital from a firm with a higher rate, as the higher-rate firm would realize greater value from the
depreciation deductions.

-10-

[*k - (Bk - B)] percent of the PC’s initial value of $1000. Lines 2 through 5 of the table repeat
this calculation for subsequent years, with the PC assumed to be scrapped at the end of year five.

Consumption of Fixed Capital and Capital Stocks in National Accounts
The Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) publishes estimates of capital consumption for
the U.S. economy in the NIPAs. In concept, the national accounts measure capital consumption
as the outlay required to keep the capital stock intact. This notion, while quite intuitive, has
generated a surprising amount of controversy in the literature on capital measurement. At the
risk of oversimplifying the debate, the key issue is whether the change in asset value that we
have labelled “revaluation” should be included in the consumption of fixed capital.
An important source of guidance on this issue is the 1993 System of National Accounts
(SNA), a comprehensive set of macroeconomic accounts prepared jointly by the World Bank, the
International Monetary Fund, the OECD, the Commission of the European Communities, and the
United Nations. Unfortunately, the standards set out in the 1993 SNA are contradictory. On the
one hand, the SNA states that:
“The value of a fixed asset ... is determined by the present value of the future
rentals ... that can be expected over its remaining service life. Consumption of
fixed capital is therefore measured by the decrease, between the beginning and
the end of the current accounting period, in the present value of the remaining
sequence of rentals.” (Section 6.182)
This definition of capital consumption includes what we have called the revaluation effect,
which is one of several factors that influence the value of an asset’s future rental income.
However, the SNA also constructs a revaluation account – separate from the measurement of
capital consumption allowances – that records the gain or loss in value that “... “accrue[s] purely

-11-

as a result of holding assets over time without transforming them in any way” (Section 12.67).
The revaluation effect for PCs is clearly a holding loss under this definition. Given these
conflicting definitions, the SNA does not settle whether revaluation should be part of the
consumption of fixed capital in national accounts.
Central to this controversy are different interpretations of what it means to “hold capital
intact” for the purpose of measuring net income. One interpretation states that capital has been
held intact if the physical quantity of capital has been maintained. By this definition, capital
consumption would consist only of what we have called depreciation, which represents the
outlay needed to cover the loss of value associated with wear-and-tear, declines in efficiency,
and asset retirements. A contrasting point of view is that capital has been held intact if the
ability of the capital stock to produce future income has been maintained. In this case, capital
consumption would include not only depreciation but also the revaluation of existing assets.
This second view underlies the tax allowance for depreciation described above. These
competing interpretations of what it means to hold capital intact date back at least to the debate
among Hayek (1941), Pigou (1941), and Hicks (1942), and economists have yet to settle this
issue.6 Going forward, it will be important for researchers and statistical agencies to reach a
consensus regarding the appropriate measurement of capital consumption in national accounts.
This debate notwithstanding, the NIPAs currently exclude revaluation effects from the
consumption of fixed capital, with these effects appearing in a separate revaluation account.

6

For more recent views on this question, see Christensen and Jorgenson (1995), who construct an integrated set of
national accounts using the narrower notion of capital consumption, and Hill (1999, 2000), who argues for the
broader definition that includes revaluation.

-12-

Accordingly, if we let Wt k denote the total value of all type-k capital goods in year t, the NIPA
capital consumption allowance for this asset is simply:

CFCtk = Wt k δ k .

(5)

Because this expression excludes revaluation effects, the NIPA concept of capital consumption
measures the outlay needed to maintain the physical quantity of capital, not the future income
stream from this capital.
The capital stock in equation 5 represents what is known in the literature as a “wealth”
stock (which motivates our use of the symbol W). This wealth stock equals the sum of the
current year’s investment in capital goods of type k plus the remaining value of the investment
done in previous years. If we let I tk denote this investment in year t and assume that the asset
has a service life of T years, the wealth stock in current dollars can be expressed as:

(6)

Wt k =

[ (

T −1

∑ Itk− i 1 − δ k − π k

i= 0

)] .
i

In our previous example involving personal computers, we assumed that *k - Bk (the combined
effect of depreciation and revaluation) is 45 percent annually and that PCs are scrapped after five
years. With these assumptions, the wealth stock of PCs in year t would be

(I

k
t

k

k

2

k

3

k

+ I t − 1 0.55 + I t − 2 0.55 + I t − 3 0.55 + I t − 4 0.55

4

-13-

).

These expressions for the consumption of fixed capital and the wealth stock are in current
dollars. That is, the wealth stock in equation 6 represents the actual dollar value of personal
computers (or any other type of asset) in year t. Similarly, the measure of capital consumption in
equation 5 represents the actual dollar outlay on personal computers required in year t to
maintain the stock of PCs intact (according to the NIPA concept). These series also can be
expressed in terms of constant dollars. Of particular importance, a constant-dollar measure of
capital consumption is needed to convert the economy’s constant-dollar gross product into a
figure for its constant-dollar net output. The capital consumption allowance for asset k in
constant dollars is simply the current-dollar measure divided by the price deflator for that asset.
Dividing both sides of equation 5 by this price deflator yields the expression for capital
consumption in constant dollars:

(7)

CFCtk ,1996$ = Wt k ,1996$δ k ,

where we assume that constant-dollar series are measured in 1996 dollars.7
The constant-dollar wealth stock in equation 7 can be computed directly from constantdollar investment flows.8 As we demonstrate in the appendix,

7

This was the NIPA convention when we completed the paper in November 2003. However, the comprehensive
NIPA revision one month later shifted the base year for constant-dollar series from 1996 to 2000. This change in
base year has no effect on the results in the paper, all of which could be re-expressed in year-2000 dollars. Note also
that equation 7 shows the constant-dollar CFC for a single type of capital good. BEA calculates an aggregate real
CFC by Fisher chain-weighting the constant-dollar CFCs for individual assets. In this paper, we focus on measuring
the CFC (and wealth stock) for a single asset type – personal computers – and abstract from the calculation of chainweighted aggregates.
8
One can also arrive at the constant-dollar wealth stock by deflating the current-dollar stock shown in equation 6.
We focus on the direct calculation of the constant-dollar stock from constant-dollar investment spending because
that is the procedure used by BEA.

-14-

(8)

Wt

k ,1996$

=

T −1

∑ Itk−,1996$
(1 − δ k )
i

i

.

t=0

Note that the investment weights here are (1-*k)i, rather than [1- (*k - Bk )]i as in the expression
for the current-dollar stock. The weights in equation 8 represent the value in year t of one
constant-dollar of past investment. As the algebra in the appendix shows, the price deflator used
to construct constant-dollar investment in equation 8 embeds the revaluation effect (Bk) for
existing assets. Hence, one constant dollar of investment from (say) year t-2 would be worth less
than a constant dollar from year t solely because of aging effects (*k); including Bk in the weight
would double-count the revaluation effect. This explains why the investment weights for the
constant-dollar stock in equation 8 differ from those for the current-dollar stock in equation 6.9
Summary and Implications for Our Empirical Framework
This section has covered a lot of ground. To review the key results, table 3 summarizes
the implications of our discussion for calculating the user cost of capital, for specifying tax
allowances for depreciation, and for measuring capital consumption allowances and wealth
stocks in the NIPAs. As shown in table 3, the combined effect of depreciation and real
revaluation, * k - (B k - B), plays a central role in the analysis. It represents the percentage loss of

9

A related point concerns the distinction between wealth stocks, which measure the value of existing assets, and socalled “productive” stocks, which measure the services provided by these assets in a given period. Productive stocks
are the appropriate concept of capital to use when estimating production functions or when measuring the
contribution of capital accumulation to the growth of output or productivity. The constant-dollar productive stock
for a given asset, like the constant-dollar wealth stock, is calculated as a weighted sum of current and previous
constant-dollar investment flows. However, the weights generally differ, as the weights for the wealth stock reflect
the remaining value of each investment cohort, while those for the productive stock reflect its remaining efficiency.
This paper deals with the measurement of wealth stocks, although the information we develop on retirement patterns
for PCs is also relevant for measuring productive stocks.

-15-

value, in real terms, experienced by an asset over the course of a year. This loss of value appears
in the user cost of capital, and it constitutes the appropriate percentage deduction for tax
purposes.
We also need to measure (* k - B k) and * k to calculate certain items in table 3. * k - B k
represents the rate of decline in the asset’s nominal value, which enters directly into the
calculation of the current-dollar wealth stock and also determines the asset price (pk) that appears
elsewhere in table 3. * k measures the pure effect of aging on asset value and is needed to
compute the constant-dollar wealth stock from data on constant-dollar investment outlays and to
calculate the consumption of fixed capital in the NIPAs.
Our empirical strategy will be to estimate * k and * k - (B k - B) directly from data on used
PC prices and then to calculate * k - B k by subtracting the rate of aggregate price inflation, B,
from the estimate of * k - (B k - B). To see how we estimate these parameters, consider a simple
log-linear expression for the price of a PC in year t scaled by the aggregate price index in that
year:

(9)

(

)

ln pzk, t , a pt = α + β ln z + γ t + φ a .

For purposes of illustration, we have written this equation with only a single performance
characteristic (z), and we have assumed that the effects of age and time on price are constant.
(We do not impose these constraints in our actual estimation.) Because this regression equation
controls for the PC’s quality, the coefficient on time, (, measures the rate at which constantquality PC prices fall relative to the aggregate price level. This is exactly (B k - B) in our

-16-

notation. Similarly, the coefficient on age, N, measures the pure effect of aging on PC prices,
which is minus * k in our notation (the minus sign appears because we have expressed the rate of
depreciation, * k, as a positive number). Thus, -N provides the estimate of * k, and -(N+()
provides the estimate of * k - (B k - B).

3. DATA
The data used in this paper were obtained from Orion Research, which publishes
bluebooks for many different used goods, including computers. The computer bluebooks
contain prices for various types of used computer equipment and peripherals, based on surveys
of used equipment dealers. The bluebook entry for each PC includes information on the
manufacturer, the model name and number, and the year or years in which the model was sold
new by the manufacturer. Each bluebook entry also includes detailed information about the
characteristics of the PC, including the processor type (Pentium III, for example), the processor
speed, the amount of random access memory, and the size of the hard disk.10
Orion’s survey form asks dealers to show the amount paid to the seller of the PC (i.e., the
wholesale price) as well as the dealer’s retail selling price and the number of days it took the
dealer to sell the PC. Using this information, Orion constructs three used prices for each
bluebook entry: the wholesale prices for units in “mint” and “average” condition, and the
“current used” price, which measures the average retail price for units sold in 30 days or less.

10

In many cases, several additional characteristics were also listed, including whether the PC has a DVD player, a
fax/modem, a video card, a sound card, or a network card. However, the reporting of these features appears to be
less consistent across models and across years.

-17-

We focus on the “current used” price for our empirical work, but our results would be virtually
the same if we used either wholesale price instead.
We collected data on prices and characteristics of desktop PCs from the Orion bluebooks
published from 1985 through 2003. Four major computer makers were included in the sample:
Compaq, IBM, Dell, and Packard Bell. From 1995 to 2003, we use the Winter edition of the
bluebook, published in January of each year. According to Orion, the prices in the Winter
edition are based on survey data collected in the fourth quarter of the previous year. In 1993 and
1994, only the Fall edition was available; these prices reflect data collected in the third quarter of
each year. Prior to 1993, the bluebooks were published annually, usually at about mid-year, so
we assume that the prices in these books were observed in the first half of the year.
The concept of age in our dataset warrants some discussion. The bluebook description of
a PC for sale never includes its age. This omission reflects the fact that the value of a PC
depends on its characteristics and its general condition; given this information, the date that the
manufacturer shipped it from the factory is unimportant. However, a second concept of age –
which we use in our empirical work – is relevant for pricing. We define “model age” as the
amount of time that has elapsed since the first shipment of a given model. For example, the Dell
“Dimension 8100" with a Pentium IV processor was first sold in 2001, while an earlier model,
the “Dimension V350" with a Pentium II processor, was first sold in 1998. When measured in
terms of model age, the V350 units are three years older than the 8100 units. The older model
would be expected to sell at a lower price both because it is a less powerful computer and
because it likely has fewer remaining years of use before obsolescence causes retirement to
occur.

-18-

Because PCs depreciate quickly, it is important to be as precise as possible about the
timing of the observed prices. Table 4 lists each edition of the bluebooks included in our sample
along with the time period in which, to the best of our knowledge, the prices were observed. We
construct the time and age variables for our empirical work at the monthly frequency using the
midpoint of the date range for the survey period. For example, we assign the price observations
from the 2001 bluebook to November of the prior year. To calculate model age, we assume that
a given model was first shipped in June of the year it was introduced. Model age is then defined
as the number of months between the (assumed) first-shipment date and the survey date. For
instance, the 2001 bluebook price for a PC listed as first sold in 1998 would be associated with a
model age of 29 months (June 1998 to November 2000). Figure 1 illustrates the resulting
distribution of observations by model age. As can be seen, our dataset contains a large number
of observations in each age group.
In previous work, Dulberger (1989) and Oliner (1993) found that, even after controlling
for performance characteristics, the prices of semiconductors and mainframe computers varied
significantly depending on whether they were near the frontier of the technologies available at
the time a price was observed. This finding was taken as evidence of disequilibrium in these
markets. We allow for the possibility of a similar pattern in the market for PCs. Accordingly,
we construct a dummy variable (denoted FAST) that distinguishes models with best-practice
technology from all other models. FAST equals one if the PC’s processor speed is in the highest
10th percentile of chip speeds available at the time of the price observation.
For the regressions that follow, we exclude observations that are missing data on price or
the major performance characteristics. In addition, we exclude used PCs with prices greater than

-19-

$10,000, because they are likely to be servers rather than personal computers, the desired focus
of our study. The final sample contains 12,896 observations. Table 5 lists the mean values of
various characteristics by the year in which the used PC was sold. As can be seen in the table,
large advances in chip speeds and memory have been accompanied by rapid declines in the price
of used PCs.

4. ESTIMATION AND RESULTS
This section presents the results of the hedonic regression that we use to estimate various
aspects of price change for personal computers. The dependent variable is the log of the used PC
price deflated by the GDP chain-weight price index, while the explanatory variables include
product characteristics and functions of time and the PC’s model age. We allow the effects of
time to vary in the usual way by including separate dummy variables for all but one of the 19
periods in which prices were observed. However, the dummy variable approach works less well
for model age because of the large number of different ages in our sample. To simplify the
regression but still allow for a wide range of age-related price movements, we employ a fourthorder polynomial function of model age. Thus, the general form of our regression equation is:

(10)

ln ( p

k
z ,t , a

18

4

n =1

j =1

pt ) = α + ∑ β i ln zi + ∑ γ n tn + ∑ φ j a j .
i

The vector z of product characteristics includes the log of the CPU speed (denoted by MHZ), the
log of the amount of random access memory (RAM), the log of hard disk size (HD), a dummy
-20-

variable for whether the price for the PC includes a monitor (MON), a dummy for whether the
PC has a CD-ROM or DVD (CDROM), and the FAST chip dummy variable. We also include
brand dummies for Compaq, IBM, and Packard Bell (with Dell as the excluded dummy) to
control for differences among the four brands in the sample. With these controls for quality, the
equation becomes:

(

)

ln pzk, t , a pt = α + β1 ln MHZ + β2 ln RAM + β3 ln HD + β4 ln MON
+ β5 ln CDROM + β6 FAST + β7 COMPAQ + β8 IBM + β9 PBELL
(11)

18

4

n=1

j =1

+ ∑ γ ntn + ∑ φ j a j .

Regression Results
The column labeled “Baseline” in table 6 presents the results from OLS estimation of
equation 11. As shown in the table, the regression fits the data quite well, with an adjusted Rsquared of 0.92. Moreover, the coefficients on all of the performance characteristics except the
FAST dummy variable are strongly significant and have the expected positive signs. Among
these characteristics, differences in processor speed have the largest price effects, consistent with
previous findings by Oliner (1993), Dulberger (1989), and Cartwright (1986). The brand effects
are also significant, revealing a large price discount for Packard Bell PCs relative to other brands
with similar product characteristics.
The coefficients on model age are all significant, with those on the higher-order terms
especially so. As a result, we can strongly reject the hypothesis that the coefficients on a2, a3,

-21-

and a4 are jointly zero, which means that the used PC prices do not decline at a constant rate
with model age. That is, the estimated age-price profile is not geometric.11
In addition, the coefficients on the time dummies fall sharply over the sample period. As
noted earlier, these coefficients represent the rate of decline in constant-quality PC prices relative
to GDP prices. The coefficients on the time dummies for March 1985 and November 2002 imply
that constant-quality PC prices dropped at an average annual rate of 35.1 percent in real terms
between these dates.12 After accounting for the rise in GDP prices over this period, this figure
implies that constant-quality PC prices fell in nominal terms at an average annual rate of 32.7

11

Age-price profiles estimated from used asset prices – as in this paper – can be affected by the “lemons” problem
first identified by Akerlof (1970). Akerlof showed that prices on second-hand markets may embed a lemons
discount when buyers cannot assess the quality of the goods offered for sale and thus presume that sellers are
attempting to pass off inferior goods. In this case, the observed prices for units of a given age will provide a
downward biased estimate of the average price for all units of that age. Although we cannot rule out a lemons bias
in our data, we doubt this is a serious problem. Importantly, the condition of a used PC can be assessed rather easily,
which limits the information asymmetry that lies behind the lemons issue. Even someone with minimal knowledge
of computers could detect whether a PC has significant defects by visually inspecting the unit and checking that its
key components operate properly. In addition, we performed a simple empirical test that failed to turn up evidence
of a lemons problem. In particular, we re-ran the baseline regression using the wholesale prices for units in mint
condition instead of the retail prices. These wholesale prices measure what the dealers – who tend to be
sophisticated buyers – paid for the PCs that they assessed to be in excellent condition. If our baseline regression
were affected by a lemons problem, we might expect the age-price profile based on wholesale mint prices to differ
from that based on retail prices. However, the two profiles were virtually the same.
12

1/17.67
 p k


ptGDP
z
,
t
=
11
/
02
,
a
=
11
/
02


We measure this average annual rate of real price decline as 100 ×  k
− 1 , where
 p z ,t = 03/ 85,a ptGDP

= 03/ 85 



17.67 years elapse between the two pricing dates and we use the values of the GDP chain-weight price index for the
quarters containing these pricing dates. We then calculate the price ratio in parentheses as follows, where the second
equality is based on equation 11:

[ (

p zk,t = 11/ 02,a ptGDP
= 11/ 02
k
GDP
≡ exp ln p zk,t = 11/ 02,a ptGDP
= 11/ 02 − ln p z ,t = 03/ 85,a pt = 03/ 85
k
GDP
p z ,t = 03/ 85,a pt = 03/ 85
with

)

(

)]

= exp[γ 11/ 02 − γ 03/ 85 ],

γ 11/02 and γ 03/ 85 denoting the coefficients on the time dummies for those dates. All other coefficients in

equation 11 drop out from the calculation.

-22-

percent. This pace is similar to estimates of quality-adjusted price change for PCs in Berndt and
Rappaport (2003) and in Geske, Ramey, and Shapiro (2003).13
The rate of price decline that we estimate is more rapid than the drop in BEA’s constantquality price index for personal computers, which fell at an average annual rate of 21.5 percent
over 1985-2002. Diagnosing the source of this gap would require an analysis beyond the scope of
this paper. There are a host of possible reasons for the gap – including differences in source data,
hedonic techniques, and the construction of price indexes – that should be explored in future
research.
For the time being, however, we focus on the implications of this difference for the
measurement of depreciation. Recall that the total change in a capital good’s price over a given
time period is the sum of depreciation and constant-quality price change (the revaluation effect).
In the various specifications that we tested, we found that the estimate of the overall price change
was tightly nailed down, while the individual components were less so; as a result, speeding up
the decline in constant-quality prices had the effect of reducing the depreciation rate by roughly
the same amount. Given this negative correlation between the components, the depreciation rate
we estimated conditional on the constant-quality price change in our dataset would not be
appropriate for use in conjunction with the NIPA measure of constant-quality prices for PCs,
which falls more slowly than our measure. To produce a depreciation estimate that would be
suitable for use in the NIPAs, we re-estimate the baseline regression after constraining the path

13

However, Pakes (2003) found a notably slower pace of quality-adjusted price decline for PCs – roughly 15 to 20
percent per year on average. See Landefeld and Grimm (2000) for a comparison of results from earlier studies and
Berndt and Rappaport (2001) for additional background on the estimation of hedonic indexes for PCs.

-23-

for constant-quality prices in our data to conform with the BEA series. We impose this constraint
PC , BEA

by replacing the time dummies in equation 11 with the natural log of ( pt

/ ptGDP ), which

is forced to have a coefficient equal to one.
The results of this regression are shown in the column labelled “Imposed PC price.” As
can be seen from the drop in the adjusted R-squared from 0.92 to 0.84, the overall fit of this
regression is not as good as the baseline regression, reflecting the imposition of a trend rate of
constant-quality price change that conflicts with the pattern in the data. This constraint affects the
estimates of some other coefficients in the regression. In particular, the coefficient on ln(MHZ),
which was strongly positive in the baseline regression, turns slightly negative in the constrained
regression. Moreover, the FAST chip dummy becomes positive and highly significant. The
coefficients on model age also change quite a bit, and we examine the effects of these changes on
the estimated age-price profile for PCs in the next subsection.
Price Profiles
Tables 7a and 7b present the estimated price profiles for PCs that we need to explore the
implications of our results for tax policy and for capital measurement in the national accounts.
Table 7a uses the coefficient estimates from the baseline regression, while table 7b employs those
from the constrained regression. Both tables have the same structure, allowing an easy
comparison of results. All of the price profiles in both tables have been normalized to equal 100
for new models.

-24-

Beginning with table 7a, column 1 shows the age-price profile implied by the coefficients
on model age in the baseline regression.14 These coefficients capture the age-related decline in
price across models at a given time, controlling for differences in performance characteristics. As
can be seen, the age-price profile in column 1 is essentially flat for the first 12 months of model
age before declining steadily to about 56 percent of initial value at the 78-month mark.
This age-price profile is based on prices for PCs that are still in use and does not account
for the units that already have been removed from service. Because these retired PCs presumably
had a low implicit price relative to those that remained in use, the age-price profile in column 1
provides an upward biased estimate of the expected profile for an initial cohort of PCs. To
correct this bias, we follow the procedure in Hulten and Wykoff (1981a, 1981b) and Oliner
(1993). On the assumption that the salvage value of retired PCs is zero, we multiply the age-price
profile in column 1 by the survival probabilities from an assumed retirement distribution. In
particular, let g(a) be the age-price profile from our regression, and let S(a) be the survival
function representing the probability that a PC will remain in service at age a. Then, the ageprice profile corrected for retirements is S(a)g(a).15

14

Each entry in column 1 equals 100 × ( p zk,t ,a = a* p zk,t ,a = 0 ), where a* varies from zero months to 78 months in

six-month increments. We calculate this price ratio as follows, where the second equality is based on equation 11:

[(

) (

p zk,t ,a = a* p zk,t ,a = 0 ≡ exp ln p zk,t ,a = a* p tGDP − ln p zk,t ,a = 0 p tGDP

[

(

)]

= exp φ1a*+ φ 2 (a*) 2 + φ 3 (a*) 3 + φ 4 (a*) 4 − φ1 × 0+ φ 2 × 0 2 + φ 3 × 0 3 + φ 4 × 0 4

[

)]

]

= exp φ1a*+ φ 2 (a*) 2 + φ 3 (a*) 3 + φ 4 (a*) 4 .
15

An alternative way to adjust for retirements would be to multiply each price observation in our sample by the
survival probability associated with that observation and then to run the regression with the adjusted data. We tried
both methods and found that the results were virtually the same either way.

-25-

Unfortunately, very little is known about retirement patterns for PCs. The limited
evidence suggests that the modal age at retirement is roughly four years.16 Because many PCs
probably continue to be used in lower-value applications for a number of years, we assumed that
the mean age of retirement is five years, one year longer than the modal age. We then selected an
asymmetric retirement distribution that matched these parameter values. Although the Winfrey
distributions have a long history in economics for portraying retirement patterns, we used the
Weibull distribution instead because of its convenient parametric form.17
The survival probabilities generated by our retirement distribution are shown in column 2.
As can be seen, this distribution implies that 88 percent of PCs remain in service after 24 months
of use, after which the pace of retirements picks up. The probability of retirement is highest over
the range from 36 to 60 months of use, and then slows, leaving a long right-hand tail to the
distribution. Column 3 shows our estimated age-price profile adjusted for retirements, calculated
as the product of columns 1 and 2. This column represents our estimate of depreciation (*k),
taking account of the implicit zero price on retired units.
The next column presents the real revaluation effect (B k - B), which equals the estimated
rate of decline in constant-quality PC prices relative to the path for GDP prices. As noted above,
this real decline in PC prices averaged 35.1 percent annually over our full sample period. Column
4 shows the cumulative effect of this real revaluation for successively older models.

16

A recent story on the Bloomberg News Service (2003) cited an industry analyst who suggested that, in the recent
past, large firms have been replacing PCs every four years. In addition, Richards (2002) estimated that the
replacement cycle for PCs is 3.9 years, based on spectral analysis of computer investment flows.
17
Outside of economics, the Weibull distribution has been used extensively to model survival patterns. See Johnson,
Kotz, and Balakrishnan (1994). Among applications in economics, Sliker (2003) has used the Weibull to model
retirement patterns for motor vehicles. The survival function implied by our Weibull retirement distribution is
exp[-(age/$)0] where $=67.8, 0=2, and age is measured in months.

-26-

Columns 5 through 7 bring together the separate influences on PC prices. Column 5
presents the combined effect of depreciation and real revaluation, calculated as the product of the
profiles in columns 3 and 4. The rate of decline shown in column 5 is the estimate of
*k - (Bk - B), which figures so prominently in our measurement system. If aggregate price

inflation were zero, *k - (Bk - B) would equal *k - Bk, and this column would represent the actual
drop in the value of a personal computer with each additional period of use – hence the label “No
Inflation” for this column. As can be seen, the value of a PC declines quickly after it enters
service. Twelve months after installation, the PC’s value has fallen to 62.5 percent of its initial
price, almost entirely reflecting revaluation; after 24 months, only 33.5 percent of the initial value
remains, and after 60 months the PC is nearly worthless. Columns 6 and 7 show the analogous
schedules when aggregate price inflation is 1 percent and 4 percent, respectively – the range
observed over our sample period. As is evident from the similarity of the three columns, the
strong downward pressure on PC prices from revaluation and age-related factors overwhelms the
effect of aggregate price inflation.
The price profiles in table 7a are the ones implied by our unconstrained baseline
regression. We will use these profiles in section 5 to assess the implications of our results for tax
depreciation schedules for PCs. However, as we discussed above, the baseline regression implies
that constant-quality PC prices have declined considerably faster than is indicated by the BEA
series. To obtain price profiles that mesh with BEA’s constant-quality price index, table 7b
recalculates all the profiles using the results from the constrained regression.
The age-price profile in column 1 of table 7b declines more rapidly than its counterpart in
table 7a. This difference is a direct result of imposing the BEA price index in the constrained

-27-

regression. That is, the slower rate of constant-quality price decline in the constrained regression
forces adjustments in other coefficients to fit the sharp drop in bluebook prices for a given PC
over its service life. One such adjustment, shown in column 1, is a speed-up in the estimated rate
of age-related price decline, which carries through to the survival-adjusted age-price profile in
column 3 (after applying the unchanged survival function). This age-price profile differs
substantially across the two tables. Indeed, over the first 60 months of the PC’s service life, the
average annual rate of depreciation is 34.6 percent in table 7b, well above the 22.4 percent rate in
table 7a.
This difference offsets virtually all of the gap in the estimated revaluation rate between the
constrained and unconstrained regressions, as can be seen by comparing column 5 across the two
tables. After 36 months of use, the PC’s remaining value (taking account of both depreciation
and revaluation) is 16.2 percent in table 7a, very similar to the 17.2 percent figure in table 7b.
The difference becomes even smaller with additional periods of use. Thus, the data enforce a
strong negative correlation between the estimated rates of depreciation and constant-quality price
change, leaving their sum largely invariant to constraints imposed on either component.
Alternative Regressions
Table 8 summarizes the main results from our empirical work. It also presents several
tests of robustness and briefly compares our results to those in Geske, Ramey, and Shapiro
(2003), abbreviated henceforth as GRS. Column 2 of the table shows the combined effect of
depreciation and revaluation for various specifications of our regression, while columns 3 and 4
display these two components of price change. Column 5 shows the cross-product term that

-28-

arises when combining the effects of depreciation and revaluation.18 We present these price
measures from:

!

the baseline regression (line 1);

!

the constrained regression that imposes BEA’s PC price index (line 2);

!

alternative versions of the baseline regression that enlarge the set of performance
characteristics (line 3), that allow the coefficients on the characteristics to vary over time
(line 4), and that use wholesale PC prices rather than retail prices as the dependent variable
(line 5);

!

the baseline regression estimated over the 1990-2000 sample period used by GRS (line 6);

!

and two sets of results from GRS (lines 7 and 8).
Perhaps the key point to take away from the table is shown in column 2: namely, the

various regression specifications all imply that the value of a PC falls roughly 50 percent on
average over the course of a year. The estimates of this annual price decline are tightly clustered
in a range from about 47 percent to 52 percent, despite substantial differences in the form of the
regression, the presence or absence of constraints, and the estimation period. Thus, as noted
above, the data yield a robust estimate of the combined effect of depreciation and revaluation on
PC prices.
However, the decomposition of this total price change between depreciation and
revaluation is less certain. The baseline specification using the full sample (line 1) implies an

18

Specifically, column 2 displays the value of Tk from the equation (1 - Tk) = (1 - *k)(1 + Bk), with *k shown in
column 3, negative Bk in column 4, and *kBk in column 5. Tk equals (*k -Bk) + *kBk (i.e., the sum of columns 3, 4,
and 5). We measure *k as the average annual decline in the survival-adjusted age-price profile over the initial 60
months of the PC’s service life. Also, we measure -Bk as the average annual rate of constant-quality price decline for
PCs over the time period shown in column 1.

-29-

annual (survival-adjusted) depreciation rate of 22.4 percent and a (nominal) revaluation rate of
32.7 percent. Imposing the BEA constant-quality price index for PCs essentially reverses the
relative magnitudes of depreciation and revaluation. This shift highlights that the estimate of
depreciation depends on the assumed rate of constant-quality price change. Line 3 shows that the
estimates of depreciation and revaluation also depend somewhat on the control variables included
in the regression. To obtain the result reported on line 3, we augmented the baseline set of
performance characteristics with a set of dummy variables for the type of central processor chip
in the PC. These dummies indicate whether the processor is a 286, 386, 486, Pentium I, Pentium
II, Pentium III, or Pentium IV. The CPU dummies could be viewed as capturing some
unmeasured dimensions of quality to the extent that processor speed and memory – the standard
measures – do not fully determine the processor’s capabilities. We find that these CPU dummies
are significant in the regression and, as shown on line 3, their presence tends to slow the rate of
depreciation while increasing the rate of revaluation.19
We also examined whether the coefficients on the characteristics change over time and
whether any such variation affects the estimates of depreciation and revaluation. This issue is
particularly important in light of Pakes’ (2003) critique of standard hedonic procedures. Pakes
argued that the coefficients in hedonic regressions may change over time in response to changes
in market structure or preferences. For similar reasons, he also argued that caution is required in
interpreting these coefficients and that they need not have the “expected” signs. To examine
19

The interpretation of these CPU dummies is subject to some ambiguity. As noted in the text, they could be
significant because they proxy for unmeasured elements of quality. However, the CPU dummies are also correlated
with a PC’s model age. Indeed, GRS use a similar variable to account for the depreciation that they estimate in a
regression similar to our baseline specification. If the CPU dummies mainly function as proxies for model age rather
than as proxies for unmeasured quality, the baseline specification would provide a more accurate measure of agerelated depreciation.

-30-

these issues, we allowed the coefficient on each characteristic to differ across three sub-periods:
1985-95, 1996-99, and 2000-02. The coefficients on characteristics in this regression did vary
somewhat over time, but as can be seen on line 4 of the table, the implied depreciation rate is the
same as in the baseline regression and the revaluation rate is only a bit faster.
Lines 5 and 6 show the results of two other tests of the baseline regression. To explore
robustness with respect to our price measures, we estimated the baseline regression using the
wholesale price for PCs in average condition rather than the retail price. As can be seen on line 5,
this change had very little effect on the estimated rates of depreciation and revaluation.20 Line 6
shows that using the GRS sample period (1990-2000) reduced the estimated depreciation rate
only slightly relative to the baseline regression, while increasing the revaluation rate more
substantially.
The final lines of table 8 present the results from GRS that most closely resemble our
baseline and constrained regressions. The regression associated with line 7 allows the data to
determine the rate of constant-quality price change, as in our baseline specification, while the
regression associated with line 8 imposes BEA’s price index for computers and peripheral
equipment.21 As we noted above, the total price decline shown on lines 7 and 8 closely
20

The gap between wholesale and retail prices represents the dealer’s margin, and in a competitive market, it
measures the transaction cost of selling used PCs. One could be concerned that swings in dealer margins might
influence our estimated price profiles. However, our nearly identical results using either wholesale or retail prices
indicate that margins have not varied systematically over time or with the age of the PC.
21
Lines 7 and 8 of the table reflect the results shown in GRS, table 6, columns 8 and 3, respectively. Several points
should be noted about the GRS regression results. First, the BEA price series imposed on their regression covers all
computers and peripheral equipment, not just PCs. This broader price index has tended to fall somewhat less rapidly
than the index for PCs alone, which accounts for the relatively small revaluation effect on line 8 of our table.
Second, GRS’s results make no adjustment for retirements. We adjusted their age-price profiles with the survival
function shown in our tables 7a and 7b, which places their depreciation estimates on the same conceptual footing as
ours. Third, GRS allow for what they call “instantaneous depreciation,” defined as the loss of value that occurs
when a buyer opens the box containing a new PC. They attempt to identify this effect from the “new list” prices
shown in the Orion bluebooks. Their estimates imply a large instantaneous loss of value, ranging from about 20 to

(continued...)
-31-

approximates the pace that we estimate. However, the GRS depreciation rates are somewhat
faster than ours, highlighting that there is a sizable confidence band around the estimates from our
study and theirs concerning this element of price change.

5. IMPLICATIONS
This section explores the implications of our empirical results for tax policy, for capital
accounting in the NIPAs, and for measuring the user cost of capital.
Tax Depreciation Allowances for Personal Computers
Under current tax rules (the “Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery System”), PCs and
other types of computing equipment are depreciated over a five-year period. The annual
deductions are calculated using the “double-declining-balance” (DDB) method with a switch to
the straight-line method at the point that maximizes the present value of the deductions. The
double-declining-balance method specifies an annual percentage deduction that is twice the
straight-line rate. For an asset with a five-year recovery period, the DDB deduction rate would be
40 percent annually.
The first column of table 9 shows the stream of tax allowances for a PC under current law,
with each year’s deduction expressed as a percent of the asset’s initial value. Note that the firstyear deduction – 20 percent – is only half of the full-year amount, reflecting a “half-year”
convention that assumes the asset was put in place at mid-year. After this deduction, 80 percent
21

(...continued)

25 percent of the new PC price in the regression specifications that most resemble ours. However, this apparent loss
of value could arise, at least in part, from unmeasured price discounts. That is, if new PCs actually sell at a discount
to list price, the regression would overstate the price drop when a new PC leaves the store. Given this identification
issue, we chose to exclude the new list prices from our dataset, and we present the GRS depreciation rates excluding
their estimate of the instantaneous price decline.

-32-

of the PC’s initial value remains to be depreciated. Applying the 40 percent rate to this remaining
value yields the 32 percent deduction for the second year. The third-year deduction is calculated
in the same way. The schedule then switches to the straight-line pattern, with the undepreciated
part of the PC’s initial value written off over the remaining 2-1/2 year recovery period.
Given our assumed retirement distribution for personal computers, a substantial fraction of
PCs would be retired before being fully depreciated under current tax rules. In such cases, the tax
code allows a firm to deduct the full amount of the remaining allowances in the year of
retirement.22 The second column of the table adjusts the statutory allowance in column 1 to
account for these early retirements. To make this adjustment, we use our estimated retirement
distribution to divide a cohort of newly installed PCs into those that are retired in the first six
months of service (to reflect the half-year convention), the next full year, the year after that, and
so on. We then calculate the appropriate depreciation schedule for each sub-cohort. For example,
the small fraction of PCs retired within the first six months of service would receive a 100 percent
deduction in the first tax year; those retired between six months and eighteen months would
receive the usual 20 percent deduction in the first tax year and the remaining 80 percent deduction
in the second tax year. We proceed in this fashion for successive annual slices of the retirement
distribution, and then aggregate the depreciation schedules for each slice using weights that equal
the probability of retirement within that slice.
As can be seen by comparing columns 1 and 2, this adjustment results in a small
acceleration of the statutory schedule of deductions. During the first two tax years, the adjusted

22

See CCH(2002, p. 337), “Abandonment and Obsolescence Losses.” The deduction would be reduced by the
amount of any sale proceeds or insurance recovery. Implicitly, we have assumed that the asset is uninsured and has
a salvage value of zero.

-33-

allowances total 55.2 percent of the initial value of the PC cohort, up from 52 percent in the
statutory schedule. This adjustment – while conceptually necessary – is fairly small because the
early retirements in our distribution are concentrated in years four and five, after the bulk of the
tax allowances have been taken.
We now compare the retirement-adjusted schedule in column 2 to the allowances implied
by our empirical results. As discussed above, the allowance in a given period equals the PC’s
loss of value in real terms, which we calculate as the product of the PC’s value at the beginning of
a period and the real percentage decline in value that it experiences over the period. Both terms
in this product were shown in tables 7a and 7b; we use the figures in table 7a, which reflect the
baseline (unconstrained) regression. Columns 5 through 7 in that table display the first term in
the product – the PC’s remaining value as it ages – under different rates of general price inflation.
For the purpose of this exercise, we measure the PC’s value at ages 6 months, 18 months, 30
months, and so forth to be consistent with the half-year convention in the tax code. The second
term in the product, the real percentage decline in a PC’s value during a given period
[*k - (Bk - B)], is calculated from column 5 of table 7a. Moving down that column gives the
period-by-period values for *k - (Bk - B). For example, the real decline in value over the initial 6
months of use is 19.1 percent [1 - (80.9/100)]. To conform with the half-year convention, we use
the rate of decline between 0 and 6 months, 6 and 18 months, 18 and 30 months, and the
successive 12-month intervals.
Columns 3 through 5 of table 9 show the resulting schedule for depreciation allowances
under different rates of aggregate inflation. Focus first on column 3, the schedule of allowances
when the aggregate inflation rate is zero. This schedule is remarkably similar to the deductions

-34-

allowed under current law after adjusting for early retirements, column 2. The first-year
deductions under both schedules are close to 20 percent of the PC’s initial value, and the secondyear deductions are both a shade less than 35 percent. When we allow for general price inflation
(columns 4 and 5), the deductions become slightly larger than in column 3 because the nominal
value of the PC – its tax basis for our calculations – declines less rapidly in the higher inflation
environment.
The bottom part of the table compares the present value of the deductions under the
various schedules. To calculate these present values, we discount the annual deductions with a
nominal after-tax interest rate of 3-½ percent in the case of no inflation, 4-½ percent when
inflation is 1 percent, and 7-½ percent when inflation is 4 percent.23 With no inflation, the present
value of the current-law deductions (adjusted for retirements) is $93.0 per $100 of initial asset
value, virtually identical to the $92.9 figure for deductions that cover the PC’s full loss of value.
However, the gap widens considerably when we introduce inflation. At 4 percent inflation, the
present value of current-law deductions (again adjusted for retirements) is $86.1, a fair amount
less than the $92.3 figure in column (5), as the higher inflation erodes the present value of the
unindexed deductions under current law.24 Thus, the current-law deductions do an excellent job
of approximating the full loss of value for personal computers under zero or very low inflation,
23

Over our sample period, the real (pre-tax) interest rate on BAA-rated corporate bonds averaged about 5-½ percent
(where we compute the real rate as the nominal rate minus the expected ten-year inflation rate from the Philadelphia
Federal Reserve Bank’s survey of professional forecasters). Under Fisher’s Law (modified to account for taxation),
each percentage point of inflation adds 1/(1-J) percentage points to the real interest rate, where J represents the
corporate tax rate, which we take to be 35 percent. The resulting nominal after-tax interest rate is
[5-½ + B/(1-J)]*(1-J) = 0.65*5-½ + B, which equals approximately 3-½ percent when B = 0, 4-½ percent when
B = 1, and 7-½ percent when B = 4.
24
Note that the present value differs slightly across columns (3)-(5), even though the PC’s remaining value is
adjusted for inflation in each case. The difference arises because, for simplicity, we have ignored the cross-product
in Fisher’s law between the real interest rate and the inflation rate as well as the cross-product between the real
decline in PC prices and the aggregate inflation rate in the inflation-adjusted tax basis for depreciation.

-35-

but the lack of indexation causes the tax deductions to fall short of this benchmark when inflation
moves higher.
Capital Accounting
NIPA Wealth Stocks for Personal Computers. As described in BEA (1999), real NIPA
wealth stocks are calculated by summing past real investment flows with weights generally based
on the geometric depreciation rates estimated by Hulten and Wykoff (1981b). However, Hulten
and Wykoff did their work prior to the widespread introduction of personal computers. Thus,
BEA must look beyond the Hulten-Wykoff results for estimates of depreciation for PCs. Prior to
the December 2003 comprehensive revision of the NIPAs, BEA used a depreciation schedule for
PCs based on Lane (1999). This schedule is nearly geometric and assumes that the value of a PC
declines to ten percent of its original value after five years. Importantly, this schedule
incorporates the full loss in a PC’s value as it ages, and thus captures both depreciation and
revaluation. As we discussed in section 2, BEA’s calculation of the real wealth stock should rely
on weights that exclude revaluation.25
Based on a preliminary version of this paper, BEA decided to adopt a geometric
depreciation rate of 34 percent for PCs for the comprehensive NIPA revision. This figure is close
to the average depreciation rate in column 3 of table 7b, which was calculated from the regression
in which we imposed BEA’s price index for PCs.26

25

Cummins and Violante (2002) also discussed this difficulty with Lane’s depreciation schedule for use in the
NIPAs.
26
The figures in table 7b imply an average depreciation rate of 34.6 percent over the first five years of a PC’s life;
the difference between 34 percent and 34.6 percent reflects assorted small changes to our dataset and specification
since we provided BEA with preliminary results. Although our results suggest that depreciation is not geometric,
time constraints prevented BEA from considering non-geometric depreciation for this revision of the NIPAs.

-36-

NIPA Consumption of Fixed Capital. As indicated in equations 5 and 7, BEA’s estimate
of the consumption of fixed capital (CFC) for an asset can be calculated as the product of the
wealth stock and the depreciation rate for that asset. Our estimate of the depreciation rate for PCs
(conditional on BEA’s constant-quality price index) is lower than the 39 percent rate that the
agency used prior to the December 2003 revision. By itself, the move to a lower rate would
reduce BEA’s estimate of the CFC for personal computers. However, a rough calculation
suggests that this effect is approximately offset by the upward revision to the wealth stock that
results from using a lower depreciation rate to construct the stock. Thus, we believe that BEA’s
switch to a lower depreciation rate implies little change to its estimate of the CFC for personal
computers.
User cost of capital
The user cost of capital in equation 3 depends on an asset’s total loss of value in real
terms, * k - (B k - B). Our estimates of * k - (B k - B) are always in the neighborhood of 50 percent
annually, and we would argue that analysts calculating a user cost for PCs for growth accounting
or investment analyses ought to use such a figure. For the purpose of constructing the user cost,
uncertainty about the precise split between depreciation and real revaluation does not matter.

6. CONCLUSION
This paper provides new estimates of depreciation rates for personal computers using an
extensive database on used prices. The approach in the paper most closely follows that in Oliner
(1993, 1994), and it is very much in the spirit of Hall (1971). Essentially, we regress prices of
used PCs (adjusted for the overall GDP price deflator) on a set of performance characteristics,

-37-

flexible functions of time and age, and other controls. After adjusting for retirements – so as to
avoid the censoring bias from unobserved prices for retired PCs – the coefficients on the age
variables provide estimates of age-related depreciation, while the coefficients on time provide a
constant-quality price index for PCs. To map our results into the concepts needed for tax policy
and capital measurement, we develop a conceptual framework laying out how depreciation should
be measured for these purposes.
Our results show that PCs lose roughly half their remaining value, on average, with each
additional year of use. The bulk of that decline reflects the downward revaluation of existing
PCs, which is driven by the steep ongoing drop in the constant-quality prices of newly-introduced
models. In addition, PCs experience age-related declines in value that stem from the inability of
older models to perform the full range of desired tasks and from the decision to retire installed
units. We estimate that the resulting depreciation proceeds slowly during the early part of the
PC’s lifetime but then picks up. In our preferred specification, the depreciation rate averages
about 22 percent annually over the first five years of service. However, as we discussed, this
figure is sensitive to the estimated rate of constant-quality price change. When we constrain our
regression to follow the NIPA constant-quality price series, the depreciation rate increases to an
average pace a bit above 34 percent. This estimate of depreciation is suitable for use in the
NIPAs, and BEA decided to adopt this geometric approximation in the December 2003 NIPA
revision.
Regarding tax policy, our conceptual framework describes the depreciation allowances
that would equalize effective tax rates across assets in the face of both general price inflation and
changes in relative asset prices. Given this benchmark, our empirical estimates suggest that the

-38-

current tax depreciation schedule for PCs is about right in a zero inflation environment.
However, because the tax code is not indexed for inflation, the tax allowances would be too small
in present value for inflation rates above the very low level now prevailing.

-39-

REFERENCES
Akerlof, George A. (1970). “The Market for ‘Lemons’: Quality Uncertainty and the Market
Mechanism.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 84 (August): 488-500.
Auerbach, Alan J. (1982). “Tax Neutrality and the Social Discount Rate: A Suggested
Framework.” Journal of Public Economics 17 (April): 355-72.
Berndt, Ernst R. and Neal J. Rappaport (2001). “Price and Quality of Desktop and Mobile
Personal Computers: A Quarter-Century Historical Overview.” American Economic
Review 91 (May): 268-73.
Berndt, Ernst R. and Neal J. Rappaport (2003). “Hedonics for Personal Computers: A
Reexamination of Selected Econometric Issues.” Mimeo, August 21.
Bloomberg News Service (2003). “U.S. Economy: Computer Replacement Delays May Damp
Recovery.” May 23.
Bradford, David F. and Don Fullerton (1981). “Pitfalls in the Construction and Use of Effective
Tax Rates.” In Depreciation, Inflation, and the Taxation of Income from Capital,
Charles R. Hulten (ed.). Washington, D.C.: The Urban Institute Press, 251-78.
Bureau of Economic Analysis (1999). Fixed Reproducible Tangible Wealth in the United States,
1925-94. Washington D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Cartwright, David W. (1986). “Improved Deflation of Purchases of Computers.” Survey of
Current Business 66 (March): 7-10.
CCH (2002). 2003 U.S. Master Tax Guide. Chicago: CCH Incorporated.
Christensen, Laurits R. and Dale W. Jorgenson (1995). “Measuring Economic Performance in
the Private Sector.” In Productivity, Volume 1: Postwar U.S. Economic Growth, Dale W.
Jorgenson. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 175-272.
Cummins, Jason G. and Giovanni L. Violante (2002). “Investment-Specific Technical Change
in the United States (1947-2000): Measurement and Macroeconomic Consequences.”
Review of Economic Dynamics 5 (April): 243-84.
Diewert, Erwin (2002). “Measuring Capital.” Working paper, April 18. Available at
http://www.econ.ubc.ca/diewert/594cap.pdf
Dulberger, Ellen R. (1989). “The Application of a Hedonic Model to a Quality-adjusted Price
Index for Computer Processors.” In Technology and Capital Formation, Dale W.
Jorgenson and Ralph Landau (eds.). Cambridge MA: The MIT Press, 37-75.
- 40 -

Fraumeni, Barbara M. (1997). “The Measurement of Depreciation in the U.S. National Income
and Product Accounts.” Survey of Current Business 77 (July): 7-23. Available at
http://www.bea.doc.gov/bea/an1.htm
Geske, Michael J., Valerie A. Ramey, and Matthew D. Shapiro (2003). “Why Do Computers
Depreciate?” Mimeo, September 2.
Gravelle, Jane G. (1982). “Effects of the 1981 Depreciation Revisions on the Taxation of
Income from Business Capital.” National Tax Journal 35 (March): 1-20.
Gravelle, Jane G. (1994). The Economic Effects of Taxing Capital Income. Cambridge, MA:
The MIT Press.
Griliches, Zvi (1960). “The Demand for a Durable Input: U.S. Farm Tractors, 1929-57.” In The
Demand for Durable Goods, Arnold C. Harberger (ed.). Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 181-207.
Hall, Robert E. (1971). “The Measurement of Quality Change From Vintage Price Data.” In
Price Indexes and Quality Change: Studies in New Methods of Measurement, Zvi
Griliches (ed.). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 240-71.
Hall, Robert E. and Dale W. Jorgenson (1967). “Tax Policy and Investment Behavior.”
American Economic Review 57 (June): 391-414.
Hayek, F. A. (1941). “Maintaining Capital Intact: A Reply.” Economica 8 (August): 276-80.
Hicks, J. R. (1942). “Maintaining Capital Intact: A Further Suggestion.” Economica 9 (May):
174-79.
Hill, Peter (1999). “Capital Stocks, Capital Services and Depreciation.” Presented at the
meeting of the Canberra Group on Capital Stock Statistics, November 8-10, 1999,
Washington D.C. Available at http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/12/47/2549891.pdf
Hill, Peter (2000). “Economic Depreciation and the SNA.” Paper prepared for the 26th General
Conference of the International Association for Research in Income and Wealth, August
27-September 2, 2000, Cracow, Poland. Available at http://www.iariw.org/prog2000.htm
Hulten, Charles R. and Frank C. Wykoff (1981a). “The Estimation of Economic Depreciation
Using Vintage Asset Prices: An Application of the Box-Cox Power Transformation.”
Journal of Econometrics 15 (April): 367-96.
Hulten, Charles R. and Frank C. Wykoff (1981b). “The Measurement of Economic
Depreciation.” In Depreciation, Inflation, and the Taxation of Income from Capital,
Charles R. Hulten (ed.). Washington, D.C.: The Urban Institute Press, 81-125.
- 41 -

Johnson, Norman L., Samuel Kotz, and N. Balakrishnan (1994). Continuous Univariate
Distributions, Volume 1. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Jorgenson, Dale W. (1974). “The Economic Theory of Replacement and Depreciation.” In
Econometrics and Economic Theory: Essays in Honour of Jan Tinbergen, Willy
Sellekaerts (ed.). White Plains, NY: International Arts and Sciences Press, 189-221.
Jorgenson, Dale W. (1996). “Empirical Studies of Depreciation.” Economic Inquiry 34
(January): 24-42.
Jorgenson, Dale W. and Martin A. Sullivan (1981). “Inflation and Corporate Capital Recovery.”
In Depreciation, Inflation, and the Taxation of Income from Capital, Charles R. Hulten
(ed.). Washington, D.C.: The Urban Institute Press, 171-237.
Landefeld, J. Steven and Bruce T. Grimm (2000). “A Note on the Impact of Hedonics and
Computers on Real GDP.” Survey of Current Business 80 (December): 17-22.
Lane, Richard N. (1999). “Appraisal Report ‘Large Aerospace Firm’ Personal Property,” Los
Angeles County, revised February 2, 1999.
OECD (2001). Measuring Capital. OECD Manual: Measurement of Capital Stocks,
Consumption of Fixed Capital and Capital Services. Paris: OECD.
Oliner, Stephen D. (1993). “Constant-Quality Price Change, Depreciation, and Retirement of
Mainframe Computers.” In Price Measurements and Their Uses, Murray F. Foss,
Marilyn E. Manser, and Allan H. Young (eds.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
19-61.
Oliner, Stephen D. (1994). “Measuring Stocks of Computer Peripheral Equipment: Theory and
Application.” Mimeo.
Pakes, Ariel (2003). “A Reconsideration of Hedonic Price Indices with an Application to PC’s.”
American Economic Review 93 (December): 1578-96.
Pigou, A. C. (1941). “Maintaining Capital Intact.” Economica 8 (August): 271-75.
Richards, Gordon R. (2002). “Nonlinear Technical Advance in the Aggregate Production
Function: An Econometric Model.” Intel Corporation. Mimeo.
Sliker, Brian K. (2003). “Steps Toward Modeling the Distribution of Automobile Retirements.”
Bureau of Economic Analysis. Mimeo, July 10.
Wykoff, Frank C. (2003). “Obsolescence in Economic Depreciation from the Point of View of
the Revaluation Term.” Mimeo, February 28.
- 42 -

APPENDIX
This appendix proves two propositions that are cited in section 2 of the text. The first
derives the tax depreciation allowances that equalize effective tax rates across assets when one
allows for both general price inflation and changes in relative asset prices. This proposition
generalizes the well-known result for equalizing effective tax rates in a world with constant
relative prices. The second proposition shows how to calculate constant-dollar wealth stocks,
again allowing for changes in relative prices.
Proposition 1: Specifying Depreciation Allowances that Equalize Effective Tax Rates
Let pzk,t ,a denote the price of a type-k capital good with the set of embodied
characteristics z; this price is observed in year t when the capital good is a years old. In addition,
let DTAX zk,t ,a denote the schedule of tax depreciation allowances for type-k capital goods, let 2k
denote the investment tax credit (ITC) for these goods, let J denote the statutory tax rate on
corporate profits, and let Jk,e denote the effective tax rate on the income generated by a type-k
capital good (taking account of depreciation allowances and any ITC).
Numerous studies (Jorgenson and Sullivan, 1981, or Gravelle, 1982, for example) have
shown that the effective tax rate for every type of capital good will equal the statutory corporate
tax rate if the tax allowances for depreciation reflect the asset’s actual loss of value and there is
no ITC. In the context of our model with changes in relative asset prices, this allowance
includes both the age-related loss of value and the revaluation of the asset in real terms. Thus,
we show that Jk,e = J for all k if 2k = 0 and
(A.1)

(

)

DTAX zk,t ,a = δ k −(π k −π ) pzk,t ,a ,

where *k and Bk are, respectively, the rate of depreciation and the rate of constant-quality price
change for type-k capital goods, and B is the general rate of inflation.1
Proof
The proof proceeds in three steps. We begin by deriving the expression for the user cost
of capital. Next, we express the effective tax rate as a function of the tax parameters and other
terms in the user cost. The final step is to show that the effective tax rate equals the statutory tax
rate for every type of capital good if 2k = 0 and the tax allowance for depreciation accords with
equation (A.1).

1

Gravelle (1982) and others have demonstrated that an investment tax credit of 2 percent for all capital goods
reduces the effective tax rate more for short-lived assets than for long-lived assets. One could counteract this effect
by granting a progressively larger credit to longer-lived assets, but given our focus on depreciation allowances, we
derive the proposition with the ITC set to zero.

- 43 -

User cost of capital
Our derivation of the user cost of capital follows the standard method in the literature
(see Hall and Jorgenson, 1967, for example). We begin by expressing the current price of the
capital good as the discounted value of its future after-tax rental income, plus the present value
of its tax allowances for depreciation and any investment tax credit it receives. Let xk denote the
present value of the depreciation allowances for type-k capital goods; xk and 2k are both
measured per dollar of the capital good’s value. Also, let c zk,t ,a denote the pre-tax user cost for
type-k capital. In equilibrium, this user cost equals the pre-tax rental income generated by the
capital good, allowing its price to be written as
(A.2)

pzk, t , a =

k
− is
k
k
k
∫ 0 (1 − τ ) cz ,t + s,a + se ds + (θ + τ x ) pz ,t ,a .
∞

Equation (A.2) adopts the usual assumption that the asset has an infinite service life within a
continuous time framework; this set-up simplifies the algebra, while preserving the key
economic results. With the asset assumed to depreciate at a constant rate of *k percent and to
experience constant-quality price change of Bk percent per period, the user cost (and, hence, the
asset’s rental income) will decline at a rate of (*k - Bk ) percent. Thus, equation (A.2) can be
expressed as
(A.3)

pzk, t , a = ∫

∞

(1 − τ ) czk,t ,a e− (δ
0

k

− π k ) s − is

(

)

(

)]

e ds + θ k + τ x k pzk, t , a

.

Solving (A.3) for c zk,t ,a yields

c zk, t , a =
(A.4)

=

(

1−θ k − τxk k
pz ,t , a i + δ k − π k
1− τ

[

)

1−θ k − τxk k
pz , t , a ( i − π ) + δ k − π k − π ,
1− τ

where the expression on the second line adds and subtracts the general rate of inflation (B). For
the remainder of the derivation, we will use the ratio of the asset’s user cost to its price, as shown
in equation (A.5):
(A.5)

(c p ) z , t , a =
k

[

]

1−θ k − τxk
( i − π ) + δ k − (π k − π ) .
1− τ

- 44 -

Effective tax rate
The effective tax rate (Jk,e) typically has been defined in the literature as the asset’s pretax return (Dk) minus its after-tax return (rk), expressed as a percent of its pre-tax return; that is,
k,e
k
k
k
J = (D - r )/D . Both the pre-tax return and the after-tax return are measured net of
depreciation and general price inflation. Abstracting from relative price changes (the standard
approach in the tax literature), the real pre-tax return net of depreciation is Dk = (c/p)k - *k, where
(c/p)k is calculated from equation (A.5) with Bk = B. To specify after-tax returns, the usual
assumption is that competitive forces equalize the real after-tax return on all assets net of
depreciation, so that rk = i - B.
We generalize this framework to allow for changes in relative asset prices. Only two
modifications are required, both affecting the measurement of the pre-tax return. First, we
calculate (c/p)k from equation (A.5) without forcing Bk to equal B. Second, we subtract both
depreciation (*k) and the real revaluation term (Bk - B) from (c/p)k. The intuition is that, with
changing relative prices, firms must cover both depreciation and revaluation effects to maintain
the real value of their capital stocks. In this general case, the real pre-tax return net of
depreciation and revaluation is Dk = (c/p)k - [*k - (Bk - B)]. Using this expression for Dk and
recalling that rk = i - B, the effective tax rate can be written as

τ k ,e

[

(

)]

k
k
ρ k − r k ( c p ) z , t , a − δ − (π − π ) − ( i − π )
=
=
ρk
( c p) kz ,t ,a − δ k − (π k − π )
k

[

(A.6)

=1 −

(

(i − π)

[

)]

(

( c p ) z , t , a − δ k − (π k − π )
k

)]

.

Next, substitute the expression for (c/p)k from equation (A.5) into (A.6), which yields
(A.7)

τ k ,e = 1 −

(1 − θ

k

−τx

k

)[(i − π ) + δ

(1 − τ )(i − π )
k

]

[

− (π − π ) − (1 − τ ) δ − (π − π )
k

k

k

]

.

Equalizing Effective Tax Rates Across Assets
The final step is to derive the conditions under which the effective tax rate for every type
of capital equals the statutory corporate tax rate. We will show that Jk,e = J for all k if 2k = 0 and
the schedule of tax depreciation allowances matches expression (A.1), which is repeated here as
(A.8):

- 45 -

(A.8)

(

)

DTAX zk, t , a = δ k − (π k − π ) pzk, t , a .

The present value of these allowances per dollar of asset value is

(A.9)

∞

DTAX zk, t + s, a + s e − is ds p zk, t , a

∞

(δ

k

− (π k − π ) pzk, t + s, a + s pzk, t , a e − is ds

∞

(δ

k

− (π k − π ) e − ( δ

xk =

∫0

=

∫0

=

∫0

)(

)

)

k

− π k ) s − is

e

ds ,

where the second line substitutes for DTAX from (A.8) and the third line makes use of the
assumption that the asset’s value declines at a constant rate of (*k - Bk) percent per period.
Equation (A.9) implies that
(A.10)

δ k − (π k − π )
δ k − (π k − π )
x =
=
( i − π ) + δ k − (π k − π )
i + δk −πk
k

.

Finally, substitute the expression for xk from (A.10) and 2k = 0 into equation (A.7). After some
algebra, the right-hand side of (A.7) reduces to J, completing the derivation.
Proposition 2: Constructing Constant-dollar Wealth Stocks
Let Wt k and Wt k,1996$ denote, respectively, the current-dollar and constant-dollar wealth
stocks for capital of type k. In addition, let I tk and I tk ,1996$ denote, respectively, current-dollar
and constant-dollar investment outlays for this type of capital. Following the NIPA convention
at the time we were writing, we assume that constant-dollar series are expressed in 1996 dollars.
We show that the constant-dollar wealth stock can be calculated in two equivalent ways:

(

Wt k ,1996$ = Wt k 1 + π k

)

t − 1996

=

T −1

∑ Itk−,1996$
(1 − δ k )
i

i

.

i= 0

That is, the constant-dollar wealth stock can be calculated by deflating the current-dollar stock or
by constructing an appropriately weighted sum of constant-dollar investment flows.2

2

For this derivation, we shift back to a discrete-time framework and assume that the asset has a finite service life; the
discrete-time framework conforms more closely with the actual data on investment and wealth stocks, and there is no
algebraic advantage in this case from using continuous time.

- 46 -

Proof
To begin, recall that the current-dollar wealth stock for type-k capital equals the sum of
current-year investment plus the remaining value of the investment done in previous years:

(A.11)

k

Wt =

T −1

∑ Itk− i ((1 + π k )(1 − δ k ))

i

.

i= 0

(

k
Next, multiply and divide the right-hand side of (A.11) by 1 + π

k

Wt =

T −1

∑

i= 0

(A.12)

=

Itk− i

(

1+ π k

(

1+ π k

(

k
k
Note that I t − i 1 + π

)

)

)

t − i − 1996

(

1+ π k

t − 1996 T − 1

t − i − 1996

∑

i= 0

)

Itk− i

)(

(1 − δ )

.

i

k i

(1 + π )

k t − i − 1996

t − i − 1996

1+ π k

t − i − 1996

(

)

to obtain:

1− δ k

)

i

equals the constant-dollar investment done in year t-i, which we

have denoted by I tk−,1996$
. Hence, (A.12) can be written as
i
(A.13)

k

Wt =

T −1
k t − 1996
1+ π
Itk−,1996$
i
i= 0

(

)

∑

(1 − δ )

k i

.

To complete the derivation, note that the constant-dollar wealth stock, Wt k,1996$ , equals the

(

current-dollar stock, Wt k , divided by the price deflator for year t, 1 + π k
yields:

(A.14)

(

Wt k ,1996$ = Wtk 1 + π k

)

t − 1996

=

T −1

∑ Itk−,1996$
(1 − δ k )
i

i= 0

- 47 -

i

.

)

t − 1996

. Thus, (A.13)

Table 1
Alternative Terms in the Literature
Authors

Terms for * k

Terms for * k - B k

Fraumeni (1997)

Depreciation

Depreciation and revaluation

Oliner (1993, 1994)

Partial depreciation

Full depreciation

Wykoff (2003)

Economic depreciation

Economic depreciation and
revaluation

Diewert (2002)
Hill (1999, 2000)

Cross-section depreciation

Time-series depreciation

Hulten and Wykoff (1981a,b)

Economic depreciation

Economic depreciation and
asset inflation

- 48 -

Table 2
Example of Tax Deductions for a Personal Computer
(All amounts in dollars, rounded to the nearest cent)

Year of
Use

Beginning-ofyear Value
(1)

End-of-year
Value
(2)

End-of-year Amount
Needed to Maintain
Real Value
(3)

Tax Deduction
(4) = (3) - (2)

1

1000.00

550.00

1050.00

500.00

2

550.00

302.50

577.50

275.00

3

302.50

166.38

317.63

151.25

4

166.38

91.51

174.69

83.18

5

91.51

50.33

96.08

45.75

Note: In this example, the PC loses 45 percent of its value each year, while the aggregate price
level rises 5 percent annually. We assume that the firm disposes of the PC at the end of year 5.

- 49 -

Table 3
Summary of Measurement Results
Concept

Notation

Measurement

[

(

User Cost of Capital1

Czk,t ,a

p z ,t ,a ( i − π ) + δ − π − π

Tax Allowances for
Actual Loss of Value

DTAX tk

p zk, t , a δ k − π k − π

k

k

k

[ (

)]

[ (

)]

)]

Wealth Stock
Current dollars

Constant dollars

Wtk

Wtk,1996$

T −1

∑ Itk− i 1 − δ k − π k
i= 0

T −1

[1 − δ k ]
i
∑ Itk−,1996$

i

i

i= 0

NIPA Consumption of Fixed Capital
Current dollars

CFCtk

Wt k δ k

Constant dollars

CFCtk ,1996$

Wt k ,1996$δ k

1. We omit the tax parameters in the expression for the user cost to highlight the common
elements across the rows of the table.

- 50 -

Table 4
Timing of Price Observations in Each Bluebook Edition
Bluebook Edition

Survey Period

1985

January-June 1985

1986

January-June 1986

1987

January-June 1987

1988

January-June 1988

1989

January-June 1989

1990

January-June 1990

1991

January-June 1991

1992

January-June 1992

Fall 1993

July-September 1993

Fall 1994

July-September 1994

Winter 1995

October-December 1994

Winter 1996

October-December 1995

Winter 1997

October-December 1996

Winter 1998

October-December 1997

Winter 1999

October-December 1998

Winter 2000

October-December 1999

Winter 2001

October-December 2000

Winter 2002

October-December 2001

Winter 2003

October-December 2002

- 51 -

Table 5
Characteristics of Used PCs by Year Sold
(Mean values shown for price and characteristics)

Model Age
(months)

Size of
Hard Disk
(Mb)

CPU
Speed
(Mhz)

Amount of
RAM
(Mb)

Year
Sold

Number of
Obs.

Used Price
(dollars)

1985

4

2439.0

12.0

12.5

6.1

0.6

1986

6

2661.2

25.0

15.0

6.9

0.5

1987

18

2549.7

29.0

31.1

8.9

0.7

1988

36

3084.0

32.3

33.4

9.0

0.8

1989

77

2154.9

38.0

45.9

10.1

0.8

1990

175

1980.4

28.0

89.8

15.7

1.3

1991

250

2094.0

34.3

106.7

17.2

1.6

1992

312

1213.5

39.2

110.3

18.6

1.8

1993

478

642.1

41.8

167.7

25.0

2.8

1994

1368

567.9

42.4

316.7

31.1

4.7

1995

970

473.2

44.5

366.8

42.1

5.8

1996

1191

471.0

43.8

598.4

60.4

8.3

1997

1319

346.0

49.0

920.9

76.9

11.0

1998

1445

299.3

43.3

2063.8

131.1

21.9

1999

1548

242.0

43.2

3911.6

197.5

36.4

2000

1818

335.7

45.9

6411.5

276.4

50.2

2001

970

289.5

33.9

11139.1

476.6

80.7

2002

911

272.9

40.5

14046.2

579.6

96.3

- 52 -

Table 6
Regression Results
(Dependent variable is natural log of used PC price divided by GDP chain-weight price index;
standard errors in parentheses)

Baseline

Imposed
PC price

Constant

2.045
(.174)

5.234
(.045)

Mar. 1988 dummy

-.251
(.183)

Ln MHZ

.463
(.013)

-.039
(.013)

Mar. 1989 dummy

-.578
(.176)

Ln RAM

.393
(.009)

.308
(.012)

Mar. 1990 dummy

-1.225
(.173)

Ln HD

.174
(.007)

.147
(.009)

Mar. 1991 dummy

-1.494
(.172)

Monitor dummy

.182
(.009)

.227
(.011)

Mar. 1992 dummy

-2.097
(.172)

CD-ROM dummy

.093
(.012)

.105
(.015)

Aug. 1993 dummy

-3.073
(.171)

FAST chip dummy

.014
(.018)

.268
(.021)

Aug. 1994 dummy

-3.278
(.171)

Compaq dummy

-.027
(.010)

-.065
(.013)

Nov. 1994 dummy

-3.422
(.171)

IBM dummy

.102
(.012)

.040
(.014)

Nov. 1995 dummy

-3.846
(.171)

Packard Bell dummy

-.269
(.018)

-.437
(.022)

Nov. 1996 dummy

-4.173
(.172)

Model age

.495
(.208)

.425
(.254)

Nov. 1997 dummy

-4.721
(.172)

(Model age)2

-5.362
(.650)

-9.836
(.800)

Nov. 1998 dummy

-5.987
(.173)

(Model age)3

6.979
(.767)

11.354
(.948)

Nov. 1999 dummy

-6.784
(.174)

(Model age)4

-2.753
(.298)

-3.918
(.370)

Nov. 2000 dummy

-6.777
(.175)

Nov. 2001 dummy

-7.620
(.176)

Nov. 2002 dummy

-7.774
(.177)

No. of observations

12,896

Variable

Mar. 1985 dummy
Mar. 1986 dummy
Mar. 1987 dummy
Adjusted R2

-.126
(.268)
0
(omitted)

Variable

Baseline

Imposed
PC price

-.324
(.195)
.92

.84

- 53 -

12,896

Table 7a
Price Profiles and Survival Probabilities for Personal Computers: Baseline Regression

Model Age
(months)

Age-Price
Profile
(1)

Survival
Probability
(2)

Survival-Adj.
Age-Price
Profile
(3) = (2)*(1)

Total Effect on Price
Real
Revaluation
(4)

No Inflation
(5) = (4)*(3)

1% Inflation
(6)

4% Inflation
(7)

0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

6

101.2

99.2

100.4

80.5

80.9

81.5

83.3

12

99.4

96.9

96.3

64.9

62.5

63.4

66.3

18

95.4

93.2

88.9

52.2

46.4

47.5

50.8

24

90.2

88.2

79.6

42.1

33.5

34.5

37.7

30

84.5

82.2

69.5

33.9

23.5

24.5

27.3

36

78.9

75.4

59.5

27.3

16.2

17.0

19.4

42

73.6

68.1

50.1

22.0

11.0

11.6

13.6

48

68.9

60.6

41.7

17.7

7.4

7.9

9.4

54

65.0

53.0

34.5

14.3

4.9

5.3

6.4

60

61.7

45.7

28.2

11.5

3.2

3.5

4.4

66

59.2

38.8

23.0

9.2

2.1

2.3

2.9

72

57.2

32.4

18.5

7.4

1.4

1.5

2.0

78

55.8

26.6

14.9

6.0

0.9

1.0

1.3

- 54 -

Table 7b
Price Profiles and Survival Probabilities for Personal Computers: Imposed PC Prices

Model Age
(months)

Age-Price
Profile
(1)

Survival
Probability
(2)

Survival-Adj.
Age-Price
Profile
(3) = (2)*(1)

Total Effect on Price
Real
Revaluation
(4)

No Inflation
(5) = (4)*(3)

1% Inflation
(6)

4% Inflation
(7)

0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

6

99.3

99.2

98.5

87.2

85.9

86.5

88.2

12

93.1

96.9

90.2

76.1

68.7

69.6

72.3

18

83.5

93.2

77.8

66.4

51.6

52.7

55.8

24

72.6

88.2

64.0

57.9

37.1

38.1

41.1

30

61.7

82.2

50.7

50.5

25.6

26.5

29.1

36

51.8

75.4

39.1

44.1

17.2

17.9

20.1

42

43.3

68.1

29.5

38.4

11.3

11.9

13.6

48

36.3

60.6

22.0

33.5

7.4

7.8

9.0

54

30.6

53.0

16.2

29.2

4.7

5.0

6.0

60

26.2

45.7

12.0

25.5

3.1

3.3

3.9

66

22.7

38.8

8.8

22.2

2.0

2.1

2.6

72

20.0

32.4

6.5

19.4

1.3

1.4

1.7

78

18.0

26.6

4.8

16.9

0.8

0.9

1.1

- 55 -

Table 8
Alternative Estimates of Price Declines for Personal Computers
(All figures at annual rates)
Sample
period
(1)

Total price
decline
(2)

Depreciation
(3)

Revaluation
(4)

Crossproduct
(5)

1. Baseline specification

1985-2002

47.8

22.4

32.7

-7.3

2. Imposing BEA PC prices

1985-2002

48.7

34.6

21.5

-7.4

3. Adding CPU dummies

1985-2002

46.9

18.7

34.7

-6.5

4. Allowing time-varying effects of characteristics

1985-2002

49.2

22.4

34.6

-7.8

5. Using wholesale average-condition prices

1985-2002

47.5

24.2

30.7

-7.4

6. Baseline specification, shorter sample

1990-2000

51.9

21.6

38.7

-8.4

7. Unconstrained

1990-2000

49.8

27.3

30.9

-8.4

8. Imposing BEA computer prices

1990-2000

50.3

41.1

15.7

-6.5

This paper

Geske, Ramey, Shapiro (2003)

Note. Revaluation is shown here as a rate of decline, and thus without the negative sign that appears elsewhere in the paper.

- 56 -

Table 9
Tax Depreciation Schedules for Personal Computers
(Percent of initial value)

Year

Current Law
(1)

Current Law,
Adjusted for
Retirements
(2)

Covering Full Loss of Value
B = 0%

B = 1%

B = 4%

(3)

(4)

(5)

1

20.0

20.6

19.1

19.1

19.1

2

32.0

34.6

34.4

34.7

35.5

3

19.2

21.1

22.9

23.4

25.1

4

11.5

11.9

12.5

13.0

14.5

5

11.5

8.7

6.1

6.4

7.5

6

5.8

3.1

2.8

3.0

3.7

7

0.0

0.0

2.1

2.3

3.0

PDV, B = 0%

92.5

93.0

92.9

PDV, B = 1%

90.6

91.2

PDV, B = 4%

85.2

86.1

92.7
92.3

Note. The figures in the table are based on the assumption that the PC is installed in the middle
of the year. Given this half-year convention, the entries for year 1 show the depreciation over
the first six months of the PC’s life, the entries for year 2 show the depreciation between six and
18 months, and so on.

- 57 -

Figure 1
Number of Price Observations by Model Age in Years

2,500
2,000

1,500
1,000

500
0
less than
1

1 to 2

2 to 3

3 to 4

- 58 -

4 to 5

5 to 6

6 to 7

more
than 7

