                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          ON THE EMPIRICS OF SUDDEN STOPS:
                      THE RELEVANCE OF BALANCE-SHEET EFFECTS

                                          Guillermo A. Calvo
                                          Alejandro Izquierdo
                                          Luis-Fernando Mejía

                                         Working Paper 10520
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10520


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2004




We would like to thank Marty Eichenbaum, Ernesto Talvi and participants at both the VI Workshop in
International Economics and Finance organized by the Department of Economics of the Universidad T. Di
Tella and the IDB Research Department Seminar for their valuable comments, Walter Sosa for substantive
technical advice, and Rudy Loo-Kung for superb research assistance. The usual caveats apply. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2004 by Guillermo A. Calvo, Alejandro Izquierdo, and Luis-Fernando Mejía. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
On the Empirics of Sudden Stops: The Relevance of Balance-Sheet Effects
Guillermo A. Calvo, Alejandro Izquierdo, and Luis-Fernando Mejía
NBER Working Paper No. 10520
May 2004
JEL No. F31, F32, F34, F41
                                        ABSTRACT

Using a sample of 32 developed and developing countries we analyze the empirical characteristics

of sudden stops in capital flows and the relevance of balance sheet effects in the likelihood of their

materialization. We find that large real exchange rate (RER) fluctuations coming hand in hand with

Sudden Stops are basically an emerging market (EM) phenomenon. Sudden Stops seem to come in

bunches, grouping together countries that are different in many respects. However, countries are

similar in that they remain vulnerable to large RER fluctuations – be it because they could be forced

to large adjustments in the absorption of tradable goods, and/or because the size of dollar liabilities

in the banking system (i.e., domestic liability dollarization, or DLD) is high. Openness, understood

as a large supply of tradable goods that reduces leverage over the current account deficit, coupled

with DLD, are key determinants of the probability of Sudden Stops. The relationship between

Openness and DLD in the determination of the probability of Sudden Stops is highly non-linear,

implying that the interaction of high current account leverage and high dollarization may be a

dangerous cocktail.

Guillermo A. Calvo                                     Luis-Fernando Mejía
Inter-American Development Bank                        University of Chicago
Stop B-600                                             Department of Economics
1300 New York Ave., NW                                 1126 East 59th Street
Washington, DC 20577                                   Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER                                               lfmejia@uchicago.edu
calvo@econ.umd.edu

Alejandro Izquierdo
Inter-American Development Bank
Stop B-600
1300 New York Ave., NW
Washington, DC 20577
alejandroi@iadb.org
I. Introduction

        The sequence of financial crises that started with the so-called Tequila crisis in

Mexico in 1994/5 strongly suggests that these phenomena cannot simply be rationalized in

terms of advanced-country business cycle models. More is at stake here. In particular,

these episodes are associated with a sharp contraction of international capital flows, or

Sudden Stop, which may by itself have triggered the ensuing disruption. Sudden Stops are

associated with large depreciations and major financial disruptions, leading to significantly

lower rates of return, investment and growth. This is the point of view that will be

elaborated and subject to empirical analysis in the present paper.

        For starters, we would like to say a few words on alternative explanations about

deep financial crisis in Emerging Market economies (EMs), and give an intuitive

presentation of the approach pursued in this paper. A popular explanation for these crises

used to be and, in some quarters, still is “lack of fiscal discipline.” As the argument goes,

crisis-prone EMs have a tendency to run high fiscal deficits, which eventually result in an

unsustainable level of the public debt. Thus, there comes the time when lenders stop

lending, forcing a major domestic adjustment. This explanation is very appealing for the

1980s Debt Crisis in Latin America, but finds little support in Asia. For example, at the

inception of its 1997 crisis, Korea’s public debt hovered around only 10 percent of GDP.

Moreover, debt levels in EMs are comparable to if not significantly lower than in advanced

countries (e.g., Japan).

        Ardent believers in the fiscal view may not be entirely convinced by these

observations, because during a financial crisis, the country as a whole, and the government

in particular, lose access to international capital markets. Thus, lenders behave as if they




                                               2
have smelled “something rotten in the State of Denmark.” However, loss of access need

not be the result of over-indebtedness in the context of a good equilibrium, but rather the

result of a bad equilibrium triggered by a Sudden Stop. This Inverse Fiscal View finds

support in the fact that Sudden Stop episodes tend to occur around the same time, and for

countries exhibiting a variety of fiscal situations (indeed, the “bunching” of Sudden Stops is

an important characteristic that we identify in the empirical section). The most outstanding

such episode was associated with the Russian August 1998 crisis, in which practically all

EMs suffered serious Sudden Stops and an increase in country risk premiums.1

         The fiscal view started to be questioned during the 1997 Asian crises because these

countries’ fiscal stances were much stronger than those in Latin America. 2 Even the IMF

(1999) recognized that it made a mistake in calling for strong fiscal adjustment in that part

of the world. As a result, attention shifted to other variables. It did not take long for

professional opinion to identify soft pegs as the likely culprit. The Soft Peg view is that

crisis countries engaged in unsustainable exchange rate pegs, which they were reluctant to

abandon in a timely fashion, and only did so when hit by a balance-of-payments crisis.

This is an eminently sensible argument, but it falls short of providing an explanation for the

ensuing real meltdown (collapse in output and employment, for instance). Thus, our

criticism follows the same lines that we have just utilized to question the relevance of the

fiscal view, and need not be repeated.

1
  This view, incidentally, sho uld not be taken as saying that public debt is not an important factor but, rather,
that by and of itself, public debt is not enough to explain the devastation surrounding Sudden Stops in the last
decade. Moreover, the fiscal view does not offer a clear explanation of why fiscal adjustment (which
typically does not exceed 4 percent of GDP) should result in major economic disruption.
2
  However, in their explanation of the Asian crisis, Burnside, Eichenbaum and Rebelo (2001) emphasize the
importance of prospective fiscal deficits related to implicit bailout guarantees due to a fragile banking sector.
This approach highlights a fundamental element of crisis that will prove to be a key determinant in our
empirical findings, yet we emphasize the valuation effects on contingent liabilities in the event that a Sudden
Stop materializes, and do not necessarily consider crises to be inevitable or fully expected events, as would be
the case in the Burnside-Eichenbaum-Rebelo framework.


                                                        3
         The view that will be spelled out in this paper is that EMs suffer from structural

weaknesses that make them vulnerable—much more than advanced economies—to shocks.

In particular, we will zero in on shocks that are reflected in large changes in the real

exchange rate (RER), i.e., the relative price of tradables with respect to nontradables. The

RER is a fundamental relative price that cuts across the fabric of the whole economy, and

involves a large variety of non-tradable goods. Large variety, in turn, militates against the

existence of effective state-contingent markets (e.g., futures markets) like those found in

commodities markets. There is, of course, nothing special about EMs in this respect.

However, what could make the variability of the RER deadly in EMs is the fact that many

of them suffer from Domestic Liability Dollarization (DLD), i.e., a high incidence of

foreign-exchange denominated obligations with the domestic banking system. 3 Hence, a

rise in the RER (i.e., real currency depreciation) makes it more difficult to repay loans for

firms producing nontradables. This effect is particularly relevant because it may trigger

substantial uncertainty about the solvency of the banking system as loans become non-

performing, sometimes leading to bank runs in expectation of bank bankruptcies, which, in

turn, almost inevitably affect the payments system and cause disruption in transactions and

output. 4 Whether or not this effect is large depends, of course, on the size of the RER

change, the stock of foreign-exchange denominated loans, and the ability of firms to switch

production into tradables along their production possibilities frontier (which is likely to be

difficult, particularly in the short run). Thus, one could conjecture that real devaluations are


3
   For evidence about this phenome non, see Eichengreen, Hausmann, and Panizza (2003), where Liability
Dollarization is a salient component of a phenomenon labeled Original Sin. In what follows we focus on
domestic liability dollarization.
4
  In contrast to DLD, foreign liability dollarization (i.e., foreign-exchange obligations with foreign creditors),
does not directly affect the domestic payments system, and those obligations are typically contracted by either
firms engaged in tradable activities, or non-tradable firms whose revenues are indexed to the dollar, a
characteristic that makes them less susceptible to RER fluctuations.


                                                        4
particularly dangerous after a period in which there have been significant capital inflows

(like the period from 1990 to 1996 in EMs). The next section will present a simple model

that helps to endogenize the RER. It should be intuitive, however, that a Sudden Stop,

being a sizable cut in credit, will bring about a fall in aggregate demand and, consequently,

a possibly large increase in the RER. Thus, a Sudden Stop may sow the seeds of a self-

fulfilling crisis. This is the main line that will be pursued in the paper. However, it will be

argued that equilibrium-multiplicity is not required in order to rationalize the existence of

Sudden Stops. Thus, for example, Sudden Stops might be displayed in models in which the

equilibrium set does not vary continuously with respect to fundamentals (Calvo (2003)).

         Our empirical findings support the view that potential RER fluctuations coupled

with DLD are key determinants of the probability of experiencing Sudden Stops, thus

highlighting the relevance of potential balance-sheet effects in explaining the likelihood of

a crisis. As will be discussed later, we argue that potential changes in the RER are linked to

the size of the current account deficit prevailing before the materialization of a Sudden

Stop. Thus, our approach focuses on the impact of dollarization on the likelihood of a

Sudden Stop, rather than on the consequences of dollarization and Sudden Stops on relevant

variables such as economic growth, as in Edwards (2003), for example.

         Recent empirical literature has focused on alternative measures of crisis, whether

currency crises (Frankel and Rose (1996), 5 Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999), 6 Edwards




5
  Using a panel of 105 countries for the period 1970-1991, they conclude that the current account has no
significance in explaining currency crises.
6
  Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999) implicitly introduce a link between current account performance and
currency crises by incorporating the growth rate of imports and exports in their analysis. They select the latter
as a relevant early warning indicator of currency crises based on noise-to-signal ratio properties of the series.


                                                       5
(2001), 7 Arteta (2003), Razin and Rubinstein (2004) 8) or current account reversals (Milesi-

Ferretti and Razin (2000), Edwards (2003)). However, we believe that to the extent that

many of the recent crises were originated by credit shocks in international markets, as

argued in Calvo (1999), measures of crisis should be more closely linked to large and

unexpected capital account movements rather than to measures that focus on large nominal

currency fluctuations or current account reversals. Besides, current account and exchange

rate behavior may be more affected by policy choices than Sudden Stops. Moreover,

Sudden Stops may imply quite different timings for the onset of a crisis compared to

exchange rate crises or current account reversals.9

        Our strategy concentrates on the valuation effects of domestic dollarized liabilities

(or, more specifically, on liabilities in terms of tradable goods), so our interest lies in real

rather than nominal exchange rate fluctuations. Furthermore, we do not focus on the

current account itself, but rather on the percentage fall in the absorption of tradable goods,

which, as will be argued later, may represent a summary statistic for the rise in the RER

following a Sudden Stop. Moreover, we highlight DLD, a phenomenon not considered in

previous empirical studies of crises, with the exception of Arteta (2003), who explores the

significance of Liability Dollarization in explaining the probability of a currency crisis.

Interestingly, he finds no significant role for Liability Dollarization. This result is not

incompatible with our findings, given that we do not focus on currency crises, and, as stated

earlier, the timing of currency crises may be quite different from that of Sudden Stops.



7
  This analysis does find that under some definitions of currency crisis, and particularly excluding African
countries, current account deficits are a significant determinant of the probability of experiencing currency
crises.
8
  They focus on large RER swings to define a crisis.
9
  According to our definition, for example, Argentina’s Sudden Stop starts in May of 1999, whereas the
currency crisis only hits in February of 2002.


                                                     6
Additionally, our measure of dollarization is different in that it includes not only deposits

but foreign borrowing as well, something that is particularly relevant for EMs when trying

to proxy for credit awarded in foreign currency. 10

         The paper is organized as follows: Section II describes a model that identifies the

variables that determine the change in the RER, which is at the heart of our crisis

framework. Section III develops an empirical definition and characterization of Sudden

Stops. Section IV focuses on an empirical analysis of the determinants of Sudden Stops,

following a panel Probit approach. Section V concludes with a description of our main

findings and future lines of research.



II. Basic Models

         The link between shocks to the current account and financial variables has been

explored in the literature and can be traced back to work by Rodríguez (1980) and

Dornbusch and Fischer (1980). 11 In these studies, which rely on a two-asset portfolio

model (the assets are domestic and foreign currency), the path of the nominal exchange rate

depends on fluctuations in the trade balance. Given that the accumulation of foreign assets

is determined by trade balance performance, the current exchange rate depends on both the

path of money supply and the path of the trade balance. Shocks to the latter with sufficient

persistence can therefore have effects on the spot exchange rate. 12 However, the motivation


10
   Our sample of countries is also different from that of Arteta (2003).
11
   The literature on current account behavior goes much further back in time, focusing mainly on the price
elasticity aspects of devaluation on the trade balance. An excellent summary of the different views on the
current account can be found in Edwards (2001).
12
   Calvo and Rodríguez (1977) construct a similar model that includes non-tradable goods to analyze RER
determination under monetary policy shocks. Although shocks akin to Sudden Stops are not discussed there,
they can be accommodated as an upward shift in the rate of accumulation of foreign assets (the equivalent of
the current account balance as a share of foreign assets analyzed in Rodríguez (1980)), leading to a rise in the
RER.


                                                       7
of these models is anchored in the persistence of structural trade deficits as an explanation

for exchange rate movements. We focus instead on shocks to the financing of the current

account.13 Consider the following demand function for nontradables:

                                          h = α + β rer + δ z , (1)

where h = log H, z = log Z, rer = log RER, H and Z are the demand for nontradables (or

home goods) and tradables, and α, β, and δ are parameters.14 Let the current account deficit

be denoted by CAD. By definition,

                                            CAD = Z – Y + S, (2)

where Y is output of tradables and S are factor payments, remittances abroad, etc. Now

consider a Sudden Stop episode. Typically, prior to these episodes the CAD is positive, and

as a result of the Sudden Stop it goes down to zero, or even runs into negative territory (this

is documented in Calvo and Reinhart (2000) for EMs, and in Calvo, Izquierdo and Talvi

(2002) for Latin American countries following the Russian 1998 crisis). Moreover, it is

worth noting that these are not common events. As shown in Appendix Table 1, as a

general rule, changes in the trade balance display substantial persistence when the latter is

approximated by an AR(1) process, both for EMs and developed economies.15

         Abstracting from remittances, and momentarily keeping international reserves

constant, it can be argued that a country could not be forced to a Sudden Stop larger than

13
   More recent models, such as Izquierdo (1999), Caballero (2001), or Arellano and Mendoza (2002), have
revisited the issue of shocks to current account financing by looking at collateral constraints. Shocks to
collateral requirements, or to the terms of trade, can lead to substantial overshooting of the RER, as the value
of assets used as collateral may overshoot downwards due to inefficient production levels when credit
constraints bind following an external shock.
14
   This equation could be derived from first principles if H and X are identified with consumption of
nontradables and tradables, the intertemporal utility function is separable, and the utility function is iso-elastic
in H and X.
15
   Monthly, seasonally adjusted data on imports and exports were used to calculate the trade balance for the
set of countries included in Appendix Table 1 (these countries will be used later on in our empirical analysis,
see section IV). Changes in the trade balance are approximated by a first-order autoregressive (AR(1))
process. On average, the estimated coefficient yields 0.38 for EMs, and 0.5 for developed countries.


                                                         8
the initial trade balance (or initial CAD if it is too costly not to pay interest on outstanding

debt). Reserves loses could momentarily cushion the blow, but as the Sudden Stop

phenomenon lingers on, international reserves will be depleted. Actually, that is the general

rule in Sudden Stop episodes that are accompanied by a balance-of-payments crisis (which

will be the focus of our empirical analysis). Thus, as a first approximation, we will center

on the case in which the CAD is driven down to zero.16 In that case, given Y and S,

                                           – ∆Z = CAD; (3)

thus,

                                       – ∆Z / Z = CAD / Z . (4)



Taking first differences in equation (1), approximating the relative change in Z by its first

difference in logs, and assuming that the supply of nontradables is constant, we obtain in

equilibrium (i.e., setting H = supply of nontradables, assumed a constant, for simplicity)



                                                  δ CAD
                                         ∆rer =         . (5)
                                                  β Z

In words, equation (5) states that the relative change in the real exchange rate is

proportional to the prevailing CAD prior to the Sudden Stop, relative to the absorption of

tradables. This equation is not intended to model the actual change in the equilibrium real

exchange rate but, rather, that part of the total change that is likely to be very difficult for

the country to prevent. A debtor country could stop paying its debt, but, as a general rule, it

cannot force new money from its creditors. That is the assumption behind equation (5). We

16
  Therefore, when we compute changes in CAD, the latter will be equivalent to (minus) the CAD prevailing in
the previous period, i.e., ∆CADt = CADt – CADt-1 = – CADt-1. For convenience, we drop the time subscript in
the equations that follow.


                                                    9
are now ready to complete the framework that will help to rationalize Sudden Stops as

defined in the empirical section, containing a largely unexpected component.

         Consider a scenario in which a shock is spread from one country to other regions

because of prevailing rules in capital market transactions (such as margin calls) that are

unrelated to country fundamentals. Such a possibility is discussed in Calvo (1999), where it

is argued that a liquidity shock to informed investors due to adverse developments in one

country 17 may trigger sales of assets from other countries in their portfolio in order to

restore liquidity. Now add to this framework a set of uninformed investors who face a

signal-extraction problem in that they cannot observe whether sales of the informed are

motivated by lower returns on projects or by the informed facing margin calls. In this

context, uninformed investors may easily interpret the informed investors staying out of the

market for EM securities or massive asset sales as an indication of lower returns and decide

to get rid of their holdings as well, even though the cause for informed investors’ sales was

indeed due to margin calls. 18 When this occurs, a set of countries with no ties to the

country at the epicenter of the crisis will be exposed to a large and unexpected liquidity

shock making their equilibrium real exchange rate rise according to equation (5). Thus, if

the relative change in RER is large and the economy is liability-dollarized, then massive

bankruptcy will likely ensue, and the economy will land on a bad equilibrium characterized

by a Sudden Stop with output contraction and low debt repayment capacity.

         The latter can be rationalized in different ways. For example, although they do not

deal with bankruptcies, models such as Izquierdo (1999) or Arellano and Mendoza (2002)

help rationalize the effects of changes in the RER on output via credit contraction, where

17
   Say, a margin call due to the fall in the price of asset holdings from a particular country.
18
   This can occur when the variance of returns to projects is sufficiently high relative to the variance of the
liquidity shock of informed investors.


                                                      10
the relevant price is that of non-tradable collateral relative to the tradable good being

produced. Aghion, Bacchetta, and Banerjee (2001) exploit the fact that with incomplete

pass-through from exchange rates to domestic prices, currency depreciation leads to a fall in

net worth due to the increase in the debt burden of domestic firms indebted in foreign

currency, thus reducing investment by constrained firms as well as output levels in future

periods. The associated fall in future money demand and consequent future currency

depreciation, coupled with arbitrage in the foreign exchange rate market, imply that

currency depreciation must take place in the current period as well, opening the door for

expectational shocks that could push an economy into a bad (low output) equilibrium.

Therefore, given the damaging effect of RER fluctuations on balance sheets, output and

repayment capacity, it can be argued that the probability of a Sudden Stop cum output

contraction will be an increasing function of CAD/Z, and the degree of Liability

Dollarization, among possibly other variables. This is the central conjecture that will be put

to a test in the next sections.

        The simple theory outlined above stresses the possibility that a current account

deficit (a proxy of unavoidable current account adjustment when the country is tested by

the capital market) combined with Liability Dollarization will bring about objective

conditions that generate a Sudden Stop. Notice that in this context the stock of debt is, in

principle, not central, unless one can argue that it changes the size of the current account

unavoidable adjustment when the country is tested. This point is worth keeping in mind

because our empirical results suggest that total debt is not a key factor behind Sudden Stop.

On the other hand, once a Sudden Stop occurs, how long financial turmoil will last should




                                               11
quite sensibly be expected to depend on total debt, a phenomenon that appears to be

supported in part by the data.



A Note on Models

           Sudden Stops could be rationalized in terms of models displaying a unique

equilibrium. It may suffice that the equilibrium outcome be a discontinuous function of

fundamentals. This feature could actually be derived in conventional models in the

presence of externalities, where if more than one equilibrium were to be displayed,

uniqueness is recovered by assuming, for example, that the best equilibrium will be chosen

(a Panglossian assumption19). This is a natural assumption in the present context if one is

prepared to assume that the IMF and other multilateral financial institutions perform a good

job in helping countries to avoid crises that would be preventable at very little cost.

           In Calvo (2003) there exists a critical level of government debt beyond which the

economy plunges into a bad equilibrium. The transition from the good to the bad

equilibrium displays Sudden Stop features. Although the model assumes perfect foresight,

it could be used to depict a situation in which the economy is hit by a totally unexpected

shock that pushes it into the bad equilibrium. Thus, this model does not rely on equilibrium

multiplicity, but it nonetheless provides some insight on a possible cause of a Sudden Stop,

namely, public sector indebtedness. Calvo (2003) is a non-monetary model, where public

debt is denominated in terms of tradables. Thus, Liability Dollarization is actually assumed

for the entire debt, implying that the higher the degree of Liability Dollarization (measured

by the public debt/output ratio), the higher the probability that a given negative shock will



19
     “All is the best possible,” says Master Pangloss in Voltaire’s Candide.


                                                         12
generate a Sudden Stop, helping to rationalize the empirical results discussed later on in the

paper. 20

         Before closing this section, a word about transitory or non-credible policy models

(see Calvo (1996)). Those models would be able to rationalize a large cut in capital inflows

(even unexpected cuts, as in Calvo and Drazen (1998)), and would be in line with Burnside,

Eichenbaum and Rebelo (2001). However, we are not keen about this as a stand-alone

interpretation because of the high degree of bunching displayed by Sudden Stop crises. In

these models, the Sudden Stop would be driven by policies that suffer a sudden reversal

because they are unsustainable. Thus, bunching implies that many countries find

themselves in this predicament at about the same time, and that policies are pushed to their

sustainability limit in regions as different as Latin America and Asia.



III. Sudden Stops and Large Real Currency Depreciations

         We start our empirical analysis with the identification and characterization of

Sudden Stops. Specifically, we explore: 1) How EMs compare in terms of the frequency of

Sudden Stops relative to developed countries; 2) Whether large real currency depreciations

are inevitably associated with unexpected reversals in capital inflows, or this is mostly a

characteristic of EMs; 3) Whether Sudden Stops precede large real currency depreciations,

or vice versa; 4) Whether Sudden Stops occur simultaneously for a large set of countries,

probably signaling disruptions in world capital markets and contagion, or they are indeed

isolated events.

20
  Uniqueness could also be obtained along the lines suggested by Morris and Shin (1998). Consider the limit
case in which informational noise (ε in their notation) goes to zero, and let currency devaluation after crisis be
an increasing function of the degree of Liability Dollarization. Then, it can be shown that the likelihood of a
crisis as a result of deterioration in fundamentals (θ in their notation) would be higher, the higher the degree
of Liability Dollarization.


                                                       13
         Given our discussion in the previous section, and following Calvo (1998b), we look

for measures of a Sudden Stop that reflect large and unexpected falls in capital inflows that

have costly consequences in terms of disruptions in economic activity, a central element in

the characterization of this type of event given its impact on repayment capacity.

          In order to make the concept of Sudden Stop operational, we first define a Sudden

Stop as a phase that meets the following conditions:

     •   It contains at least one observation where the year-on-year fall in capital flows lies

         at least two standard deviations below its sample mean (this addresses the

         “unexpected” requirement of a Sudden Stop).21

     •   The Sudden Stop phase ends once the annual change in capital flows exceeds one

         standard deviation below its sample mean. This will generally introduce persistence,

         a common fact of Sudden Stops.

     •   Moreover, for the sake of symmetry, the start of a Sudden Stop phase is determined

         by the first time the annual change in capital flows falls one standard deviation

         below the mean. 22

         Notice that there is an important difference between this concept of crisis and the

one used in other studies focusing on measures such as a fixed current account deficit

threshold as a share of GDP in that, in line with the theoretical arguments outlined in the

previous section, our definition accounts for the volatility of capital flow fluctuations of

each particular country at each point in time in deciding whether an event is “large and


21
   Both the first and second moments of the series are calculated each period using an expanding window with
a minimum of 24 (months of) observations and a start date fixed at January 1990. This intends to capture a
learning process or updating of the behavior of the series.
22
   As a result, a Sudden Stop phase starts with a fall in capital flows exceeding one standard deviation,
followed by a fall of two standard deviations. The process lasts until the change in capital flows is bigger than
minus one standard deviation.


                                                      14
unexpected”. If anything, our concept of crisis will tend to include episodes that would

otherwise not qualify for crisis when using measures such as a fixed current account deficit

threshold. This is so because the latter would exclude many crisis episodes in developed

countries simply because their volatility is smaller.

         To maximize the chances of detecting Sudden Stops, we work with monthly data,

since lower frequency data may hide the origin of these episodes. Given that capital

account information is typically not available at this frequency, we construct a capital flow

proxy by netting out the trade balance from changes in foreign reserves 23 (both net factor

income and current transfers are thus included in our measure of capital flows, but since

they represent mostly interest payments on long-term debt, they should not vary so

substantially as to introduce significant spurious volatility into our capital flo ws measure).

Changes in this measure of capital flows are measured on a yearly basis to avoid seasonal

fluctuations. We work with a sample of 32 countries, 15 EMs and 17 developed economies

for the period 1990-2001 (see the Data Appendix for details)24

         We also construct a Sudden Stop measure that builds upon the one previously

described by adding a criterion of costly disruption in economic activity, defined as a

contraction in output. 25 We do this because, in many cases, a fall in capital flows may just

be the natural consequence of a positive shock that works as alternative financing, namely,


23
   See the Data Appendix for definitions and sources of these variables. All series are measured in constant
1995 US dollars.
24
   The first two years of observations are lost, given that such information is used to construct initial standard
deviations.
25
   Alternatively, one could replace this absolute criterion with some relative measure of output fall that takes
into account the economy’s track record. To address this issue, we defined a “relatively large output fall” as
one displaying an output fall exceeding two standard deviations below the mean change in (the log of) output.
Interestingly, however, due to the high volatility in output growth in EMs (even for periods of positive
growth), this criterion turned out to be much more stringent than the absolute output fall, as it would require
falls in output of such a large magnitude to highlight a crisis that it would ignore most of the crisis episodes in
our sample of countries.


                                                       15
a terms-of-trade shock. Thus, we would be including a phenomenon that could be

dismissed as a crisis event, and is therefore not relevant for our analysis. As a matter of

fact, when comparing Sudden Stop episodes picked up by our first criterion, but not by our

second criterion, we find that 61% of the time these episodes coincide with an increase in

the terms of trade26 (see Appendix Table 2). For this reason, we decided to work with our

second definition of Sudden Stop.

         Results are presented in Figures 1 and 2, for EMs and developed countries,

respectively, showing the binary variable describing periods of Sudden Stop, together with

a binary variable indicating periods of a large rise in the RER (see the Data Appendix for

details). For EMs, Sudden Stop signals are mostly lit around the Tequila (1994), East Asian

(1997), and Russian (1998) crises. Sudden Stops in developed countries are centered on the

ERM (1993) crisis. These results imply that there are periods of Sudden Stop “bunching,”

suggesting contagion effects across countries. This is clearly shown in Figure 3, which

measures the number of Sudden Stop episodes taking place simultaneously, both for our

EM and developed country samples. Bunching is particularly striking around the time of

the Russian crisis of August 1998. Within a window stretching one year before and after

the Russian crisis, countries like Argentina, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Indonesia, Korea,

Peru, Thailand, Turkey, and the Philippines were all in a Sudden Stop phase. Out of this

sample, five countries, namely, Argentina, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador and Turkey, entered a

period of Sudden Stop either in 1998 or 1999. Countries in this group were quite



26
  Also, when using the first criterion, Probit estimations of the type described in section IV yield the result
that an increase in the terms of trade would lead to an increase in the probability of experiencing a Sudden
Stop, something that is clearly picking up the mechanical negative correlation between capital flow changes
and terms of trade growth. Estimations performed with our alternative measure, including costly disruption of
economic activity, predict exactly the opposite, i.e., terms of trade growth impacts negatively on the
probability of a Sudden Stop.


                                                     16
heterogeneous in terms of their fiscal stance and other macroeconomic measures, making it

hard to argue that there was a common flaw in fundamentals driving these episodes, other

than the fact that they are all EMs. 27 This suggests that all these episodes were not

necessarily crises just waiting to happen, although there may be factors that made them

more prone to crisis, an issue that we will analyze in the following section.



                                              Figure 1
           Real Exchange Rate Depreciation Dummy (20%) vs. Sudden Stop Dummy, 1992-2001
                                           Emerging Markets




           Note: Tall grey areas indicate Sudden Stop periods. Short black areas indicate intervals of large
           RER depreciation.




27
     For a detailed treatment of the Latin American episodes see Calvo, Izquierdo and Talvi (2002).


                                                       17
                                     Figure 2
Real Exchange Rate Depreciation Dummy (20%) vs. Sudden Stop Dummy, 1992-2001
                                Developed Economies




Note: Tall grey areas indicate Sudden Stop periods. Short black areas indicate intervals of large
RER depreciation.




                                           18
                                          Figure 3
                             The Bunching of Sudden Stops Events
                             Emerging Markets vs. Developed Economies


    7
                                                                               Emerging Markets
                                                                               Developed Economies
    6



    5



    4



    3



    2



    1



    0
     1991    1992   1993    1994    1995    1996     1997    1998       1999      2000    2001



            Note: The sample of countries includes 15 EMs and 17 developed countries.



        Next, we discuss a set of relevant statistics regarding Sudden Stops that we

summarize in Table 1. It is particularly interesting to note that for EMs only 37 percent of

all depreciation episodes were not associated with a Sudden Stop. This figure is even

smaller (25 percent) once we exclude South Africa, which captures three out of the seven

episodes of depreciation without Sudden Stops in EMs. South Africa is a particularly

interesting case, given that it was identified in previous work by Calvo and Reinhart (2000)

as one of the few EMs without “fear of floating”, resembling in this respect the behavior of

developed economies. Results change dramatically for developed countries, where 83


                                               19
percent of all depreciation episodes were not associated with a Sudden Stop. This is a clear

indication that, unlike the case of EMs, capital markets for developed countries are more

likely to remain open during currency crises. Within the developed-country sample,

newcomers to the European Union (Portugal and Spain) experienced half of the Sudden

Stop episodes. This evidence suggests that Sudden Stops are typically events associated

with EMs, and sometimes even with countries that have recently graduated into the group

of highly developed economies.

        The next question that we address is whether, in episodes in which large real

currency depreciation lies in the neighborhood28 of a Sudden Stop, capital flow reversal

comes first, or depreciation comes first. Our sample does not provide a clear-cut answer,

but there is some evidence that capital flow reversals may precede high real depreciation, as

indicated by the fact that 63 percent of the time capital reversals come first. This figure

increases slightly (to 67 percent) for EMs (see Table 1). 29



                                                 Table 1
                                           Sudden Stop Statistics

                                               In % of total
                                                               Emerging              Developed
                                                                Markets              Economies
        Devaluations associated with Sudden Stop                   63                      17
        Of which: First Sudden Stop, then devaluation              42                      9
                  First devaluation, then Sudden Stop              21                      9
        Devaluations not associated with Sudden Stop               37                      83
        Note: The total number of large devaluations is 19 in emerging markets and 23 in developed
        economies.



28
  Defined as a one-year-window before and after a Sudden Stop.
29
  Granger-causality-type tests of the effects of a Sudden Stop on depreciation and vice versa (using a Probit
model to measure the joint significance of depreciation lags on the probability of a Sudden Stop, and another
Probit to measure the joint significance of Sudden Stop lags on depreciation) do not provide a conclusive
answer.


                                                     20
       Another element of the characterization of Sudden Stop episodes that we are

interested in is the behavior of key macroeconomic variables at the time of a Sudden Stop.

In particular, we focus our attention on the performance of real interest rates, foreign

reserves and the current account balance. Appendix Table 3 shows the average behavior of

real money market interest rates from trough to peak in a two-year window centered at the

beginning of a Sudden Stop episode, both for EMs and developed countries, as well as for

the whole sample. Clearly, real interest rates rise sharply in the neighborhood of a Sudden

Stop (on average, 3900 basis points), particularly so for EMs (on average, 4670 basis

points). Thus, we conjecture that Sudden Stops are mainly capturing supply-side shifts in

capital markets.

       Let us now examine the behavior of foreign reserves in the neighborhood of Sudden

Stops. We do this in order to check to what extent countries have used reserves to smooth

out the effect of a Sudden Stop on the current account deficit. Even though this is in

principle a losing strategy if Sudden Stop events are highly persistent (reserves will

typically not be enough to sustain a current account deficit for a long time), many countries

have engaged in reserve loss strategies to sustain exchange rates and avoid abrupt current

account adjustment, perhaps in the hope that Sudden Stops would be reversed. Indeed, as

discussed in Calvo (2003), under a Sudden Stop, a Central Bank may have incentives to

hand its reserves to credit constrained non-tradable corporate sectors via credit expansion (a

strategy that requires keeping a quasi-fixed exchange rate). As shown in Appendix Table 3,

there is a substantial reserve loss from peak to trough within the Sudden Stop phase (on

average, 35.7 percent) for every country in our sample.




                                              21
           We also keep track of current account balance behavior in times of Sudden Stops.

The important point to notice here is that Sudden Stops bring along abrupt current account

adjustment, reflecting the disruption in international credit markets. This is presented in

Appendix Table 3. As expected, the toll of capital reversals and current account adjustment

is much more substantial in EMs than in developed countries. The average increase from

trough to peak in the current account balance30 is of 6.1 percent of GDP in EMs, while it is

only 1.1 in developed economies. These results are akin to those found in Calvo and

Reinhart (2000).



IV. Determinants of Sudden Stops: Empirical Analysis

           Having examined the empirical characteristics of Sudden Stops, we now turn to a

search for Sudden Stop determinants. The theories discussed in Section II suggest a set of

factors that exacerbate an economy’s vulnerability to Sudden Stops: The degree of

domestic liability dollarization (both in the private and public sectors), as well as the

sensitivity of the RER to capital flow reversals, which is related to the degree of openness

(measured by the size of the supply of tradable goods relative to demand of tradable goods).

The latter becomes clear once we examine equation (5), which shows that the size of the

increase in the RER 31 depends on the percentage fall in the absorption of tradables needed

to close the current account gap (CAD/Z). As a matter of fact, the less leveraged the

absorption of tradable goods is, the smaller will be the effect on the RER. To see this,

rewrite CAD/Z as:

                                 CAD Z − Y + S      Y−S
                                    =          = 1−     = 1 − ω , (6)
                                  Z      Z           Z
30
     In a two-year interval centered at the beginning of a Sudden Stop.
31
     An increase means a real depreciation of the currency.


                                                        22
where ω is defined as ω = (Y − S ) / Z . It is evident that the more open an economy is,

(defining openness as a higher value of the supply of tradables (Y ) ), the smaller will be the

financing from abroad (or leverage) of the absorption of tradables, (Z − Y + S ) / Z .

Following Calvo, Izquierdo and Talvi (2002), we rely on 1-ω for our estimations, given that

it represents a key summary variable to assess the impact of a Sudden Stop on relative

prices, since it measures the leveraged portion of the absorption of tradables. Thus, higher

values of 1-ω mean that a country relies less on its own financing of the absorption of

tradables, and is therefore more vulnerable to RER depreciations stemming from closure of

the current account gap.

         In order to construct a measure of 1-ω for each of the 32 countries in our sample, we

need to obtain a value for the absorption of tradable goods (Z), which is composed of

imports plus a fraction of the supply of tradable goods. We do this by proxying tradable

output by the sum of agriculture plus industrial output, i.e., we exclude services from total

output (for these and all other variables used in this section, see the Data Appendix for

details on definitions and sources). Next, we obtain the fraction of tradable output

consumed domestically by subtracting exports from tradable output, and add imports to the

latter in order to get a measure of Z. Having computed values for Z, and using CAD data,

we get values for 1-ω as indicated by equation (6).

         We use as a benchmark a panel Probit model3233 that estimates the probability of

falling into a Sudden Stop regime as a function of lagged values of 1-ω and DLD,


32
  We use random effects to control for heterogeneity across panel members.
33
  The use of a Probit model and the construction of a dichotomous Sudden Stop variable are due to our belief
that large and unexpected capital flow reversals have non- linear effects, as they trigger substant ial balance-
sheet fluctuations that may lead to serious credit constraints or plain bankruptcies. An alternative, which is
not explored in this paper, would be to use regime-switching models.


                                                      23
controlling for time effects using yearly dummies. In order to reduce endogeneity issues,

and given that many of the variables used in our estimations come at an annual frequency,

we switch to yearly data. 34 DLD is defined as BIS reporting banks’ local asset positions in

foreign currency as a share of GDP. Such data is not available for EMs, so we construct a

proxy by adding up dollar deposits and bank foreign borrowing as a share of GDP. Under

the assumption that banks are matched by currency in their assets and liabilities, then this

measure should be a good proxy for liability dollarization35. Following related literature on

determinants of crises, we also include a set of macroeconomic control variables, which we

describe later. We lag variables 36 to avoid endogeneity problems. We are particularly

interested in lagged ω because it proxies for the potential change in relative prices that

could occur were the country to face a Sudden Stop, something that would not be conveyed

by contemporaneous ω once the current account gap is closed and relative prices have

adjusted.

         Regression results, presented in Appendix Table 4, indicate that both 1-ω and DLD

are significant at the 1% level in almost every specification, underscoring the relevance of

ω as an indicator of potential Sudden Stops, taken here as a signal of the potential change in

relative prices that could materialize at the time of a Sudden Stop. These results withstand

the inclusion of a set of other control variables, such as the ratio of foreign reserves to CAD

(a measure of the ability to finance CAD, at least initially), private sector credit growth,

total public debt, FDI and the public sector balance (all expressed as shares of GDP), and




34
   Thus, lagged observations are one year apart from contemporaneous observations.
35
   Data on dollar deposits is mainly that in Honohan and Shi (2003), see the Data Appendix for a full
description.
36
   Except for terms-of-trade growth, which is included contemporaneously.


                                                      24
terms of trade growth, as well as two different measures of exchange rate flexibility, and an

EM dummy.

           Having accounted for the relevance of ω and DLD in explaining the likelihood of a

Sudden Stop, we now focus on their interaction, which is particularly amenable to Probit

models. We find that the effects of ω on the probability of a Sudden Stop crucially depend

on the degree of DLD. Low values of ω (high leverage of CAD) imply a higher probability

of Sudden Stop, but this is particularly so for dollarized economies. Consider, for example,

the effects of varying ω on the probability of a Sudden Stop, keeping all other variables

constant at their means, except for DLD, which could be low (5th percentile in our sample),

average, or high (95th percentile). This is represented in Figure 4 (panel A). 37 For small

values of ω, there are substantial differences in the probability of a Sudden Stop depending

on whether DLD is low or high. Take, for example, any two countries with a value of ω of

0.76 (the lowest measure of ω in our sample), and assume that the first country is highly

dollarized (medium-dash line), whereas the second country is not (solid line). The

probability of a Sudden Stop in the highly dollarized country exceeds that of the lowly

dollarized country by about 0.65. Now evaluate this difference for the same two countries

when ω is equal to 1 (i.e., when CAD = 0). The difference in the probability of a Sudden

Stop is now only about 0.30, about half the difference at the lower ω level. The high non-

linearity described by the data implies that low ω and high dollarization can be a very

dangerous cocktail, as potential balance sheet effects become highly relevant in determining

the probability of a Sudden Stop.




37
     We use model (1) in Table 4 of the Appendix to construct this figure.


                                                        25
                                    The effects of DLD on the probability of a Sudden Stop are particularly important

for EMs. As of end-2001, 78 percent of EMs in our sample lay above the dollarization

median, whereas 76 percent of developed countries lay below the dollarization median.

This helps in rationalizing why the EM dummy included in our estimations turned out not

to be significant, as dollarization seems to capture appropriately a key difference between

these groups.


                                                                           Figure 4
                                 Probability of a Sudden Stop for Different Values of ω and Domestic Liability Dollarization
                                                                   in the Average Country


                                               Not controlling for the                                Controlling for the
                                                 endogeneity of ω                                      endogeneity of ω

                                                            (A)                                              (B)
                                 1.00                                                   1.00




                                                         Low dollarization
                                                         Average dollarization
                                 0.75
                                                         High dollarization             0.75
  Probability of a sudden stop




                                 0.50                                                   0.50




                                 0.25                                                   0.25




                                 0.00                                                   0.00
                                        0.75      1.00             1.25          1.50          0.75   1.00         1.25     1.50
                                                    Omega                                               Omega




                                                                                        26
           We now turn to the remaining set of variables used as controls in our regressions.

First, we focus on two measures of exchange rate regime flexibility that were used

alternatively in the estimations presented in Appendix Tables 4 and 5. These measures are

those constructed by Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger (2002), who classify the flexibility of

exchange rate regimes based on exchange rate volatility, exchange-rate-changes volatility,

and foreign reserves volatility. The first, narrower measure, classifies regimes into floating

regimes, intermediate regimes, and fixed regimes, while the second measure extends this

classification to 5 categories. This first pass suggests that neither of these two measures of

exchange rate flexibility turns out to be significant for the whole sample, although results

are different for the EM group when we estimate later on a linear probability model that

controls for endogeneity due to unobserved common factors.38 Although this finding may

seem puzzling, it can be explained by the fact that the loss of access to international credit

is a real phenomenon with real effects such as output contraction, which in principle does

not rely on the behavior of nominal variables. Indeed, the framework presented in Section

II does not rely on any particular nominal setup to explain the change in relative prices

following a Sudden Stop, which would materialize under both flexible and fixed exchange

rate regimes. As a matter of fact, models that provide a full-fledged version of the effects

of Sudden Stops on output such as Izquierdo (1999), Arellano and Mendoza (2002), and

Calvo (2003) are concerned with real effects that are independent of nominal arrangements.

Of course, this does not rule out very different short-term dynamics, which are likely to be

dependent on nominal arrangements, as was evidenced by the very dissimilar behavior of

several Latin American economies after the Sudden Stop triggered by the Russian crisis of

1998. Even though all countries hit by Sudden Stops eventually experienced substantial
38
     See the section on robustness checks and Appendix Table 9.


                                                      27
real currency depreciation and output loss, the dynamics were very different for countries

like Colombia, for example, which quickly depreciated its currency and withstood the real

shock sooner, and Argentina, which took much longer to correct the resulting RER

misalignment39 Other macroeconomic variables that we added for control, including the

ratio of foreign reserves to CAD, credit growth, FDI, government balance, terms of trade

growth, and public sector debt, do not turn out to be significant at the 5 percent level. 40

This is consistent with other empirical work on the determinants of crises that do not find a

strong relationship between most of these variables and the probability of a crisis. Of

particular interest to us was public sector debt, because one would expect that highly

indebted countries would be more susceptible to capital flow reversals, as suggested by

Calvo (2003) (see Section II for a discussion). We tried four different versions of total

public sector debt: its share to GDP, the debt-to-revenue ratio 41, the debt-to-GDP ratio

scaled by its de-trended standard deviation, as well as the debt-to-GDP ratio interacted with

an EM dummy. The last three transformations attempt to capture the fact that developed

countries are able to sustain higher levels of debt relative to GDP because they have a

higher tax base to support the debt-servicing burden, or because the demand for public

bonds is less volatile, or simply because other factors (includ ing their reputation in terms of

willingness or ability to pay) fare better than for EMs.                    Despite all these plausible

considerations, public debt in any of these variations turns out not to be statistically

significant at the 10 percent level. We also worked with the external debt-to-exports ratio

to capture the ability to support the external debt-servicing burden as an explanatory


39
   See Calvo, Izquierdo and Talvi (2002) for a more detailed discussion.
40
   At least when not controlling for potential endogeneity of ω. We address this issue later on (see page 30).
41
   For space reasons, only this variable is reported in our estimations. Other estimations are available upon
request.


                                                     28
variable, with similar results. Finally, in the same vein as our DLD variable, we included a

proxy of public dollar-denominated debt as a share of GDP to account for potential balance

sheet effects in the public sector. This variable also turns out not to be significant at the 10

percent confidence level. To control for the fact that instead of public debt, it may be total

foreign debt that is responsible for determining the likelihood of Sudden Stop, we also

constructed a proxy for total debt by adding up current account balances from 1982

onwards.42 This figure was later normalized by either GDP or government revenues. These

measures did not turn out significant either. These results suggest that public debt or total

foreign debt stocks are not clear factors that determine the likelihood of a Sudden Stop.

The fact that ω as well as domestic DLD remain significant, while debt measures do not,

suggests that valuation effects, coupled with the materialization of contingent liabilities

resulting from public sector takeover of private debts with the financial system may be key

in explaining the likelihood of a Sudden Stop.43 This assertion is particularly relevant for

cases like Korea, where public sector debt represented only 10 percent of GDP prior to its

1997 Sudden Stop, before quadrupling once the financial sector bailout was added to the

fiscal burden.



Robustness Checks

Using the EM Sample. In order to address the fact that all efforts to account for debt as a

determinant of the likelihood of a Sudden Stop were unsuccessful, and that this failure

could be due in part to problems in accounting for differences between EMs and developed

42
   We chose 1982 as the starting date because several EMs defaulted on their obligations prior to 1982. Thus,
it would be incorrect to add current account balances prior to this date, since they were not necessarily paid
off.
43
   Models such as Calvo (2003) should therefore be extended to include a financial sector as well as debt in
both tradable and non-tradable goods.


                                                     29
countries regarding the size of debt levels deemed sustainable by capital markets, we repeat

our estimations, this time only for the EM group. Interestingly, we confirm the same results

reached with the full dataset (see Appendix Table 5). Both ω and domestic DLD remain

significant at the 5% level, whereas the ratio of total debt to fiscal revenues does not (as

well as all other measures of public debt mentioned above), even after controlling for the

same set of macroeconomic variables used in previous estimations, thus indicating the

robustness of ω and DLD to the choice of panel members.



Further Addressing Endogeneity. One issue we have not yet fully covered is that there

may be room for endogeneity between ω t-1 and the latent variable behind Sudden Stops

(capital flows) due to unobserved and persistent characteristics common to both variables.

Such would be the case of variables proxying credibility or political factors. To tackle this

potential endogeneity problem, we carried out a Rivers-Vuong test to the estimations

previously presented in Appendix Tables 4 and 5. 44 Based on the results of this test (see

Appendix Tables 6 and 7), we cannot reject the presence of endogeneity since the residuals

obtained in the first stage of this method appear to be significant. 45 Therefore, in order to

assess the significance of all variables included in the estimations in the presence of

endogeneity, we need to construct appropriate measures of the standard deviation of their

coefficient estimators, as standard test statistics are no longer valid. In order to do this, and

44
   Probit models can be reduced to latent variable models. For this particular case where endogeneity in ω is
suspected, a system of two equations can be defined, one representing the latent variable behind the Sudden
Stop variable (which is assumed to be a linear function of all variables in the Probit, including ω), the other
representing ω, which is considered to be a linear function of all other variables included in the Probit
estimation, as well as a lag in ω. Residuals from this second regression are included in the Probit regression
to determine their significance. If the latter are significant, endogeneity cannot be rejected. For further details,
see Rivers and Vuong (1988), or Wooldridge (2002).
45
   In the first stage, we used all the other explanatory variables in the corresponding equation and the second
lag of ω as instruments of the potentially endogenous variable (ωt-1).


                                                        30
given the presence of random effects, we rely on a non-parametric hierarchical two-step

bootstrap methodology. Random effects introduce an intra-group correlation structure

among observations. This is accounted for by first randomly sampling countries with

replacements, and, in a second stage, randomly sampling without replacement within the

countries sampled in the first stage. According to Davison and Hinkley (1997), this

procedure closely mimics the intra-group correlation structure of the data mentioned above

(see the Technical Appendix for a detailed explanation). Confidence intervals are

computed using the percentile method at a 5 percent significance level, based on 500

replications.

        Using bootstrapped confidence intervals, we confirm that both 1-ω and domestic

liability dollarization remain significant at the 5 percent level even after controlling for

endogeneity. Results for the whole sample of countries are reported in Appendix Table 6.

It is worth considering that, in particular, the coefficient accompanying 1-ω increases

substantially compared to results shown in Appendix Table 4, indicating that the relevance

of 1-ω increases once controlling for endogeneity. 46 This can be seen graphically by

replicating panel (A) of Figure 4 with the new estimates, to show that the non-linear effect

of ω on the probability of a Sudden Stop increases compared to previous estimates that do

not control for endogeneity (panel B of Figure 4).



Further Addressing Endogeneity for EMS. Results for 1-ω and domestic liability

dollarization remain significant at the 5 percent level when we apply a Rivers-Voung

correction to the EM country sample. One additional interesting result emerges after

46
  None of the previous point estimates of the coefficient accompanying 1-ω in Appendix Table 4 fall within
the confidence interval shown in Appendix Table 6.


                                                   31
controlling for endogeneity: Terms of trade growth becomes a significant variable

throughout our set of estimations (see Appendix Table 7), with a negative coefficient

indicating that falls in terms of trade growth increase the likelihood of a Sudden Stop. This

result is consistent with the case made by Caballero and Panageas (2003) that in countries

where commodities are relevant, a fall in commodity prices may be accompanied by a

Sudden Stop, thus amplifying the original shock.



Linear Probability Model Estimation. To check the robustness of our results, we also

estimate a linear probability model. Despite its limitations,47 this approach lets us control

for endogeneity using standard two stages least squares 48 techniques, and it is amenable to

the introduction of fixed effects to capture country-specific differences.49 The obtained

results (see Appendix Tables 8 and 9) show that previous results remain valid: both 1-ω and

the degree of DLD are significant determinants of the probability of a Sudden Stop at the

5% confidence level in most specifications, both for our full sample, as well as for EMs

only. For the EM group, terms-of-trade growth does show up as a significant variable at the

10 percent significance level. Interestingly, the coefficient accompanying exchange rate

regime measures does come up positive and significant at the 5 percent level, implying that,

controlling for dollarization, fixed exchange rate regimes may increase the likelihood of a

Sudden Stop. However, these results are not robust to the Rivers-Voung specification

shown earlier (see Appendix Tables 8 and 9).




47
   Such as the fact that probability is not necessarily constrained to the [0,1] interval.
48
   As in the Rivers-Vuong estimation, we use all other variables previously included in the Probit as well as
the second lag of ω as instruments of the potentially endogenous variable (ωt-1).
49
   A control that cannot be applied to the panel Probit estimation without a significant loss in observations.


                                                     32
        Another relevant robustness check is that an interaction term between 1-ω and DLD

comes up significant in the linear estimation, both for the whole sample as well as for EMs

only, confirming results shown with Probit analysis indicating that the combination of

dollarization and low values of ω can be dangerous in terms of amplifying the probability

of a Sudden Stop.



V. Conclusions

        Focusing on the characteristics and determinants of large capital flow reversals for a

set of EMs and developed countries, we obtained a few key suggestive empirical findings

that open up several areas of research. We summarize them as follows:



•   Large RER fluctuations coming hand in hand with Sudden Stops are basically an EM

    phenomenon. In contrast, developed countries can sustain large depreciations while

    keeping their capital account open.

•   Sudden Stops seem to come in bunches, grouping together countries that are different in

    many respects, such as fiscal stance, monetary and exchange rate arrangements.

    However, countries are similar in that they remain vulnerable to large RER

    fluctuations—be it because they could be forced to large adjustments in the absorption

    of tradable goods, and/or because the size of their dollar liabilities in the banking

    system is high.

•   This particular type of bunching suggests that when analyzing Sudden Stops, careful

    consideration should be given to financial vulnerabilities to external shocks, rather than




                                               33
       to arguments relying only on unsustainable domestic policies that may exhibit sharp

       reversals.

•      Sudden stops are accompanied by large interest rate upswings, reserve losses and large

       current account adjustment, suggesting that these phenomena are associated with shifts

       in the supply of capital flows.

•      Openness, understood as a large supply of tradable goods relative to absorption of

       tradable goods, and Domestic Liability Dollarization, are key determinants of the

       probability of a Sudden Stop.

•      Both Openness and the structure of Balance Sheets are the result of domestic policies.

       Countries may be tested by foreign creditors, but vulnerability to Sudden Stops is purely

       due to domestic factors, such as tariff and competitiveness policies affecting the supply

       of tradable goods, and badly managed fiscal and monetary policies that result in

       Domestic Liability Dollarization.

•      The effect of Openness and Liability Dollarization on the probability of a Sudden Stop

       could be highly non-linear. In particular, high current account leverage and high

       Domestic Liability Dollarization could be a dangerous cocktail.



           Although our work has established the empirical relevance of balance-sheet effects

on the likelihood of Sudden Stops, it does not cover another topic that represents an

important extension of research, namely, the consequences of Sudden Stops and balance

sheet effects on economic growth, particularly in dollarized economies 50. We leave this

significant topic for future analysis.


50
     Relevant work in this direction has recently been conducted by Edwards (2003).


                                                       34
References

AGHION, PHILIPPE, P HILIPPE BACCHETTA, and ABHIJIT BANERJEE (2001). “Currency Crises
       and Monetary Policy in an Economy with Credit Constraints,” European Economic
       Review, 45: 1121-50.
ARELLANO, CRISTINA AND ENRIQUE MENDOZA (2002). “Credit Frictions and Sudden Stops
       in Small Open Economies: An Equilibrium Business Cycle Framework for
       Emerging Market Crises”, NBER Working Paper No. 8880.
ARTETA, CARLOS O. (2003). “Are Financially Dollarized Countries More Prone to Costly
       Crises?” International Finance Discussion Paper 763, Board of Governors of the
       Federal Reserve System.
BURNSIDE, CRAIG, EICHENBAUM, MARTIN, and SERGIO REBELO (2001). “Prospective
       Deficits and the Asian Currency Crisis,” Journal of Political Economy, 109(6):
       1155-97.
CABALLERO, R ICARDO , and ARVIND KRISHNAMURTHY (2001). “International and Domestic
       Collateral Constraints in a Model of Emerging Market Crises,” Journal of Monetary
       Economics, 48(3): 513-548.
CABALLERO, R ICARDO , and STAVROS PANAGEAS (2003). “Hedging Sudden Stops and
       Precautionary Recessions: A Quantitative Framework,” mimeograph, M.I.T.
CALVO, GUILLERMO A. (1996). Money, Exchange Rates, and Output (Cambridge, MA:
       MIT Press).
——— (1998a). “Growth, Debt, and Economic Transformation: The Capital Flight
       Problem,” in F. CORICELLI, M. DI MATTEO, and F. HAHN (eds.), New Theories in
       Growth and Development (New York: St. Martin’s Press).
——— (1998b). “Capital Flows and Capital-Market Crises: The Simple Economics
       of Sudden Stops,” Journal of Applied Economics (CEMA), 1(1): 35-54.
——— (1999). “Contagion in Emerging Markets: When Wall Street is a Carrier,”
       mimeograph, University of Maryland.
——— (2003). “Explaining Sudden Stop, Growth Collapse, and BOP Crisis: The Case of

       Distortionary Output Taxes,” IMF Staff Papers, 50, Special Issue.




                                           35
CALVO, GUILLERMO A., and ALLAN DRAZEN (1998). “Uncertain Duration of Reform:
       Dynamic Implications,” Journal of Macroeconomic Dynamics, 2(4): 443-55.
CALVO, GUILLERMO A., ALEJANDRO IZQUIERDO , and ERNESTO TALVI (2002). “Sudden
       Stops, the Real Exchange Rate and Fiscal Sustainability: Argentina’s Lessons”,
       NBER Working Paper No. 9828.
CALVO, GUILLERMO A., and CARMEN REINHART (2000). “When Capital Inflows Come to a
       Sudden Stop: Consequences and Policy Options,” in P. KENEN and A. SWOBODA
       (eds.), Reforming the International Monetary and Financial System (Washington,
       D.C.: International Monetary Fund).
CALVO, GUILLERMO A., and CARLOS A. R ODRÍGUEZ (1977). “A Model of Exchange Rate
       Determination under Currency Substitution and Rational Expectations,” Journal of
       Political Economy, 85(3): 617-25.
CALVO, GUILLERMO A., and CARLOS VEGH (1993). “Exchange-Rate-Based Stabilization

       under Imperfect Credibility,” in H. FRISCH AND A. WORGÖTTER (eds.), Proceedings

       from IEA Conference on Open-Economy Macroeconomics. ( Hampshire, England:

       Macmillan Press Ltd), pp. 3-28.

DAVISON, A. AND HINKLEY, D. (1997). “Bootstrap Methods and Their Applications”,
       (Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press).
DORNBUSCH, RUDIGER, and STANLEY FISCHER (1980). “Exchange Rates and the Current
       Account,” American Economic Review, 70(5): 960-71.
EDWARDS, SEBASTIAN (2001). “Does the Current Account Matter?” NBER Working Paper
       No. 8275.
EDWARDS, SEBASTIAN (2003). “Current Account Imbalances: History, Trends and
       Adjustment Mechanisms,” paper prepared for the Fourth Mundell-Fleming Lecture
       at the International Monetary Fund, November 6th, 2003.
EICHENGREEN, BARRY, RICARDO HAUSMANN, and UGO PANIZZA (2003). “The Mystery of
       Original Sin”, mimeograph, Inter-American Development Bank.
FRANKEL, JEFFREY, and ANDREW ROSE (1996). “Currency Crashes in Emerging Markets:
       An Empirical Treatment,” Journal of International Economics, 41(3/4): 351-66.




                                             36
HONOHAN, P ATRICK, and ANQING SHI (2002). “Deposit Dollarization and the Financial
       Sector in Emerging Economies," World Bank Working Paper No. 8880.
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND (1999). International Capital Markets: Developments,
       Prospects, and Key Policy Issues. World Economic and Financial Surveys.
       (Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund).
IZQUIERDO, ALEJANDRO (1999). “Credit Constraints, and the Asymmetric Behavior of
       Output and Asset Prices under External Shocks”, doctoral dissertation, University of
       Maryland.
KAMINSKY, GRACIELA L., and CARMEN M. REINHART (1999). “The Twin Crises: The
       Causes of Banking and Balance-of-Payments Problems,” American Economic
       Review, 89(3): 473-500.
LEVY-YEYATI, EDUARDO, and FEDERICO STURZENEGGER (2002). “Classifying Exchange
       Rate Regimes: Deeds vs. Words,” forthcoming, European Economic Review.
MILESI-FERRETTI, GIAN MARIA, and ASSAF RAZIN (2000). “Current Account Reversals and
       Currency Crises: Empirical Regularities”, in P. KRUGMAN (ed.), Currency Crises
       (Chicago, USA.: University of Chicago Press).
MORRIS, STEPHEN, and HYUN SONG SHIN (1998). “Unique Equilibrium in a Model of Self-

       Fulfilling Currency Attacks”, American Economic Review, 88(3): 587-97.

RAZIN, ASSAF, and YONA RUBINSTEIN (2004). “Exchange Rate Regimes, Capital Account

       Liberalization and Growth and Crises: A Nuanced View”, mimeograph, Tel-Aviv

       University.

RIVERS, DOUGLAS and QUANG H. VUONG (1988), “Limited Information Estimators and
       Exogeneity Tests for Simultaneous Probit Models,” Journal of Econometrics, 39(3):
       347-366
RODRÍGUEZ, CARLOS A. (1980). “The Role of Trade Flows in Exchange Rate
       Determination: A Rational Expectations Approach,” Journal of Political Economy,
       88(6): 1148-58.
WOOLDRIDGE, JEFFREY M. (2002). Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data.
       (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).



                                            37
                                      Appendix Table 1
             AR(1) Coefficients of Changes in the Trade Balance (in absolute value)

                            Emerging                          Developed
                             Markets                          Economies
                    Argentina             0.170    Australia                0.506
                    Brazil                0.305    Canada                   0.487
                    Chile                 0.373    Denmark                  0.540
                    Colombia              0.386    Finland                  0.487
                    Czech Rep.            0.585    France                   0.479
                    Ecuador               0.431    Germany                  0.477
                    Indonesia             0.413    Italy                    0.536
                    Korea                 0.445    Japan                    0.454
                    Mexico                0.230    Netherlands              0.481
                    Nigeria               0.302    Norway                   0.502
                    Peru                  0.374    New Zealand              0.500
                    Philippines           0.383    Portugal                 0.475
                    South Africa          0.558    Spain                    0.518
                    Thailand              0.431    Sweden                   0.541
                    Turkey                0.340    Switzerland              0.505
                                                   United Kingdom           0.473
                                                   United States            0.456
                    Min.                  0.170    Min.                     0.454
                    Max.                  0.585    Max.                     0.541
                    Average               0.382    Average                  0.495




                                        Appendix Table 2
                              Costless Capital Flow Reversals Statistics

                                            In % of Total
                                                                           Emerging       Developed
                                                                           Markets        Economies
Associated with and Increase in Terms of Trade                                62             60
Not Associated with and Increase in Terms of Trade                            38             40
Note: The total number of costless capital flow reversals is 26 in emerging markets and 30 in developed
economies.




                                                  38
                          Appendix Table 3
   Trough to Peak Differences in a Two-year Window Centered Around
           the Beginning of a Sudden Stop, Selected Variables

                     Current Account               Real Foreign          Real Interest
                         Balance                     Reserves               Rates
                      (% of GDP)                    (% change)               (%)
 Argentina-94               1.40                        -40.95             20.36
 Argentina-99               1.75                        -14.17               0.97
 Argentina-01              13.43                        -48.61             48.05
 Chile-98*                  4.57                        -22.30             24.15
 Colombia-98                6.24                        -18.29             36.28
 Czech Republic-97          4.94                        -33.44             13.97
 Ecuador-99*               15.63                        -72.90             10.37
 Germany-93                -0.43                        -43.03               1.05
 Indonesia-97               7.41                        -24.48            102.16
 Japan-97                   1.62                        -10.68               3.88
 Korea-97                  17.15                        -41.14             21.49
 Mexico-94                  5.25                        -85.16             56.07
 Peru-97*                   0.58                         -6.58             11.03
 Philippines-97             6.85                        -31.54             20.20
 Portugal-92                1.19                        -40.53             11.71
 Spain-92                   2.48                        -44.12               3.69
 Sweden-92                  0.57                        -35.52             68.79
 Thailand-96                5.82                        -37.22             17.34
 Turkey-94                  2.44                        -53.06            132.08
 Turkey-98                  0.41                        -10.94             23.31
 Turkey-01                  4.04                        -34.89            209.02
 Emerging Markets           6.12                        -35.98             46.68
 Developed Economies        1.09                        -34.78             17.82
 Overall sample             4.92                        -35.69             39.81
* Due to lack of data on money market rates, lending rates were used instead.




                                         39
                                                        Appendix Table 4
                                                          Panel PROBIT
                                     All Countries – Dependent Variable: Sudden Stop Indicator
                               (1)             (2)              (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)

1- ϖ                           5.193           4.812           4.915          4.745        4.825        4.818        6.099
                            (1.836)***      (1.834)***      (1.841)***     (1.842)***   (1.849)***   (1.848)***   (2.402)**
DLD                            7.924           7.009           6.948          6.961        7.106        7.104       7.513
                            (2.183)***      (2.255)***      (2.267)***     (2.275)***   (2.292)***   (2.290)***   (3.090)**
EM Dummy                                       0.460           0.463          0.473        0.444        0.443       0.174
                                              (0.403)         (0.405)        (0.396)      (0.398)      (0.398)     (0.586)
TOT Growth                                                    -1.383         -1.369       -1.380       -1.371       -1.857
                                                              (2.220)        (2.212)      (2.216)      (2.218)     (2.299)
Total Debt over Revenues                                                      0.014        0.009        0.009       0.026
                                                                             (0.115)      (0.116)      (0.116)     (0.131)
Ex. Regime 3                                                                               0.028
                                                                                          (0.165)
Ex. Regime 5                                                                                           0.019         0.001
                                                                                                      (0.109)       (0.130)
Reserves over CAD                                                                                                   -0.003
                                                                                                                    (0.006)
M2 over Reserves                                                                                                    -0.036
                                                                                                                    (0.031)
Credit Growth                                                                                                       -1.919
                                                                                                                    (1.341)
FDI/GDP                                                                                                             -1.372
                                                                                                                    (9.096)
Public Balance/GDP                                                                                                   2.382
                                                                                                                    (6.386)
Constant                      -3.393          -3.550          -3.558         -3.563       -3.599       -3.610       -3.154
                            (0.762)***      (0.790)***      (0.788)***     (0.812)***   (0.876)***   (0.896)***   (1.132)***
Observations                    302             302             302            298          296          296          294

All regressions include time dummies
Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                      40
                                               Appendix Table 5
                                                 Panel PROBIT
                           Emerging Markets – Dependent Variable: Sudden Stop Indicator

                                 (1)            (2)            (3)          (4)            (5)         (6)

1- ϖ                            4.709          4.979          4.546        5.102        4.994         5.690
                              (2.127)**      (2.148)**      (2.089)**    (2.226)**    (2.180)**     (2.240)**
DLD                             4.719          4.638          4.604        5.006        4.911         4.073
                              (1.949)**      (1.970)**      (1.917)**    (2.141)**    (2.125)**     (1.623)**
TOT Growth                                     -1.801         -1.759       -1.639       -1.568        -2.514
                                              (2.253)        (2.250)      (2.246)      (2.249)       (2.336)
Total Debt over Revenues                                       -0.098       -0.118       -0.105        -0.087
                                                              (0.137)      (0.149)      (0.146)       (0.130)
Ex. Regime 3                                                                 0.359
                                                                           (0.239)
Ex. Regime 5                                                                               0.222       0.134
                                                                                          (0.155)    (0.125)
Reserves over CAD                                                                                      0.014
                                                                                                     (0.010)
M2 over Reserves                                                                                      -0.068
                                                                                                     (0.059)
Credit Growth                                                                                         -1.067
                                                                                                     (1.155)
FDI/GDP                                                                                              -18.102
                                                                                                    (10.227)*
Public Balance/GDP                                                                                    -3.027
                                                                                                      (5.009)
Constant                        -2.630         -2.651         -2.424       -3.155       -3.234        -2.117
                              (0.726)***     (0.721)***     (0.755)***   (0.969)***   (1.019)***    (0.834)**
Observations                      138            138            134          134          134           132


All regressions include time dummies
Standard errors in parent heses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                          41
                                                                Appendix Table 6
                                                    Panel PROBIT – Rivers & Vuong Approach
                                             All Countries – Dependent Variable: Sudden Stop Indicator
                                                  Estimates and Bootstrapped Confidence Intervals

                                      (1)                (2)              (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)             (7)

Residuals                          -12.654**         -12.590**         -14.154**         -14.100**         -14.053**         -13.912**        -18.700**
                                  [-25.5, -3.8]     [-30.1, -4.5]    [-34.5, -3.8]      [-354, -4.5]     [-40.1, -4.7]     [-44.3, -4.5]    [-72.1, -5.3]
1- ϖ                                17.909**          17.722**          19.597**          19.040**         19.014**          18.743**         24.471**
                                   [9.8, 35.6]       [9.2, 40.3]      [9.6, 48.8]       [8.1, 45.8]       [9.7, 57.2]       [9.7, 57.0]    [10.0, 100.9]
DLD                                 10.569**          10.831**         10.665**          10.651**          10.766**          10.672**         12.070**
                                   [6.2, 20.8]       [6.0, 23.9]      [5.6, 28.6]       [5.8, 25.1]       [6.3, 26.7]       [6.2, 27.6]      [6.5, 50.8]
EM Dummy                                                -0.054           -0.081            -0.141            -0.170            -0.157           -1.622
                                                      [-1.4, 2.3]      [-1.7, 2.1]       [-1.4, 2.5]       [-1.8, 2.5]       [-1.8, 3.0]      [-5.7, 2.5]
TOT Growth                                                               -4.436            -4.612            -4.581            -4.581           -4.369
                                                                      [-15.3, 2.4]      [-16.4, 1.8]      [-16.8, 2.4]      [-16.8, 1.9]     [-13.1, 5.4]
Total Debt over Revenues                                                                   -0.111            -0.118            -0.121           -0.121
                                                                                         [-1.1, 0.3]       [-1.2, 0.4]       [-1.4, 0.4]      [-1.5, 0.7]
Ex. Regime 3                                                                                                  0.022
                                                                                                           [-0.5, 0.9]
Ex. Regime 5                                                                                                                  0.035            -0.091
                                                                                                                            [-0.4, 0.7]      [-0.5, 1.0]
Reserves over CAD                                                                                                                              -0.004
                                                                                                                                           [-0.01, 0.03]
M2 over Reserves                                                                                                                              -0.132**
                                                                                                                                           [-0.6, -0.03]
Credit Growth                                                                                                                                  -1.539
                                                                                                                                            [-13.5, 1.7]
FDI/GDP                                                                                                                                        -5.532
                                                                                                                                           [-55.3, 24.5]
Public Balance/GDP                                                                                                                             25.875
                                                                                                                                            [-2.6, 80.1]
Constant                           -4.055**          -4.065**          -4.229**          -3.872**          -3.857**          -3.893**          -1.514
                                  [-7.1, -2.8]      [-8.2, -2.9]      [-9.0, -2.8]      [-8.8, -2.7]     [-10.6, -2.7]     [-11.4, -2.8]    [-13.5, 0.6]
Observations                          302               302               302               298               296               296              294

** Significant at the 5 percent level using bootstrapped confidence interv als constructed by the percentile method, shown in brackets.

Note: Larger models, including several variables, show wide confidence intervals. Instability in the random effects estimator may arise when the
dimension of the problem is increased and the number of individual observations is low (Guilkey and Murphy (1993)). These facts point towards
keeping the dimension of the model relatively low. Yet, even for the more problematic cases, both 1-ω and DLD remain significant at the 5 percent
level.




                                                                            42
                                                   Appendix Table 7
                                       Panel PROBIT – Rivers & Vuong Approach
                             Emerging Economies – Dependent Variable: Sudden Stop Indicator
                                     Estimates and Bootstrapped Confidence Intervals

                                      (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)

Residuals                         -19.480**         -22.569**          -24.485**         -27.164**         -28.273**         -22.988**
                                 [-71.3, -8.3]     [-97.1, -9.3]    [-103.6, -11.1]   [-144.8, -11.7]   [-173.2, -16.0]   [-422.5, -14.8]
1- ϖ                               23.790**          27.131**           28.433**          31.704**          32.777**         23.984**
                                 [13.5, 92.2]     [16.4, 119.6]      [17.8, 144.5]     [19.3, 181.6]     [19.8, 201.2]    [18.5, 5548.5]
DLD                                10.149**           9.816**            9.725**          10.822**          11.001**          6.877**
                                  [7.1, 30.7]       [6.2, 39.0]        [6.3, 44.0]       [6.7, 52.6]       [6.8, 62.7]     [4.8, 1393.9]
TOT Growth                                           -7.077**            -7.621**          -8.502**          -8.663**         -7.512**
                                                   [-31.5, -1.0]      [-36.6, -1.4]     [-43.1, -2.0]     [-54.6, -3.1]   [-1500.5, -1.0]
Total Debt over Revenues                                                  -0.258            -0.301            -0.300           -0.303
                                                                        [-1.7, 0.1]       [-2.0, 0.1]       [-2.3, 0.2]     [-47.2, 0.1]
Ex. Regime 3                                                                                 0.305
                                                                                          [-0.2, 2.1]
Ex. Regime 5                                                                                                0.210                0.029
                                                                                                          [-0.2, 1.4]        [-0.4, 30.9]
Reserves over CAD                                                                                                              0.009**
                                                                                                                             [0.004, 1.6]
M2 over Reserves                                                                                                                -0.018
                                                                                                                              [-2.3, 1.5]
Credit Growth                                                                                                                   -2.000
                                                                                                                            [-513.0, 0.1]
FDI/GDP                                                                                                                        -14.165
                                                                                                                          [-183.3, 535.8]
Public Balance/GDP                                                                                                              -6.453
                                                                                                                           [-936.2, 64.5]
Constant                           -3.563**          -3.735**          -3.282**          -4.122**           -4.365              -2.159
                                 [-11.5, -2.8]     [-14.1, -2.9]     [-15.6, -2.4]     [-23.6, -2.7]     [-27.4, -2.8]      [-512.9, -1.0]
Observations                          138               138               134               134               134                 132

** Significant at the 5 percent level using bootstrapped confidence intervals constructed by percentile method, shown in brackets.

Note: Larger models, including several variables, show wide confidence intervals. Instability in the random effects estimator may arise
when the dimension of the problem is increased and the number of individual observations is low (Guilkey and Murphy (1993)).
These facts point towards keeping the dimension of the model relatively low. Yet, even for the more problematic cases, both 1-ω and
DLD remain significant at the 5 percent level.




                                                                   43
                                              Appendix Table 8
                                  Linear Probability Model with Fixed Effects
                                             Two-Stage Estimation
                           All Countries – Dependent Variable: Sudden Stop Indicator

                                     (1)           (2)              (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)

(1- ϖ )                             1.148         1.260             1.290        1.376        1.374        1.385
                                  (0.457)**    (0.481)***         (0.507)**    (0.532)**    (0.535)**    (0.543)**
DLD                                 1.722         1.674             1.628        1.818        1.818        2.009
                                 (0.424)***    (0.428)***        (0.454)***   (0.450)***   (0.450)***   (0.465)***
(1- ϖ )*DLD                         4.486         4.459             4.211        4.366        4.322        4.610
                                  (1.773)**     (1.773)**         (1.807)**    (1.813)**    (1.815)**    (1.871)**
TOT Growth                                        -0.541            -0.568       -0.615       -0.615       -0.500
                                                 (0.365)           (0.371)      (0.378)      (0.380)      (0.373)
Total Debt over Revenues                                            -0.027       -0.032       -0.032       -0.027
                                                                   (0.026)      (0.026)      (0.026)      (0.028)
Ex. Regime 3                                                                      0.017
                                                                                (0.030)
Ex. Regime 5                                                                                 0.012         0.013
                                                                                            (0.020)       (0.021)
Reserves over CAD                                                                                         -0.001
                                                                                                          (0.001)
M2 over Reserves                                                                                          -0.007
                                                                                                        (0.003)**
Credit Growth                                                                                             -0.196
                                                                                                         (0.103)*
FDI/GDP                                                                                                    0.534
                                                                                                          (0.883)
Public Balance/GDP                                                                                         1.458
                                                                                                         (0.812)*
Constant                           -0.113        -0.110           -0.048       -0.079       -0.086         0.017
                                  (0.059)*      (0.059)*          (0.084)      (0.097)      (0.102)       (0.117)
Observations                         302           302              298          296          296           294
R-squared                           0.23          0.23              0.24         0.25         0.25          0.27


All regressions include time dummies
Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                            44
                                           Appendix Table 9
                                Linear Probability Model with Fixed Effects
                                          Two-Stage Estimation
                       Emerging Markets – Dependent Variable: Sudden Stop Indicator

                                      (1)           (2)             (3)       (4)          (5)         (6)

(1- ϖ )                              2.396         2.736          2.877       2.794        2.731       2.076
                                   (1.011)**     (1.111)**     (1.203)**   (1.250)**    (1.267)**     (1.331)
DLD                                  1.837         1.885          1.712       1.749        1.735       1.272
                                  (0.663)***    (0.666)***     (0.724)**   (0.717)**    (0.720)**    (0.732)*
(1- ϖ )* DLD                         4.351         4.359          4.379       4.607        4.529       6.645
                                    (2.508)*      (2.511)*      (2.621)*    (2.579)*     (2.583)*   (2.831)**
TOT Growth                                         -1.110        -1.178      -1.125       -1.106      -0.805
                                                  (0.600)*      (0.628)*    (0.633)*     (0.639)*     (0.682)
Total Debt over Revenues                                         -0.025      -0.024       -0.023       0.002
                                                                 (0.046)     (0.046)      (0.046)     (0.051)
Ex. Regime 3                                                                  0.100
                                                                            (0.055)*
Ex. Regime 5                                                                              0.058         0.088
                                                                                         (0.037)     (0.037)**
Reserves over CAD                                                                                      -0.000
                                                                                                      (0.001)
M2 over Reserves                                                                                        0.003
                                                                                                      (0.008)
Credit Growth                                                                                          -0.864
                                                                                                    (0.305)***
FDI/GDP                                                                                                2.385
                                                                                                      (2.676)
Public Balance/GDP                                                                                     1.210
                                                                                                      (1.837)
Constant                             -0.313        -0.350       -0.290       -0.457       -0.458       -0.500
                                   (0.137)**     (0.144)**     (0.153)*    (0.170)***   (0.175)**   (0.188)***
Observations                           138           138          134          134          134          132
R-squared                             0.34          0.35         0.35         0.38         0.38          0.42


All regressions include time dummies
Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                          45
Data Appendix

Our sample of EMs are those countries tracked by JP Morgan’s Emerging Market Outlook (which includes the subset of countries used
in the calculation of the EMBI+ index), i.e., EMs that significantly participate in world capital markets. Countries with missing
information on their monthly trade balance, or which do not report quarterly capital account information (a measure we used to check
the accuracy of our monthly proxy in mimicking quarterly fluctuations) were dropped from the sample. The complete list of EMs
included therefore consists of Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Czech Republic, Ecuador, Indonesia, Korea, Mexico, Nigeria, Peru,
Philippines, Thailand, Turkey, and South Africa. Our choice of developed countries is dictated by OECD membership, and it includes
Australia, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, United Kingdom, and USA. Data is collected on an annual basis unless otherwise stated.

            Variable                                                     Definitions and Sources
Capital Flows Proxy              Trade balance minus changes in international reserves (monthly). All figures are expressed in 1995
                                 US dollars. Source: IMF IFS.
Absorption of tradable goods (Z) Imports plus tradable output domestically consumed, proxied by the sum of agricultural and
                                 industrial output minus exports. More specifically, we construct the share of tradable output in total
                                 output as the ratio of agriculture plus industrial output to total GDP at constant prices. Next, we
                                 multiply this share by total dollar GDP to obtain the dollar value of tradable output. We do this in
                                 order to avoid excessive fluctuations in output composition due to valuation effects that are present
                                 in sectoral data at current prices. Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators.
CAD                              Current account deficit. Source: IMF’s World Economic Outlook (WEO) database.
Financial Dollarization          For developed economies: BIS reporting banks’ local asset positions in foreign currency as a share
                                 of GDP (since data for Australia and New Zealand is not available from this source, we used data
                                 from their respective Central Banks). For emerging economies: dollar deposits obtained from
                                 Honohan and Shi (2002) (and complemented with data from Central Banks for the cases of
                                 Colombia, Korea, Brazil) plus bank foreign borrowing (IMFIFS banking institutions line 26c) as a
                                 share of GDP.
Total Public Debt                Data on public debt for developed economies was obtained from OECD. Data on public debt for
                                 EMs was obtained from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators database (WDI). (for a
                                 few cases, data from Central Banks and JP Morgan was used when not available from WDI). Data
                                 refers to gross central government debt.
External Public Debt             Data on external debt for developed economies was obtained from OECD (for a few cases, it was
                                 complemented with data from IMF IFS). Data on external debt for EMs was obtained from WDI


                                                                   46
                             (for a few cases, data from Central Banks was used when not available in WDI).
TOT growth                   Annual rate of change of terms of trade on goods and services. Source: IMF’s WEO database.
Ex. Regime 3                 3-way exchange regime classification: 1 = float; 2 = intermediate (dirty, dirty/crawling peg); 3 = fix.
                             Source: Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger (2002)
Ex. Regime 5                 5-way exchange regime classification: 1 = inconclusive; 2 = float; 3 = dirty; 4 = dirty/crawling peg;
                             5 = fix. Source: Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger (2002)
Credit growth                Annual rate of change on the credit to private sector to GDP ratio. Source: IMF IFS.
Deposit rates                Source: IMF IFS.
FDI                          Net foreign direct investment. Source: IMF’s WEO database.
Fiscal Revenue               General Government Revenues. Source: IMF’s WEO database.
GDP                          Gross domestic product. Source: IMF’s WEO database.
Lending rates                Source: IMF IFS.
M2                           Money plus quasi-money. Source IMF IFS.
Money market rates           Source: IMF IFS.
Public Balance               General government balance to GDP ratio. Source: IMF’s WEO database.
Large RER depreciation dummy Dummy variable that takes the value of 1 when a large rise on RER (vis-à-vis US dollar) occurs and
                             0, otherwise. We define a rise in the RER (i.e., real depreciation of the currency) to be large when it
                             exceeds two standard deviations of the sample mean prevailing before the rise. We also impose that
                             the rise be of at least 20 percent, in order to ensure we capture episodes of substantial depreciation.
                             This is particularly important for some developed countries where two standard deviation changes
                             may not be big enough in size so as to make balance sheet effects play a relevant role.
Reserves                     International reserves. Source: IMF IFS.




                                                                  47
                                          Technical Appendix

                  Inference with Random-Effects Probits under Endogeneity

                                        Walter Sosa Escudero51


        This note is concerned with estimation and inference in a random effects Probit
specification allowing for possibly endogenous explanatory variables. The standard random
effects Probit model with exogenous explanatory variables is:

                             yit* = xit′ β + µ i + ε it , i=1,2, … , n; t=1,2, …,T


where xit is a k vector of exogenous explanatory variables, ß is a k vector of coefficients, µi is
IN(0, σ µ2 ), and ε it is IN(0, σ ε2 ). The observed binary random variable yit is related to the model
through:

                                              y it = 1[ y *it > 0]

       Maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) of this model is extensively studied in Heckman
(1981) and reviewed in Hsiao (2003). The likelihood function for this problem is given by:

                                                    ρ  
                                                               1/ 2
                                                                            
                   L = ∏ ∫ ∏ Φ  (x it ß/s e ) + µi 
                        N   +∞ T
                                           ′      ~            [2 yit − 1] f ( µ
                                                              
                                                                                  ~ ) d ~µ
                                                       1 − ρ  
                                                                                   i      i
                            −∞
                       i =1    t =1                                      


where ρ ≡ σ µ2 / σ ε2 . The evaluation of the integral in the previous expression is not trivial and it
is usually carried out through Hermite integration or simulation.

       Guilkey and Murphy (1993) conducted an extensive Monte Carlo experiment to study the
small sample behavior of alternative estimation strategies of the random effects Probit model.
The most important results that are relevant for this study are summarized below:

     1. Standard probit and MLE of the random effects Probit provide consistent estimation of ß.
     2. The standard Probit estimator of the standard errors of the estimators is markedly
        downward biased, leading to incorrect inferences, in the sense of suggesting significant
        coefficients when in fact they are not.
     3. The random effects MLE based estimator provides more accurate estimators of the
        standard errors but the gain in performance is relatively mild when compared to that of
        the standard Probit.

51
  Universidad de San Andres, Victoria, Argentina. Email: wsosa@udesa.edu.ar, Phone: 54-11-4725-7024. Martin
Cicowiez provided excellent computing support.


                                                     48
     4. For small individual observations (N around 25), the numerical accuracy problems
        involved in the evaluation of the integral shown above severely affect the performance of
        the procedure, invalidating the use of standard asymptotic approximations.

       The possibility of allowing for endogenous explanatory variables has been studied in the
context of the standard Probit model:


                                      y *j = z j γ + x ′j β + u j ,    j=1,2,…,J


where uj is IN(0, σ u2 ), and xj, ß and y *j are defined as in the previous model, and zj is a possibly
endogenous explanatory variable. Rivers and Vuong (1988) provided a simple estimation
strategy for the case where:

                                                    zj = ~
                                                         x 'jδ + v j

and (u j, vj) have a bivariate normal distribution independent of ~x j . ~x j is a vector of exogenous
explanatory variables in the reduced-form model for zj, which in this context is endogenous if
and only if uj and vj are correlated. Rivers and Vuong (1988) propose a consistent estimation 52
based on a two-step approach:

•    Step 1: Run the OLS regression of zj on ~x j and save residuals v̂ j .

•    Step 2: Run a standard Probit regression of yj on xj, zj and v̂ j .

        Details of the procedure can be checked in the original reference and in Wooldridge
(2002). The main intuition behind the result comes from the fact that under bivariate normality of
u and v, we can write uj = θvj + ηj where ηj is independent of ~x j and vj. Then, replacing in the
definition of y *j :

                                            y *j = z j γ + x ′j β + θv j + η j

        If vj were observable, consistent estimation could proceed by a standard Probit regression
of yj on zj, xj and vj, since, by construction, all explanatory variables are exogenous with respect
to ηj. The first stage of the Rivers-Vuong procedure replaces vj by a consistent estimate obtained
from OLS regression in a first stage.

        The performance of the Rivers and Vuong (1998) procedure in the context of the random
effects specification has not been explored, and though it deserves a more detailed exploration

52
  It is important to remark that, as it is usual in binary choice index models, not all the parameters are identified,
hence appropriate normalizations must be adopted. See Rivers and Vuong (1998) for details on this subject.


                                                           49
than the one offered here, some insights can be discussed. A simple extension in the panel
context, as described in the first equation of this appendix, is to allow for endogenous
explanatory variables by allowing for correlation between the observation specific error term of
the index model (ε it) and the error term of the reduced form of the possibly endogenous
explanatory variable (vit). In this context, the index model can be written as:

                                  y *it = z it γ + x it′ β + θv it + µ i + η it

and, again, if vit were observable, the model should be unaltered albeit for some redefinition of
relevant parameters. In this case, the Rivers-Vuong procedure is replacing an exogenous
explanatory variable (vit) with a consistent estimate obtained from a first stage regression.

        An important problem is how to perform reliable inference with the proposed method.
As discussed previously, Guilkey and Murphy (1993) suggest that the numerical accuracy
problem related to the evaluation of the likelihood function of the random effects Probit makes
asymptotic approximations very unreliable. A natural possibility is to consider a bootstrap
approach. The nature of such procedure in this context is complicated due to the fact that, by
construction, observations are not independent due to the presence of random effect. In this note
we follow Davidson and Hinkley (1997) and use a non-parametric hierarchical two-step
bootstrap strategy, where in a first stage, individuals are randomly sampled with replacements,
and, in a second stage, observations are randomly sampled without replacement within the
individuals sampled in the first stage. According to Davison and Hinkley (1997, pp. 100-102),
this procedure closely mimics the intra-group correlation structure of the data, due to the
presence of the individual random effect.

References

Davison, A. and Hinkley, D. (1997). Bootstrap Methods and Their Applications, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.

Guilkey, D., and Murphy, J. (1993). Estimation and Testing in the Random Effects Probit
Model, Journal of Econometrics, 59, 301-317.

Heckman, J. (1981). Statistical Models for Discrete Panel Data, in C. Manksi and D. McFadden,
eds. Structural analysis of discrete data with econometric applications, MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA.

Hsiao, C. (2003). Analysis of Panel Data, 2nd edition, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Rivers, D. and Vuong, Q. (1988). Limited Information Estimators and Exogeneity Tests for
Simultaneous Probit Models, Journal of Econometrics, 39, 347-366.

Wooldridge, J. (2002). Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data, MIT Press,
Cambridge.




                                                     50
