NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECT OF ADOLESCENT EXPERIENCE
ON LABOR MARKET OUTCOMES:
THE CASE OF HEIGHT
Nicola Persico
Andrew Postlewaite
Dan Silverman
Working Paper 10522
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10522
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2004

This work was supported by National Science Foundation grants SES 0095768 and SES-0078870, which are
gratefully acknowledged. The first author is grateful for an Alfred P. Sloan Foundation Research Fellowship.
We thank Jere Behrman, Julie Cullen, Dan Hamermesh, Chris Peterson, Mark Rosenzweig, Gary Solon, and
particularly Ken Wolpin for helpful conversations. We are grateful to the editor, Steve Levitt, and to an
anonymous referee for comments and suggestions that greatly improved the paper. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Nicola Persico, Andrew Postlewaite, and Dan Silverman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Effect of Adolescent Experience on Labor Market Outcomes: The Case of Height
Nicola Persico, Andrew Postlewaite, and Dan Silverman
NBER Working Paper No. 10522
May 2004
JEL No. J7, J3, Z1
ABSTRACT
Taller workers receive a wage premium. Net of differences in family background, the disparity is
similar in magnitude to the race and gender gaps. We exploit variation in an individual's height over
time to explore how height affects wages. Controlling for teen height essentially eliminates the effect
of adult height on wages for white males. The teen height premium is not explained by differences
in resources or endowments. The teen height premium is partly mediated through participation in
high school sports and clubs. We estimate the monetary benefits of a medical treatment for children
that increases height.
Nicola Persico
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
persico@econ.upenn.edu
Andrew Postlewaite
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
apostlew@econ.upenn.edu
Dan Silverman
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
611 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
dansilv@umich.edu

1

Introduction

Labor market outcomes are likely to diﬀer depending on a person’s outward characteristics. These diﬀerences have motivated a large body of research focussed on the
disparities across racial and gender groups. Beyond establishing the magnitude of the
disparities, a goal of this research is to identify the channels through which the gaps
develop. In this paper we take up the same research agenda with respect to height. We
start by estimating the magnitude of the height premium, and find it comparable to
those associated with race and gender.1 We then take advantage of a special feature of
height relative to race and gender: height varies over time, so that a relatively tall 16year old may turn out to be a relatively short adult, and vice versa. This time-variation
allows us to investigate the stage of development at which having the characteristic (in
our case, being short) most strongly determines the wage disparity. We find that being
relatively short through the teen years (as opposed to adulthood or early childhood)
essentially determines the returns to height. We document that the beneficial eﬀects
of teen height are not complementary with any particular vocation path, broadly defined; instead, they manifest themselves in a higher level of achievement in all vocation
categories. We point out some social activities that might be important channels for
the emergence of the height premium. We use our estimates of the return to teen
height to evaluate the monetary incentive to undertake a newly approved treatment
that increases teen height, human growth hormone therapy. Finally, we show that teen
height is predictably greater for sons of tall parents, meaning that there is an expected
wage penalty incurred by the as-yet-unborn children of short parents.
Height is widely believed to be an important ingredient of professional and personal
success. Popular books discuss the advantages of being tall.2 In the past 13 US
presidential elections, the taller candidate has won 10 times (the most recent exception
being George W. Bush) and, as shown in Figure 1, presidents tend to be distinctly
taller than the average population.3
1

While for methodological purposes we will compare our analysis with the literature on racial and
gender discrimination, we do not imply that height discrimination, if the term were well-defined, is
morally equivalent to racial or gender bias.
2
See, for example, The Height of Your Life by Ralph Keyes: Little, Brown and Co. 1980.
3
The height of Presidents is taken from http://www.uvm.edu/~tshepard/tall.html. The average
height in the population is taken from Steckel (1995) and is the adult height of white males born in the
US around the year in which the president was in oﬃce. Because average height is trending up, in any
given year this measure most likely overestimates the average height of adults in the US population.
The period 1850-1900 over which the height trend flattens is a possible exception.

2

78
76
74

W as hington
Jeffers on

Linc oln

Roos evelt

Johns on

C linton

72
70
68
66
64

M adis on

62

P res idential H eight (in.)

60

A verage Height in P opulation

58
W as hington, G eorge
1797
1789

Harris on, W illiam
H enry
1841
1841

Johns on, A ndrew
1869
1865

M c K inley , W illiam
1901
1897

Trum an, H arry S .
1953
1945

B us h, G eorge
1993
1989

Figure 1: Height of US Presidents
There is an academic literature that investigates the possibility that labor markets
reward height separate from ability.4 Following a standard approach that accounts for
diﬀerences in productive characteristics and interprets the residual wage diﬀerential as
a height premium, prior research has estimated that an additional inch of height is
associated with a 0.025-5.5 percent increase in predicted wages.5 Taking into account
the potential biases allowed by most of the previous literature, and using data from
Britain’s National Child Development Survey (NCDS) we find that among white British
men every additional inch of adult height is associated with a 2.2 percent increase in
wages. In a complementary analysis, drawing on data from the National Longitudinal
Survey of Youth (NLSY) we find that among adult white males in the US, every
additional inch of height as an adult is associated with a 1.8 percent increase in wages.
As the interquartile range of adult heights spans 3.5 to 5 inches in our data (in Britain
4

This research is found mainly in sociology and psychology. For a review of the evidence from
sociology and psychology see Martel and Biller (1987). A more recent example from this literature is
Frieze et al. (1990). This evidence is not only drawn from less developed economies where physical size
may be an important determinant of productivity (see Steckel (1995) for a review of the connection
between height and standard of living).
5
Sargent and Blanchflower (1994) estimate the eﬀect on age-23 wages of height measured at various
ages, for the NCDS cohort born in 1958. They estimate that every additional 10 centimeters in height
at age 16 (23) is associated with 2.7 (3.3) percent increase in wages at age 23. Using the NLSY
data, Loh (1993) regresses wages on adult height and estimates that workers who are below-average
height as adults earn 4%-6% less than above-average workers. Berhman and Rosenzweig (2001) use
the variation in height between monozygotic female twins, and estimate that every additional inch of
height is associated with a 3.5-5.5 percent increase in women’s wages.

3

and the US, respectively), the tallest quarter of the population has a median wage that
is more than 13 percent higher than that of the shortest quarter. The impact of this
height wage disparity is comparable to those associated with characteristics such as
race or gender.6
Beyond estimating the magnitude of the height premium, our primary focus is to
investigate its roots. Several plausible theories have been proposed for why markets
might treat shorter people diﬀerently. A leading theory in social psychology describes
the interpersonal dominance derived from height. According to this theory, short
people are stigmatized by others, perceived less positively, and thus placed at a disadvantage in negotiating interpersonal dealings.7 Evolutionary selection may also explain
the disadvantages of being shorter than competitors. As the human species evolved,
to the extent that size provided a direct advantage in the competition for resources,
a preference for associating with tall people might have been naturally selected. In
addition, greater height may have signaled good health throughout the development
process, and therefore a genetic makeup robust to illness and deprivation. To the degree that this signal translated into a preference for taller mates, this may provide an
explanation for why, other things equal, shorter people may be viewed as less appealing.
These theories are designed to explain a ‘taste’ for height among employers. A final
theory emphasizes self-esteem by placing the roots of the height premium in a superior
conception of self that is achieved through a comparison with a socially-determined
notion of ideal height. A greater self-image leads to higher achievement through a
variety of channels, including perseverance and interpersonal skills.
The theories presented above are designed to account for the adverse consequences
of a current lack of height. Of course, the fact that we observe a height wage premium
does not imply that shorter workers are penalized for their current stature. There may
be another characteristic, correlated with current height and valuable to employers
that is in fact acquired at some pre-market stage. We can think of this characteristic
as a form of human capital, a set of skills that is accumulated at earlier stages of
development. If this characteristic were unobservable to the researcher, the lower
wages of shorter people would be incorrectly ascribed to their lack of height, instead
of to their lack of human capital. For example, short children, if stigmatized because
6

Correcting for diﬀerences in family background and region of residence, we estimate the blackwhite wage gap to be approximately 15% among full time male workers in the NLSY. Similar analysis
indicates that the male-female wage gap is approximately 20% among white full-time workers in both
the NCDS and NLSY.
7
See, Martel and Biller (1987) and Frieze, et al. (1990).

4

of their stature, might find it more diﬃcult to develop interpersonal skills, positive
self-conception, or might simply be excluded from participation in groups that foster
the development of skills. The mechanisms that generate the disadvantage of short
people in acquiring human capital could include any of the channels presented above
(interpersonal dominance, self-image, etc.) which may have an impact at any early
stage of development. An alternative theory, statistical discrimination, might predict
that children who forecast being short adults invest less in human capital because the
returns to human capital are smaller for short adults; a rational individual will invest
less in assets that provide lower personal return.
Finally, we might entertain a theory that pushes back the source of the height
premium to birth: taller people might be endowed to a greater degree with some
favorable characteristics. These characteristics could be family resources which raise
a person’s productivity, or other characteristics such as intellectual stamina or work
energy, that are directly productive characteristics independent of external factors.
Distinguishing among these theories is important for understanding the channels
through which outward characteristics aﬀect market outcomes. The magnitude of the
height premium alone makes it important to investigate these theories. In addition,
understanding the ways in which height aﬀects income may shed light on other labor
market disparities such as the race and gender gaps. In the case of the height, it is
possible to make progress on tests of the relative importance of these theories. Alone
among common bases of labor market disparities, height is impermanent. Relative
stature often changes as an individual grows to his or her full adult height. Participants
in the NCDS were measured by physicians at ages 7, 11, 16, and 33, and self-reported
height at age 23. Respondents to the NLSY provided self-reported measures of height
in 1981, 1982 and 1985. Of particular interest for the present study is that in each
of these samples, among those who were relatively short when young, many grew to
become average height or even tall adults. These changes in relative stature provide
an opportunity to understand better the sources of the height premium.
We show that two adults of the same age and height who were diﬀerent heights at
age 16 are treated diﬀerently on the labor market: the person who was taller as a teen
earns more. In fact, the preponderance of the disadvantage experienced by shorter
adults on the labor market can be explained by the fact that, on average, these adults
were also shorter at age 16. This finding suggests that a large fraction of the disparity
is not due to a taste for tall adult workers, or to any employer’s preference for height
when young (which the employer presumably cannot observe); rather, the disparity
must reflect a characteristic correlated with height when young. This observation
5

leads our investigation away from a theory of the labor market’s taste for height, and
toward an analysis of the nature of the unobservable characteristic.
We show that the teen height premium does not much diminish when we control
for variables such as family resources, good health, and native intelligence. Using the
fact that NCDS measures height at ages 7 and 11 in addition to 16 and 33 we are
able to parse the contribution to the height premium of being tall at diﬀerent ages.
When we regress wages on height measured at ages 7, 11, 16, and 33 we find that only
age-16 height has either an economically or statistically significant coeﬃcient. Among
the diﬀerent heights, therefore, height at age 16 uniquely influences future wages. The
negligible role played by height prior to age 16 (together with other supporting evidence) suggests that the height premium is not simply a premium to early development
at any age.
The wealth of data provided by the NLSY allows an analysis of the channels through
which teen height influences later wages. In the US data, those who were relatively
short when young were less likely to participate in social activities associated with the
accumulation of productive skills and attributes.8 About half of the wage diﬀerential
can be accounted for by variation in participation in school-sponsored non-academic
activities (such as athletics and clubs), and a smaller fraction of it can be explained
by greater levels of schooling. We interpret these findings as evidence of the eﬀects of
social factors on the development of human capital and the distribution of economic
outcomes. Viewed in this light, our findings suggest that social eﬀects during adolescence, rather than contemporaneous labor market discrimination or correlation with
productive attributes may be at the root of the disparity in wages across heights.
In our eﬀort to better understand the channels through which teen height aﬀects
wages, we establish that the height premium is not reflected in an observably diﬀerent
choice of occupations, broadly defined. Thus, the height premium is reflected in a higher
level of achievement within the same vocation category, broadly defined. Overall, the
beneficial eﬀects of teen height seem to accrue across the board, as a sort of all-purpose
resource.
Finally, we use our estimates of the teen height premium to calculate the monetary
return to an investment in teen height, i.e., a treatment with human growth hormone
8

Examples of human capital that might be acquired through such activities include skills of interpersonal negotiation, social adaptablity, and motivation. Productive attributes that are often ascribed to
participation in extra-curricular activities include self-esteem and self-discipline. See Heckman (2000)
for a complete discussion of the importance of these ‘non-cognitive’ skills, and their development by
social institutions.

6

(HGH). From our viewpoint, the HGH treatment represents an indirect investment in
human/interpersonal capital of the type that we have suggested. Because the treatment
was not available to the individuals in our data set, we have an opportunity to perform
a cost-bene…t analysis of an investment in this type of human capital. Since the return
to investment is a percentage of adult wages, taking into account the cost of treatment
we …nd that males with expected average annual earnings exceeding $100,000 have a
monetary incentive to undertake the HGH treatment.

2

Data

Our two main data sources are the NCDS and the 1979 youth cohort of the NLSY.
The …ndings from the NLSY closely parallel those in the NCDS. We draw attention
to the aspects in which the results from the US and Britain are substantially di¤erent,
and where some distinctive features of the each data set provide additional insight.
The NCDS began as a perinatal mortality study of all the children born in England,
Scotland and Wales during the week beginning March 3, 1958. Seven years later, an
attempt (sweep) was made to recontact all of the children who survived infancy. Similar
sweeps were made again when the children were ages 11, 16, 23 and 33. At age 33,
11,407 (66%) of the original 17,414 children were recontacted and at least partially
surveyed.9 The NLSY began in 1979 with 12,686 men and women ages 14-21, and
has interviewed this cohort every year until 1994, and every other year since then.
Respondents to the NLSY were …rst asked to report their height in 1981, when they
were ages 16-23, and most recently in 1985 when they were ages 20-27. We will refer
to height measured in 1985 as adult height.
To avoid confounding the e¤ects of race, gender and height discrimination we focus
our attention primarily on white males. In Britain this implies excluding the small
number of native-born non-whites; we also exclude those participants in the NCDS who
immigrated to Britain after 1958. In the US we focus on the 2,063 white, non-Hispanic
males for whom there exists both adequate height data, and other information.10
Table 1 presents summary statistics of the height measures from our primary data
sets, along with statistics from an unrelated survey of measured height in the US.
9

Selection analysis indicates that those from Scotland and the Northwest of England, and those
with lower reading test scores at age 7 were less likely to respond to the …fth sweep. Elias and
Blanch‡ower (1988) …nd similar results with respect to the fourth sweep.
10
Our interest in adult wages also leads us to exclude the entire NLSY oversample of poor whites
who were dropped from the survey after 1990.

7

We note a few features of the data. First, even when attention is restricted to white
men, there is substantial cross-sectional variation in adult height. The data include
respondents as short as 60 inches and as tall as 83 inches. The interquartile range spans
3.5 inches (NCDS) and 5 inches (NLSY). Second, while in the NCDS the average change
in height between ages 16 and 33 (2.5 inches) represents a substantial fraction of total
variation in adult height, in the NLSY the variation in height over time is limited by
the fact that respondents were 16 or older when …rst measured, with more than half
being older than 18.11 On average, the NLSY sample grew just 0.28 inches between
1981 and 1985. Of the NLSY respondents, 618 (30%) reported growth of at least
one inch over the period; among those who grew, the average change was 1.68 inches.
Nevertheless, as our later analysis shows, this variation in height over time is adequate
to provide reasonably precise estimates of the relationship between youth height and
adult outcomes, conditional on adult height.
A potentially important limitation of the NLSY data is that height is self-reported
to the nearest inch, which raises the issue of measurement error. To illustrate, we note
that among our white male subsample, 315 (15.2%) respondents report a height in 1985
that is strictly less than what they reported in 1981, and 75 (3.6%) report a decline in
height of more than one inch.12 By itself, the presence of classical measurement error
may strengthen our results, as the error would be expected to bias the coe¢ cients of
interest towards zero. Nevertheless, we would like a gauge for the accuracy of self
reporting. By one measure the height data recorded in the NLSY appear reasonably
accurate. The distribution of the NLSY’s self-reported heights is quite similar to that of
a national survey of carefully measured heights completed in 1980; with the distribution
in the NLSY shifted slightly to the right, and having a fatter right tail.13
In contrast, in each sweep of the NCDS except for the age-23 sweep, height is
measured by a physician. The advantages of the earlier and more accurate height
measures in the NCDS are clear. Among the 1,772 white men for whom there exists
su¢ cient data, the average growth between ages 16 and 33 is 2.54 inches, and just 44
11

It is estimated that in the US adult height is reached at a median age of 21.2 years for males,
with a median growth after age 16 of slightly less than 1 inch (Roche 1992, pp. 104-5).
12
Not all those who report a decrease in height need be in error. Damon, Stoudt, and McFarland
(1966) p. 50 reports that adults shrink by an average of 0.95 inches over the course of a day.
13
The National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey conducted by the National Center for
Health Statistics between 1976 and 1980 measured standing height against a calibrated bar and used a
camera to standardize recording. In this survey, the average measured height for white males ages 1824 was 69.8 inches, with a standard deviation of 2.8 inches. See National Center for Health Statistics
(1987), Table 13. The comparable …gures in our subsample of the NLSY are 70.41, and 2.85.

8

(2.5%) report negative growth over this period.14 We will use age-33 height as our
measure of adult height, to eliminate any bias induced by self-reporting. The presence
of another measure of adult height— self-reported at age 23— is useful because it allows
us to gauge the impact of the bias induced by self-reporting of heights. In the NCDS,
at least, this bias is negligible: all the coe¢ cients in this paper are almost identical
when age-33 height is replaced by age-23 height.

3

Evidence of the Height Premium

Our …rst task is to examine whether in our data sets, consistent with the literature,
there are sizable associations between height on wages. There are some important
aspects in which our investigation di¤ers from previous studies. Unlike much of the
prior research, we estimate the regression equations separately by race and gender,
and focus on the results for white, non-Hispanic males. As noted above, estimating
the equations separately avoids confounding the e¤ects of race, gender and height discrimination; moreover this approach allows all of the coe¢ cients to di¤er by race and
gender. In addition, unlike most prior studies, we are able to measure wages at a
relatively advanced age (31–38) and thus capture the cumulative e¤ects of di¤erences
in height. Finally, our approach to estimating the e¤ect of height takes care to avoid
controlling for variables such as education, work experience, and occupation that are
endogenous, i.e. choice variables that may be in‡uenced by height. This approach is
consistent with the strategy taken by Neal and Johnson (1996) who, along with Heckman (1998), provide detailed arguments against accounting for di¤erences in decision
variables when estimating the e¤ect of labor market discrimination.
To begin our assessment of the relationship between height and wages, Table 2
compares summary statistics of the white male subsample by above- and below-median
adult height. For the adult outcomes in the NCDS we consider wages at age 33; in the
NLSY we consider the data from 1996 when respondents were 31 to 38 years old. The
statistics on adult wages summarize only the data for full time workers.15 Comparing
14

Among the shrinkers, 19 respondents report shrinking by an inch or more during this period.
The NCDS has disadvantages as well. For large fractions of those successfully contacted in the later
sweeps, data from their earlier sweeps (including height measures) are incomplete.
15
In the NCDS, wages are de…ned as gross pay per reporting period divided by usual hours worked
during reporting period. (The reporting period varies depending on how often the respondent is paid.)
In the NLSY wages are de…ned as annual income from wages, salaries and tips, divided by annual
hours worked. Full time workers are identi…ed as those who worked more than 1,000 hours in the
previous year. The results discussed here and elsewhere in the paper are qualitatively unchanged

9

mean log of wages, we find that the average wage of shorter males is 11 percent lower
than that of the taller group in the NCDS and 10 percent lower in the NLSY.
Importantly, these shorter and taller males come from family backgrounds that are
also diﬀerent. In particular, Table 2 shows that compared with their taller counterparts, shorter males, on average, come from larger families with less educated parents
who were less likely to have worked in skilled or professional occupations.16 Thus, an
immediate concern is that the disparities in the average adult outcomes of taller and
shorter males reflect these diﬀerences in family background rather than any form of
height premium. Growing up in families with less human and financial capital, shorter
than average men may be placed at a disadvantage in the labor market for reasons
that have nothing to do with their lack of height.
To account for the influence of these systematic diﬀerences in family background,
Table 3 presents OLS estimates of the eﬀect of height on wages holding constant a
number of family characteristics.17 Results from the NCDS are presented along side
those from the NLSY. In Columns 1 and 5, the first, simple regression of log wages
on height, age, and region of residence18 indicates that every additional inch of adult
height is associated with an increase in wages of 2.7% percent (or an average of approximately £422 ($756) in 1991 full-time equivalent annual earnings) in the NCDS,
and 2.5 percent (or an average of $820 in 1996 full-time equivalent annual earnings) in
the NLSY. In Columns 2 and 6, after controlling for family characteristics including
parents’ education and occupation status, and number of siblings, the coeﬃcient on
adult height is reduced to 2.2 percent in the NCDS and 1.8 percent in the NLSY.19
hours worked. Full time workers are identified as those who worked more than 1,000 hours in the
previous year. The results discussed here and elsewhere in the paper are qualitatively unchanged
when other definitions of full time work are used.
16
The mothers of shorter men in the NCDS are an exception.
17
Here, as in our subsequent regression analyses, we assume that, conditional on other observables,
an individual’s heights at various ages are exogenously given. This assumption precludes, for example,
a model in which, conditional on other observables, height at various ages is determined in part by
parents’ unobservable investment decisions that also contribute directly to adult productivity and
thus to adult wages.
18
There are small, but statistically significant diﬀerences in the distribution of heights across regions.
We find, for example, that males from Scotland are on average 0.5 inches shorter than those from the
East or the North Midlands of England. In the US, white males in the Northeast are, on average,
0.45 inches shorter than their counterparts in Northcentral states, and 0.59 inches shorter than in the
Southern states.
19
We also consider whether diﬀerences in measures of school quality such as student-teacher ratio,
disadvantaged student ratio, dropout rate and teacher turnover rate may explain more of the height
wage premium. In each data set introducing these controls for school quality leaves the estimated

10

Although the estimated coeﬃcients on height are somewhat reduced after accounting for diﬀerences in some external resources, the reduction is minor especially when
compared with the analysis of Neal and Johnson (1996), who find that family and
school variables may account for a large fraction of the racial wage gap. In our analysis, the fact that taller people tend to come from somewhat more advantaged families
does not explain a large part of the height premium.

4

It’s All in Teen Height

The fact that shorter people are penalized on the labor market does not imply they
are penalized for being short. We now argue that much of the wage disadvantage
experienced by shorter people can be explained by a characteristic other than adult
height, namely height in adolescence. This finding casts substantial doubt on the
relevance of a taste for height as an explanation for the observed wage premium.

4.1

Irrelevance of Adult and Pre-teen Heights

Adult height predicts wages only insofar as it is correlated with teen height. The
evidence for this claim comes both from the NCDS and the NLSY. (For height when
old and young, in the NCDS we use age-33 and age-16 height, in the NLSY height
reported in 1985 and 1981.) Consider a random sample of 33 year-old males all of
the same height. Among this group, individuals will have been more or less tall at
age 16. More specifically, some will not have grown at all in the intervening years,
while others may have grown several inches to achieve this adult height. Conditional
on adult height, we find a sizable (and statistically significant) diﬀerence between the
wages of late and early maturers– a ‘teen-height premium.’ In fact, of the total eﬀect
that might be ascribed to adult height discrimination, nearly all can be attributed to
the fact that adults who are relatively tall at age 33 tend to be relatively tall at age
16.
A regression analysis is reported in Table 3. Each specification takes the following
form:
wi = α0 + α1 Hi,adult + α2 Hi,youth + αXi + ui
(1)
eﬀect of adult height on adult wages essentially unchanged. See Persico, Postlewaite and Silverman
(2003) for details.

11

where:
wi

= i’s adult wage

Hi,adult = adult height
Hi,youth = youth height
Xi = a vector of other covariates
ui = an error term
In the first, basic specification, (Table 3, Columns 3 and 7) we regress adult wages
on adult height, youth height, age, and region. In this basic specification we find that,
conditional on adult height, every additional inch of height when young, is associated
with a 2.6% increase in adult wages in Britain, and a 2.7% increase in the US. Importantly, when we control for youth height, the estimated eﬀect of adult height on
wages is nearly zero. The point estimate suggests that conditional on youth height,
any additional adult height is associated with a statistically insignificant 0.4% increase
in adult wages in the British data. In the US data the estimated coeﬃcient on adult
height is a statistically insignificant 0.2%.
As in Section 3 concerning the analysis of adult height alone, we move on to account
for a possible relationship between height and aspects of family background.20 Adding
controls for family characteristics (Columns 4 and 8) changes the estimates slightly.
Accounting for diﬀerences in family background we find that, conditional on adult
height, every additional inch of age-16 height is associated with a somewhat diminished,
but still highly significant 2.1% increase in adult wages in Britain, and a 2.6% increase
in the US. Controlling for the eﬀect of youth height, we estimate that adult height is
associated with a 0.5% but statistically insignificant increase in adult wages in Britain.
In the US, the estimated eﬀect of adult height on wages is -0.4% but not statistically
diﬀerent from zero. Thus, the finding that pre-adult height, rather than adult height
itself, determines the wage premium is robust to the introduction of controls for region
and family background.21
20

It may be argued that, to capture the gross eﬀect of teen height on adult wages, it is appropriate
to condition on the teen’s stock of human capital. One argument for such a specification is that,
conditional on adult height and family resources, investments in human capital that are positively
correlated with later wages are also positively correlated with teen height. Observe, however, that to
the extent that these investments are the result of greater stature, conditioning on teen human capital
would lead to an underestimate of the gross eﬀect of teen height on adult wages. Consistent with this
interpretation, our analysis indicates that while pre-teen investments in human capital are unrelated
to the teen height premium, post-teen investments may be. See Tables 6 and 7 below.
21
In the relevant samples, introducing controls for school quality leaves unchanged the estimated

12

The data from the NCDS also aﬀord an opportunity to parse further the height
premium according to the age at which relatively high stature is attained. Respondents
to the NCDS were also measured at ages 7 and 11, allowing us to consider the extent
to which height at these ages contributes to the height premium. It is clear that each
of these heights, if considered on its own (without conditioning on other heights), will
appear to carry a wage premium simply because of the positive correlation between
heights at all ages. To determine the extent to which teen height proxies for preteen heights, we examine how the estimated contribution of teen height is changed
when we introduce earlier heights. Table 4 considers only those respondents for whom
there exists data on age 33, 16, 11 and 7 heights. The basic estimation (Column
1) regresses log of age-33 wages on age-33 height, age-16 height, family background,
region. Column 2 adds controls for both pre-teen heights. Comparing the results in
Columns 1 and 2 we find first that age-11 and 7 heights have no appreciable eﬀect on
adult wages. Conditional on all other heights, the estimated eﬀect of an increase in
either age-11 or age-7 height is nearly zero. In addition, introducing these controls for
earlier height leaves the estimated eﬀects of both age-33 and age-16 height essentially
unchanged. Among all recorded heights, only age-16 height is estimated to have an
economically large and statistically significant eﬀect on adult wages; no other height
makes an appreciable contribution to the height premium.
Since the eﬀect of adult and pre-teen heights on wages, conditional on teen height,
is nearly zero, this analysis indicates that the adult height-wage disparity is not due to
a taste for tall workers. Rather, the diﬀerent outcomes for taller and shorter workers
appear to reflect a characteristic correlated with teen height.

5
5.1

Explaining the Teen-Height Premium
Not an Eﬀect of Observable External Resources

As shown in Section 4.1, diﬀerences in family and school resources explain little of the
disparity between tall and short adults. The coeﬃcient on teen height (adult and/or
eﬀect of an additional inch of youth height in the NCDS, and reduces it from 2.7% to 2.5% in the
NLSY. Our results in each data set are also qualitatively and quantitatively robust to the exclusion
of outliers in height, growth and wages, and to the inclusion of part-time workers. Moreover, we
experimented with several non-linear specifications and found that the primacy of teen height in
explaining the height premium is not an artifact of the linear specification. See Persico, Postlewaite
and Silverman (2003) for details.

13

youth) was little changed in both the British and the US data when we controlled for
family and school background characteristics, and our finding of a 1.9-2.6% per-inch
teen height premium is net of family background characteristics. The conclusion that
the height premium is not driven by family background characteristics draws additional
support from the analysis of Behrman and Rosenzweig (2001), who find evidence of a
sizable wage premium between female twins of varying heights.
One may argue that the robustness of the teen height premium to controlling for
resources is due to the necessarily imperfect quality of our measure of resources. According to this argument, teen height is a better indicator than our imperfect measure
of resources of some productive unobservable which is directly related to resources.
Our measures of resources, however, perform quite well in predicting performance on
achievement tests. For example, our measures of family background can explain at
least 29 percent of the variation in AFQT scores.
In addition, to the extent that external resources are correlated with height at
all ages, if resources were driving the height premium then we should expect heights
at all ages to be positively associated with wages. Since only teen height seems to
matter in the data, the only remaining possibility is that heights at various ages may
be proxying for the same unobservable, productive resources but teen height is much
better correlated with these unobservable resources. In that case we might obtain the
estimates we have, but our interpretation would be misleading. Plausible candidates for
unobservable productive factors may be summarized by the child’s home environment.
Home factors may contribute to health, cognitive development, and other forms of
human capital. One way to assess the influence of such home factors in determining the
estimated teen height premium is to test whether teen height is systematically a better
predictor than all other heights of observable endowments that are plausibly correlated
with productive home factors.22 If teen height were, in fact, a better predictor of
observable home endowments, we would have more reason to be concerned about the
influence on our estimates of correlation between teen height and omitted productive
home factors. Appendix A presents the results from regressions of various endowments
on heights at diﬀerent ages. Generally, we find that each of the heights is only very
weakly associated with these observable endowments, and we find no evidence that
teen height is a systematically better predictor of these endowments.
22

We are grateful to Esther Duflo for suggesting this procedure.

14

5.2

Not an Eﬀect of Unobservable, Intergenerationally Correlated Resources

The previous subsection has ruled out the possibility that the teen height premium
reflects a correlation between teen height and certain measurable resources. In addition,
the previous subsection casts doubt on the possibility that the teen height premium
reflects unobserved resources plausibly correlated with observable endowments. In this
section we provide additional evidence that the teen height premium is not merely
a reflection of omitted, unobserved resources, such as the wealth of the family, the
amount of social connections, etc. While controlling for such unobservable variables
is impossible in this context, inference may still be drawn about their eﬀects as long
as these variables are positively correlated across generations. Suppose, for example,
our concern was that well-connected, high social class individuals are more likely to
be tall as teens. Since well-connnectedness is presumably positively correlated across
generations, controlling for the father’s teen height would diminish the eﬀect of teen
height on wages. More generally, if controlling for the father’s teen height reduces the
size of the son’s teen height premium, we can infer that the teen height premium partly
reflects the omission of unobserved resources that are correlated across generations.23
The NCDS allows us to implement a variant of this empirical strategy because that
data set contains a measure of the father’s adult height, a relatively good proxy for
the father’s teen height. Our strategy will be to assess the eﬀect on the estimated teen
height premium of introducing father’s adult height as a control. Restricting attention
to those with information on father’s height in Columns 3 and 4 of Table 4, we find
that the eﬀect of controlling for father’s height is negligible. We conclude that there is
no evidence of an unobservable resource that can account for the teen height premium
and is correlated across generations.

5.3

Not a Proxy for Good Health or Weight

Another potential explanation for the teen height premium is that teen height proxies
for health problems experienced before or during adolescence that inflict lasting damage
and depress adult wages. Indirect evidence against this hypothesis is provided by the
findings of Section 4.1, which indicate that height before adolescence does not account
for the teen height premium. Direct evidence is available, to varying degrees, both in
the NCDS and in the NLSY. These data sets allow us to investigate the importance of
23

See Persico, Postlewaite and Silverman (2003) for a rigorous argument.

15

health in explaining the teen height premium.
In the NCDS, the physical exams that provide our height measures also provide
detailed information on the respondents’ health status. To the extent that the teen
height premium is attributable to better health among the tall, conditioning on this
health information would be expected to diminish the coeﬃcient on age-16 height.
Table 5 presents results from regressions in which we add to our set of explanatory
variables the number of health conditions reported by the physician in the age 7 and
age 16 exams.24 Consistent with the idea that poor child or adolescent health has a
lasting impact, these measures of health are have economically important, negative
associations with adult wages. However, introducing these measures does nothing to
reduce the estimated teen-height premium.
The NLSY lacks detailed health measures until the respondents reach their 40’s.
In every survey year since 1979, however, respondents were asked whether they have a
health condition that limits the kind or amount of work that they can do. We control
for these measures in columns 5-8 of Table 5. The results indicate that the kind of work
health limitation has an economically important and statistically significant negative
association with adult wages. The amount of work limitation measure has a positive
point estimate, but is not statistically distinguishable from zero. In either case, the
inclusion of these health measures does not appreciably aﬀect the size of the teen height
premium. In sum, controlling directly for health conditions leaves the estimate of the
teen height premium essentially unchanged.
A complementary approach is pursued in Appendix A where we regress health
measures on heights at diﬀerent ages (see Table A1). Generally, we find that each of
the heights is only very weakly associated with these health measures, and we find no
evidence that teen height is a systematically better predictor of the health measures
positively associated with wages. We therefore conclude that, with respect to the height
wage premium, teen height is not merely proxying for good health.
Another possibility is that teen height is proxying for weight. If, for example,
short teens were more likely to be overweight and being overweight as a teen decreased
expected adult wages, then we might incorrectly attribute to height some adverse eﬀects
that are in fact due to weight. Weight, however, is a choice variable to a greater degree
than, for instance, external resources or even good health, and so we must be especially
careful in interpreting any regression result. In Table 5, Columns 5 and 9 we regress
adult wages on height alone (plus our usual controls), and then we look at how the
24

This methodology follows Case, Fertig and Paxson (2003). See notes in Table 5 for a detailed
description of the health conditions.

16

coeﬃcient on height changes as we introduce weight in the regression in Columns 6 and
10. To the extent that weight is not a choice variable for the individual, a decrease in
the coeﬃcient on teen height would indicate that teen height is proxying for weight.
To the extent that weight is a choice variable, a decrease in the coeﬃcient on teen
height would suggest that part of the eﬀect of teen height on adult wages is channeled
through weight. We find that adding the controls for weight leaves our estimates of the
adult and teen height premia essentially unchanged. We conclude that the teen height
premium is largely independent of weight.

5.4

Not a Premium to Native Intelligence or Early Cognitive
Development

Suppose that height were proxying for native intelligence; given the pattern we observe
where age-16 height alone among heights at all ages explains wages, the productive
components of native intelligence must be most strongly correlated with age-16 height.
Although this hypothesis seems peculiar, we can use the NCDS to investigate it by
conditioning on the score of a test of academic achievement taken at age 7. Insofar as
academic achievement at age 7 measures native intelligence, conditioning on the test
score ought to reduce the coeﬃcient on age-16 height. Table 6 presents the eﬀect of
introducing age-7 test scores on the coeﬃcient for age-16 height. Note that all of these
estimates account for diﬀerences in family backgrounds, so the test scores do not proxy
for these characteristics.
Columns 1 and 2 of Table 6 restrict attention to those respondents to the NCDS
with information on height ages 16 and 33, and test scores at age 7. Consistent with
the notion that they capture native intelligence, the test scores contribute importantly
on their own to explaining adult wages. Each test score is associated with a statistically
significant, positive coeﬃcient (1.5% increase in wages per point on the reading test,
and 2.4% per point on the math test). However, introducing the scores does not
reduce appreciably the estimated teen-height premium. Without controlling for the
test scores, the teen-height premium is estimated at 2.1% per inch in this sample.
Adding the controls merely reduces the estimated teen-height premium to 1.9% per
inch. A complementary approach is pursued in Appendix A where we regress the age
7 test scores on heights at diﬀerent ages (see Table A1 columns 1-2). Generally, we
find that each of the heights is only very weakly associated with these test scores, and
we find no evidence that teen height is a systematically better predictor of these test
scores.
17

Comparable measures of native intelligence are not available in the NLSY. The
earliest standardized measure of intellectual ability is the AFQT, an achievement test
administered in 1981, when the respondents are 16 or older. We will discuss achievement tests in Section 6.
Later physical maturers might also be later cognitive or emotional maturers. If this
were the case, we would expect those maturing later to, for example, get less from
the same amount of schooling than their early maturing adult peers and, therefore,
complete less school or do worse in the adult labor market. The notion is that at any
age, being taller allows one to get more out of education. In this were the case, greater
height would be beneficial at all ages and we would expect the coeﬃcient on height at
all pre-adult ages to be substantial in Table 4. The fact that we do not see this pattern
suggests that there is no advantage to earlier development per se.
Alternatively, it might be argued that puberty has a special quality among stages
of development. It may be that achieving puberty enables one to start accumulating a
special kind of human capital, and those who achieve puberty early (and so are taller
as teens) get a head start in the accumulation process. This could be the reason for the
pre-eminence of teen height among all heights in explaining adult wages. According to
this hypothesis, the teen years are not special because of the environment associated
with them; rather, being tall as a teen is merely a symptom of early puberty and thus
the precocious achievement of a large fraction of one’s ultimate height. This argument
can be explored by estimating the extent to which the fraction of one’s ultimate height
achieved as a teen, rather than height level, matters for adult wages. Table 6 introduces
the fraction of final height achieved as a teen along with teen height level. This allows
us to distinguish the eﬀect on adult wages of being fully developed as a teen from just
being tall on the way to greater heights. If early puberty were the key to larger wages,
then the estimated coeﬃcient of percentage height achieved should be large.
Columns 3 and 4 of Table 6 present results from the NCDS. In these specifications
we estimate of the eﬀect on wages of teen height alone, and of the eﬀect of teen height
conditional on percentage of adult height achieved, respectively. In Column 3 we regress
the log of age-33 wages on age-16 height, family background and region, and estimate
a 2.4% per inch teen height premium. Column 2 adds a control for the percentage
of age-33 height achieved by age 16. In these British data we find no relationship
between adult wages and the fraction of adult height achieved by age-16; and adding
this control leaves the estimated eﬀect of teen height essentially unchanged. In the US
data (Columns 5 and 6) we observe an identical pattern. In Column 5 we estimate a
2.2 percent teen height premium, absent a control for fraction of adult height achieved.
18

As in the British data adding the control for teen development (Column 6) leaves the
estimated eﬀect of teen height level basically unchanged. Here, as in the NCDS, this
percent of maturity measure does not explain the teen height wage premium.

6

Channels

The previous section indicates that the advantage of being a tall teen is not due to
some omitted resource variable such as native intelligence, health, etc., and thus we
are lead to the conclusion that being tall as an adolescent facilitates the acquisition of
some form of human capital. In this section we try to get a better handle on the form of
this human capital by exploring some of the channels through which teen height aﬀects
wages. Our data sets aﬀord a rich set of alternatives to be explored. We have data
on occupation choice, self-esteem measures, high school sports and clubs participation,
achievement test scores, and years of completed schooling.
Occupation Choice
To investigate the correlation between teen height and occupational choice, we
rank occupations according to the sample average teen height in the respondent’s
occupational category. We then use average occupation height as a control in our
wage regression. This variable seems to play a limited role in mediating the eﬀect
of teen height (see Table 7, Columns 1-2 top and bottom panels). This means that,
while tall teens earn more as adults, the premium is largely not a result of sorting
across occupations. Consistent with this finding of little sorting, we find that in the
US the diﬀerence between the average heights of those working in occupations with the
25th and 75th percentile of average height is only 0.48 inches (compare this with the
diﬀerence between the population’s 25th and 75th height percentile, which is 5 inches
in the US).25
Self-esteem
Self-esteem, in light of the social-psychological theories described in the introduction, is a natural measure to consider in our search for the channels for the height
premium. Our measure of self-esteem is drawn from questions asked in the 1980 wave
of the NLSY, when respondents were administered the Rosenberg self-esteem scale.26
25

Occupational choice appears to be similarly unimportant if we condition directly on occupation
codes instead of the average height within occupation (results not shown).
26
The Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale is constructed by adding up the scores (each ranging between 1
and 4) describing the extent to which respondents agreed with 10 statements about themselves. For
example, respondents were asked the extent to which they agreed with the statements “I am a person

19

There is no self-esteem measure in the UK data. Self-esteem has a statistically significant and economically important association with wages (see Table 7, Column 3).
Self-esteem, however, seems to have little to do with the teen height premium. Conditioning on self-esteem leaves the estimated teen height premium essentially unchanged.
Thus, those who were tall teens do not appear to earn more because they had greater
self-esteem as teens.
Social Activities
Having ruled out several possible channels through which teen height influences
adult wages, we now provide evidence suggesting that participation in social activities
in adolescence contributes importantly to the teen-height premium. To this end we
restrict attention to the NLSY data set, which contains especially detailed information
concerning participation in social activities. Those who were relatively short when
young are less likely to participate in social activities that may facilitate the accumulation of productive human capital like social adaptability. We think of athletics, school
clubs, and dating as examples of these types of activities. We show that participation
in extracurricular activities plays a role in the teen-height premium.
Table 7, Column 4 presents estimates of the eﬀects of height on adult wages, conditional on participation in high school social activities. Retrospective questions about
participation in high school activities were asked in 1984, only to those who had finished or were expected to finish high school. Our measure of social activity is the
number of non-vocational, non-academic high school clubs in which the respondent
participated.27 Because height is often a criterion for participation in athletics, we
separate athletics from these other high school activities.28 Last, we note that for the
younger members of the sample, height in 1981 represents (at least in part) high school
height. For those 19 and older in 1981, however, height in 1981 will be a noisier signal
of high school height. The analysis is performed both for all white males for whom we
have adequate data (Table 7, Column 4), and for those younger than 19 in 1981 alone
(Table 7, Column 11).
The results for the all-age sample (Table 7, Column 4) indicate that participation
of worth” and “I have very little to be proud of.” The average self-esteem score among the white
male subsample is 23.93, standard deviation 2.72. We note that self-esteem was measured in 1980,
one year prior to the self-reported height measurement. Because of this time lag, our measure may
be somewhat less accurate as a correlate of self-esteem in 1981.
27
These clubs include youth groups, hobby clubs, student government, newspaper/yearbook, performing arts, and ‘other’ clubs. This list does not include, in particular, honor societies or vocational
clubs. On average, the white male subsample participated in 0.69 clubs, standard deviation 1.00.
28
Among the white males in our subsample, 51% participated in high school athletics.

20

in social activities is associated with a statistically and economically significant wage
premium. Controlling for age, height, region and family background, and other club
membership, participation in high school athletics is associated with an 11.7% increase
in adult wages. Participation in every additional club other than athletics is associated
with a 5.1% increase in wages. When we add controls for the levels of participation in
high school activities the coeﬃcient on youth height declines by a modest 22%. The
estimated eﬀect of adult height is qualitatively unchanged.
The eﬀects of accounting for high school activities are more dramatic, however,
when attention is restricted to those who were actually in high school in 1981 when
their height was recorded. Table 7, Column 8 presents the basic regression for this
younger group. Here we estimate that every inch of youth height is associated with
a 2.6% increase in adult wages. Again the eﬀect of adult height, while estimated at
-1.6% per inch, is statistically indistinguishable from zero. When, in Column 4, we add
controls for the levels of participation in high school activities the coeﬃcient on youth
height declines by more than 38% and is no longer statistically significant at the 10%
level. Again the coeﬃcients on participation in activities are economically meaningful
and statistically significant.
We should emphasize that one must be cautious in interpreting these regressions.
Participation in athletics and clubs are choice variables and we have not modelled that
choice. Thus, it would be incorrect to conclude that compulsory participation in athletics and/or clubs would raise expected adult wages. Consider sports, for example. If it
were success that mattered for the wage premium, requiring shorter boys to participate
(and fail) in sports would have no beneficial eﬀect. There are obviously many other
plausible models consistent with our finding a relationship between teen participation
in athletics and adult wages. Understanding the particular form of that relationship is
important, but is beyond the scope of this paper.29
Achievement Tests
Next we ask what achievement test scores reveal about channels for the teen height
premium. Controlling for achievement test scores has a considerable eﬀect on the teen
height coeﬃcient (see Table 7, top panel Columns 5 and 12, bottom panel, Column
3) suggesting that an important channel through which teen height aﬀects wages is
captured by the achievement tests. Depending on the sample, however, the eﬀect on
29

Barron, Ewing, and Waddell (2000) analyze the link between participation in high school athletics
and labor market outcomes. They find that the link can be attributed to lower cost of eﬀort of those
who participate in athletics, or to a directly productive role of athletic in training youth for the labor
market.

21

the estimated teen height premium of conditioning on achievement tests depends on
whether we control for, among other things, sports and clubs participation. Table 7,
Column 7 shows the estimates from the entire US sample, where we condition on all
of our potential channels variables. Comparing these results with those from Table 7,
Column 5, the estimated AFQT premium is 57% of what it was in the absence of conditioning on the rest of our channels measures, including sports and clubs participation.
Comparing columns 4 and 7, we find that conditioning on the achievement tests, and
the other channels variables reduces the coeﬃcient on athletics to 29% of what it was
unconditional of achievement tests. Comparing Columns 5 and 7 in Table 7, the degree
to which conditioning on the test score explains the teen height premium is unchanged
by the inclusion of controls for the other channels. In this sample, therefore, AFQT
appears to be a suﬃcient statistic for the productive components of all of the channels
measures.
Columns 8-14 of Table 7 restrict attention to the sample that was actually in high
school when height was recorded in 1981. In this sample, participation in high school
sports and clubs appears to have an eﬀect on wages and the teen height premium that is
independent of what is measured by AFQT. Comparing the results in Columns 12 and
14, we find that, as in the entire sample, the estimated AFQT premium is 57 percent
of what it was in the absence of conditioning on sports and clubs participation. Unlike
in the entire sample, however, comparing columns 11 and 14 we find that conditioning
on the other channels measures reduces the coeﬃcient on athletics symmetrically. The
coeﬃcient on athletics conditional on AFQT is 55 percent of what it is unconditional
of the achievement test score.
In this younger sample, AFQT is not a suﬃcient statistic for the productive component of participation in sports and clubs. Comparing Columns 11 and 12 of Table
7, the degree to which conditioning on the test score explains the teen height premium
is essentially the same as that explained by conditioning on sports and clubs participation. Comparing Columns 12 and 14 in Table 7, the degree to which conditioning
on the test score explains the teen height premium is here improved by the inclusion
of controls for sports and clubs participation. Alone, the activities measures and test
score each reduce the estimated teen height premium by 38 and 42 percent respectively.
Together, along with the other channels controls, these measures reduce the estimated
teen height premium by 58 percent (Table 7, Column 14).
The role played by achievement tests requires a careful interpretation. The AFQT,
for example, reflects not only intellectual endowment but also education and other
inputs that are the results of past experiences–in this case inputs that are correlated
22

with social activities.30 The eﬀect on the estimated teen height premium of conditioning
on achievement test scores taken during or after adolescence is consistent, therefore,
with a teen height premium that derives from adolescent experiences. The evidence
in this paper indicates that the alternative hypothesis, that pre-adolescent intellectual
endowments explain the teen height premium, is not very plausible for three reasons.
First, we have seen in the NCDS that conditioning on earlier intelligence tests does
not diminish the height premium, nor does teen height predict the scores of early
intelligence tests (see Section 5.4). Second, since intellectual endowment is partly
heritable, the argument developed in Section 5.2 casts doubt on the importance of
that endowment as an explanation for the teen height premium. Third, we find no
evidence that the teen height premium might reflect an early development premium
(see Section 5.4). Overall, the evidence suggests that to the extent that achievement
test scores help explain the teen height premium, this is not because they partly reflect
pre-adolescent intellectual endowment, but rather because they also reflect schooling
and other adolescent experiences.31
Not Statistical Discrimination
We argue that, if short adolescents participate less in social or AFQT-enhancing
activities, it is not because they anticipate a lower return to these factors when adult.
Again restricting attention to the NLSY data, and those who were 19 or younger
in 1981, we estimate the return to participation in social activities and to AFQT,
depending on height. In two separate regressions, we investigate whether the estimated
30

While it is plausible that achievement test scores reflect some component of intellectual endowments (these could be intelligence, persistence, social adaptability, etc.) the notion that achievement
tests like the AFQT measure only pre-adolescent endowments has been discredited. It is known,
for example, that the AFQT score increases with age and education. Hansen, Heckman and Mullen
(2003), for example, find an important eﬀect of education on AFQT scores (see also Neal and Johnson 1996). Our analysis has added to this evidence; as discussed before, while for individuals in the
NLSY who take the AFQT later in life that score is a suﬃcient statistic (with respect to wages) for
participation in high school sport and clubs, the same is not true when the AFQT is measured at
adolescence (see below).
31
To the extent that years of schooling explain the teen height premium, that eﬀect is mediated
by diﬀerences in achievement tests scores. Without controlling for achievement test scores, the estimated teen height premium decreases modestly when we control for schooling (see Table 7, top panel,
Columns 6 and 13, and bottom panel Column 4). When we control for achievement tests, however,
the teen height premium is unaﬀected by the inclusion of years of completed schooling (results not
shown). This means that the ability of years of schooling to explain the teen height premium is mediated by the achievement tests scores. We view this finding as further evidence that, with regard to
the teen height premium, achievement test scores should be interepreted as an outcome of individual
choice rather than an external resource.

23

returns to participation in social activities and AFQT are significantly diﬀerent for
those white male workers who were less than median height as adults that for those who
were at least median height as adults. Conditioning only on age, family background
and region, we find that the coeﬃcients on social activities and AFQT do not diﬀer
significantly, or systematically between the two regressions. Among those who grew to
less than median adult height the estimated coeﬃcient on participation in athletics is
0.092, while for those who grew to at least median adult height the estimated coeﬃcient
is larger (0.145), though we can not reject the null hypothesis that the two coeﬃcients
are the same. The estimated coeﬃcient on participation in clubs among the shorter
adult group is actually larger (0.063) than that for the taller group (0.037), though
again we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the coeﬃcients are the same.32 For
the AFQT, the estimated coeﬃcient is also larger for the shorter group (0.007) than
for the taller group (0.005). Thus we find little evidence that the returns to investing
in social or AFQT-enhancing activities when young are significantly or systematically
diﬀerent depending on whether one forecasts becoming a tall or short adult.33

7

Discussion

Parents-Children Correlation in Height
If the correlation between parents’ teen or adult height and the child’s teen height is
substantial, then the children of tall parents are advantaged in expectation on the labor
market. This advantage could be magnified if parents are found to match assortatively
by height (i.e., taller men tend to have children with taller women). While the NLSY
does not report the subject’s parent’s height, the NCDS allows us to explore these
issues. Unfortunately we do not have a measure of the NCDS parents’ teen height, but
we have a (self-reported) measure of the parents’ adult height. We first compute the
correlation coeﬃcient between the parents’ adult height and the child’s teen height.
The coeﬃcient is 0.35 for fathers and 0.40 for mothers. Thus, a son of a tall couple
enjoys a relatively large advantage, in expectation, due to his superior expected teen
height.
Because the correlation between parents’ and children’s teen height is high, we
might worry that the child’s teen height proxies for the parents’ height, and thus the
estimated coeﬃcient on the child’s teen height may reflect some parental endowment
32

Similar results hold when we analyze the entire sample of white male workers rather than only
this younger subsample.
33
This evidence, however, must be interpreted cautiously. See Moro and Norman (2003).

24

that is not completely captured by our measures of resources. The results in Table 4
indicate, however, that the estimate of the teen height coeﬃcient is unaﬀected by the
inclusion of his father’s height (the same is true for mother’s height, results omitted).
This result suggests that the beneficial eﬀects of teen height do not perpetuate across
generations except through height itself.
Human Growth Hormone Replacement Therapy
Since 1985, pathologies resulting in short stature have been treated with injections
of synthetic human growth hormone (HGH) replacement in the form of somatropin, the
drug’s generic name. In July 2003, Humatrope (the name brand of somatropin from
Eli Lilly) was approved by the FDA for use by patients of short stature who display
normal levels of HGH. The total sales of the five brands currently on the market reached
$1.5 billion in 2001. It is likely that FDA approval will mean an even larger use of
somatropin.
From our viewpoint, somatropin provides a previously unavailable means of control over a variable, teen height, that in our data sets is not under the control of
individuals. As such, our data allow us to estimate the monetary returns from the
previously unavailable medical option and compare these returns to the monetary cost
of treatment.
Treatment with HGH varies depending on the weight of the patient. For a child
who weighs 30 kilograms, the annual treatment would cost approximately $25,000 in
2003. The average length of treatment is 6.5 years.34 Using an annual discount factor of
0.97, the discounted monetary cost at age 10 of starting a 6-year somatropin treatment
course equals $135,000. This figure must be compared with the discounted additional
earnings from the expected increase in teen height. In the more relevant FDA cited
study, the mean final height exceeded mean height predicted at enrollment in the study
by nearly three inches. If we take our lowest estimate of the teen height premium of
1.9 percent per year, and assume a 30-year working career at a constant yearly wage,
the minimum wage that would justify investing in the somatropin treatment at age 10
is $149,910. If we take our highest estimate of the teen height premium of 2.7 percent,
investment is justified by those earning $105, 500.This back-of-the-envelope calculation
suggests that the monetary benefits of somatropin treatment are not incommensurate
with the cost, and that a sizable fraction of the population might be willing to consider
treatment purely on an economic basis. Of course, one can reasonably suppose that
there are other benefits associated with greater height that are not pecuniary.
34

See Mele (2003). In addition, there are non-trivial non-monetary costs to be factored in, as the
treatment is administered daily by injection.

25

8

Conclusions

Labor market outcomes diﬀer depending on a person’s physical characteristics, and the
resulting disparities have motivated a large body of research focussed on identifying
the channels through which these disparities develop. In this paper we took up this
agenda with respect to height. First, we found that the magnitude of wage diﬀerences
associated with height is similar to that associated with racial diﬀerences; without
correcting for education or occupation choice, we estimate the black-white wage gap
to be approximately 15% among males in the NLSY. Depending on our specification,
this estimated gap is approximated by the diﬀerence in wages for two men whose
heights diﬀer by six to eight inches. We then took advantage of a special feature
of height relative to other bases of wage disparity, such as race and gender: height
changes over time, so that a relatively tall 16-year old may turn out to be a relatively
short adult, and vice versa. This time-variation allowed us to investigate the stage of
development at which having the characteristic (in our case, being short) most strongly
determines the wage disparity. We found that being relatively short through the teen
years, as opposed to adulthood or early childhood, essentially determines the returns to
height. We documented that the beneficial eﬀects of teen height are not complementary
with any particular vocation path; instead, they manifest themselves in a higher level
of achievement in all vocation categories, broadly defined. We suggested that social
eﬀects might be an important channel for the emergence of the height premium. We
found that teen height is predictably greater for sons of tall parents. This suggests
that, similar to race-based disparities (but unlike gender-based disparities), there is an
expected wage penalty incurred by the as-yet-unborn children of short parents. Finally,
we used our estimates of the return to teen height to evaluate the monetary incentive to
undertake a relatively new treatment that boosts teen height, human growth hormone
therapy.
Our analysis can be extended both to blacks and to women. With respect to
blacks, sample sizes are smaller for this group, and nearly non-existent in the UK data
we use; the estimates in the US are, however, quite similar to those for white men. The
findings for white women are diﬀerent. While we find an economically substantial, and
sometimes statistically significant, adult height premium for white women in both the
UK and the US, the height premium is not attributable to teen height. This finding
must be qualified by the recognition that proper estimates of the wage oﬀer functions
for women should take account of the important labor market participation decision,
and the results described here ignore the selection issue. While far from conclusive, we

26

view these results for females as suggesting that the relationship between productive
endowments and the timing of physical development is diﬀerent for males and females.
Or, as plausible, in our view, the social-psychological returns to earlier development are
diﬀerent for males and females; research in psychology indicates that earlier physical
development is a hindrance for girls (see, e.g., Brooks-Gunn, et al., 1985, Ge, et al.,
1996, and Graber, 1997). When considered in light of our results for males, the absence
of a teen height premium for females reinforces the notion that the estimated teen height
premium for males is not merely the result of a correlation between earlier physical
development and omitted productive endowments. If the male teen height premium
were simply a premium for resources associated with earlier development then we might
expect to observe similar benefits to females who developed earlier.
A number of questions pertaining to the height premium are left open by our
analysis. Assuming there are valuable skills that are acquired through participation in
clubs and athletics, what precisely is acquired? Likely candidates are the interpersonal
skills acquired through social interactions, social adaptability from working in groups,
and discipline and motivation that result from participation. We also do not know that
it is discrimination within athletics and other extracurricular activities that accounts
for shorter teens’ lower participation. It may be, for example, that earlier treatment
has made these youths more sensitive to slights, and that as a result they withdraw
from such interactions. More detailed data on the activities that youths engage in, and
the job market consequences would permit a better understanding of the production
process of social skills.

27

A

Teen Height not a Superior Correlate of Endowments Relative to Other Heights

[Insert table A1]

28

References
[1] Averett, Susan, and Sanders Korenman (1996). “The Economic Reality of The
Beauty Myth.” Journal of Human Resources 31(2):304-330.
[2] Behrman, Jere, and Mark Rosenzweig (2001). “The Returns to Increasing Body
Weight.” Working Paper. University of Pennsylvania.
[3] Barron, John M., Bradley T. Ewing, and Glen R. Waddell “The Eﬀects of High
School Athletic Participation on Education and Labor Market Outcomes.” The
Review of Economics and Statistics, August 2000, 82(3), pp. 409-21.
[4] Blau, Francine and Lawrence Kahn. “Swimming Upstream: Trends in the Gender
Wage Diﬀerential in the 1980s.” Journal of Labor Economics 15(1, Part 1) 1997:
1-42.
[5] Cain, Glen (1986). “The Economic Analysis of Labor Market Discrimination: A
Survey.” In Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 1, Eds. Orley Ashenfelter and
Richard Layard. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
[6] Case, Ann, Angela Fertig and Christina Paxson (2003). “From Cradle to Grave?
The Lasting Impact of Childhood Health and Circumstance.” Princeton University
Center for Health and Wellbeing. Working Paper.
[7] Damon, Albert, Howard Stoudt, and Ross McFarland The Human Body in Equipment Design, Harvard University Press, Cambridge MA 1966.
[8] Cawley, John, Karen Conneely, James Heckman, Edward Vytlacil “Cognitive
Ability, Wages, and Meritocracy.” In Devlin, Bernie, Stephen Fienberg, Daniel
Resnick, Kathryn Roeder, eds. Intelligence, Genes, and Success: Scientists Respond to the Bell Curve Springer Verlag, New York, 1997.
[9] Elias, P., and David Blanchflower (1988). “The Occupations , Earnings and Work
Histories of Young Adults — Who Gets the Good Jobs?” London England, Department of Employment.
[10] Frieze, Irene H., Olson, Josephine E., and Deborah C. Good (1990). “Perceived
and Actual Discrimination in the Salaries of Male and Female Managers. Journal
of Applied Social Psychology 20(1):46-67.

29

[11] Hamermesh, Daniel S., and Jeﬀrey E. Biddle (1994). “Beauty and the Labor
Market.” American Economic Review 84(5):1174-1194.
[12] Hansen, Karsten, James Heckman and Kathleen Mullen (2003). “The Eﬀect of
Schooling and Ability on Achievement Test Scores.” Forthcoming, Journal of
Econometrics.
[13] Heckman, James J. (2000) “Policies to Foster Human Capital.” Research in Economics 54(1):3-56.
[14] _____ (1998). “Detecting Discrimination.” Journal of Economic Perspectives
12(2):101-116.
[15] Loh, Eng Seng (1993). “The Economic Eﬀects of Physical Appearance.” Social
Science Quarterly. 74 (2):420-38.
[16] Martel, Leslie F. and Henry B. Biller (1987). Stature and Stigma: The Biopsychosocial Development of Short Males. Lexington Books. Lexington, Mass.
[17] Mele, Joy (2003). “Statistical Review and Evaluation: Clinical Studies” NDA
#19-640/SE1-033. Food and Drug Administration Center for Drug Evaluation
and Research Report (on file with the authors).
[18] Moro, Andrea and Peter Norman (2003). “Empirical Implications of Statistical
Discrimination on the Returns to Measures of Skill“Empirical Implications of Statistical Discrimination on the Returns to Measures of Skill.” Annales d’Économie
et de Statistique.
[19] National Center for Health Statistics, US. Department of Health and Human
Services (1987). “Anthropometric Reference Data and Prevalence of Overweight:
United States, 1976-80.” DHHS Publication No., (PHS) 87-1688.
[20] Neal, Derek, and William Johnson (1996). “The Role of Premarket Factors in
Black-White Wage Diﬀerences.” Journal of Political Economy. 104 (5):869-95.
[21] Persico, Nicola, Andrew Postlewaite and Dan Silverman (2003). “The Eﬀect of
Adolescent Experience on Labor Market Outcomes: The Case of Height.” PIER
Working Paper 03-036.
[22] Roche, Alex F. Growth, Maturation, and Body Composition: the Fels Longitudinal
Study 1929-1991. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge UK 1992.
30

[23] Sargent, James D., and David G. Blanchflower (1994). “Obesity and Stature in
Adolescence and Earnings in Young Adulthood: Analysis of a British Birth Cohort.” Archives of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine 148:681-687.
[24] Steckel, Richard H. “Stature and the Standard of Living,” Journal of Economic
Literature, 33(4), Dec. 1995, pp. 1903-40.

31

Table 1: Distribution of Height and Change in Height, White Males of the NCDS and NLSY
Britain -- NCDS1
Mean
Median
Standard deviation
25th percentile
75th percentile
N
US -- NLSY2

Height age 16

Height age 33

67.28
67.32
3.01
65.35
69.29
1772

69.81
69.69
2.62
68.11
71.65
1772

Height 1981

∆ age 16-33
2.54
1.97
1.99
1.18
3.54
1772

Height age 11

Height age 7

56.94
57.01
2.63
55.00
58.74
1684

48.50
49.02
2.16
47.01
50.00
1702

∆ 1981-85

Height 1985

Entire subsample
Mean
Median
Standard deviation
25th percentile
75th percentile
N

70.41
70
2.85
68
73
2603

70.69
70
2.77
68
73
2603

0.28
0
1.44
0
1
2603

Those with
∆ height >0
Mean
Median
Standard deviation
25th percentile
75th percentile
N

69.54
69
3.09
68
72
618

71.22
70
2.73
69
74
618

1.68
1
1.51
1
3
618

US Measured heights for white males, ages 18-24, from the National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey 1976-19803
Mean
69.8
Median
69.7
Standard deviation
2.8
25th percentile
67.9
75th percentile
71.6
N
846
1

The subsample consists only of the full-time, white male workers in the NCDS for whom there is a measure of
height at age 33 and 16, and information on wages and family background. The sample is further restricted when we
consider those with data on age-11 and age-7 height.
2
The subsample consists only of the white male respondents to the NLSY for whom there is a measure of height at
in 1985 and 1981, and information on family background. The NLSY’s oversample of poor whites is excluded.
3
Source: National Center for Health Statistics (1987), Table 13.

1

Table 2: Summary Statistics, White Males by Adult Height
Britain -- NCDS

Adult Characteristics:
Teen height
(inches)
Adult height
(inches)
Age

US -- NLSY

Adult Height
Median or Below

Adult Height
Above Median

Adult Height
Median or Below

Adult Height
Above Median

Mean
(SE)
65.55*

Mean
(SE)
69.12

Mean
(SE)
68.19*

Mean
(SE)
72.23

(0.08)

(0.08)

(0.07)

(0.06)

67.80*

71.96

68.25*

72.70

(0.05)

(0.06)

(0.06)

(0.05)

33.0

33.0

35.34

35.31
(0.07)

(…)

(…)

(0.07)

Ln(wage per hour)

1.99*

2.10

2.58*

2.68

(0.02)

(0.02)

(0.03)

(0.02)

Years of completed
schooling
Ever
married (%)
Divorced or
separated (%)1

11.04*

11.19

13.38*

13.79

(0.03)

(0.03)

(0.09)

(0.08)

79.89

80.09

78.84*

83.15

Family Background:
Mother’s years of
schooling
Mother skilled/
professional (%)
Father’s years of
schooling
Father skilled/
professional (%)
Number of
siblings
N

(1.34)

(1.38)

(1.42)

(1.17)

16.74

14.97

20.71*

15.90

(1.40)

(1.38)

(1.59)

(1.26)

10.43*

10.57

11.83*

12.29

(0.05)

(0.06)

(0.08)

(0.07)

56.67

54.66

7.20*

9.98

(1.64)

(1.70)

(0.85)

(0.89)

11.29*

11.50

12.14*

12.66

(0.04)

(0.06)

(0.10)

(0.10)

79.87

82.87

12.78

14.92

(1.32)

(1.29)

(1.09)

(1.06)

3.14*

2.89

2.99

2.91

(0.05)

(0.05)

(0.06)

(0.06)

914

858

931

1132

* Indicates means are statistically different at the 5% confidence level.
1
Conditional on having been married.
Notes: Teen height is height recorded at age 16 (NCDS), or in 1981 (NLSY), adult height is height recorded at age
33 (NCDS), or 1985 (NLSY). Log wages are in measured in 1991 pounds (NCDS) and 1996 dollars (NLSY), and
are for full-time workers only. For the NCDS, years of schooling equal the age at which the respondent (or parent)
left school minus five. Parents are identified as skilled (professional) if they work in a professional and or skilled,
non-manual (NCDS) or professional/managerial (NLSY) occupation.

2

Table 3: OLS Estimates Ln(wage) Equation for Adult, White Male Workers, NCDS and NLSY
Britain -- NCDS

(1)
Covariates
Adult height
(inches)
Youth height
(inches)
Age

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.027

0.022

0.004

0.005

0.025

0.018

0.002

-0.004

(0.0053)

(0.0052)

(0.0074)

(0.0073)

(0.0062)

(0.0060)

(0.0096)

(0.0091)

…

Mother’s years of
schooling
Mother skilled/
professional
Father’s years of
schooling
Father skilled/
professional
Number of
siblings
N
Adjusted R2
F-Statistic (K,N-K-1)

(2)

US -- NLSY

1772
0.032
9.99

…

0.026

0.021

0.027

0.026

(0.0066)

(0.0066)

(0.0095)

(0.0090)

…

…

0.028

0.027

0.024

0.023

(0.0066)

(0.0065)

(0.0067)

(0.0065)

0.016

0.016

0.025

0.023

(0.0104)

(0.0104)

(0.0092)

(0.0092)

-0.080

-0.074

0.019

0.024

(0.0357)

(0.0356)

(0.0608)

(0.0606)

0.008

0.007

0.030

0.030

(0.0086)

(0.0087)

(0.0065)

(0.0065)

0.135

0.130

0.050

0.052

(0.0467)

(0.0465)

(0.0459)

(0.0458)

-0.033

-0.029

-0.023

-0.023

(0.0084)

(0.0084)

(0.0077)

(0.0077)

1772
0.047
10.25

1772
0.037
11.47

1772
0.049
10.97

1577
0.031
9.86

1577
0.092
15.52

1577
0.034
8.82

1577
0.094
14.31

Standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity are in parentheses.
Notes: See notes for Table 2. Sample consists only of white male, full-time workers. Each specification includes
controls for region and a constant term, results omitted.

3

Table 4: OLS Estimates Ln(wage) Equation for White Male Workers of
Britain’s NCDS, at Age 33, Controlling for Prior Physical Development, and
Father’s Height
(1)

Covariates
Height age 33
(inches)
Height age 16
(inches)
Height age 11
(inches)
Height age 7
(inches)
Father’s Adult Height
(inches)
Mother’s years of
schooling
Mother
skilled worker
Father’s years of
schooling
Father
skilled worker
Number of
siblings

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.003

0.002

0.003

0.003

(0.0076)

(0.0079)

(0.0074)

(0.0079)

0.021

0.019

0.020

0.020

(0.0069)

(0.0084)

(0.0065)

(0.0065)

0.003
(0.0107)

0.003
(0.0109)

-0.001
(0.0056)

0.016

0.016

(0.0109)

(0.0109)

-0.095

-0.095

(0.0368)

(0.0370)

0.007

0.007

(0.0089)

(0.0090)

0.132

0.132

(0.0491)

(0.0491)

-0.031

-0.030

(0.0090)

(0.0090)

0.018
(0.0105)

-0.066
(0.0337)

0.009
(0.0090)

0.106
(0.0462)

-0.032
(0.0088)

N
1617
1617
1713
1713
Adjusted R2
0.056
0.055
0.051
0.051
F-Statistic (K,N-K-1)
10.02
8.92
10.77
10.14
Standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity are in parentheses.
Sample consists only of full time workers. Equations include controls for region and a
constant term, results omitted
Notes: See notes for Tables 2 and 3.

4

Table 5: OLS Estimates Ln(wage) Equation for Adult, White Male Workers, NCDS and NLSY Controlling for Measures of Past Health, and Weight
Britain -- NCDS

Covariates
Height age 33
(inches)
Height age 16
(inches)
Age

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.007

0.006

0.007

0.006

0.006

0.006

(0.0079)

(0.078)

(0.0079)

(0.0078)

(0.0074)

(0.0077)

0.020

0.020

0.020

0.020

0.020

0.021

(0.0073)

(0.0073)

(0.0073)

(0.0073)

(0.0066)

(0.0089)

**

**

**

**

**

**

# health conditions
age 16
# health conditions
age 7
Weight age 33
(kg)
Weight age 16
(kg)
N
Adjusted R2
F-Stat. (K,N-K-1)

US -- NLSY

-0.052

-0.049

(0.0262)

(0.0276)

-0.046

-0.029

(0.0406)

(0.0434)

-0.0008
(0.001)

-0.0001
(0.0021)

1546
0.049
10.26

1546
0.049
9.79

1546
0.093
9.66

1546
0.049
9.26

1752
0.051
10.74

1752
0.050
9.56

(5)
Covariates
Height in 1985
(inches)
Height in 1981
(inches)
Age

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

-0.006

-0.006

-0.006

-0.006

-0.004

-0.006

(0.0092)

(0.0092)

(0.0092)

(0.0092)

(0.0090)

(0.0091)

0.028

0.027

0.028

0.027

0.026

0.028

(0.0092)

(0.0093)

(0.0092)

(0.0092)

(0.0090)

(0.0096)

0.023

0.023

0.023

0.024

0.023

0.026

(0.0066)

(0.0066)

(0.0066)

(0.0066)

(0.0065)

(0.0069)

Health limits kind of
work 79
Health limits
amount of work 79
Weight in 1985
(kg)
Weight in 1981
(kg)
N
Adjusted R2
F-Stat. (K,N-K-1)

(6)

-0.216

-0.156
(0.0788)

(0.100)

0.026

0.158

(0.086)

(0.120)

0.004
(0.0023)

-0.004
(0.0025)

1558
0.094
15.68

1558
0.095
13.39

1558
0.093
12.86

1558
0.096
12.50

1577
0.094
14.31

1577
0.095
12.56

Standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity are in parentheses.
Notes: See notes for Tables 2 and 3. In the NCDS, at age 7 the possible health conditions include slight, moderate, or severe: general motor handicap, disfiguring condition,
mental retardation, emotional maladjustment, head or neck abnormality, upper limb abnormality, lower limb abnormality, spine abnormality, respiratory system problem,
alimentary system problem, urogenital system problem, heart condition, blood abnormality, skin condition, epilepsy, other central nervous system condition, diabetes, and any
other condition. The possible conditions at age 16 are the same except: disfiguring condition is replaced by general physical abnormality, emotional maladjustment is replaced
by emotional/behavioral problem, and eye, hearing and speech defects are also included. In the NLSY, respondents were asked in 1979 a) whether their health limited the kind
of work they could do and b) whether their health limited the amount of work they could do. In the UK data, two extreme values of the weight distribution -- a respondent
reporting a weight of 252lbs at age 16 and a respondent with a recorded weight of 1741lbs at age 33 -- were omitted from the sample. Specifications include controls for
family background, region, and a constant term results not presented

5

Table 6: OLS Estimates Ln(wage) Equation for Adult, White Male Workers, NCDS and NLSY Controlling for Measures of Early
Development and Native Intelligence
Britain -- NCDS

Covariates
Height age 33
(inches)
Height age 16
(inches)
100*(Height 16)/
(height 33)
Age 7 reading
test score (0-30)
Age 7 math
test score (0-10)
N
Adjusted R2
F-Stat. (K,N-K-1)

(1)

(2)

0.004

-0.000

(0.0074)

(0.0073)

US -- NLSY

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Covariates

0.021

0.019

0.024

0.026

(0.0066)

(0.0065)

(0.0047)

(0.0055)

-0.004

Height in 1981
(inches)

(0.0053)

100*(Height in 81)/
(Height in 85)

1772
0.049
10.97

N
Adjusted R2
F-Stat. (K,N-K-1)

0.022

0.022

(0.0059)

(0.0063)

0.002
(0.0062)

0.015
(0.0025)

0.024
(0.0080)
1726
0.049
10.98

1726
0.093
17.56

1772
0.050
11.72

1577
0.095
15.71

1577
0.094
14.29

Standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity are in parentheses.
Sample consists only of full time workers. Equations include controls for family background, region, a constant term, and age in the US data, results
omitted
Notes: See notes for Tables 2 and 3.

6

Table 7: OLS Estimates Ln(wage) Equation for Adult, White Male Workers, NCDS and NLSY Controlling for Other Outcome Measures
US -- NLSY

All Ages
(1)
Covariates
Height in 1985
(inches)
Height in 1981
(inches)
Average height of
occupation in 1996

(2)

(3)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

-0.004

-0.004

-0.003

-0.001

0.003

-0.002

0.002

-0.016

-0.016

-0.015

-0.009

-0.009

-0.010

-0.006

(0.0097)

(0.0097)

(0.0097)

(0.0093)

(0.0095)

(0.0093)

(0.0127)

(0.00125)

(0.00126)

(0.0124)

(0.0117)

(0.0122)

(0.0117)

0.023

0.022

0.022

0.018

0.011

0.018

0.011

0.026

0.025

0.024

0.016

0.015

0.020

0.011

(0.0095)

(0.0094)

(0.0095)

(0.0095)

(0.0092)

(0.0093)

(0.0092)

(0.0118)

(0.0113)

(0.0118)

(0.0120)

(0.0111)

(0.0115)

(0.0112)

0.070

0.020

0.199

0.127

(0.0486)

(0.0449)

(0.0662)

(0.0604)

0.028

0.014

0.023

0.009

(0.0061)

(0.0059)

(0.0087)

(0.0085)

Participation in HS
athletics
No. of HS clubs
participated in
AFQT percentile in
1980
Yrs of completed
schooling in 1996
1485
0.094
13.85

1485
0.096
12.86

1485
0.106
14.80

0.117

0.034

0.165

0.090

(0.0325)

(0.0315)

(0.0461)

(0.0445)

0.051

-0.011

0.097

0.028

(0.0179)

(0.0179)

(0.0231)

(0.0234)

1485
0.109
13.31

0.007

0.004

0.007

0.004

(0.0007)

(0.0008)

(0.0010)

(0.0010)

1485
0.162
22.30

0.078

0.049

0.078

0.045

(0.0076)

(0.0087)

(0.0011)

(0.0122)

1485
0.164
23.42

1485
0.185
18.49

627
0.194
11.12

627
0.229
9.43

Britain -- NCDS

Height age 33
(inches)
Height age 16
(inches)
Average height of
occupation age 33
Reading test score age
16

(8)

(0.0098)

Self-esteem in 1980

N
Adjusted R2
F-Stat. (K,N-K-1)

(4)

Less than 19 Years old in 1981

0.006

0.005

0.005

0.005

0.005

(0.0084)

(0.0082)

(0.0081)

(0.0082)

(0.0080)

0.020

0.018

0.010

0.016

0.011

(0.0071)

(0.0068)

(0.0068)

(0.0068)

(0.0065)

0.352

0.243

(0.0320)

(0.0328)

0.018

0.013

(0.0029)

(0.0029)

7

627
0.114
7.12

627
0.136
7.62

627
0.138
6.86

627
0.153
8.94

627
0.192
11.52

Math test score age 16
Yrs of completed
schooling age 33
N
Adjusted R2
F-Stat. (K,N-K-1)

1376
0.045
8.56

1376
0.125
18.96

0.014

0.005

(0.0025)

(0.0027)

1376
0.123
13.46

0.179

0.084

(0.0191)

(0.0241)

1376
0.109
13.76

1376
0.172
22.64

Standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity are in parentheses.
Notes: Sample consists only of full time workers. Equations include controls for region and a constant term, and in the US age, results omitted. Average height of
occupation is defined as the sample average teen height of all the workers in the respondent’s occupational category, excluding the respondent himself. Occupations are
divided into 17 categories in the UK and 12 in the US. In the UK, years of completed schooling are defined as the age at which the respondent left school minus five.
See notes for Tables 2 and 3.

8

Table A1: Conditional Relationships Between Heights at Various Ages and Endowments, White, Male, Full-time Workers
Britain -- NCDS
Math test score
age 7
height33
height16

Reading test score
age 7

Number of health Mother's years of Mother in a skilled Father's years of
Father in a skilled
conditions age 7 completed schooling
profession
completed schooling
profession

Number of
silblings

0.055

0.043

0.212

0.182

0.001

0.002

0.015

0.007

0.004

0.000

0.027

0.019

0.001

0.000

0.023

0.046

(0.0335)

(0.0357)

(0.0961)

(0.1007)

(0.0051)

(0.0055)

(0.0223)

(0.0254)

(0.0068)

(0.0075)

(0.0205)

(0.0245)

(0.0051)

(0.0056)

(0.0215)

(0.0236)

0.067

0.041

0.099

0.026

-0.002

0.001

0.031

0.041

-0.010

-0.016

0.038

0.007

0.008

0.003

-0.099

-0.024

(0.0292)

(0.0383)

(0.0851)

(0.1103)

(0.0049)

(0.0057)

(0.0174)

(0.0217)

(0.0059)

(0.0079)

(0.0157)

(0.0231)

(0.0047)

(0.0062)

(0.0199)

(0.0259)

height11

0.046

0.128

-0.006

-0.001

0.019

0.054

0.006

-0.055

(0.0417)

(0.1117)

(0.0057)

(0.0287)

(0.0099)

(0.0344)

(0.0077)

(0.0282)

**

**

**

-0.001

-0.008

0.005

0.004

-0.087

(0.0307)

(0.0108)

(0.0313)

(0.0088)

(0.0324)

height07

N

1729

1645

1743

1658

1679

1597

1772

1617

1772

1617

1772

1617

1772

1617

1772

1617

R-squared

0.0178

0.0183

0.0154

0.0160

0.0003

0.0012

0.0069

0.0078

0.0022

0.0041

0.0115

0.0148

0.0042

0.0063

0.0289

0.0406

US -- NLSY
Health limits kind
Health limits
Mother's years of Mother in a skilled Father's years of
Father in a skilled
of work ‘79
amount of work ‘79 completed schooling
profession
completed schooling
profession
1985 height

Number of
silblings

0.002

0.004

0.054

0.010

0.130

0.007

-0.023

(0.0034)

(0.0030)

(0.0455)

(0.0048)

(0.0565)

(0.0051)

(0.0353)

-0.004

-0.004

0.056

-0.004

-0.001

-0.004

0.011

(0.0037)

(0.0036)

(0.0440)

(0.0051)

(0.0538)

(0.0050)

(0.0352)

N

1558

1558

1577

1577

1577

1577

1577

R-squared

0.001

0.002

0.0172

0.0042

0.0125

0.0009

0.0005

1981 height

Standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity are in parentheses. In addition, each specification controls only for a constant term, results omitted.

9

