                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               POLITICAL BUDGET CYCLES IN
                          NEW VERSUS ESTABLISHED DEMOCRACIES

                                                Adi Brender
                                                Allan Drazen

                                          Working Paper 10539
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10539


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        June 2004




We wish to thank Amir Marchak and Sagie Dagan for superb research assistance. We have benefited from
the comments of Alessandra Casella, Marcela Eslava, Zvi Hercowitz, Nuno Limão, Daniele Paserman, Ken
Rogoff, Rob Sauer, Jakob Svensson, and seminar participants at the Bank of Israel, the 2003 International
Seminar on Macroeconomics, the University of Maryland, University of Pennsylvania, New York University,
and the Hebrew University of Jerusalem. The second author wishes to thank the Jack and Lisa Yael Chair in
Comparative Economics, Tel Aviv University for financial support and the Research Department of the Bank
of Israel for its hospitality. The views expressed in the paper do not necessarily reflect those of the Bank of
Israel. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

©2004 by Adi Brender and Allan Drazen.. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Political Budget Cycles in New versus Established Democracies
Adi Brender and Allan Drazen
NBER Working Paper No. 10538
June 2004
JEL No. D72, E62, D78
                                        ABSTRACT

Like other recent studies, we find the existence of a political deficit cycle in a large cross-section

of countries. However, we find that this result is driven by the experience of "new democracies".

The strong budget cycle in those countries accounts for the finding of a budget cycle in larger

samples that include these countries; when these countries are removed from the larger sample, so

that only "established" democracies remain, the political budget cycle disappears. The political

deficit cycle in new democracies accounts for findings in both developed and less developed

economies, for the finding that the cycle is stronger in weaker democracies, and for differences in

the political cycle across governmental and electoral systems. Our findings may reconcile two

contradictory views of pre-electoral manipulation, one arguing it is a useful instrument to gain voter

support and a widespread empirical phenomenon, the other arguing that voters punish rather than

reward fiscal manipulation.

Adi Brender
Research Department
Bank of Israel
Jerusalem 91007
Israel
adib@bankisrael.gov.il

Allan Drazen
Berglas School of Economics
Tel Aviv University
Ramat Aviv 69978
Israel
and NBER
drazen@post.tau.ac.il
                                                1


1. Introduction
        A common perception is that incumbents often try to use expansionary economic
policy before elections to increase their re-election chances. Most politicians and non-
politicians alike would probably subscribe to this view, and the term “election-year
economics” or its equivalent is common in many countries.1
        In the political economy literature, this view is summarized as the “political
business cycle”, that is, the possibility of a macroeconomic cycle induced by the political
cycle. Models of the political business cycle are motivated by the finding that good
macroeconomic conditions prior to the elections help an incumbent to get re-elected, a
finding that has wide support in studies (conducted mainly in developed economies).2
The strength of this finding was an important factor generating formal modeling of how
opportunistic incumbents may manipulate economic policy to induce economic
expansions before elections.
        However, notwithstanding both common perceptions and the substantial evidence
that a “strong economy” helps incumbents get re-elected, empirical studies – especially in
developed economies – provide little evidence of a regular and statistically significant
increase in economic activity before elections.3 In short, voters care about the economy
but this does not appear to translate into econometrically verifiable cycles in aggregate
economic activity.
        Given the lack of empirical evidence for political cycles in economic outcomes, a
literature examining possible cycles in policy instruments has developed. More


1
  Tufte (1978, p.3) begins his famous book on the political business cycle with a quote from 1814,
“A Government is not supported a hundredth part so much by the constant, uniform, quiet
prosperity of the country as by those damned spurts which Pitt ]used to have just in the nick of
time.”
2
  The most influential work is probably that of Fair (1978, 1982, 1988), who found such results
for the U.S. In his original article, Fair looked at presidential elections from 1916 through 1976,
and found that the change in real economic activity in the year of the election appears to have an
important effect on votes for president. Specifically, a one percent increase in the growth rate
increases the incumbent’s vote total by about one percent. Numerous other articles find similar
results on the importance of pre-election conditions on voting patterns in both the U.S. and other
countries. Looking at voting or popularity functions, Lewis-Beck (1988) found that the sort of
results that Fair reports for the U.S. hold in Britain, France, West Germany, Italy and Spain as
well. Madsen (1980) reported similar results for Denmark, Norway, and Sweden.
3
  See Drazen (2000), chapter 7, for a review of the empirical evidence on opportunistic political
business cycles in economic activity.
                                                2


specifically, the focus is on fiscal expansions in election years meant to generate the
desired electoral effects, termed the “political budget cycle”. Conventional wisdom,
supported by the findings of a number of econometric studies using large cross-country
data sets, is that the political budget cycle is a widespread phenomenon, a result that we
find as well. (We discuss these papers in greater detail in section 3 below).
          A very different view casts doubt on the widespread existence of political cycles
in macroeconomic policy. While it is agreed that a “strong economy” helps incumbent's
re-election prospects, it is argued that politicians have very limited ability to successfully
manipulate the economy to help their re-election chances. There are at least two reasons
to question whether politicians will engage in pre-electoral monetary and fiscal expansion
in order to manipulate aggregate economic activity. First, there is the technical question
of whether it is possible to time the expansion accurately enough to happen just before
the elections. Though high precision missiles may now dominate military conflict, the
economic equivalent in electoral conflict is believed not to exist. It is impossible to fine-
tune the aggregate economic effects of economic policy so that they can be turned on and
off with sufficient precision.4
          Even if it were technically possible to time precisely the aggregate effects of
policy, manipulating economic activity is considered harmful to the economy over time
in terms of “unsmoothing” consumption, inducing investment cycles, etc. If voters are
rational and well informed they would not support such policies, so that pre-electoral
manipulation would be punished rather than rewarded at the polls. This is argued in a
number of papers, such as Peltzman (1992), Alesina, Perotti and Tavares (1998), and
Brender (2003), which present evidence that voters in developed economies are “fiscal
conservatives” and often tend to remove deficit-producing incumbents from office.
          The lack of an aggregate fiscal cycle, and particularly avoiding deficits before
elections, does not mean that incumbents do not use fiscal policy to influence voting.
Fiscal manipulation may occur at a level other than the aggregate, for example, transfers
to one group offset by a reduction in transfers to other groups of voters or in changes in
the composition of spending towards spending valued by “impressionable” voters. This
would allow fiscal manipulation to work, but would be consistent with voters being fiscal

4
    See, for example, Lewis-Beck (1988).
                                             3


conservatives who dislike the need to finance higher aggregate spending. Provided that
the overall budgetary change is small enough, it would also be consistent with it being
harder to detect fiscal manipulation.
       In this paper we find a political budget cycle in a large cross-section of countries,
but argue that this finding is driven by the experience of “new democracies”, where fiscal
manipulation may work because voters are inexperienced with electoral politics or may
simply lack the information needed to evaluate fiscal manipulation that is produced in
more established democracies. It is the strong fiscal cycle in these countries that
accounts for the finding of a fiscal cycle in larger samples including these countries.
Once these countries are removed from the larger sample, the political fiscal cycle
disappears. The political cycle in new democracies accounts for findings in both
developed and less developed economies, for the finding that the cycle is stronger in
weaker democracies, and for differences in the political cycle across government or
electoral systems.
       Our findings also reconcile the two contradictory views of pre-electoral
manipulation set out above: one that it is reasonable to expect politicians to engage in
such manipulation and that empirically it is widespread; the other, that voters punish
rather than reward fiscal manipulation. In new democracies it is possible to carry out
such manipulation, whereas in more established democracies, voters have the ability to
identify fiscal manipulation and punish such behavior, so that politicians avoid it.
       The plan of the paper is as follows. In the next section we summarize the existing
evidence for a political budget cycle. This includes earlier evidence for the political
fiscal cycle, mostly from less-developed countries, as well as more recent papers arguing
that a cycle is observed in both less-developed and developed countries. In section 3, we
set up the basic empirical work, discuss a number of data and estimation issues, and
present the basic regressions for the set of democracies as a whole. In section 4, the heart
of the paper, we demonstrate that the political budget cycle found in larger data sets is
due to the significant political cycle in “new democracies”. In section 5, we consider
some arguments on observable characteristics of countries that may account for the cycle
and argue that these too are new democracy effects. In section 6, we discuss
                                                   4


conceptually why the political budget cycle is a phenomenon of “new democracies”.
Section 7 concludes. A Data Appendix contains a detailed description of the data.


2. Evidence on Fiscal Cycles – A Summary
          For less-developed countries, there are a large number of both country and cross-
country studies that point to the existence of a political budget cycle. Ames (1987)
presents a panel study of 17 Latin American countries in which he shows that over the
period 1947-1982, government expenditures increased by 6.3% in the pre-election year
and decreased by 7.6% in the year after the election. Block (2000) presents evidence of a
political business cycle in both fiscal and monetary policy in a cross-section of 44 Sub-
Saharan African countries. Schuknecht (1996) is a comprehensive study of the political
business cycle in 35 less-developed countries over the period 1970-92.5 He argues that
there is more room for manipulation in LDCs, as checks and balances are weaker and the
incumbent has more power over monetary and fiscal policy. He suggests that in LDCs,
expenditure policies, such as distribution of free or subsidized goods or employment
generation via public works programs, are probably more effective than tax cuts to affect
voter behavior. He finds a clear significant effect of elections on the fiscal balance, but
no significant effect on output. Individual country studies arguing for a significant
political fiscal cycle include Ben-Porath (1975) for Israel over the period 1952-73,
Krueger and Turan (1993) for Turkey over the period 1950-1980, and Gonzàlez (2002)
for Mexico over the period 1958-1997, to name a few. Drazen (2001) presents further
discussion.
          For developed countries, fiscal manipulation observable at the aggregate level is
thought to be less common. Individual country studies generally do not find a regular,
statistically significant political budget cycle. Alesina, Roubini, and Cohen (1997) find a
budget balance cycle in a set of 13 OECD economies over the period 1960-1993 (about
half of the countries have observations only from 1970 onward), but no significant cycle
in the components of the budget. In the United States, Keech and Pak (1989) found a
cycle for veteran benefits in the United States between 1961 and 1978. Consistent with
the findings of Keech and Pak, Alesina, Cohen, and Roubini (1992) find evidence of a

5
    See also Block (2002) for a recent cross-section study.
                                                5


political cycle in transfers relative to GNP in the U.S. over 1961 to 1985, which they
argue disappears if one extends the sample either forward or backward. They find no
statistically significant political cycle in other fiscal instruments.6
        Two recent studies find evidence that the political budget cycle is present in both
developed and less-developed countries. Shi and Svensson (2002a, 2002b) consider a
panel data set of 91 countries, both democracies and non-democracies, over the period
1975-95. They find that, in an election year, the government surplus falls significantly in
both less-developed and developed countries, though they show that the effect is far
stronger in less-developed countries, consistent with earlier studies. Both government
spending rises and revenues fall, though the significance differs across the data sets and
the estimation technique. The economic effect is significant for the sample as a whole,
the fiscal surplus falling on average in their full sample by 1/2 to 1 percent in an election
year, depending on the estimation method they use.
        Persson and Tabellini (2002, see also Persson and Tabellini [2003, chapter 8])
argue that there is a strong political budget cycle in developed economies as well. They
restrict the sample to countries with democratic political institutions and competitive
elections and consider a group of sixty democracies from 1960 to 1998. They find a
political revenue cycle (government revenues as a percent of GDP decrease before
elections), but no political cycle in expenditures, transfers, or the overall budget balance
across countries or political systems.


3. Estimating Political Budget Cycles in Democracies
        As is well known, the IFS data on which many studies are based are noisy.
Therefore, as a first step in our empirical work, the data were “cleaned”. In Table A1 in
the Appendix, we set out what are the problems with the data on a country-by-country
basis, and what were the adjustments that we made. (The data are available at
http://www.tau.ac.il/~drazen.) On this basis, we then estimate equations similar to those
estimated by Persson and Tabellini, using the same economic controls, variable

6
 Analyzing U.S. elections for President, Senators, and state governors in the period 1950-1988,
Peltzman (1992) goes further and argues that voters penalize growth in federal and state spending
at the polls. In U.S. state governor’s elections, increases in spending on welfare payments are
especially heavily punished, as is spending just prior to an election.
                                                6


definitions, and a somewhat extended sample. Our main conclusion is that in a broad
cross-section of democracies over the period 1960-2001 there indeed exists a political
cycle in the fiscal balance, though the strength of the cycle is sensitive to the set of
countries included. In section 4 we will refine this further, and show that the crucial
country characteristic is whether the country is a “new” or an established democracy.
        Our basic data set consists of 106 countries for which we collect data on the
central government balance, total expenditure and total revenue and grants from the IFS
database. (Further details are given in the Data Appendix and Tables A1 and A2.) The
sample period is 1960-2001, although the data for many countries cover shorter periods.
        Our initial sample includes many countries that are not democracies. In our view,
if the political budget cycle reflects the manipulation of fiscal policy to improve an
incumbent’s re-election chances, then it only makes sense in countries in which elections
are competitive. If elections are not competitive, then the basic argument underlying the
existence of a political budget cycle loses much of its validity.7 In fact, one might argue
that finding a political budget cycle in non-democratic countries weakens the support for
the theory, rather than strengthening it. Hence, from either an empirical or conceptual
perspective, one needs to separate democratic from non-democratic countries.8
        We therefore separate democracies from non-democracies, analogous to Persson
and Tabellini, by applying to these data a filter for the level of democracy in each country
in each year. This filter is taken from the POLITY IV project, conducted at the
University of Maryland, covering nations with a population exceeding half a million
people. Each country is assigned in this dataset a value that ranges from -10 (autocracy)
to 10 (the highest level of democracy). We restrict our sample to democracies, by
selecting only the countries that receive a score between 0 and 10 on this scale; this
reduces our sample to 68 countries. These countries may be classified as those that were
in the OECD for the entire sample period, the “transition” economies of Eastern Europe
7
  Shi and Svensson argue that the desire of dictators to eliminate signs of discontent even before
“sham” elections may account for increases in spending and deficits in non-democracies that they
report. Alternative explanations of pre-election fiscal expansions that might be observed under
both competitive and non-competitive electoral systems would include multi-year economic plans
which coincide with the term of governments or “end of term” budgeting effects.
8
  It is too simple to argue that including non-democratic countries in the sample simply lowers the
probability of finding significant results. The model should be tested separately for democracies
and other countries.
                                                         7


and the former Soviet Union (for the period 1990-2001), and all others. Tables A1 and
A2 provide a list, as well as a description of the available data for each country.9
        An important feature of the data is that the number of countries in the sample is
increasing over time. This feature reflects not only the expanded coverage of the IFS, but
also an increase in the number of democracies. Using the POLITY filter to identify
democracies, we find that there are 31 democracies in the sample in the 1960s; 44 in the
1970s, 53 in the 1980s, and 59 in the 1990s, not counting the formerly socialist
economies. If the transition economies are included the number of democracies rises to
69 in the 1990s, more than twice the number in the 1960s. More specifically, new
democracies are being added to each of the samples over time.
        The basic regression is of the form:
         f i ,t = ∑ b k f i ,t − k + ∑ c′x i ,t + dELEC t + µ i + ε i ,t            (1)
                 k


where f i ,t is a fiscal indicator in country i in year t, xi,t is a vector of control variables,

ELECt is an electoral dummy, and µ i is a country fixed effect. (Year effects were
generally insignificant and were dropped from the regressions.10) In the tables, we present
only the coefficient of the electoral variable, indicating whether or not there is a
statistically significant political cycle.
        In addition to fixed country effects, our control variables are those used by
Persson and Tabellini, which encompass those commonly used in the literature. These
include real GDP per capita taken from the 2002 version of the World Bank's World
development Indicators dataset (WDI)), the trade share, two demographic variables
representing the fraction of the population aged 15-64 and 65+ (also taken from WDI),
and the log difference between real GDP and its (country specific) trend (computed using
the Hodrick-Prescott filter), as a measure of the output gap.
        The electoral dummy, meant to capture pre-electoral effects, is that used by these
authors. It equals 1 in an election year and 0 otherwise, no matter when during the year


9
  Table A3 lists countries that were excluded, either because: IFS data doesn't exist, even though
some other studies include these countries; IFS data exist, but they were not democracies; or,
because, though the country is democratic, we judged the IFS data to be of very low quality.
10
   The insignificance of the year effects may be due to the inclusion of controls for the level of
economic activity in each country in each year.
                                                  8


the election occurred.11 However, we adjust the electoral year definition to be consistent
with the fiscal year, when fiscal data are reported for a fiscal year different than the
calendar year. Election dates and institutional data on the election process are taken from
the DPI dataset, provided by the World Bank (Beck et. al., [2001], Keefer [2002]). These
data were complemented, where needed, by other political datasets, such as the IDEA
(Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance, “Voter Turnout Since 1945 to Date”)
and IFES (International Foundation for Electoral Systems, election guide).
        Using country fixed effects in an OLS regression with lagged dependent variables
introduces a potential estimation bias that is of order 1/T, where T is the length of the
panel. (See, for example, Nickell [1981] or Wooldridge [2002].) The bias arises because
the initial condition f i , 0 is correlated with the country fixed effect µ i , so that the lagged

dependent variable is correlated with the error term. This problem is thought to be
especially severe in micro panel data, where the number of individuals i is large, while T
is quite small, often less than half-a-dozen. Since the potential bias of the fixed effects
estimator is of order 1/T, the magnitude of the bias in our estimates reported below
depends on which sample and fiscal indicator we use. In a panel of all democracies from
1960-2001, the average length of the sample is 24 years in the whole sample, 34 years in
the developed country subsample, and 18 years for less-developed country subsample.
(Remember that some countries do not have data for the entire period.) The average
length of the time series in our panel of “old” democracies is longer – 35 years, with few
countries having a time series shorter than the maximum. Hence, the bias from using a
fixed effects estimator in these regressions is likely to be small.
        The potential bias may be greater in the panel of elections in “new democracies”,
since by definition the sample length is much shorter (12 years including transition
economies, 13 years excluding them). To address this problem we also present GMM
estimates for the subsample of new democracies, using the Arellano-Bond procedure.12
        In the first column of Table 1, we present fixed-effects regressions for the fiscal
balance, revenues and expenditures, all as a percentage of GDP. We present only the

11
   See Table 9 and the associated discussion for the effect of splitting the electoral dummy into
elections that occurred in the first half of the year and those that occurred in the second half of the
year. We consider the endogeneity of election dates in section 5 below.
12
   Wooldridge (2002) discusses the advantages and disadvantages of the two methods.
                                                 9


coefficient on the electoral variable, indicating the presence or absence of a political
cycle. We find a highly significant political cycle in the fiscal balance, with the deficit
rising in an election year by about three-tenths of one percent of GDP relative to non-
election years.13,14


4. The Empirical Importance of Being a New Democracy
        As mentioned above, the number of democracies in the sample increased
substantially as more countries, both developed and less-developed, became democracies.
Whether a country is a new or established democracy may have a significant effect on the
likelihood that incumbents would use pre-electoral fiscal manipulation to increase the
probability of their re-election. Many models arguing that voters hold incumbents
accountable for deficits and wasteful spending would predict that incumbents who value
office would cut rather than increase spending, especially in developed economies, where
government expenditure is high relative to GDP. (See Peltzman (1992) Besley and Case
(1995), Alesina, Perotti and Tavares (1998), among others.) For this to be the case, one
would require, however, that voters have both the necessary information to draw such
inferences, as well as the ability to process that information correctly. These would
reflect experience with the electoral process by voters, the establishment of the
institutions that would collect and provide the relevant data, and experience by media in
disseminating and analyzing this information. In the absence of this experience, it is
more likely that fiscal manipulation would be rewarded rather than punished, so that
incumbents would engage in it. We will return to these arguments in more detail in
section 5 below.
        Another reason why the interpretation of economic data by voters may be more
complicated in new democracies is the shift in economic structure that often goes along


13
 The qualitative results in these and all other regressions do not significantly change when the
White Heteroskedasticity Consistent Covariance correction is used to calculate standard errors.
14
  These results correspond to those found in studies such as Shi and Svensson (2002a,
2002b), who considered a cross-section of both democracies and non-democracies over the
period 1975-95. When we used a sample without a democracy filter over the same twenty year
period with their control variables, we found a significant coefficient of -.632 with an FE
estimator, insignificantly different from their coefficient of -.49. When we ran their regression
over the entire sample period using only democracies, the coefficient was -.325.
                                                 10


with the shift to democracy. This is perhaps most striking when one considers the
formerly socialist economies in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union where the
centrally planned economic system and the reporting mechanisms were abolished in a
relatively short period. The collapse of old economic systems may also present a
problem in the analysis of the political fiscal cycle in these countries: to the extent that
high deficits associated with the economic transition occur simultaneously with the
political transition, without either one causing the other, one would not classify this as a
classic political fiscal cycle. On the other hand, politicians facing the new phenomenon
of contested elections who are aware of the desire for rapid economic transition may
respond especially strongly with deficit spending.15
        To test this hypothesis that political budget cycles are more prevalent in “new
democracies”, we separate them from established democracies in our sample. Using the
POLITY filter, we separate those countries that had competitive elections during the
entire sample period for which we have data from those that began having competitive
elections only within the sample period. For the latter, we take observations for the first
four competitive elections and define those observations as coming from a “new
democracy”.16 In Table A2, we list those observations characterized as “new
democracies” in both the sample of developed and less developed countries. Table A4
provides a breakdown of all the elections in our sample according to the various country
classifications.
        In the second and third columns of Table 1, we present results over only new
democracies in the sample both including and excluding the new democracies in Eastern
Europe (columns 2 and 3, respectively). The fourth column of the table presents results




15
   This suggests that one needs to be careful in how one treats the transition economies in the first
years after transition, and in how one interprets the results of any study that simply lumps them
together with other countries. To err on the safe side, we exclude all the elections that took place
in the first two years following the transition.
16
   An alternative characterization of elections in a new democracy is those elections that occur
within a specific time period after the country became democratic. We tried alternative definition
of all elections in the first 10 years and the first 15 years after becoming democratic. The results
(available on request) are very similar, not surprisingly, since generally the same elections are
being captured.
                                                  11


for only old, that is, established, democracies (that is, all countries which were in a
sample of democracies using the POLITY filter, excluding the new democracies).17
        Because of the short sample length in the new democracy panels, there is a
possible bias in using a fixed effects estimator including lagged dependent variables. In
table 2 we therefore present GMM estimates of the new democracy regressions, using the
methodology of Arellano and Bond (1991). (In the table, we also present the regressions
for all and only old democracies for comparison purposes, though the length of the time
series in these samples implies no significant bias in the fixed effects estimates.)
        A number of results stand out. First, we find a significant deficit cycle for the set
of new democracies, whether or not the formerly socialist economies are included. The
coefficients on the electoral variable are larger than in the sample of all democracies. We
also find, in contrast to all other results presented so far, that there is a significant
political expenditure cycle in the new democracies (as suggested, for example, by
Schuknecht [1996]). Note, moreover, that the coefficients on the fiscal balance and on
expenditures in the analogous equations are very similar (and of opposite sign), while the
coefficient on revenues is smaller in absolute value and not significantly different from
zero. The deficit cycle in the new democracies appears to be clearly driven by higher
election-year expenditures. When the sample includes only established democracies,
there is no significant deficit cycle, but a significant revenue cycle not present in the
sample of all democracies. Revenues fall in an election year, similar to what was found
by Persson and Tabellini.
        To further test the “new democracy” effect, we run regressions for the sample as a
whole, that is, both new and old democracies, including separate dummy variables for
each of the first four elections, a dummy for all elections in old democracies and a
dummy for all elections after the fourth in “former” new democracies. The results are

17
  There are two ways one may exclude elections in “new democracies” in testing for a political
cycle in “old” democracies. One is to exclude all elections (i.e., all observations) that is, to
exclude those countries that made the transition to democracy in the sample period entirely. The
other is to exclude only those election observations which occurred when the democracy was in
fact “new” (up to the first four elections after the transition to democracy in our definition), but to
include all other observations for these countries in a sample of elections in old democracies. As
we cannot be sure a priori how long the new democratic effect persists (we take four elections as
a possible minimum), we prefer the first procedure and present results using that procedure. We
ran the regressions using the second definition of “old” democracies and found the same results.
                                              12


presented in Table 3. Each of the four new election dummies is significant in regressions
for a fiscal balance cycle, with approximately equal magnitude, while the coefficients on
the dummies for elections after the fourth in new democracies and in elections in old
democracies are not significant. Moreover, starting with the second election in new
democracies, the significance of the coefficient drops as one moves to the third and
fourth elections, suggesting that electoral fiscal effects may be becoming less strong in
new democracies as there is more experience with elections. Analogous to our other
results there is no significant political cycle in revenues or expenditures when separate
election dummies are used.
       To summarize, the political deficit cycle is a phenomenon of new democracies.
The finding of a statistically political deficit cycle in a cross-section of all democracies is
due to the first few elections in countries that are new democracies. Once these are
removed from the sample and only elections in established democracies are considered,
the political deficit cycle as a statistically significant phenomenon in aggregate data
disappears.
       We should stress that we are not arguing that fiscal manipulation does not occur at
all in other countries, but only that it is not sufficiently prevalent and large to show up as
an econometrically significant regularity in the aggregate fiscal deficit for groups of
countries other than new democracies. Of course, there may be incidents of aggregate
fiscal cycles in other countries, as well as fiscal manipulation other than fiscal expansion
that is not observable in the aggregate fiscal data. But, in terms of aggregate fiscal
expansion, it is the new democracies where the political budget cycle is really occurring.


5. Country, Government, and Electoral Characteristics
       Many empirical studies of the political budget cycle across countries argue that
the strength of cycle depends on a country’s economic or political characteristics. Such
arguments include: the level of economic development (see section 2 above), whether
elections dates are predetermined or not (Shi and Svensson, 2002b), constitutional rules
determining electoral rules and form of government (Persson and Tabellini, 2002, 2003),
the “level” of democracy (Shi and Svensson, 2002a, Gonzalez 2002), or other measurable
factors such as “transparency” or rent-seeking (Shi and Svensson, 2002a, Alt and Lassen,
                                               13


2003). In this section we consider some of these arguments. For each of the first four
arguments, we show that significant finding of a deficit cycle are driven by the
experience of new democracies.


A. Developed versus Less Developed Countries
          We first consider developed and less developed countries separately. As already
indicated, until recently the political budget cycle was thought to be a phenomenon
largely of less developed countries. Shi and Svensson found a cycle in both developed
and less-developed countries, but argued that the cycle was significantly stronger in the
latter.
          Corresponding roughly to a set of developed countries are members of the OECD
for the entire sample period. There are four “new democracies” in the sample period in
this group – Greece, Portugal, Spain, and Turkey. While there are not enough data points
to test for a political fiscal cycle in a sample of only new democracies, we can estimate
the equations both with and without these four countries. In columns 1 and 2 of Table 4,
we present results for the political fiscal cycle in OECD countries. What we find is that
once the new democracies are removed from the sample, so that the sample contains only
established democracies, the fiscal balance cycle found in the group of OECD countries
as a whole disappears. Similar to what was found for the sample as a whole, there is a
statistically significant revenue cycle in OECD established democracies. Hence, as before, the
political deficit cycle in new democracies is driving the results for the sample of OECD
countries as a whole.
          In columns 3, 4, 5, and 6 of Table 4, we consider the political fiscal cycle in less-
developed countries (strictly speaking, countries which were not in the OECD at the
beginning of the sample period.) The regressions correspond to all LDC democracies,
LDC new democracies with both FE and GMM estimation, and LDC old democracies.
As in the case of developed countries, there is a statistically significant deficit cycle in the
LDC sample as a whole, but it is due to the new democracies. We also find that the
deficit in the new democracies is driven by higher expenditures in election years. No
statistically significant political deficit or revenue cycle is found in the subset of
established LDC democracies.
                                              14



B. Pre-determined election dates
The strength of the political budget cycle may also depend on whether the election date is
pre-determined or not. Although one might think that fiscal manipulation in the year of
an election will be stronger when the election date is exogenously fixed by law, there are
two conceptual problems with such a simple presumption.
        First, the distinction between electoral systems where the election date is
exogenously fixed and systems where early elections may be called is not as clear cut as
it may at first appear. In many countries fixed election periods are set and early elections
may only be called under “exceptional circumstances”, but in fact early elections are the
rule rather than the exception. That is, what determines “exceptional circumstances” may
in practice be quite different than what appears to be the case from a simple reading of
the election laws. Since almost all countries have some provision for elections at a date
earlier than the end of the legally mandated term of office for the executive or the
legislature, whether the elections actually occur at the legally determined date is an
empirical question. By the same token, there are countries where the government may
call early elections, but rarely does.
        Second, we believe that there is no clear theoretical presumption about whether
fiscal manipulation will be stronger or weaker when election dates are effectively
predetermined. When the election date is known well in advance, an opportunistic
incumbent has ample opportunity to use fiscal policy to help his re-election, far greater, it
would seem than if there are “snap” elections, with a short lag between elections being
called and being held. On the other hand, since incumbents can largely control the timing
of endogenous elections, there may be more scope for fiscal manipulation. As argued in
the introduction, it is extremely difficult to fine tune when policy will have the desired
effect; the option of early elections with a short campaign period may allow elections to
be held roughly when the economy looks best18. Knowing this, incumbents may be more




18
  Heckelman and Berument (1998) find, for example, that election dates in Japan and the U.K.
are endogenous.
                                                 15


tempted to use fiscal policy in the attempt to affect voting behavior.19 Conversely,
deterioration in the fiscal situation may create a majority for replacing the government
and hence lead to a call for early elections.
        One way to address the endogeneity bias from reverse causation or from shocks
affecting both the election date and the fiscal balance is to separate out those elections
whose timing is pre-determined. We do this by looking at the constitutionally determined
election interval taking as predetermined those elections which were held either at the
fixed interval or within the expected year of the constitutionally fixed term.
        The results are presented in Table 5. In column1 of the table, we report the results
for the sample of all democracies using an OLS fixed-effects estimator. We find that the
coefficient on the electoral variable is similar in size and statistically significant for both
pre-determined and endogenous election dates. In columns 2 and 3, we restrict the sample
to only new democracies, using a fixed-effects and a GMM estimator, respectively. The
coefficient is significant for both pre-determined and endogenous election dates using
either method. There is no significant political cycle in established democracies either for
pre-determined or for endogenous election dates.
        To summarize, we find a deficit political cycle in “new” democracies, but not in
established democracies, regardless of whether elections were pre-determined or took
place before their scheduled date. We also find a significant expenditure cycle in "new"
democracies for the case of endogenous election dates and a revenue cycle in pre-
determined elections in old democracies. Taken as a whole, the results suggest that our
finding that the political budget cycle found in large samples is due to new democracies
is not caused by the endogeneity of election dates.


C. Constitutional Rules
        Persson and Tabellini (2003) argue that fiscal policy outcomes depend
significantly on the nature of the government system – whether a country has a
parliamentary or presidential system of government and whether voting for the legislature
was primarily via proportional or majoritarian rules. In a number of papers they consider

19
   The view that there is no clear theoretical presumption of the effect in one direction or the other
is consistent with the results of Shi and Svensson. They find that the coefficient on the fiscal
balance was similar across countries with predetermined versus endogenous election dates.
                                                 16


the importance of constitutional rules on fiscal policy in general and find significant
empirical differences in fiscal policy outcomes across systems. Persson and Tabellini
(2002, 2003, chapter 8) focus is on differences in political budget cycles across
government systems and find differences in the cycle across systems.
          Following their differentiation of systems, we considered the difference in the
political budget cycle across these four categories. There are in fact differences in the
deficit cycle across systems when one considers the sample of all democracies.
However, similar to our earlier results, we find that these differences reflect the
experience of new democracies.
          The results on differences between presidential and parliamentary systems are
presented in Table 6, where the classification follows Persson and Tabellini. We split our
electoral dummy into two: one for elections in parliamentary systems, the other for
elections in presidential systems. In column1 of the table we show that in the sample of
all democracies, there is a significant deficit cycle in both presidential and parliamentary
systems. As before, when we separate new from old democracies, we find that the deficit
cycle exists only in the former. Interestingly, the statistically significant revenue cycle
which we found in some earlier specifications for established democracies is a
phenomenon of parliamentary established democracies, as we see comparing the
columns.
          In Table 7 we compare the effect of proportional versus majoritarian voting rules
on the political budget cycle. In column1 we show that in the sample of all democracies,
the deficit cycle is significant only in those countries that use proportional voting rules.
The coefficient for majoritarian systems is similar, but it is not statistically significant.
As before, when we separate the sample into new and old democracies, we find a strong
and significant cycle in new democracies with proportional systems, but no significant
cycle in the analogous old democracies. Moreover, we also find that the cycle reflects
increased expenditures during election years in the new democracies. Hence, we find that
the electoral rule matters, consistent with Persson and Tabellini’s arguments, but only in
the group of countries where the fiscal cycle exists to begin with, namely, the new
democracies.20

20
     We note, however, that our sample includes only 19 majoritarian elections in new democracies.
                                              17



D. Level of Democracy
        Another hypothesis is that it is not the length of time a country has been a
democracy, but the level of democracy that matters for the existence of a political fiscal
cycle. That is, the political fiscal cycle may be a phenomenon of countries where
democracy is relatively weaker. (See, for example, Shi and Svensson [2002a] and
Gonzàlez [2002].) To examine this, we compare the political budget cycle in countries
with a lower level (“quality”) of democracy to those with a higher level. Specifically, we
once again split the electoral dummy into two: Elect-high takes a value 1 in an election
year if the POLITY value is between 0 and 9 and a value of 0 otherwise; and Elect-low,
which takes a value 1 in an election year if the POLITY value is 10 and a value of 0
otherwise.21
        The results for the sample as a whole and for new and old democracies separately
are given in Table 8. In the first column, we indeed find that the political budget cycle is
stronger in countries with a lower level of democracy. The deficit cycle is significant in
those countries where the POLITY index of democracy is between 0 and 9, whereas it is
insignificant in countries with a POLITY index of 10.
        However, once we separate old democracies from new democracies we find that
the apparent effect of the level of democracy is entirely due to the new democracies. In
the second and third columns in Table 8 we show that for new democracies, the deficit
cycle is significant, regardless of the level of democracy. In contrast, in the last column,
where we consider only established democracies, we find that there is no political budget
cycle, once again regardless of their level of democracy.
        The reason we find stronger evidence for a political budget cycle in the sample of
all countries when we condition on the level of democracy is probably a composition
effect. The proportion of new democracies in the group of lower “quality” democracies is
significantly higher: 50 percent of the data points in that group, compared to 7 percent
among the countries with a high level of democracy (See also Table A4). The findings in



21
  In some countries the POLITY index changed over time, in which case we split the
observations for the country between the groups according to the index in each year.
                                                  18


Table 8 also rule out the explanation that the results for new democracies actually reflect
their lower level of democracy, rather than their being “new”.


E. Election Dates
        Following much of the empirical literature, our election dummy was equal to one
in the year of an election no matter when in the year the election took place. If the
election took place late in the year, then the dummy indeed captures mostly the period
before the election. However, if the election took place early in the year, then the dummy
may be capturing, for the most part, post-electoral effects.22
        One way to address this problem with annual data is to define the dummy as equal
to one in the year before the election if the election took place in the first half of the year,
and equal one in the year of the election otherwise. However, this covers a time period
so far before the election in the first case (and may still miss the few months nearest to
the election) that the dummy may also be a poor indicator of pre-electoral effects,
especially if fiscal manipulation to gain votes is strongest in the months right before an
election as suggested, for example, by Akhmedov and Zhuravskaya (2003). Optimally,
one would like to have high-frequency data if electoral manipulation is short-lived.
However, since this is not possible in a large cross-section study, these considerations
suggest that any electoral dummy used with annual data (as must be) might be quite
“noisy” for cases where elections are held in the first part of the year. Hence, rather than
re-defining the electoral dummy as discussed above, we split the dummy into two, one
for elections held in the first half of the fiscal year, the other for elections held in the
second half.
        The results of our estimation with the dummies are presented in Table 9. We find
that for elections held in the second half, where we believe the variable is less noisy,
there is a deficit cycle in the sample as a whole that is due to the new democracies. The
coefficient estimates are larger than those reported in Table 1. There is no cycle in old

22
  We also tested directly the existence of a post-electoral effect by adding a dummy variable for
the year after elections. The coefficient was not statistically significant in almost all the equations,
did not affect the significance of any of our new democracy results, and eliminated the
significance of the revenue coefficient in the old democracies, except for those with
parliamentary elections.
                                               19


democracies. In contrast, for elections held in the first half of the year, there is no
significant cycle in any sample, which we attribute to the noisiness of the dummy in this
case.


6. The New Democracy Effect
        Why are new democracies more susceptible than established democracies to
election-year economics at the aggregate level? It is beyond the scope of this paper to
investigate this question in any depth, though our results, as well as those of others, may
suggest some avenues of research.
        Whether election-year deficits are rewarded or punished at the polls may depend
on the availability of information – including the existence of media that would deliver
such information to voters. (See, for example, Brender [2003]). An incumbent might be
rewarded at the polls only if he can hide the manipulation and make the public believe
that the good economic conditions reflect the success of his policy or his high ability.
This assumption seems unreasonable in many countries because voters – especially
experienced ones (who understand the incentives and the tools of electoral manipulation)
– know that election years are particularly “suspect” for manipulation and therefore
would interpret “surprises” in these years with special caution. Therefore, in economies
in which the electorate has a lot of experience with elections, and where the collection
and reporting of the relevant data to evaluate economic policy are common, voters would
be unlikely to “fall” for the trick of making the economy look good right before elections.
        In contrast, fiscal manipulation may work when voters lack the necessary
information to draw such inferences, as well as the ability to process that information
correctly. This would reflect a lack of experience with an electoral system, of the
availability of data, and of media experienced in finding, disseminating and analyzing the
relevant data. This is more likely to characterize a new democracy.23
        We want to stress that the ability to draw inferences about incumbent performance
from pre-electoral economic variables is not meant simply to represent the experience of
voters, but of experience and interactions of all actors with the electoral system. Put

23
  If “pivotal” voters are harder to identify in a new democracy, then transfers meant to woo
voters may be spread more widely, implying higher aggregate government deficits. We are
indebted to Alessandra Casella for this suggestion.
                                              20


another way, it is not that new democracies are characterized by unsophisticated or naïve
voting population, but that in countries with less of an electoral history, and hence less
exposure to pre-electoral fiscal manipulations, a political cycle is more likely to occur. In
many new democracies, even basics like the collection of data and reporting it to the
public are not well established, so that fiscal manipulation is easier to engage in. (The
demand for data may in fact be driven in part by the possibility of holding office-holders
accountable through elections.)
       Some recent papers found evidence consistent with this view in specific countries.
Brender (2003) shows how the electoral response to deficit spending in local Israeli
elections changed dramatically over the period 1989 -1998. He found that when direct
elections for mayors were introduced in Israel, voters were initially indifferent to deficits
and local fiscal management. By the 1998 elections, however, when accounting and
reporting standards were enforced on the local authorities, and when the local media
expanded, deficit spending was “punished” at the polls.
       A very recent paper by Akhmedov and Zhuravskaya (2003) found similar
evidence in regional elections in Russia after its transition to democracy. Using monthly
data between 1996 and 2003, they found a sizable, but short-lived political budget cycles
in which large expansions and contractions in local fiscal spending occur in the two
months before and after elections. They find that the magnitude of the cycle becomes
smaller over time and that an additional election in a region reduces the magnitude of the
cycles by over 30%, so that each new round of regional elections had substantially
smaller cycles, with the cycle disappearing for most (but not all) fiscal instruments after
two rounds of elections.
       A number of papers have considered the role of transparency more formally and
may thus shed further light on one important characteristic of new democracies.
Gonzàlez (1999) and Shi and Svensson (2002a) extend Rogoff's model to study the effect
of the degree of democracy and the level of institutions on the magnitude of fiscal cycles.
Both models stress the importance of “transparency,” which ultimately means the
probability that voters learn the incumbent's characteristics costlessly, that is,
independent of signaling. The higher the degree of transparency, the smaller is the
political budget cycle.
                                               21


        Shi and Svensson further argue that while the proportion of uninformed voters –
who may be influenced by fiscal manipulation – is initially large, it is likely to decrease
over time, thus decreasing the magnitude of budget cycles. They create a measure of the
availability of information and show that as voters become more informed the magnitude
of the cycle decreases.24
        Other papers also find that greater transparency is associated with smaller
political cycles. Akhmedov and Zhuravskaya (2003) find similarly that measures of the
freedom of the regional media and the transparency of the regional governments were
important predictors of the magnitude of the cycle. Alt and Lassen (2003) find that in
OECD countries, higher fiscal transparency also lowers the magnitude of the electoral
cycle. All these results are consistent with ours if lack of transparency or information, as
measured by these papers, is an important characteristic of new democracies.
        One should also note an essential difference between some of these arguments
and ours. Whereas Shi-Svensson and Gonzàlez, for example, view transparency
primarily as a characteristic of political systems (that may evolve over time, with
institutional change or development), our new democracy results suggest a somewhat
different view. “Transparency” reflects experience with the elections themselves, with
the crucial variable being the number of competitive elections a country has held (or, the
length of time a country has been a democracy), rather than the level of democracy. Our
findings in Table 8, namely that the importance of the level of democracy in explaining
the cycle may actually reflect the new democracy effect, suggest the importance of
distinguishing the two. A key implication of our view is that the signal content of fiscal
actions necessarily changed over time as voters became more experienced over time with
electoral fiscal manipulation and were provided with more economic and fiscal
information in order to draw inferences. This is certainly consistent with the findings of
Akhmedov and Zhuravskaya (2003) discussed at the beginning of this section. Hence,
any positive effect of deficit spending on an incumbent's electoral prospects would not
only diminish over time, but would probably change sign as a country has more
experience with a competitive electoral process.


24
  The index is a product of the number of radios per capita and a binary variable of whether the
country had freedom of broadcasting.
                                              22


         This last point brings us back to the relation between the theory of the
opportunistic political business cycle, predicated on the view voters may reward deficit
spending at the polls, and the view that voters may punish deficit spending at the polls.
Our results for new democracies are consistent with the first view, while the findings for
established democracies are consistent with the second. Proponents of the latter view,
such as Peltzman (1992) or Alesina, Perotti, and Tavares (1998) looked at established
democracies, and it is not surprising that they do not find support for an electoral benefit
of deficit spending. Our new democracy result – and the view that there is a learning
process which leads to the empirical disappearance of an aggregate political budget cycle
– can reconcile and make consistent these two approaches.
         An implication of the argument that voters in established democracies may punish
deficit spending is that opportunistic politicians will use fiscal policy to influence voters
in ways that don’t increase the overall budget deficit. This may be by changing the
composition of expenditures in an election year in a way designed to get more votes, or,
more specifically, by targeting particular groups of voters. Drazen and Eslava (2004a)
present a model of rational voter in the first case and present evidence on the importance
of composition of spending effects for the political budget cycle in regional and
municipal elections in Colombia. In Drazen and Eslava (2004b), it is shown that when
rational but imperfectly informed voters must infer whether they are targeted for election
purposes are not, effective fiscal manipulation can take place without increasing the
government budget deficit.


7. Conclusions
         In this paper we considered the empirical evidence for the existence of a political
budget cycle. The question of whether such a cycle exists on the macroeconomic level
across countries turns out to be a question of where it exists, that is, in which types of
countries. The answer to that question is not only empirically relevant, but theoretically
important as well, since it sheds light on what factors may account for the existence of a
cycle.
         Our empirical results indicate that the political deficit cycle is a phenomenon of
new democracies. The strong political cycle in those countries, which is characterized by
                                             23


increased expenditures in election years, accounts for the finding of a political deficit
cycle in larger samples including these countries. Once these countries are removed from
the larger sample, the political deficit cycle in larger samples disappears. Furthermore,
our results indicate that empirical findings of stronger cycles in less-developed than
developed countries, in countries with lower levels of democracy, or across government
systems and electoral rules is driven by the experience of new democracies.
       This finding suggests that fiscal manipulation is used more broadly in “new”
democracies, where it may “work” because of lack of experience with electoral politics or
lack of information that is available in established democracies and used by experienced
voters. As models that view rational voters as “fiscal conservatives” suggest, once a
country becomes experienced in electoral politics, the scope for a political fiscal cycle at
the aggregate level should be diminished, perhaps significantly so.
                                                   24


               REFERENCES

Akhmedov, A. and Zhuravskaya, E. (2003), “Opportunistic Political Cycles: Test in a Young
     Democracy Setting,” working paper. (Corresponding author: zhuravsk@ias.edu)

Alesina, A., G. Cohen, and N. Roubini (1992), “Macroeconomic Policy and Elections in OECD
       Democracies” Economics and Politics 4, 1-30.

Alesina, A., R. Perotti and Tavares (1998), "The Political Economy of Fiscal Adjustments,"
       Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1:1998.

Alesina, A., N. Roubini, and G. Cohen (1997), Political Cycles and the Macroeconomy,
       Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Alt, J.E. and D. Lassen (2003), “Fiscal Transparency, Political Parties, and Debt
        In OECD Countries,” working paper. (jalt@latte.harvard.edu)

Ames, B. (1987), Political Survival, Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

Arellano, M. and S. Bond (1991), "Some Tests of Specification for Panel Data: Monte Carlo
       Evidence and an Application to Employment Equations," Review of Economic Studies 58,
       277-297.

Beck et al., (2001), World Bank Database on Political Institutions.

Ben-Porath, Y. (1975), “The Years of Plenty and the Years of Famine -- A Political Business
      Cycle,” Kyklos 28.

Besley, T. and A. Case (1995), “Does Political Accountability Affect Economic Policy Choices,”
       Quarterly Journal of Economics 110, 769-798.

Block, S. (2000), “Political Business Cycles, Democratization, and Economic Reform: the Case
       of Africa,” working paper, Fletcher School, Tufts University.

_______ (2002), “Elections, Electoral Competitiveness, and Political Budget Cycles in
      Developing Countries,” working paper, Fletcher School, Tufts University.

Brender, A. (2003), “The Effect of Fiscal Performance on Local Government Election Results in
      Israel: 1989-1998,” Journal of Public Economics, 87, 2187-2205.

Drazen, A. (2000), Political Economy in Macroeconomics, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
      Press.

_______ (2001), “The Political Business Cycle After 25 Years” NBER Macroeconomics Annual
      2000 Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
                                                  25


Drazen, A. and M. Eslava (2004a), “Political Budget Cycles without Deficits: Expenditure
      Composition Effects,” working paper. (drazen@econ.umd.edu)

_______ (2004b), “Political Budget Cycles when Politicians Have Favorites,” working paper.

Fair, R. (1978), “The Effect of Economic Events on Votes for President,” Review of Economics
        and Statistics 60, 159-72.

_______ (1982), “The Effect of Economic Events on Votes for President: 1980 Results,” Review
      of Economics and Statistics 64, 322-25.

_______ (1988), “The Effects of Economic Events on Votes for President: 1984 Update,”
      Political Behavior 10, 168-79.

Gonzàlez, M. (1999), “On Elections, Democracy and Macroeconomic Policy Cycles,” working
      paper. (mgonzalez@imf.org)

_______ (2001), “Do Changes in Democracy affect the Political Budget Cycle? Evidence from
      Mexico,” Review of Development Economics 6.

Heckelman, J. and H. Berument (1998), "Political Business Cycles and Endogenous Elections,"
      Southern Economic Journal, 64(4), 987-1000.

Keech, W. and K. Pak (1989), “Electoral Cycles and Budgetary Growth in Veterans’ Benefit
       Programs,” American Journal of Political Science 33, 901-11.

Keefer, P. (2002), DPI2000 Database of Political Institutions: Changes and Variable
       Definitions, The World Bank.

Krueger, A. and I. Turan (1993), “The Politics and Economics of Turkish Policy Reform in the
      1980's,” in R. Bates and A. Krueger, eds. (1993), Political and Economic Interactions in
      Economic Policy Reform: Evidence from Eight Countries, Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

Lewis-Beck, M. (1988), Economics and Elections, Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

Madsen, H. (1980), “Electoral Outcomes and Macroeconomic Policies: The Scandinavian
      Cases,” in P. Whitely, ed., Models of Political Economy, London: Sage, 15-46.

Nickell, S. (1981), “Biases in Dynamic Models with Fixed Effects,” Econometrica 49, 1417-
       1426.

Peltzman (1992), “Voters as Fiscal Conservatives,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, 327-
       61.

Persson, T. and G. Tabellini (2002), “Do Electoral Cycles Differ Across Political Systems?”
       working paper, IIES, Stockholm University.
                                                   26



_______ (2003), The Economic Effect of Constitutions: What Do the Data Say?, Cambridge,
      MA: MIT Press.

Rogoff, K. (1990), “Equilibrium Political Budget Cycles,” American Economic Review 80, 21-
       36.

Schuknecht, L. (1996), “Political Business Cycles in Developing Countries,” Kyklos 49, 155-70.

Shi, M. and J. Svensson (2002a), “Conditional Political Budget Cycles,” CEPR Discussion Paper
       #3352.

_______ (2002b) “Political Business Cycles in Developed and Developing Countries,” working
      paper, IIES, Stockholm University.

Tufte, E. (1978), Political Control of the Economy, Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press.

Wooldridge, J (2002), Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data, MIT Press:
      Cambridge, MA.
                                                  27


Data Appendix
     Sample
     We use IFS data for all the countries with available central government data on the
     Deficit, Total Expenditure and Total Revenue (including Grants). Where IFS data are
     missing we tried to complement them by using GFS data or alternative sources. A
     detailed list of all the adjustments made to the data appears in Table A1.
     To restrict our sample only to democracies, we include only the observations with a non-
     negative score in the POLITY IV Level of Democracy index, which is produced by the
     University of Maryland. Hence, only data points with a score of 0 and above are left in
     the sample.
     In the former socialist economies in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union we
     exclude the observations for the first two years after transition, as they may represent the
     simultaneous effect of the shift to democracy and the collapse of central planning, rather
     than political manipulation of fiscal variables. The elections in these countries which are
     included in the sample are listed in Table A2.


     Fiscal policy variables
     The dependent variables are the following: Balance- calculated as the difference between
     Total Revenue & Grants and Total Expenditure. Total Expenditure- taken from the IFS
     dataset. Total Revenue & Grants- calculated as Revenue plus Grants from the IFS
     dataset.
     All these variables are presented as a percentage of GDP, the latter also taken from the
     IFS dataset.


     Election variables
     The data on election years and dates, are mainly retrieved from the Institute for
     Democracy and Electoral Assistance (IDEA), "Voter Turnout Since 1945 to Date"
     (www.idea.int/vt/index.cfm). Additional sources are: The International Foundation for
     Electoral Systems (www.ifes.org/eguide.elecguide.htm), The Database of Political
     Institutions (DPI) Version 2000, (a project conducted by the World Bank) and are
     complemented by other political data sources. See also www.electionworld.org.
                                             28


Our election year variable Elect- is a dummy variable that receives the value 1 in the
election year and 0 otherwise.
All our estimations contain fixed country effects, as well as one lag of the dependent
variable. Fixed year effects were tested and removed since they were not statistically
significant and have not affected the main results.


Economic control variables
Trade- the share of international trade, as a percentage of GDP, taken from the World
Development Indicators (WDI) 2002 publication of the World Bank.
Lgdp_pc - the log of real per-capita income. The data for 1975-2001 are taken directly
from the WDI dataset (mentioned above). The data for the years 1960-1975 are computed
using the WDI "GDP per capita in constant 1995 US$" series.
Pop1564, Pop65 - Two demographic variables measuring the fraction of a country's
population, ranging between 15 through 64, and above 65, respectively.
Gdp_rhp - A measure of the output gap, calculated as the difference between real GDP
and its (country specific) trend. The trend was computed using the Hodrick-Prescott
filter on the change in real GDP. Real GDP data were extracted from the WDI dataset in
constant 1995 US$.


Presidential Vs. Parliamentary constitutional rules
The DPI database provides information whether the chief executive responsible for
economic policy, in each country and in each election year, is elected directly by the
public or by parliament. In the former case we define the electoral rule as Presidential
and in the latter as Parliamentary, as in Persson and Tabellini (2002). Based on this
distinction between the electoral rules we computed the following variables:
Pres - receives the value 1 in a Presidential electoral system, and 0 otherwise.
Parl - receives the value 1 in a Parliamentary electoral system, and 0 otherwise.
Elect_pres - an interaction between Pres and Elect= (Pres)*(Elect).
Elect_parl - an interaction between Parl and Elect= (Parl)*(Elect).
                                             29


When estimating the Presidential vs. Parliamentary equation, we use both Elect_pres and
Elect_parl variables, together with the economic control variables, and one lag of the
dependent variable.


Proportional vs. Majoritarian electoral rules
The DPI database provides information, in each country and in each election year,
whether candidates are elected based on the percent of votes received by their party. In
this case they define the electoral system as Proportional representation and in the other
case we define the electoral system as Majoritarian representation. Based on the
distinction between the electoral systems we computed the following variables:
Prop – receives the value 1 in a Proportional electoral system and 0 otherwise.
Maj – receives the value 1 in a Majoritarian electoral system, and 0 otherwise.
Elect-prop – an interaction between Prop and Elect = (prop)*(Elect)
Elect-maj – an interaction between Maj and Elect = (Maj)*(Elect).

Level of democracy
The analysis regarding the level of democracy was based on the score of each country in
the POLITY IV dataset. We split the sample between these countries with a score of 0 to 9
and those with a score of 10, because more than 50 percent of the data points represent
countries with a score of 10. Where the score changed during the covered period, we split
the data points for that country according to the score in each year.


Predetermined vs. Endogenous elections
Based on www.electionworld.org data that indicate the frequency of elections country by
country, we determined when the next elections should have been held. If the election
were held in the expected year we classified them as predetermined; otherwise they were
classified as endogenous.
                               Table 1: The Political Budget Cycle Across Countries, Fixed Effects Estimates


                                                                                                           "New Democracies" Excluding
                                        All Democracies                  All "New Democracies"                                     3             "Old Democracies"
                                                                                                             "Transition Economies"
                                            (1)                                  (2)                                   (3)                              (4)
Estimation period                        1960-2001                            1960-2001                             1960-2001                        1960-2001
Dependent variable1              balance   texp              trg      balance   texp              trg       balance   texp          trg      balance   texp        trg

            Elect2              -0.341***      0.071      -0.263      -0.868***    0.745**      -0.159      -0.685**     0.435*    -0.248    -0.092    -0.153    -0.239**
                                 (0.123)      (0.193)     (0.170)      (0.273)     (0.292)      (0.235)      (0.289)     (0.259)   (0.247)   (0.133)   (0.143)    (0.117)


         Adjusted R2             0.686     0.906     0.915        0.461       0.937     0.954         0.504       0.929     0.919        0.768       0.961      0.970
          F- Statistic           48.79    213.58     240.88        9.46      151.34     204.55        11.68       141.63    119.85       97.301     714.91      944.86
         DW Statistic            1.943     1.548     1.448        1.822       2.046     2.107         1.692       1.952     2.115        1.893       1.965      1.861
        No. of countries           68       68         68           36          36        36            26          26         26          32         32          32
          No. of obs.            1617      1632       1641         416         424        416          337         345        337         1105       1112        1128
    Avg. time series length       23.8     24.0       24.1         11.6        11.8      11.6          13.0        13.3      13.0         34.5       34.8        35.3
The covariates include one lag of the dependent variable, the log of per-capita GDP, the ratio of international trade to GDP, the fraction of the population over age 65,
the fraction of the population between ages 15 and 64, and the log difference between real GDP and its (country specific) trend, estimated using a Hodrick-Prescott
filter.
1
 Variable definitions (all in percent of GDP):balance-central government surplus;texp-total expenditure by the central government;trg-total revenue and grants of the
central government.
2
 Elect - a dummy variable with the value 1 in the election year and 0 otherwise.
3
 The "new democracies" among the transition economies are listed in Table A1.
* - Significant at the 10 percent level; ** - Significant at the 5 percent level; *** - Significant at the 1 percent level.
                                Table 2: The Political Budget Cycle Across Countries, GMM Estimates.1


                                                                                                         "New Democracies" Excluding
                                        All Democracies                 All "New Democracies"                                    3               "Old Democracies"
                                                                                                           "Transition Economies"
                                            (1)                                 (2)                                  (3)                                (4)
Estimation period                        1960-2001                           1960-2001                            1960-2001                          1960-2001
Dependent variable2              balance   texp             trg      balance   texp              trg      balance   texp            trg      balance   texp        trg

              Elect3            -0.374***      0.217       -0.140    -0.739***   0.955***      0.299      -0.687***    0.592**     -0.022    -0.191     -0.047   -0.223**
                                 (0.109)      (0.173)     (0.148)     (0.272)    (0.339)      (0.394)      (0.259)     (0.253)     (0.346)   (0.123)   (0.142)    (0.106)


         Sargan test4             0.001       0.998       1.000        1.000       1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000      1.000      0.000    0.000      0.000
       2 Order Test5
         nd
                                  0.557       0.815       0.040        0.665       0.961       0.328        0.725       0.521      0.694      0.504    0.903      0.572
       No. of countries            68          68          68           36          36          36           26          26         26         32       32         32
          No. of obs.             1445        1458        1469          339         347         339          280         288        280       1028     1033       1051
    Avg. time series length       21.3        21.4        21.6          9.4         9.6         9.4         10.8        11.1       10.8       32.1     32.3       32.8

1
Estimated using the Arellano-Bond procedure with two lags of the dependent variable. The covariates are as in table 1.
2
 Variable definitions (all in percent of GDP):balance-central government surplus;texp-total expenditure by the central government;trg-total revenue and grants of the
central government.
3
Elect - a dummy variable with the value 1 in the election year and 0 otherwise.
4
    P-values for rejecting the null hypothsis that the instruments are uncorrelated with the residuals.
5
    P-values for rejecting the null hypothsis that there is no second order serial correlationin the first-difference residuals.

* - Significant at the 10 percent level; ** - Significant at the 5 percent level; *** - Significant at the 1 percent level.
                                                                                                     1
                              Table 3: The Evolution of the "New Democracy" Effect Over Time.


                                                 All Democracies

                                                        (1)
Estimation period                                    1960-2001
                  2
Dependent variable                balance              texp                   trg

                  3
       Elect_old                    -0.100             -0.131               -0.223
                                   (0.145)             (0.228)              (0.201)
                   4
       Elect_ND1                  -1.377**              0.751               -0.645
                                   (0.543)             (0.833)              (0.762)
                   4
       Elect_ND2                  -0.816**              0.441               -0.434
                                   (0.384)             (0.590)              (0.539)
                   4
       Elect_ND3                  -0.973**              0.842                0.071
                                   (0.462)             (0.729)              (0.648)
                   4
       Elect_ND4                   -1.169*              0.090               -1.038
                                   (0.635)             (1.003)              (0.892)
                          4
    Elect_ND_LATER                  -0.693             -0.180               -0.845
                                   (0.608)             (0.962)              (0.854)

                      2
     Adjusted R                     0.687               0.906                0.915
      F- Statistic                  46.98              199.80               225.27
     DW Statistic                   1.945               1.545                1.452
    No. of countries                 68                  68                   68
      No. of obs.                   1617                1632                 1641

1
 Fixed Effects Estimates.For the list of covariates and variable definitions see Table 1.
2
 Variable definitions (all in percent of GDP):balance-central government surplus;texp-total expenditure by the central
government; trg-total revenue and grants of the central government.
3
 Elect_old - a dummy variable with the value 1 in the election year - only in old democracies - and 0 otherwise.
4
 Dummy variables with the value of 1 in the election year of the first, second, third, fourth and later elections, respectively -
only in new democracies - and 0 otherwise.
* - Significant at the 10 percent level; ** - Significant at the 5 percent level; *** - Significant at the 1 percent level.
                              Table 4: The Political Budget Cycle in Developed and Less Developed Economies.

                                                                  Developed Economies Excluding
                                 Developed1 Economies, FE
                                                                      "New Democracies" 2, FE
                                        Estimation
                                                                            Estimation
                                          (1)                                (2)
Estimation period                      1960-2001                          1960-2001
Dependent variable3            balance   texp            trg      balance   texp              trg

             Elect4             -0.224*    -0.081      -0.324      -0.072      -0.150      -0.237**
                                (0.121)    (0.302)     (0.275)     (0.122)     (0.139)      (0.115)

      Adjusted R2                0.832      0.865       0.872       0.838       0.972       0.978
      F- Statistic              136.02     175.91      189.58      144.91      985.45      1249.73
     DW Statistic                1.842      1.281       1.234       1.775       1.844       1.849
   No. of countries               24         24          24          20          20          20
      No. of obs.                 819        823         832         722         726         734
Avg. time series length          34.1       34.3        34.7        36.1        36.3        36.7


                               All Less Developed Economies,           Less Developed "New                 Less Developed "New              Less Developed "Old
                                        FE Estimation               Democracies", FE Estimation         Democracies", GMM Estimation     Democracies", FE Estimation

                                          (3)                                (4)                                   (5)                              (6)
Estimation period                      1960-2001                          1960-2001                             1960-2001                        1960-2001
Dependent variable3            balance   texp            trg      balance   texp              trg       balance   texp           trg     balance   texp         trg

             Elect4            -0.492**     0.260      -0.182     -0.846***    0.658**      -0.195       -0.665*     0.789**    0.038    -0.137    -0.170     -0.244
                                (0.215)    (0.226)     (0.185)     (0.296)     (0.321)      (0.266)      (0.361)     (0.360)   (0.328)   (0.317)   (0.331)    (0.268)

      Adjusted R2                0.570      0.936       0.948       0.365       0.936        0.953         ...          ...      ...      0.689     0.938      0.947
      F- Statistic               22.16     238.44      295.61       6.49       143.89       193.09         ...          ...      ...      47.98    323.85     388.09
     DW Statistic                1.972      2.135       2.043       1.852       2.034        2.121         ...          ...      ...      1.965     2.077      1.873
     Sargan test5                  ...        ...         ...         ...         ...          ...       1.000        1.000    1.000        ...       ...        ...
   2nd Order Test5                 ...        ...         ...         ...         ...          ...       0.893        0.601    0.937        ...       ...        ...
   No. of countries               44         44          44          32          32           32          32           32       32         12        12         12
      No. of obs.                 798        809         809         365         373          365         296          304      296        383       386        394
Avg. time series length          18.1       18.4        18.4        11.4        11.7         11.4         9.3          9.5      9.3       31.9      32.2       32.8

The covariates are as in table 1.
1
    OECD Economies that were members of the organization during the entire sample period.
2
    The "new democracies" among the developed economies are Spain, Portugal, Greece and Turkey.
3
    Variable definitions (all in percent of GDP):balance-central government surplus; texp-total expenditure by the central government;trg-total revenue and grants of
4
    Elect - a dummy variable with the value 1 in the election year and 0 otherwise.
5
    For the definitions of these tests see Table 2.

* - Significant at the 10 percent level; ** - Significant at the 5 percent level; *** - Significant at the 1 percent level.
                                  Table 5: Predetermined vs. Endogenous Election Dates.


                                        All Democracies, FE            "New Democracies", FE               "New Democracies", GMM1            Old Democracies, FE
                                             Estimation                     Estimation                           Estimation                        Estimation
                                              (1)                              (2)                                  (3)                               (4)
Estimation period                          1960-2001                        1960-2001                            1960-2001                         1960-2001
Dependent variable2                balance   texp         trg       balance   texp              trg      balance   texp           trg      balance   texp         trg


           Elect-pred3             -0.294*    -0.010    -0.308     -0.840***      0.407       -0.429     -0.650**      0.487     0.028     -0.062    -0.224    -0.285**
                                   (0.150)    (0.235)   (0.208)     (0.325)      (0.344)     (0.279)      (0.302)     (0.356)    (0.438)   (0.164)   (0.176)   (0.143)

                          4
        Elect-endog                -0.417**    0.204    -0.190      -0.930**    1.492***      0.419       -0.894*     1.764***   0.738     -0.138    -0.043      -0.166
                                   (0.185)    (0.293)   (0.259)     (0.467)      (0.501)     (0.401)      (0.483)     (0.578)    (0.570)   (0.198)   (0.214)   (0.175)


           Adjusted R2              0.686      0.906     0.915       0.460        0.938       0.954          ...         ...       ...      0.768    0.961       0.970
           F- Statistic             48.13     210.65    237.54        9.22       148.82       201.03         ...         ...       ...      94.73    696.26    920.06
           DW Statistic             1.943      1.548     1.448       1.822        2.035       2.103          ...         ...       ...      1.894    1.966       1.861
                      5
           Sargan test                ...       ...        ...         ...          ...         ...        1.000       1.000     1.000       ...       ...         ...
        nd                    5
       2     Order Test               ...       ...        ...         ...          ...         ...        0.650       0.857     0.382       ...       ...         ...
       No. of countries              68         68        68           36          36           36          36           36        36        32        32         32
          No. of obs.               1617       1632      1641         416         424          416          339         347       339       1105     1112        1128
    Avg. time series length         23.8       24.0      24.1         11.6        11.8         11.6         9.4         9.6       9.4       34.5     34.8        35.3

1
Estimated using the Arellano-Bond procedure as described in table 1.
2
Variable definitions (all in percent of GDP):balance-central government surplus;texp-total expenditure by the central government;trg-total revenue and grants of the
3
Elect-pred - a dummy variable with the value 1 in an election year if the elections are in their predetermined dates, as defined in the text, and 0 otherwise.
4
Elect-endog - a dummy variable with the value 1 in an election year if the elections are not in their predetermined dates, as defined in the text, and 0 otherwise.
5
 For the definitions of these tests see Table 2.
* - Significant at the 10 percent level; ** - Significant at the 5 percent level; *** - Significant at the 1 percent level.
                                 Table 6: Constitutional Rules and the Political Budget Cycle

                                                                                                                                        1
                                       All Democracies, FE             "New Democracies", FE              "New Democracies", GMM               Old Democracies, FE
                                            Estimation                      Estimation                           Estimation                         Estimation
                                             (1)                               (2)                                  (3)                                (4)
Estimation period                         1960-2001                         1960-2001                            1960-2001                          1960-2001
Dependent variable2               balance   texp          trg       balance   texp             trg       balance   texp          trg        balance   texp        trg


           Elect-pres3            -0.395*     0.386      0.050     -0.850***     0.755**      -0.098     -0.684**     0.942**   0.374        0.172    -0.206     0.074
                                  (0.218)    (0.343)    (0.301)     (0.328)      (0.354)     (0.283)      (0.324)     (0.376)   (0.447)     (0.315)   (0.339)   (0.271)


           Elect-parl4            -0.317**   -0.070    -0.407**     -0.907*       0.724       -0.293      -0.877*      1.058*   0.109       -0.148    -0.141    -0.309**
                                  (0.147)    (0.231)    (0.205)     (0.482)      (0.500)     (0.415)      (0.501)     (0.642)   (0.601)     (0.146)   (0.158)   (0.129)


           Adjusted R2             0.686      0.906      0.915       0.460        0.937       0.954          ...         ...      ...        0.768    0.961      0.970
           F- Statistic            48.12     210.78     237.78        9.22       147.44      199.34          ...         ...      ...        94.81    695.95    921.22
           DW Statistic            1.943      1.548      1.449       1.822        2.046       2.109          ...         ...      ...        1.897    1.965      1.863
                         5
           Sargan test               ...       ...         ...         ...          ...         ...        1.000       1.000    1.000         ...       ...        ...
        nd                   5
       2     Order Test              ...       ...         ...         ...          ...         ...        0.769       0.847    0.342         ...       ...        ...
       No. of countries             68         68         68           36          36           36          36           36       36          32        32        32
          No. of obs.              1617       1632       1641         416         424          416          339         347      339         1105     1112       1128
    Avg. time series length        23.8       24.0       24.1         11.6        11.8         11.6         9.4         9.6      9.4         34.5     34.8       35.3

The covariates are as in table 1.
1
Estimated using the Arellano-Bond procedure as described in table 1.
2
Variable definitions (all in percent of GDP):balance-central government surplus;texp-total expenditure by the central government;trg-total revenue and grants of
3
Elect-pres - a dummy variable with the value 1 in an election year if system is presidential, and 0 otherwise.
4
Elect-parl - a dummy variable with the value 1 in an election year if system is parlamentary, and 0 otherwise.
5
 For the definitions of these tests see Table 2.
* - Significant at the 10 percent level; ** - Significant at the 5 percent level; *** - Significant at the 1 percent level.
                               Table 7: Electoral Rules and the Political Budget Cycle

                                                                                                                                        1
                                    All Democracies, FE               "New Democracies", FE               "New Democracies", GMM               Old Democracies, FE
                                         Estimation                        Estimation                            Estimation                         Estimation
                                           (1)                                (2)                                   (3)                                (4)
Estimation period                       1960-2001                          1960-2001                             1960-2001                          1960-2001
Dependent variable2             balance   texp            trg      balance   texp              trg       balance   texp          trg        balance   texp       trg


         Elect-prop3            -0.339**    0.093       -0.221     -0.995***    0.908***     -0.036     -0.840***    1.168***   0.475       -0.067    -0.148    -0.200
                                (0.140)    (0.220)     (0.195)      (0.305)     (0.325)      (0.263)     (0.283)      (0.383)   (0.424)     (0.153)   (0.165)   (0.135)


          Elect-maj4             -0.340    -0.003       -0.401      -0.356       0.074       -0.652       -0.332       0.207    -0.766      -0.168    -0.167    -0.355
                                (0.254)    (0.400)     (0.349)      (0.613)     (0.658)      (0.528)     (0.609)      (0.677)   (0.664)      0.264    (0.285)   (0.229)


         Adjusted R2             0.686      0.906       0.915        0.461       0.937        0.954         ...          ...      ...        0.768    0.961     0.970
         F- Statistic            48.11     210.60       237.55       9.258      147.97       199.86         ...          ...      ...        94.73    695.94    920.09
         DW Statistic            1.943      1.548       1.447        1.819       2.040        2.105         ...          ...      ...        1.894    1.965     1.860
                       5
         Sargan test              …           ...         ...          ...         ...          ...       1.000        1.000    1.000         ...       ...       ...
      nd                   5
     2     Order Test             …           ...         ...          ...         ...          ...       0.791        0.917    0.467         ...       ...       ...
    No. of countries              68         68           68          36           36          36           36          36        36          32        32        32
      No. of obs.                1617       1632        1641         416          424         416          339          347      339         1105     1112      1128
Avg. time series length          23.8       24.0        24.1         11.6         11.8        11.6         9.4          9.6      9.4         34.5     34.8      35.3

The covariates are as in table 1.
1
Estimated using the Arellano-Bond procedure as described in table 1.
2
Variable definitions (all in percent of GDP):balance-central government surplus;texp-total expenditure by the central government;trg-total revenue and grants of
3
Elect-prop - a dummy variable with the value 1 in an election year if the electoral system is proportional, and 0 otherwise.
4
Elect-maj - a dummy variable with the value 1 in an election year if the electoral system is majoritarian, and 0 otherwise.
5
 For the definitions of these tests see Table 2.
* - Significant at the 10 percent level; ** - Significant at the 5 percent level; *** - Significant at the 1 percent level.
                          Table 8: The Effect of the Level of Democracy on the Political Budget Cycle.


                                All Democracies, FE             "New Democracies", FE           "New Democracies", GMM1                Old Democracies, FE
                                     Estimation                      Estimation                        Estimation                           Estimation
                                      (1)                               (2)                               (3)                               (4)
Estimation period                  1960-2001                         1960-2001                         1960-2001                         1960-2001
                  2
Dependent variable         balance   texp            trg     balance   texp            trg     balance   texp            trg     balance   texp           trg

                     3
         Elect-low         -0.634***    0.364      -0.230    -0.783***   0.607*      -0.265    -0.736**    0.855**     0.198      -0.255     -0.196     -0.353
                            (0.193)    (0.303)     (0.266)    (0.300)    (0.319)     (0.258)    (0.311)    (0.354)    (0.424)     (0.273)    (0.294)    (0.232)

        Elect-high4          -0.150     -0.122      -0.286   -1.264**    1.401**    -(0.336)    -0.735     1.394*      0.721      -0.042     -0.139     -0.201
                            (0.157)    (0.247)     (0.220)    (0.636)    (0.686)     (0.548)    (0.554)    (0.756)    (0.751)     (0.152)    (0.163)    (0.134)


      Adjusted R2       0.687           0.906       0.915      0.461      0.937       0.954        ...        ...        ...         0.768    0.961       0.970
      F- Statistic      48.28          210.83      237.52      9.24      147.90      199.81        ...        ...        ...         94.77   695.95      920.07
     DW Statistic       1.942           1.549       1.448      1.826      2.043       2.103        ...        ...        ...         1.893    1.965       1.860
     Sargan test5         ...             ...         ...        ...        ...         ...      1.000      1.000      1.000           ...      ...         ...
     nd            5
   2 Order Test           ...             ...         ...        ...        ...         ...      0.705      0.943      0.324           ...      ...         ...
   No. of countries      68              68          68          36         36          36         36         36         36           32       32          32
      No. of obs.       1617            1632        1641        416        424         416        339        347        339          1105     1112        1128
Avg. time series length 23.8            24.0        24.1       11.6       11.8        11.6        9.4        9.6        9.4          34.5     34.8        35.3

The covariates are as in table 1.
1
    Estimated using the Arellano-Bond procedure as described in table 1.
2
    Variable definitions (all in percent of GDP): balance-central government surplus; texp-total expenditure by the central government; trg-total revenue and
3
  Elect-low - a dummy variable with the value 1 in an election year if the level of democracy is between 0 and 9, and 0 otherwise.
4
  Elect-high - a dummy variable with the value 1 if the level of democracy is 10, and 0 otherwise.
5
  For the definitions of these tests see Table 2.
* - Significant at the 10 percent level; ** - Significant at the 5 percent level; *** - Significant at the 1 percent level.
                                 Table 9: Alternative Timing of the Budget Cycle.


                                                                   1
                                                         Balance , FE Estimation

                                                                     (2)
Estimation period                                                 1960-2001
Dependent variable                    All Democracies          New Democracies           Old Democracies


            Elect-half12                  -0.150                    -0.448                    0.058
                                          (0.164)                   (0.386)                  (0.177)


            Elect-half23                 -0.537***                 -1.233***                 -0.252
                                          (0.166)                   (0.362)                  (0.181)

                       2
           Adjusted R                      0.687                       0.463                   0.768
            F- Statistic                  48.249                       9.329                  94.909
          DW Statistic                     1.944                       1.814                   1.896
        No. of countries                    68                          36                      32
            No. of obs.                    1617                         416                    1105
     Avg. time series length               23.8                        11.6                    34.5

1
    Variable definitions (in percent of GDP): balance-central government surplus.
2
 Elect-half1 - a dummy variable with the value 1 in an election year if the elections are in the first half of the year,
and 0 otherwise.
3
 Elect-half2 - a dummy variable with the value 1 in an election year if the elections are in the second half of the year,
and 0 otherwise.
* - Significant at the 10 percent level; ** - Significant at the 5 percent level; *** - Significant at the 1 percent level.
Table A1: Sample Characteristics and data adjustments


                        Years with     Years with                                                                                                                        Number of
                        positive       available Years not using IFS - and description of the                 OECD     "New                                              elections in
No. Country             Polity value   data       adjustments to the fiscal data                             economy democracy" Other comments                           the sample 1
 1 Argentina            1973-75,       1983-2000 IFS data for years before 1995 are missing; GFS data                    x      Fiscal data not available for 1973-1975.        3
                        1983-2001                 were used.Since GFS data are presented as an index.                           The change in real GDP for 1991 and 1992
                                                  1978 was used as a base year,                                                 is calculated from IFS 2003.
 2   Australia          1960-2001      1960-2000 1998-99 GFS, 2000 IMF staff report                              x              The change in real GDP for 1968 is             16
                                                                                                                                calculated from IFS.
 3   Austria            1960-2001      1960-99   1999 - GFS. There are breaks in the IFS series in 1970,         x                                                             13
                                                 1980 and 1990. These were bridged by using differences
                                                 from OECD data.
 4   Belgium            1960-2001      1960-98   There is a break in the Series in 1970. It was bridged by      x                                                              12
                                                 using the difference from the OECD dataset.
 5   Bolivia            1982-2001      1985-2000 1988-1991 - GFS. 1982-1984 are excluded because the                        x                                                  3
                                                 revenue data are not conssistent with the following years

 6   Brazil             1960-63,       1985-98     1998 - GFS. Data for 1995-96 missing                                     x                                                  3
                        1985-2001
 7   Bulgaria           1990-2001      1990-2000                                                                            x                                                   2
 8   Canada             1960-2001      1960-2000                                                                x                  Real GDP and population data for 1960-      12
                                                                                                                                   1965 and trade data for 1960-64 and 2000,
                                                                                                                                   calculated from IFS (the 2000 data from
                                                                                                                                   IFS 2003).
 9   Chile              1960-72,       1989-2000 Data prior to 1973 are unreliable and excluded.                            x                                                  2
                        1989-2001
10 Colombia             1960-2001      1971-2000 Expenditure data: 1971-1993 - GFS (IFS data not                                                                               7
                                                 available).
11 Costa-Rica           1960-2001      1972-99   Revenue: 1972-1999 - GFS; IFS revenue data is not                                                                             7
                                                 comparable with expenditure data. Expenditure: 70-2000
12 Cyprus               1960-62,       1975-2001 2001, IMF staff report                                                            The Greek part of Cyprus.                   5
                        1968-2001
13 Czech Republic       1990-2001      1993-2000                                                                            x                                                  2

14 Denmark              1960-2000      1960-99     A break in the series in 1970 was bridged using the          x                                                              15
                                                   differences calculated from OECD data.
15 Dominican Republic   1963,   1978- 1978-2000                                                                             x                                                  4+2
                        2001

16 Ecuador              1960, 1968- 1979-2001                                                                               x                                                  4+2
                        71, 1979-
                        2001
17 El Salvador          1964-70,    1984-2000                                                                               x                                                  3
                        1984-2001

18 Estonia              1991-2001      1991-2000                                                                            x                                                  3

19 Fiji                 1970-86,       1970-86     A gap in the IFS data in 1998 was bridged using                          x                                                  5
                        1990-99        1990-99     differences from the IMF staff report data.
20 Finland              1960-2001      1960-98     Missing revenue data for 1968-1971 were bridged by           x                                                              10
                                                   using differences from OECD data.
21 France               1960-2001      1972-97                                                                  x                                                              7
                 Years with     Years with                                                                                                                                 Number of
                 positive       available Years not using IFS - and description of the                   OECD     "New                                                     elections in
No. Country      Polity value   data       adjustments to the fiscal data                               economy democracy" Other comments                                  the sample 1
22 Germany       1960-2001      1960-98    A break in 1970 was bridged using differences from               x              West Germany until 1990. GDP data prior               11
                                           OECD data.                                                                      to 1972 were calculated from IFS 2003.
                                                                                                                           Trade data prior to 1972 are not available.

23 Greece        1960-66,       1960-98     1994-1998 - GFS, due to extra-ordinary expenditure data -       x           x                                                      4+4
                 1975-2001                  reflecting accounting adjustments.GDP was revised in
                                            1988: GDP for 1975-1987 was multiplied by 1.23 to be
                                            consistent with the revised level. The 1982 expenditure
                                            figure was corrected using GFS.
24 Guatemala     1966-73,       1966-73,                                                                                x                                                       4
                 1986-2001      1986-2000

25 Honduras      1982-2001      1990-2000                                                                               x                                                       2
26 Hungury       1990-2001      1990-2000                                                                               x                                                       2

27 Iceland       1960-2001      1972-2000                                                                   x                  Trade data for 2000 were calculated from         8
                                                                                                                               IFS 2003.
28 India         1960-2001      1960-2000                                                                                                                                        8
29 Ireland       1960-2001      1960-98                                                                     x                                                                   11
30 Israel        1960-2001      1960-1999 1973, 1985 excluded due to war and hyper-inflation,                                                                                   10
                                          respectively.The 1991 budget figures are multiplied by
                                          1.33 to account for the 9 month fiscal year.

31 Italy         1960-2001      1960-98                                                                     x                                                                  10
32 Japan         1960-2001      1970-93   IFS data not available. GFS was used.                             x                                                                   8
33 Korea         1960, 1963-    1963-71,                                                                                x                                                      2+1
                 71, 1988-      1988-2001
                 2001
34 Lithuania     1991-2001      1993-2000                                                                               x                                                       1

35 Luxembourg    1960-2001      1970-74,  1975 - a break in the series.1970-72 GFS data.                    x                                                                   5
                                1976-97
36 Madagascar    1992-2001      1992-2000                                                                               x                                                       2
37 Malaysia      1960-2001      1960-99                                                                                                                                         9
38 Mali          1992-2001      1992-2000                                                                               x                                                       1

39 Mauritius     1968-2001      1968-2000                                                                                      Democratic elections took place since            6
                                                                                                                               1958 - before independence.
40 Mexico        1988-2001      1980-2000                                                                               x                                                       2

41 Nepal         1990-2001      1990-99                                                                                 x                                                        4
42 Netherlands   1960-2001      1960-98                                                                     x                                                                   12
43 New zealand   1960-2001      1960-2000 1989 - data not available.                                        x                  Trade data for 1960-72 and 2000 are taken        12
                                                                                                                               from IFS 2003.
44 Nicaragua     1990-2001      1988-2000                                                                               x      GDP and trade data were calculated from          1
                                                                                                                               IFS 2003.
                             Years with     Years with                                                                                                                                         Number of
                             positive       available Years not using IFS - and description of the                    OECD     "New                                                            elections in
No. Country                  Polity value   data       adjustments to the fiscal data                                economy democracy" Other comments                                         the sample 1
45 Norway                    1960-2001      1960-98    A break in the fiscal series in 1972 is bridged by using          x                                                                           10
                                                       differences from OECD data.
    46 Pakistan              1962-68,       1973-76,                                                                                    x       The period before 1973 was excluded                 3
                             1973-76,       1988-1998                                                                                           because Pakistan included Bengaladesh.
                             1988-98
    47 Panama                1960-67,       1960-1967                                                                                   x       Trade data for 1960-67 are taken from IFS          2+1
                             1989-2001      1989-2000                                                                                           2003.
    48 Papua new Guinie      1975-2001      1975-99                                                                                             Elections took place before complete                6
                                                                                                                                                independence in 1975.
    49 Paraguay              1989-2001      1986-2000                                                                                   x       GDP and trade data were calculated from             2
                                                                                                                                                IFS 2003.
    50 Peru                  1960-67,       1986-2000                                                                                   x       1992 is included - despite a negative Polity        2
                             1980-99                                                                                                            garde - to avoid a break in the series.

    51 Philipines            1960-71,       1960-71,                                                                                    x                                                          3+3
                             1987-2001      1987-2001
    52 Poland                1989-2001      1991-2000 Fiscal data for 1991-1993 were calculated on the basis of                         x                                                           2
                                                      differences from OECD data.
    53 Portugal              1976-2001      1970-98                                                                       x             x                                                          4+2


    54 Romania               1990-2001      1990-99                                                                                     x                                                           2

    55 Russia                1992-2001      1995-2000                                                                                   x                                                           2

    56 Slovak Republic       1993-2001      1994-2000 1994 and 1995 data were calculated by using differences                           x                                                           1
                                                      from OECD data.

    57 Slovenia              1991-2001      1993-2001                                                                                   x                                                           2

    58 South Africa          1960-91,       1960-2000                                                                                                                                               9
                             1994-2001
    59 Spain                 1978-2001      1978-99      1999 was calculated by using differences from OECD               x             x                                                          4+2
                                                         data.
    60 Sri Lanka             1960-2001      1960-2000                                                                                                                                                7
    61 Sweden                1960-2001      1960-2000                                                                     x                     There are substantial breaks in the series          13
                                                                                                                                                in the early 1990s.
    62 Switzerland           1960-2001      1960-2000                                                                     x                     Trade data for 2000 were calculated from            10
                                                                                                                                                IFS 2003
    63 Trinidad & Tobago     1962-2001      1962-72,                                                                                                                                                4
                                            1976-89,
                                            1993-95
    64 Turkey                1961-70,       1968-70,                                                                      x             x       Previous periods excluded due to lack of           3+2
                             1973-79,       1973-79,                                                                                            data and shortness of sample period.
                             1983-2001      1983-2000
    65 United Kindom         1960-2001      1960-1999                                                                     x                                                                         9

    66 United States         1960-2001      1960-2000                                                                     x                     Trade data for 2000 were calculated from            10
                                                                                                                                                IFS 2003
    67 Uruguay               1960-70,       1985-2000                                                                                   x                                                           3
                             1985-2001
    68 Venezuela             1960-2001      1960-2000                                                                                                                                               8
1
The figure after a + sign indicates the number of elections that took place in a country which is defined as a "new democracy" during years in which it was not a "new democracy".
Table A2: The "New Democracies"

                                  Year of Becoming a      Elections Included as a "New   "Transition"
    No.           Country            Democracy1                    Democracy"             Economy
     1    Argentina                      1983                       89, 95, 99
     2    Bolivia                        1982                       89, 93, 97
     3    Brazil                         1985                       89, 94, 98
     4    Bulgaria                       1990                         92, 96                  x
     5    Chile                          1989                         93, 00                  x
     6    Czech Republic                 1990                         96, 98
     7    Dominican Republic             1978                     82, 86, 90, 94
     8    Ecuador                        1979                     84, 88, 92, 96
     9    El Salvador                    1984                       89, 94, 99
    10    Estonia                        1991                       92, 95, 99                x
    11    Fiji                       1970, 1990                 73, 77, 82, 92, 99
    12    Greece                         1975                     77, 81, 85, 89
    13    Guatemala                  1966, 1986                   70, 90,95, 99
    14    Honduras                       1982                   85 2, 89 2, 93, 97
    15    Hungary                        1990                         94, 98                  x
    16    Korea                          1988                         92, 97
    17    Lithuania                      1991                           97                    x
    18    Madagascar                     1992                         93, 96
    19    Mali                           1992                           97
    20    Mexico                         1988                         94, 00
    21    Nepal                          1990                     91, 95, 97, 99
    22    Nicaragua                      1990                           96
    23    Pakistan                       1988                       91, 94, 97
    24    Panama                         1989                         94, 99
    25    Paraguay                       1989                         93, 98
    26    Peru                           1980                         90, 95
    27    Philipines                     1987                       92, 95, 98
    28    Poland                         1989                         95, 00                  x
    29    Portugal                       1976                     80, 83, 85, 87
    30    Romania                        1990                         92, 96                  x
    31    Russia                         1992                         96, 00                  x
    32    Slovak Republic                1993                           98                    x
    33    Slovenia                       1991                         96, 00                  x
    34    Spain                          1978                     79, 82, 86, 89
    35    Turkey                         1983                       87, 91, 95
    36    Uruguay                        1985                       89, 94, 99

1
  The first year in which the country receives a positive value in the POLITY scale,
following a substantial period of negative values. The actual transition (e.g., first
democratic elections) can take place during the previous year.
2
  Expenditure only.
Source: Calculations based on the POLITY IV dataset, produced by the University of
Maryland, and the World Bank Database on Political Institutions.
Table A3: Countries excluded from the sample1
                             Years With
No.      Country             Positive Polity       Reason for exclusion
 1       Bahamas,The         no polity             No POLITY rank
 2       Bangladesh          72-73,91-2001         No fiscal data in IFS.
 3       Barbados            no polity             No POLITY rank
 4       Belarus             1991-1995             Available sample too short.
 5       Belize              no polity             No POLITY rank
 6       Bostwana            1966-2001             Extra-ordinary changes in the series.
 7       Burkina Faso        78-79                 Only two years with positive POLITY rank
 8       Burundi             all negative          Negative POLITY rank throuout the sample period.
 9       Cameroon            all negative          Negative POLITY rank throuout the sample period.
10       Chad                all negative          Negative POLITY rank throuout the sample period.
11       Congo               60-62,92-96           Sample too short
    12   Croatia             2000                  Sample too short
    13   Egypt, Arab Rep.    all negative          Negative POLITY rank throuout the sample period.
    14   Gambia, The         65-93                 No fiscal data in IFS.
    15   Ghana               70-71,79-80,96-2001   No fiscal data in IFS.
    16 Guyana                1966-79, 1992-2001 Available periods too short, due to low quality data.
    17   Indonesia           1999-2001             Sample too short
    18   Iran                1997-2001             Sample too short
    19   Jamaica             1960-2001             No fiscal data in IFS.
    20   Kenya               1963-1968             Sample too short
    21   Latvia              1991-2001             Sample too short
    22   Liberia             1997-2001             Sample too short
    23   Malawi              1994-2001             Sample with IFS data too short
    24   Maldives            no polity             No POLITY rank
    25   Malta               no polity             No POLITY rank
    26   Nigeria             60-65,79-83,99-2001   Each democratic episode is too short.
    27   Senegal             2000-2001             Sample too short
    28   Siera Leone         61-66,68-70,97        Each democratic episode is too short.
    29   Singapore           1960-1962             Sample too short
    30   Solomon Islands     no polity             No POLITY rank
    31   St.Lucia            no polity             No POLITY rank
    32   Suriname            no polity             No POLITY rank
    33   Syrian, Arab Rep    all negative          Negative POLITY rank throuout the sample period.
    34   Thialand            69-70,74-75,78-       Too many breaks in the periods of democracy.
                             90,92-2001
    35   Togo                all negative          Negative POLITY rank throuout the sample period.
    36   Tunisia             all negative          Negative POLITY rank throuout the sample period.
    37   Zambia              64-71,91-2001         Extra-ordinary changes in the series.
    38   Zimbabwe            70-78,80-86           Available periods too short.

1
Countries that appear in the IFS or that were used in other studies.
                                        Table A4: Election Years According to Various Classifications


                                          All Democracies       New Democracies         Old Democracies

            1
Elections                                        413                    94                     300

Of which:
    Developed countries                          239                    15                     214

    Less developed countries                     174                    79                      86
    Of which:
      Transition countries                       19                     19                      0

Predetermined elections                          252                    63                     180

Endogeneous elections                            161                    31                     120

Elections in Presidential systems                122                    63                      49

Elections in Parliamentary systems               291                    31                     251

                         2
Proportional elections                           318                    75                     229

Majoritarian elections
                       2                         91                     19                      71

High level of democracy                          257                    17                     234

Low level of democracy                           156                    77                      66


1
  The number of election years in "new" and "old" democracies does not add-up to the total number of
election years because elections that took place in "new" democracies after the fourth elections are excluded
from both samples but are included in the "all democracies" sample.
2
 The number of proportional and majoritarian elections does not add-up to the total number of elections
because the elections in Panama in 1964 and in the Philipines in 1961, 1967 and 1969 were not classifies as
either in the DPI.
