                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             NON—MONETARY EFFECTS OF THE FINANCIAL
       CRISIS IN THE PROPAGATION OF THE GREAT DEPRESSION



                        Ben S. Bernanke




                     Working Paper No. 10514




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MP 02138


                           January 1983




Stanford Graduate School of Business and Hoover Institution. I
received useful comments from too many people to list here by name,
but I am grateful to each of them. The National Science Foundation
provided partial research support. The research reported here is
part of the NBER's research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper #1054
                                                       January 1983




               Non-Monetary Effects of the Financial Crisis
                in the Propagation of the Great Depression


                                ABSTRACT




This paper examines the effects of the financial crisis of the 1930s on
the path of aggregate output during that period. Our approach is
complementary to that of Friedman and Schwartz, who emphasized the monetary
impact of the bank failures; we focus on non-monetary (primarily credit-
related) aspects of the financial sector--output link and consider the
problems of debtors as well as those of the banking system. We argue
that the financial disruptions of 1930-33 reduced the efficiency of the
credit allocation process; and that the resulting higher cost and reduced
availability of credit acted to depress aggregate demand. Evidence suggests
that effects of this type can help explain the unusual length and depth of
the Great Depression.




                                      Ben S. Bernanke
                                      Stanford Graduate School of Business
                                      Stanford, California   94305

                                      (415) 497—3285
                                      (415) 497—2763
I. Introduction

     During 1930—33 the U.S. financial system experienced conditions
that were among the most difficult and chaotic in its history. Waves
of bank failures culminated in the shutdown of the banking system (and
of a number of other intermediaries and markets) in March 1933. On
the other side of the ledger, exceptionally high rates of default and
bankruptcy affected every class of borrower except the Federal
government.

     An interesting aspect of the general financial crises—-most
clearly, of the bank failures——was their coincidence in timing with
adverse developments in the maeroeconomy.1     Notably, an apparent
attempt at recovery from the 1929—30 recession2 was stalled at the
time of the first banking crisis (November—December 1930); the
incipient recovery degenerated into a new slump during the mid-1931
panics; and the economy and the financial system both reached their
respective low points at the time of the bank "holiday" of March 1933.
Only with the New Deal's rehabilitation of the financial system in
1933—35 did the economy begin its slow emergence from Depression.
     A possible explanation of these synchronous movements is that the
financial system simply responded, without feedback, to the declines
in aggregate output. This is contradicted by the facts that problems
of the financial system tended to lead output declines, and that
sources of financial panics unconnected with •the fall in U.S. output
have been documented by many writers. (See Section V below. )
     Among    explanations that emphasize the opposite direction of
causality, the most prominent is the one due to Friedman and Schwartz

(1963). Concentrating on the difficulties of the banks, they pointed
                                    —2—

out two ways in which these worsened the general economic contraction:

first, by reducing the wealth of bank shareholders; second, and much
more important, by leading to a rapid fall in the supply of money.
There is much support for the monetary view.      However, it is not a
complete explanation of the link between the financial sector and
aggregate output in the 1930s. One problem is that there is no theory
of monetary effects on the real economy that can explain protracted
non-neutrality. Another is that the reductions of the money supply in
this period seems quantitatively insufficient to explain the
subsequent falls in output. (Again, see Section V.)
     The present paper builds on the Friedman-Schwartz work by
considering a third way in which the financial crises (in which we
include    debtor bankruptcies as well as the failures of banks and other
lenders) may have affected output. The basic premise is that, because
markets for financial claims are incomplete, intermediation between
some classes of borrowers and lenders requires nontrivial
market—making and information—gathering services. The disruptions of
1930—33 (we shall try to show) reduced the effectiveness of the
financial sector as a whole in performing these services. As the real
costs of intermediation increased, some borrowers (especially
households, farmers, and small firms) found credit to be expensive and
difficult to obtain. The effects of' this credit squeeze on aggregate

demand helped convert the severe but not unprecedented downturn of
1929—30 into a protracted depression.
     It should be stated at the outset that our theory does not offer

a complete explanation of the Great Depression (for example, nothing
Is said about 1929—30). Nor is it neàessarily inconsistent with some
                                —3—

existing explanations.3   If'owever, it does have the virtues that,
first, it seems capable (in a way in which existing theories are not)
of explaining the unusual length and depth of the Depression; and,
second, it can do this without assuming markedly irrational behavior
by private economic agents. Since the reconciliation of the obvious
inefficiency of the Depression with the postulate of rational private

behavior remains a leading unsolved puzzle of macroeconomics, these
two virtues alone provide motivation for serious consideration of this
theory.

     There do not seem to be any exact antecedents of the present
paper in the formal economics literature.        The work of Chandler
(1970,1971) provides the best historical discussions of the general
financial crisis extant; however, he does not develop very far the
link to macroeconomic performance. Beginning with Fisher (1933) and
Hart (1938), there is a literature on the macroeconomic role of inside

debt; an interesting recent example is the paper by Mishkin (1978),
which stresses household balance sheets and liquidity.       Friedman
(1981) has written on the relationship of credit and aggregate
activity.   Minsky (1977) and Kindleberger (1978) have in several
places argued for the inherent instability of the financial system,
but in doing so have had to depart from the assumption of rational
economic behavior.5 None of the above authors has emphasized the
effects of financial crisis on the real costs of credit
intermediation, the focus of the present work.
     The paper is organized as follows:   Section II presents some
background on the 1930—33 financial crisis, its sources, and its
correspondence with aggregate output movements.
       Section III begins the principal argument of the paper.             We

explain how the runs on banks and the extensive defaults could have
reduced         the efficiency of the financial, sector in performing its
intermediary functions. Some evidence of these effects is introduced.
     Possible channels by which reduced financial efficiency might
have affected output are discussed in Section IV.               Reduced—form
estimation        results, reported in Section V, suggest that augmenting a
purely monetary approach by our theory significantly improves the
explanation of the financial sector—output connection in the short
run. Section VI looks at the persistence of these effects.
       Some       international aspects of the financial sector—aggregate
output link         are briefly discussed in Section VII.       Section VIII
concludes.

I•     I.!12.               LL22.L                2!
       The problems faced by the U.S. financial system between October

1930 and March 1933 have been described in detail by earlier authors,6
but it will be useful to recapitulate some principal facts here.
Given this background, we will turn attention to the more central
issues of the paper.

       The two major components of the financial collapse were the loss
in    confidence     in financial institutions,   primarily   commercial banks,
and the widespread insolvency of debtors. We give short discussions
of each of these components and of their joint relation to aggregate
fluctuations.
      1.  The failure of financial institutions.    Most financial
institutions        (even semi—public ones, like the Joint Stock Land Banks)
                                 —5—

came under pressure in the 1930s.       Some, such as the insurance
companies and the mutual savings banks, managed to maintain something
close to normal operations.   Others, like the building—and—loans
(which, despite their ability to restrict withdrawals by depositors,
failed in significant numbers) were greatly hampered in their attempts
to carry on their business.7 Of most importance, however, were the
problems of the commercial banks.      The significance of the banking
difficulties derived both from their magnitude and from the central
role commercial banks played in the financial system.8

     The great severity of the banking crises in the Depression is
well known to students of the period.     The percentages of operating
banks which failed in each year from 1930 to 1933 inclusive were 5.6,
10.5, 7.8, and 12.9; because of failures and mergers, the number of
banks operating at the end of 1933 was only just above half the number
that existed in 1929. Banks that survived experienced heavy losses.
     The sources of the banking collapse are best understood in the
historical context. The first point to be made is that bank failures
were hardly a novelty at the time of the Depression. The U.S. system,
made up as it was primarily of small, independent banks, had always
been particularly vulnerable. (Countries with only a few large banks,
such as Britain, France, and Canada, never had banking difficulties on

the American scale.) The dominance of small banks in the U.S. was due

in large part to a regulatory environment which reflected popular
fears of large banks and "trusts"; for example, there were numerous
laws restricting branch banking at both the state and national level.
Competition between the state and national banking systems for member
banks also tended to keep the legal barriers to entry in banking very
                                   —6—

low.10 In this sort of environment, a significant nuiber of failures
was to be expected and probably was even desirable. Failures due to
"natural causes" (such as the agricultural depression of the 1920s
upon which many small, rural banks foundered) were common.11

        Besides the simple lack of economic viability of some marginal
banks, however, the U.S. system historically suffered also from a more

malign source of bank failures; namely, financial panics. The fact
that liabilities of banks were principally in the form of fixed—price,
callable debt (i.e., demand deposits), while many assets were highly
illiquid,    created the possibility of the perverse expectational
equilibrium known as a "run" on the banks. In a run, fear that a bank
may fail induces depositors to withdraw their money, which in turn
forces liquidation of the bank's assets. The need to liquidate
hastily, or to dump assets on the market when other banks are also
liquidating, may generate losses that actually do cause the bank to
fail. Thus the expectation of failure, by the mechanism of the run,
tends   to become self—confirming.12

        An interesting question is why banks at this time relied on
fixed—price demand deposits, when alternative instruments might have
reduced or prevented the problem of runs.13 The answer is provided by
Friedman and Schwartz:      They pointed out that, before the
establishment of the Federal Reserve in 1913, panics were usually
contained by the practice of suspending convertibility of bank
deposits into currency.    This practice, typically initiated by loose
organizations of urban banks called clearinghouses, moderated the
dangers of' runs by making hasty liquidation unnecessary.       In

conjunction with the suspension of convertibility practice, the use of
                                 —7—

demand deposits created relatively little instability.1

     However, with the advent of the Federal Reserve (according to
Friedman and Schwartz), this roughly stable institutional arrangement
was upset.   Although the Federal Reserve introduced no specific
injunctions against the suspension of convertibility, the
clearinghouses apparently felt that the existence of the new
institution relieved them of the responsibility of fighting runs.
Unfortunately, the Federal Reserve turned out to be unable or
unwilling to assume this responsibility.

     No serious runs occurred between World War I and 1930; but the
many pieces of bad financial news that came in from around the world
in 1930—32 were like sparks around tinder.     Runs were clearly an
important part of the banking problems of this period. Some evidence

emerges from contemporary accounts, including descriptions of specific
events precipitating runs.   Also notable Is the fact that bank
failures tended to occur in short spasms, rather than in a steady
stream (see Table 1, column 2 for monthly data on the deposits of
failing banks).    The problem was not arrested until government
intervention became important in late 1932 and early 1933.

     We see, then, that the banking crises of the early 1930s differed
from earlier recorded experience both in magnitude and in the degree
of danger posed by the phenomenon of runs.    The result of this was
that the behavior of almost the entire system was adversely affected,

not just that of marginal banks. The bankers fear of runs, we shall
argue below, had important macroeconomic effects.
     2. Defaults   and bankru2tcies. The   second major aspect of the
financial crisis (one that is currently much neglected by historians)
                                     —8—

was the pervasiveness of debtor insolvency. Given that debt contracts
were written in nominal terms,15 the protracted fall in prices and
money incomes greatly increased debt burdens.    According to Clark
(1933), the ratio of debt service to national income went from 9% in
1929 to 19.8% in 1932—33. The resulting high rates of default caused
problems for both borrowers and lenders.

     The "debt crisis" touched all sectors. For example, about half

of all residential properties were mortgaged at the beginning of the

Depression; as of January 1, 19314
           "The proportion of mortgaged owner—occupied houses
           with some interest or principal in default was in
           none of the twenty—two cities [surveyed) less than
           21 percent (the figure for Richmond, Virginia); in
           half it was above 38 percent; in two (Indianapolis
           and Birmingham, Alabama) between 50 percent and 60
           percent; and in one (Cleveland), 62 percent. For
           rented properties, percentages in default ran
           slightly higher." (note 16)
     Because of the long spell of low food prices, farmers were in
more difficulty than homeowners. At the beginning of 1933, owners of
145% of all U.S. farms, holding 52% of the value of farm mortgage debt,
were delinquent in payments.17 State and local governments——many of
whom tried to provide relief for the unemployed——also had problems
paying their debts:   As of March 19314, the governments of 37 of the

310 cities with populations over 30,000 and of three states had
defaulted on obligations.18

     In the business sector, the incidence of financial distress was

very uneven. Aggregate corporate profits before tax were negative in
1931 and 1932, and after—tax retained earnings were negative in each
year from 1930 to 1933.19 But the subset of corporations holding more
than fifty million dollars in assets maintained positive profits
                                  —9—

throughout this period, leaving the brunt to be borie by smaller
companies. Fabricant (1935) reported that, in 1932 alone, the losses
of corporations with assets of 850,000 or less equalled 33% of total

capitalization; for corporations with assets in the 850,000—$100,000

range, the comparable figure was 14%.     This led to high rates of
failure among small firms.

     Although the deflation of' the 1930s was unusually protracted,
there had been a similar episode as recently as 1921—22 which had not
led to mass insolvency. The seriousness of the problem in the Great

Depression was due not only to the extent of' the deflation but also to
the large and broad—based expansion of inside debt in the 19203.
Persons   surveyed the credit expansion of the pre—Depression decade in
a 1930 article: He reported that outstanding corporate bonds and
notes increased from $26.1 billion in 1920 to $47.1 billion in 1928,
and that non—Federal public securities grew from $11.8 billion to
833.6 billion over the same period. (This may be compared with a 1929

national income of' $86.8 billion.) Perhaps more significantly, during
the twenties small borrowers, such as households and unincorporated
businesses, greatly increased their debts. For example, the value of
urban real estate mortgages outstanding increased from $11 billion in
1920 to $27 billion in 1929, while the growth of consumer installment
debt reflected the introduction of major consumer durables to the mass
market.

     Like the banking crises, then, the debt crisis of the 1930s was
not qualitatively a new phenomenon; but it represented a break with
the past in terms of its severity and pervasiveness.

     3.      Correlation of the financial crisis with macroeconomic
                                    -10—

activ1.       The close connection of the stages of the financial crisis
(especially    the bank failures) with changes in real output has been
noted by Friedman and Schwartz and by others.     An informal review of
this connection is facilitated by the monthly data in Table 1.     Column
1 is an index of real industrial production. Columns 2 and 3 are the
(nominal) liabilities of failing banks and non—bank commercial
businesses, respectively.

        The industrial production series reveals that a recession began

in the U.S. during 1929. By late 1930 the downturn, although serious,
was still comparable in magnitude to the recession of 1920—22; as the

decline slowed, it would have been reasonable to expect a brisk
recovery, just as in 1922.
        With the first banking crisis, however, there came what Friedman

and Schwartz called a "change in the character of the contraction."20
The economy first flattened out, then went into a new tailspin just as

the banks began to fail again in June 1931.

        A lengthy slide of both the general economy and the financial
system    followed.   The banking situation calmed in early 1932, and
non—bank    failures peaked shortly thereafter. A new recovery attempt
began    in August         within a few months.21 In March 1933 the
                      but failed

bottom was reached for both the financial system and the economy as a
whole. Measures taken after the banking holiday ended the bank runs
and greatly reduced the burden of debt.       Simultaneously aggregate
output began a recovery that was sustained until 1937.
        The leading explanation of the correlation between the conditions
of the financial sector and of the general economy is that of Friedman
and Schwartz, who stressed the effects of the banking crises on the
                                     —11—

supply of money.       We agree that money was an important factor in
1930—33, but, because of reservations cited in the Introduction, we
doubt that it completely explains the financial sector—aggregate
output connection.      This motivates our study of a non—monetary channel
through    which an additional impact of the financial crisis may have
been felt.



III. The Effect of the Crisis on the Cost of Credit Intermediation.
      This paper posits that, in addition to its effects via the money
supply, the financial crisis of 1930—33 affected the macroeconomy by
reducing the quality of certain financial services, primarily credit
intermediation.       The basic argument is to be made in two steps.

First,    it   must be shown that the disruption of   the financial sector by
the   banking and debt crises raised the real cost of intermediation
between lenders and certain classes of borrowers. Second, the link
between higher intermediation costs and, the decline in aggregate
output must be established.       We present here the first step of the
argument, leaving the second to be developed in Sections IV-VI.
      In order to discuss the quality of performance of the financial
sector, we must first describe the real services that the sector is
supposed to provide. The specification of these services depends on
the model of the economy one has in mind.        We shall clearly riot be

interested in economies of the sort described by Farna (1980), in which
financial markets are complete and information/transactions costs can

be neglected.        In such a world banks and other intermediaries are
merely passive holders of portfolios. Banks' choice of portfolios or
the scale of the banking system can never make any difference in this
                                   —12-.

case, since depositors can offset any action taken by banks through
private portfolio decisions.22
     As an alternative to the Fama complete—markets world, consider
the following stylized description of the economy. Let us suppose
that savers have many ways of transferring resources from present to
future, such as holding real assets or buying the liabilities of
governments or corporatIons on well—organized exchanges. One of the
options savers have is to lend resources to a banking system.     The
banks also have a menu of different assets to choose from. We assume,

however, that banks specialize in making loans to small, idiosyncratic

borrowers whose liabilities are too few in number to be publicly
traded. (Here is where the complete—markets assumption is dropped.)
     The small borrowers to whom the banks lend will be taken, for
simplicity, to be of two extreme types, "good" and "bad".     "Good"
borrowers desire loans in order to undertake individual—specific
investment projects. These projects generate a random return from a
distribution whose mean will be assumed always to exceed the social
opportunity cost of investment.      If this risk is nonsystematic,
lending to good borrowers is socially desirable. "Bad" borrowers try
to look like good borrowers, but in fact they have no "project". Bad
borrowers are assumed to squander any loan received in profligate
consumption, then to default.     Loans to bad borrowers are socially
undesirable.

     In this model, the real service performed by the banking system
is the differentiation between good and bad borrowers.23      For a
competitive banking system we define the cost of credit intermediation

(CCI) as being the cost of channeling funds from the ultimate
                                 —1   3—

savers/lenders into the hands of good borrowers. The CCI includes
screening, monitoring, and accounting costs, as well as the expected
losses inflicted by bad borrowers. Banks presumably choose operating
procedures that minimize the CCI.          This is done by developing
expertise at evaluating potential borrowers; establishing long—term
relationships with customers; and offering loan conditions that
encourage potential borrowers to self—select in a favorable way.2
     Given this simple paradigm, we can describe the effects of the
two main components of the financial crisis on the efficiency of the
credit allocation process (that is, on the CCI).
     1.   Effect of the bank     crises on      the   CCI.   The banking
problems of 1930—33 disrupted the credit allocation process by
creating large, unplanned changes in the channels of credit flow.
Fear of runs led to large withdrawals of deposits, precautionary
increases in reserve—deposit ratios, and an increased desire by banks
for very liquid or re—discountable assets. These factors, plus the
actual failures, forced a contraction of the banking system's role in
the intermediation of credit. Some of the slack was taken up by the
growing importance of alternative channels of credit (see below).
However, the rapid switch away from the banks (given the banks'
accumulated expertise, information, and customer relationship              no

doubt Impaired financial efficiency and raised the Cd.25
     It would be useful to have a direct measure of the CCI;
unfortunately, no really satisfactory empirIcal representation of this
concept is available.   Reported commercial loan rates reflect loans
that are actually made, not the shadow cost of bank funds to a
representative potential borrower; since banks in a period of
                                   —1 LI_


retrenchment   make only the safest and highest—quality loans, measured
loan rates may well move inversely to the CCI. We obtained a number
of interesting results using the yield differential between Baa
corporate bonds and U.S. government bonds as a proxy for the CCI;
however, the use of the Baa rate is not consistent with our story that
bank borrowers are those whose liabilities are too few to be publicly

traded.
     While we cannot observe directly the effects of the banking
troubles on the CCI, we can see their impact on the extension of bank

credit: Table 1 gives some illustrative data.      Column L$ gives, as a

measure of the flow of bank credit, the monthly change in bank loans

outstanding, normalized by monthly personal income.26 One might have
expected the loan—change—to—income ratio to be driven primarily by
loan demand and thus by the rate of production. Comparison with the
first two columns of Table 2 shows, however, that the banking crises
were as important a determinant of this variable as output.        For

example, except for a brief period of liquidation of speculation loans
after the stock market crash, credit outstanding declined very little
before    October 1930——this despite a 25% fall in industrial production

that had occurred by that time.       With the first banking crisis of
November 1930, however, a long period of credit contraction was
initiated.     The shrinkage of credit shared the rhythm of the banking
crises; for example, in October 1931, the worst month for bank failure
before the bank holiday, net credit reduction was a record 31% of

personal income.
      The fall in bank loans after November 1930 was not simply a
balance—sheet reflection of the decline in deposits.       Column 5 in
                                   —15—

Table 1 gives the monthly ratio of outstanding bank loans to the sum
of demand and time deposits. This ratio declined sharply as banks
switched   out of loans and into more liquid investments.
    The perception that the banking crises and the associated
scrambles for liquidity exerted a deflationary force on bank credit
was shared by writers of the time. A 1932 National Industrial
Conference   Board survey of credit conditions reported that

             "During 1930, the shrinkage of commercial loans
             no more than reflected business recession. During
             1931 and the first half of 1932 Ithe period studied],
             it unquestionably represented pressure by banks on
             customers for repayment of loans and refusal by banks
             to grant new loans." [note 27]
Other contemporary sources, including other surveys of credit
conditions, tended to agree.28
     Two other observations about the contraction of bank credit can
be made.     First, the class of borrowers most affected by credit

reductions were households, farmers, unincorporated businesses, and
small corporations; this group had the highest direct or indirect
reliance on bank credit. Second, the contraction of bank credit was
twice as large as that of other major countries, even those which
experienced comparable output declines.29
     The fall in bank loans outstanding was partly offset by the
relative expansion of alternative forms of credit.     In the area of
consumer finance, retail merchants, service creditors and non—bank
lending agencies improved their position relative to banks and
primarily bank—supported installment finance companies.3° Small firms
during this period significantly reduced their traditional reliance on
banks in favor of trade credit.31 But, as argued above, in a world
                                   —16—

with transactions costs and the need to discriminate among borrowers,
these shifts in the loci of credit intermediation must have at least
temporarily reduced the efficiency of the credit allocation process,

thereby raising the effective cost of credit to potential borrowers.

        2. The   effect of bankruptcies on the CCI.    We   turn now to a

brief    discussion of the impact of the increase in defaults and
bankruptcies during this period on the cost of credit intermediation.
        The very existence of bankruptcy proceedings, rather than being
an obvious or natural phenomenon, raises deep questions of economic
theory. Why, for example, do the creditor and defaulted debtor make
the payments to third parties (lawyers, administrators) that these
proceedings entail, instead of somehow agreeing to divide those
payments between themselves? In a complete—markets world, bankruptcy
would never be observed; this is because complete state—contingent
loan agreements would    uniquely define each   party s obligations   in all
possible    circumstances, rendering third—party arbitration unnecessary.
That we do observe bankruptcies, in our incomplete—markets world,
suggests that creditors and debtors have found the combination of

simple loan arrangements and ex post adjudication by bankruptcy (when
necessary) to be cheaper than attempting to write and enforce complete

state—contingent contracts.
        To be more concrete, let us use our "good borrower——bad borrower"

example.     In writing a loan contract with a potential borrower, the
bank has two polar options.      First, it might try to approximate the
complete state—contingent contract by making the borrowers actions
part of the agreement and by allowing re—payment to depend on the
outcome of the borrower's "project".       This contract, if properly
                                   —17—

written and enforced, would completely eliminate the possibility of
either side nt being able to meet its obligations; its obvious
drawback is the cost of monitoring which it involves. The bank's
other option is to write a very simple agreement ("payment of
such—amount to be made on such—date"), then to make the loan only if
it believes that the borrower is likely to repay. The second approach

usually dominates the first, of course, especially for small
borrowers.

     A device which makes the cost advantage of the simpler approach
even greater is the use of collateral.    If the borrower has wealth
that can be attached by the bank in the event of non-payment, the
bank's risk is low.   Moreover, the threat of loss of collateral
provides the right incentives for borrowers to use loans only for
profitable projects. Thus, the combination of collateral and simple
loan contracts helps to create a low effective CCI.

     A useful way to think of the 1930—33 debt crisis is as the

progressive erosion of borrowers' collateral relative to debt burdens.
As the representative borrower became more and more insolvent, banks
(and other lenders as well) faced a dilemma.   Simple, non—contingent
loans faced increasingly higher risks of default; yet a return to the
more complex type of contract involved many other costs. Either way,
debtor insolvency necessarily raised the CCI for banks.
     One way for banks to adjust to a higher CCI is to increase the
rate that they charge borrowers.     This may be counterproductive,
however, if higher interest charges increase the risk of default.     The
more usual response is for banks just not to make loans to some people
that they might have lent to in better times. This was certainly the
                                  —18—

pattern in the 1930s:      For example, it was reported that the
extraordinary rate of default on residential mortgages forced banks
and life insurance companies to "practically stop making mortgage
loans, except for renewals."32      This situation precluded many
borrowers, even with good "projects", from getting funds, while
lenders rushed to compete for existing high—grade assets.        As one

writer of the time put it:

             "We see money accumulating at the centers, with
             difficulty of finding safe investment for it;
             interest rates dropping down lower than ever
             before; money available in great plenty for things
             that are obviously safe, but not available at all
             for things that are in fact safe, and which under
             normal conditions would be entirely safe (and there
             are a great many such), but which are now viewed
             with suspicion by lenders." (note 33)
As   this quote suggests, the idea that the low yields on Treasury or

blue—chip corporation liabilities during this time signalled a general

state of "easy money" is mistaken; money was easy for a few safe
borrowers but difficult for everyone else.

       An indicator of the strength of lender preferences for safe,
liquid assets (and hence of the difficulty of risky borrowers in
obtaining funds) is the yield differential between Baa corporate bonds

and Treasury bonds (Table 1, column 6).         Because this variable

contains no adjustment for the reclassification of firms into higher
risk categories, it tends to understate the true difference in yields

between representative risky and safe assets.        Nevertheless, this

indicator showed some impressive shifts, going from 2.5% during
1929—30 to nearly 8% in mid—1932.        (The differential never exceeded

3.5%   in   the sharp 1920—22 recession.)      The yield differential

reflected changing perceptions of default risk, of course; but note
                                       —1   9—

also   the close relationship of the differential and the banking
crises (a fact first pointed out by Friedman and Schwartz). Bank
crises depressed the prices of lower quality investments as the fear
of runs drove banks into assets that could be used as reserves or for

re—discounting.     This effect of bank portfolio choices on an asset
price could not happen in a Fama—type, complete—markets world.

       Finally,   it is    instructive to consider the experience of a
country   that had a debt crisis without a banking crisis.        Canada
entered the Depression with a large external debt, much of it      payable
in   foreign currencies.        The combination of deflation and the
devaluation of the Canadian dollar led to many defaults. Internally,
debt problems in agriculture and in mortgage markets were as severe as
in the United States, while major industries (notably pulp and paper)

experienced many bankruptcies.3 Although Canadian bankers did not
face serious danger of runs, they shifted away from loans to safer
assets.     This shift toward safety and liquidity, though less
pronounced than in        the U.S. case, drew criticism from all facets of
Canadian society. The American Banker of December 6, 1932, reported
the following complaint from a non—populist Canadian politician:
             "The chief criticism of our present system appears
             to be that in good times credit is expanded to great
             extremes...but, when the pinch of hard times is first
             being felt, credit is suddenly and drastically restricted
             by the banks...At the present time, loans are only being
             made when the banks have a very wide margin of security
             and every effort is being made to collect outstanding
             loans. All our banks are reaching out in an endeavor
             to liquefy their assets..."

Canadian lenders other than banks also tried to retrench: According

to the Financial Post, May 1, 1932 (quoted in Safarian, p.130)
             "Insurance, trust, and loan companies were increasingly
             unwilling to lend funds with real estate and rental
                                   —20—

            values falling, a growing number of defaults of interest
            and principal, the increasing burden of property taxes,
            and legislation which adversely affected creditors."
     More   careful study of the Canadian experience in   the Depression
would be useful.     However, on first appraisal, that experience does
not seem to be inconsistent with the point that even "good" borrowers
may find it more difficult or costly to obtain credit when there is
extensive insolvency. The debt crisis should be added to the banking
crises as a potential source of disruption of the credit system.


IV. Credit Markets and Macroeconomic Performance.

     If it is taken as giv     that   the financial crisis during the
Depression did interfere with the normal flows of credit, it still
must be shown how this might have had an effect on the course of the

aggregate economy.

      There are many ways in which problems in credit markets might
potentially affect the macroeconomy.      Several of these could be
grouped under the heading of "effects on aggregate supply".        For

example, if credit flows are dammed up, potential borrowers in the
economy may not be able to secure funds to undertake worthwhile
activities or investments; at the same time, savers may have to devote
their funds to inferior uses. Other possible problems resulting from

poorly—functioning credit markets include a reduced feasibility of

effective risk—sharing and greater difficulties in funding large,
indivisible projects.     Each of these might limit the economys
productive capacity.
     These arguments are reminiscent of some ideas advanced by Gurley
and Shaw (1955), McKinnon (1973), and others in an economic
                                  —21—

development context. The claim of this literature is that immature or
repressed financial sectors cause the "fragmentation" of less
developed economies, reducing the effective set of production
possibilities available to the society.

     Did the financial crisis of the 1930s turn the United States into

a "temporarily underdeveloped economy" (to use Bob Hall's felicitous
phrase)? Although this possibility is intriguing, the answer to the
question is probably no. While many businesses did suffer drains of
working capital and investment funds, most-larger corporations entered
the decade with sufficient cash and liquid reserves to finance
operations and any desired expansion (see, for example, Lutz (1915)].
Unless it is believed that the outputs of large and of small
businesses are not potentially substitutes, the aggregate supply
effect must be regarded as not of great quantitative importance.
     The reluctance of even cash—rich corporations to expand
production during the Depression suggests that consideration of the
aggregate   demand channel for credit market effects on output may be
more fruitful. The aggregata demand argument is in fact easy to make:
A higher cost of credit intermediation for some borrowers (e.g.,
households and smaller firms) implies that, for a given safe interest
rate, these borrowers must face a higher effective cost of credit.
(Indeed, they may not be able to borrow at all.) If this higher rate
applies to household and small firm borrowing but not to their saving
(they may only earn the safe rate on their savings), then the effect

of higher borrowing costs is unambiguously to reduce their demands for
current—period goods and services. This pure substitution effect (of
future for present consumption) is easily derived from the classical
                                      —22—

two—period model of savings.        [The classical model may be augmented,
if the reader desires, by considerations of liquidity constraints,
bankruptcy costs, or risk—aversion; see Bernanke (1981).)
      Assume that the behavior of borrowers unaffected by credit market

problems is unchanged. Then the paragraph above implies that, for a
given safe rate, an increase in the cost of credit intermediation
reduces the total quantity of goods and services currently demanded.
That is, the aggregate demand curve, drawn as a function of the safe
rate, is shifted downward by a financial crisis.        In any macroeconomic

model one cares to use, this implies lOwer output and lower safe
interest rates.         Both of these outcomes characterized 1930—33, of
course.

      Some   evidence on the magnitude of the effect of the financial
market problems on aggregate output is       now presented.


V.   Short-run Macroeconomic acts of the Financial Crisis.
     This section studies the short—run or "impact" effects of the
financial crisis. For this purpose, we use only monthly data on the
relevant variables. In addition, rather than consider the 1929—33
episode outside of its context, we have widened the sample to include
the   entire interwar period (January 1919 —     December 19141).
       Section   11.3    above has already given some evidence of the
relationship     between the troubles of the financial sector and those of

the economy as a whole. However, support for the thesis of this paper
requires that non—monetary effects of the financial crisis on output
be distinguished from the monetary effects studied by Friedman and
Schwartz. Our approach will be to fit output equations using monetary
                                 —23—

variables, then to show that adding proxies for the financial crisis
substantially improves the performance of these equations. Comparison
of financial to totally non—financial sources of the Depression, such
as those suggested by Temin (1976), is left to future research.
     To isolate the purely monetary influences on the economy, one
needs a structural explanation of the money—income relationship.
Lucas (1972) has presented a formal model in which monetary shocks
affect production decisions by causing confusion about the price
level. Influenced by this work, most recent empirical studies of the
role of money have related national income to measures of
"unanticipated" changes in money or prices.35

     The most familiar way of constructing a proxy for unanticipated
components of a variable is the two—step method of Barro (1978), in
which the residuals from a first—stage prediction equation for (say)

money are employed as the independent variables in a second-stage
regression.   We experimented with both the Barro approach and some
alternatives.36 Since our conclusions were unaffected by choice of
technique, we report here only the Barro—type results.
     In the spirit of the Lucas-Barro analysis, we considered the

effects of both "money shocks" and "price shocks" on output. Money
shocks (M_Me) were defined as the residuals from a regression of the
rate of growth of Ml on four lags of the growth rates of industrial

production, wholesale prices, and Ml itself; price shocks (p_pc) were
defined symmetrica].ly.37 We used ordinary least squares to estimate
the effects of money and price shocks on the rate of growth of
industrial production, relative to trend.

     The basic regression results for the interwar sample period are
                                   —211—

given as equations (11.1) and (11.2) in Table 2. These two equations

are of interest, independently of the other results of this paper.
The estimated "Lucas supply curve", equation (11.2), shows an effect of
price shocks on output that is statistically and economically

significant.    As such, it complements the results of Sargent (1976),

who found a similar relationship for the postwar. The relationship of
output to money surprises, equation (11.1), is a bit weaker. The fact
that we discover a smaller role for money in the monthly data than
does Evans (1981) is primarily the result of our inclusion of lagged
values of production on the right—hand side. This inclusion seems
justified both on statistical grounds and for the economic reason that

costs of adjusting production can be presumed to create a serial
dependence in output. Like Evans, we were not able to find effects of

money (or prices) lagged more than three months.
      While these regression results exhibit statistical significance

and   the expected signs for coefficients, they are disappointing in the
following sense: When equations (11.1) and (11.2) are used to perform
dynamic simulations of the path of output between mid—1930 and the
bank holiday of March 1933, they capture no more than half of the
total decline of   output   during the period. This is the basis of the

comment     in the Introduction that the declines in money seem
"quantitatively insufficient" to explain what happened to output in
 1930—33.
       Given the basic regressions (11.1) and (11.2), the next step was to
examine the effects of including proxies for the non—monetary
financial impact as explanators of output. Based on the earlier
analysis of this paper, the most obvious such proxies are the deposits
                                   —25—

of failing banks and the liabilities of failing businesses.

     A preliminary problem with the bank deposits series that needs to
be discussed is the value for March 1933, the month of the bank
holiday.   As can be seen in Table 1 ,    the deposits of banks suspended
in March 1933 is seven times that of the next worse month.         The

question arises if any adjustment should be made to that figure before
running the regressions.

     We believe that it would be a mistake to eliminate totally the
bank holiday episode from the sample.        According to contemporary
accounts, rather than being an orderly and planned—in—advance policy,
the imposition of   the   holiday was a forced response to the most
panicky  and chaotic financial conditions of the period. The deposits
of suspended banks figure for March, as large as it is, reflects not
all closed banks but only those not licensed to re—open by June 30,
1933. Of these banks, most were liquidated or placed in receivership;
less than 25% had been licensed   to re—open as of December 31, 1936.38

Qualitatively, then, the March 1933 episode resembled the earlier
crises; it would be throwing away Information not to include in some
way the effects of this crisis and of its resolution on the economy.

     On the other hand, the mass closing of banks by government action
probably created less confusion and fear of future crises than would
have a similar number of suspensions occurring without government
intervention.   As a conservative compromise, we assumed that the
"supervised" bank closings of March 1933 had the same effect as an
"unsupervised" bank crisis involving 15% as much in frozen deposits.
This scales down the March 1933 episode to about the size of the

events of October 1931. The sensitivity of the results to this
                                         —26—

assumption is as follows:                          importance
                                     Increasing the amount of
attributed to the March 1933 crisis raises the magnitude and
statistical significance of the measured effects of the financial
crises on output.           (It is in this sense that the 15% figure is

conservative.)          However, the bank failure coefficients in the
regressions retained high significance even when less weight was given
to March 1933.

        We turn now to the results of adding (real) deposits of failing
banks and liabilities of failing businesses to the output equations

(11.3   and   4•14   in Table 2).   (The sample period begins in 1921 because
of   the unavailability of data on monthly bank failures         before then.)

In both regressions current and lagged first differences of the added

variables enter the explanation of the growth rate of industrial

production       (relative to trend) with the expected sign and, taken
jointly, with a high level of statistical significance.                 The

magnitudes and significance of the coefficients of money and price
shocks are not much changed.           This provides at least a tentative
confirmation that non—monetary effects of the financial crisis

augmented      monetary effects in the short—run determination of output.
        Some alternative proxies for the non—monetary component of the

financial crisis were also tried.           For the sake of space, only a
summary of these results is given:              1) To examine the direct effects

of the contraction of bank credit on the economy, we began by

regressing the rate of growth of bank loans on current and lagged
values of suspended bank deposits and of failing business liabilities.
(This regression indicated a powerful negative effect of financial
crisis on bank loans.) The fitted series from this regression was
                                   —27—

used as a proxy for the portion of the credit contraction induced by
te financial crisis. In the presence of money or price shocks, the
effect of a decline in this variable on output was found to be
negative for two months, positive for the next two months, then
strongly   negative for the fifth and sixth months after the decline.
For the period from 1921 until the bank holiday, and with monetary
variables included, the total effect of credit contraction on output
(as measured by the sum of lag coefficients in a polynomial
distributed lag) was large (comparable to the monetary effect),
negative, and significant at the 95% level. For the entire interwar
sample, however, the statistical significance of this variable was
much reduced. This last result is due to the fact that the recovery
of 1933_Lfl was financed by non—bank sources, with bank loans remaining
at a low level.

      2)   Another proxy for the financial crisis that was tried was the

differential between Baa corporate bond yields and the yields on U.S.
bonds. As described in Section 11.3, this variable responded strongly

to both bank crises and the problems of debtors, and as such was a
sensitive indicator of financial market conditions.       The yield
differential variable turned out to enter very strongly as an
explanator of current and future output growth, overall and in every
subsample. As much of this predictive power was no doubt due to pure
financial market anticipations of future   output declines, we also put
the   differential variable through a first—stage regression on the
liabilities of bank and business failures. Assuming that these latter
variables themselves were not determined by anticipations of future
output declines (see below), the use of the fitted series from this
                                   —28—

regression "purged" the differential variable of its pure anticipatory

component.    The fitted series entered the output equations less
strongly than the raw series, but it retained the right sign and
statistical significance at the 95% confidence level.
     In almost every case, then, the addition of proxies for the
general financial crisis improved the purely monetary explanation of
short—run (monthly) output movements. This finding was robust to the
obvious experiments. For example, with the above—noted exception of
the credit variable in 1933—kl, coefficients remained roughly stable

over subsamples.    Another experiment was to include free dummy
variables for each quarter from 1931:1 to 1932:IV in the above
regressions. The purpose of this was to test the suggestion that our
results are only a reflection of    the   fact that both the output and
financial crisis variables "moved a lot" during 1930—33. The rather
surprising discovery was that the inclusion of the dummies increased
the magnitude and statistical significance of the coefficients on bank
and business failures.    Finally, the economic significance of the
results   was tested by using the various estimated equations to run
dynamic simulations of monthly levels of industrial production
(relative to trend) for mid—1930 to March 1933. Relative to the pure

money—shock and price—shock simulations described above, the equations
including financial crisis proxies did well.       Equations (p.3) and
(U.14) reduced the mean squared simulation error over (p.1) and (4.2)

by about fifty per cent.     The other (nonreported) equations did
better; e.g., those using the yield differential variable reduced the
MSE of simulation from ninety to ninety—five per cent.
     These results are promising. However, a caveat must be added:
                                     —29—

To conclude that the observed correlations support the theory outlined

in this paper requires an additional assumption, that failures of
banks and commercial firms are not caused by anticipations of (future)

changes in output. To the extent that, say, bank runs are caused by
the receipt of bad news about next month's industrial production, the
fact that bank failures tend to lead production declines does not
prove that the bank problems are helping to cause the declines.39
     While it may not be possible to convince the determined skeptic
that bank and business failures are not purely anticipatory phenomena,

a good case can be made against that position. For example, while in
some cases a bad sales forecast may induce a firm to declare
bankruptcy, more often that option is forced by insolvency (a result
of past business conditions). For banks, it might well be argued that
not only are failures relatively independent of anticipations about
output, but that they are not simply the product of current and past
output performance either: First, banking crises had never previous
to this time been a necessary result of declines in output.0 Second,
Friedman and Schwartz, as well as other writers, have identified
specific events that were important sources of bank runs during
1930—33. These include the revelation of scandal at the Bank of the
United States (a private bank, which in December 1930 became the
largest    bank to fail up to that time);      the collapse of the
Kreditanstalt    in   Austria and the ensuing financial panics in central
Europe; Britain's going oft gold; the exposure of huge pyramiding
schemes in the U.S. and Europe; and others, all connected very
indirectly (if at all) with the path of industrial production in the
United States.
                                        —30—

      If   it is accepted that bank suspensions and business bankruptcies

were the product of factors beyond pure anticipations of output
      then the evidence of this section supports the view that
decline,
non—monetary aspects of the financial crisis were at least part of the
propagatory mechanism of the Great Depression.           If it is further
accepted that the financial crisis contained large exogenous
components (there is evidence for this in the case of the banking
panics),    then there are elements of causality in the story as well.



VI. Persistence of' the Financial Crisis

       The claim was made in the Introduction that our        theory seems
capable,    unlike the major alternatives, of explaining the unusual
length     and depth of the Depression.        In the previous section we
attempted     to deal with the issue of depth; simulations of the
estimated regressions suggested that the combined monetary and
non—monetary effects of the financial crisis can explain much of the
severity of' the decline in output. In this section the question of
the   length of'   the   Depression is addressed.
       As a matter of       theory,   the duration of the credit effects
described    in Section III above depends on the amount of time it takes
to 1) establish new or revive old channels of' credit flow after a
major disruption, and 2) rehabilitate insolvent debtors. Since these

processes may be difficult and slow, the persistence of non—monetary
effects of financial crisis has a plaus1ble basis.           (In contrast,
persistence of purely monetary effects relies on the slow diffusion of'

information or unexplained stickiness of wages and prices.)            Of

course, plausibility is not enough; some evidence on the speed of
                                 —31—
financial recovery should be adduced.

     After struggling through 1931 and 1932, the financial system hit
its low point in March 1933, when the newly—elected President
Roosevelt's "bank holiday" closed down most financial intermediaries
and markets. March 1933 was a watershed month in several ways:     It

marked not only the beginning of economic and financial recovery but
also the introduction of' truly extensive government involvement in all

aspects of the financial system. It might be argued that the
Federally—directed financial rehabilitation——which took strong
measures against the problems of both creditors and debtors——was the
only major New Deal program that successfully promoted economic
recovery.2 In any case, the large government intervention is prima
facie evidence that by this time the public had lost confidence in the

self—correcting powers of the financial structure.
     Although the government's actions set the financial system on its
way back to health, recovery was neither rapid nor complete.     Many
banks did not re—open after the holiday, and many that did open did so
on a restricted basis or with marginally solvent balance sheets.
Deposits did not flow back into the banks in great quantities until

193)4, and the government (through the Reconstruction Finance
Corporation and other agencies) had to continue to pump large sums
into banks and other intermediaries.    Most important, however, was a
noticeable change in attitude among lenders; they emerged from the
1930—33 episode chastened and conservative.    Friedman and Schwartz
(pp. 14)4962) have documented the shift of banks during this time away

from making loans toward holding safe and liquid investments. The
growing level of bank liquidity created an illusion (as Friedman and
                                    —32—

Schwartz pointed out) of "easy money"; however, the combination of'
lender reluctance and continued debtor insolvency interfered with
credit flows for several years after 1933.

     Evidence of post—holiday credit problems is not hard to find.
For example, small businesses, which (as we have noted) suffered
disproportionately during   the   Contraction, had continuing difficulties
with credit during recovery. Kimmel (1939) carried out a survey of
credit availability during 1933—38 as a companion to the National
Industrial Conference Board's 1932 survey:        His conclusions are
generally sanguine (this may reflect the fact that the work was
commissioned by the American Bankers Association).        However, his
survey results (p. 65) show that, of responding manufacturing firms
normally dependent on banks, refusal or restriction of bank credit was
reported by 30.2% of very small firms (capitalization less than
$50,000); 114.3% of small firms ($50,001 —    $500,000); 10.3% of medium
firms ($500,001 —   $1,000,000); and 3.2% of the largest companies
(capital over $1 million).    (The corresponding results from the 1932

NICE survey were 141.3%, 22.2%, 12.5%, and 9.7%.)
     Two well—known economists, Hardy and Viner, conducted a credit
survey in the Seventh Federal Reserve District in 19314—35. Based on
"intensive coverage of 2600 individual cases", they found "a genuine
unsatisfied demand for credit by solvent borrowers, many of whom could

make economically sound use of working capital...The total amount of
this unsatisfied demand for credit is a significant factor, among many

others, in retarding business recovery." They added, "So far as small
business is concerned, the difficulty in getting bank credit has
increased more, as compared with a few years ago, than has the
                                 —33—
difficulty of getting trade credit."3

     Finally, another credit su'vey for the 1933—38 period was done by
the Small Business Review Committee for the U.S. Department of
Commerce.   This study surveyed 6000 firms with between 21 and 150
employees. From these they chose a special sample of 600 companies
"selected because of their high ratings by a standard commercial
rating agency".   Even within the elite sample, 5% of the firms
reported difficulty in securing funds for working capital purposes
during this period; and 75% could not obtain capital or long—term loan
requirements through regular markets.
     The reader may wish to view the American Bankers Association and
Small Business Review Committee surveys as lower and upper bounds,
with the Hardy—Viner study in the middle. In any case, the consensus
from surveys, as well as the opinion of careful students such as
Chandler, is that credit difficulties for small business persisted for
at least two years after the bank holiday.5

     Home mortgage lending was another important area of credit
activity.   In this sphere private lenders were even more cautious
after 1933 than in business lending.     They had a reason for
conservatism; while business failures fell quite a bit during the
recovery, real estate defaults and foreclosures continued high through
1935.6 As has been noted, some traditional mortgage lenders nearly
left the market: Life insurance companies, which made $525 million in
mortgage loans in 1929, made $10 million In new loans in 1933 and $16
million in 193ZL47 During this period, mortgage loans that were made
by private institutions went only to the very best potential
borrowers: Evidence for this is the sharp drop in default rates of
                                    —3k;—

loans made    in the   early 1930s as compared to loans made in earlier
years (see Behrens (1952, p. 11)); this decline was too large to be
explained by the improvement in business conditions alone.
      To the extent that the home mortgage market did function in the
years immediately following 1933, it was largely due to the direct
involvement of the Federal government.       Besides establishing some
important new institutions (such as the FSLIC and the system of

Federally—chartered savings and loans), the government "readjusted"
existingdebts, made investments in the shares of thrift institutions,
and substituted for recalcitrant private institutions in the provision
of   direct credit. In 193L, the government—sponsored Home Owners' Loan
Corporation made 71% of all mortgage loans extended.8
       Similar conditions obtained for farm credit and in other markets,

but space does not permit this to be pursued here. Summarizing the
reading of all of the evidence by us and by other students of the

period,    it seems safe to say that the return of the private financial
system to normal conditions after March 1933 was not rapid; and that
the financial recovery would have been more difficult without
extensive government intervention and assistance. A moderate estimate
is that the U.S. financial system operated under handicap for about

five years (from the beginning of 1931 to the end of 1935), a period
which covers most of the time between the recessions of 1929—30 and
1937—38.     This is consistent with the claim that the effects of
financial crisis can help explain the persistence of the Depression.

VII. International Aects
       The Depression was a worldwide phenomenon; banking crises, though
                                   —35—

occurring in a number of important countries besides the U.S., were
not so ubiquitous.     A number of large countries had no serious
domestic banking problems, yet experienced severe drops in real income
in the early 1930s.     Can this be made consistent with the important
role we have ascribed to the financial crisis in the U.S.? A complete
answer would require another paper; but we will offer some
observations:

     1)   The experience of different countries and the mix of
depressive forces each faced varied significantly.      For example,
Britain, suffering from an overvalued pound, had high unemployment
throughout the 1920s; after leaving gold in 1931, it was one of the
first countries to recover.      The biggest problems of food and raw
materials exporters were falling prices and the drying up of overseas
markets. Thus we need not look to the domestic financial system as an
important cause in every case.
     2)   The countries in which banking crises occurred (the U.S.,
Germany, Austria, Hungary, and others) were among the worst—hit by the
Depression.     Moreover, these countries held a large share of world
trade and output. The U.S. alone accounted for almost half of world
industrial output in 1925—29, and its imports of basic raw materials
and foodstuffs in 1927-28 made up almost O% of the trade in these
commodjtjes.19 The reduction of imports as these economies weakened
exerted downward pressure on trading partners.
     3)   There were interesting parallels between the troubles of the
domestic financial system and those of the international system. One
of the Federal Reserve's proudest accomplishments had been the
establishment, during the 1920s, of an international gold—exchange
                                    — 36—

standard.    Unfortunately, like domestic banking, the gold—exchange
standard had the instability of a fractional—reserve system.
International reserves included not only gold but also foreign
currencies, notably the dollar and the pound; for countries other than

the U.S. and the U.K., foregn exchange was 35% of total reserves.
     In 1931 expectations that the international financial system
would collapse became self—fulfilling. A general attempt to convert
currencies into gold drove one currency after another off the
gold—exchange standard. Restrictions on the movement of capital or
gold were widely imposed. By 1932 only the U.S. and a small number of
other countries remained on gold.

     As the fall of the gold standard parallelled domestic bank
failures, the domestic insolvency problem had an international
analogue  as well. Largely due to fixed exchange rates, the deflation
of prices was worldwide. Countries with large nominal debts, notably
agricultural exporters (the case of Canada has been mentioied), became
unable to pay.    Foreign bond values in the U.S. were extremely
depressed.

     As in the domestic economy, these problems disrupted the
worldwide mechanism of credit.      International capital flows were
reduced to a trickle. This represented a serious problem for many
countries.

     Thus the fact that the Depression hit countries which did not
have banking crises does not preclude the possibility that banking and

debt problems were important in the U.S. (or, for that matter, that
countries with strong banks had problems with debtor insolvency).
Moreover, our analysis of the domestic financial system may be able to
                                   —37—
shed    light on some of the international financial difficulties of the
period.

VIII.     Conclusion

        Did the financial collapse of the early 1930s have real effects
on the macroeconomy, other than through monetary channels?        The

evidence is at least not inconsistent with this proposition. However,
a stronger reason for giving this view consideration is the one stated
in the Introduction:       This theory has hope of achieving a
reconciliation of the obvious sub—optimality of this period with the

postulate of reasonably rational, market—constrained agents.       The

solution to this paradox lies in recognizing that economic
institutions, rather than being a "veil", can affect costs of
transactions and thus market opportunities and allocations.
Institutions which evolve and perform well in normal times may become

counterproductive during periods when exogenous shocks or policy
mistakes drive the economy off—course.        The malfunctioning of
financial    institutions during the early 1930s exemplifies this point.
                                         —38—




    Table   1.    Sel cc ted   macroeconomic data, Ju 1929 -    March 1933


Month       IP           Banks       Falls      AL/PI   L/DEP        DIP
1929J       114          60.8        32.4        .163   .851         2.31
    A       114           6.7        33.7        .007   .855         2.33
    S       112           9.7        34.1        .079   .860         2.33
    0       110          12.5        31.3        .177   .865         2.50
    N       105          22.3        52.0        .121   .854         2.68
    D       100          15.5        62.5       —.214   .851         2.59
1930J       100          26.5        61.2       —.228   .837         2.49
    F       100          32.4        51.3       —.102   .834         2.48
    M        98          23.2        56.8        .076   .835         2.44
    A        98          31.9        49.1        .058   .826         2.33
    M        96          19.4        55.5       —.028   .820         2.41
    J        93          57.9        63.1        .085   .818         2.53
    J        89          29.8        29.8       —.055   .802         2.52
    A        86          22.8        149.2      —.027   .800         2.47
    3        85          21.6        46.7        .008   .799         2.41
    0        83          19.7        56.3       —.010   .791         2.73
    N        81         179.9        55.3       —.067   .777         3.06
    D        79         372.1        83.7       —.144   .775         3.49
1931J        78          75.7        914.6      —.187   .763         3.21
    F        79          34.2        59.6       —.144   .747         3.08
    M        80          34.3        60.$       —.043   .738         3.17
    A        80          41.7•       50.9       —.104   .722         3.45
    M        80          43.2        53.4       —.133   .706         3.99
                                             — 39—




Table 1 (continued)
1931J      77         190. 5          51.7           —. 1   20   .707       11.23
    J      76          40.7           61.0           —.013       .7014      3.93
    A      73         180.0            53.0          —.103       .706       14 .29

    S      70         233.5            117.3         —.050       .713       11.82
    0      68         117   1   .14   70.7           —.310       .716       5.111
    N      67          67.9            60.7          —.101       .726       5.30
    D      66         277.1            73.2          —.120       .732       6.119
1932J      64         218.9            96.9          —.117       .745       11.87
    F      63          51.7            811.9         —.138       .757       4.76
    M      62           10.9           93.8          —.183       .71111     11.91
    A      58           31.6          101   •1       —.225       .718       6.78
    M      56           311.14         83.8          —.154       .696       7.87
    II     514        132.7            76.9          —.170       .689       7.93
    J      53           148.7          87.2          —.219       .677       7.21
    A      54          29.5            77.0          —.130       .662       11.77
    S      58           13.5          56.1           —.091       .6111      11.19
    0      60          20 •      1    52.9           —.095       .623       11.1111

    N      59          43.3           53.6           —.133       .602       11.79
    D      58          70.9           614.2          —.039       •   59 6   5.07
1933J      58         133.1           79.1           —.139       .576       11.79
    F      57          62.2           65.6           —.059       .583       4.09
    M      54     3276.3'             48.5           —.767'      .607'      14.03
                                        — zI0_




   IF       seasonally adjusted index of industrial production, 1935—39
          100; Federal Reserve Bulletin
Banks       deposits of failing banks, $millions; Federal Reserve Bulletin
Fails
                                  ta2
            liabilities of failing commercial businesses, $millions;
            !!i21 2!.
AL/PI       ratio of net extensions of commercial bank loans to (monthly)
            personal income; from Bank and Moneta Statistics and
            National Income
  L/D       ratio of loans outstanding to the sum of demand and time
            deposits, weekly reporting banks; Bank and Moneta
            Statistics



                                       tfl
  DIF           difference (in percentage points) between yields on Baa
            corporate bonds and long—term U.S. Government bonds;
                          !12.a!1
  ()
   ft
            A   national bank "holiday" was declared in March 1933

        to Table 2 (overleaf)

                rate of growth of industrial production (Federal Reserve
                Bulletin), relative to exponential trend

(M_Me)t =       rate of growth of Ml, nominal and seasonally adjusted
                (Friedman and Schwartz, Table 4—1), less predicted rate
                of growth

(p_pe)t =       rate of growth of wholesale price index (Federal Reserve
                Bulletin), less predicted rate of growth

DBANKSt =       first  difference of deposits of failing banks
                 (deflated by wholesale price index)

DFAILSt =       first  difference of liabilities of failing businesses
                 (deflated by wholesale price index)
Data are monthly. t—statistics are in parentheses.
                                                  _141_

Table 2. Es t I mated ouut               uat ions
(4.1)         =    .623 't_i —
                  (10.21)
              + .1141



   s.c. = .0272
                  (1.16)
                           (M—M)
                                    .11313
                                   (—2.37)




                            D.W. = 2.02
                                        +
                                             Y_2 +


                                             (0.42)
                                                           •1so7
                                                          (3.42)

                                              .051 (M_Me)t —2 +
                                                                   (M_Me)

                                                                          .
                                                                         (1.19)


                                                 sample: 1/19 — 12/41


(4.2)         =    .582                               +     533 (ppm)
                  (9.50)           (176)t_2 (533)
              +    .350 (p_pc)          +     .036 (P_pe) , + .069 (p_pe)3
                  (3.33)                     (0.34)          (0.66)

   S.C. = .0260             D.W. = 2.01          sample: 1/19 — 12/131


(23.3)    '!t =    .613                               +    .332 (M_Me) + .113 (M_Me)t_l
                  (9.86)           (23)t_2 (2.92)                       (0.99)
              +    .110                                                 — .869E—014
                  (0.96)
                           (M_Me)t2                                t3     (—13.24)
                                                                                    DBANKSt

              —    .406E—0'4
                             DBANKSt 1 - .258E—03 DFAILSt —                        .325E—03 DFAILSt_i
                   (—1.93)               (—1.95)                                   (_2.137)


   S.C.       .0249         D.W. = 1.99          sample: 1/21 — 12/131


             = .615 Y_ — .131 t—2 +
                  (9.76)           (—2.13)
                                                           .1355
                                                          (3.99)
                                                                   (_e) +         .231
                                                                              (1.97)
                                                                                         (e)
             —     .004 (p_pc) t-2                                      — . 799E—013
                  (-0.03)                                                            DBANKSt
                                                                          (-4.03)
             — .337E—0$
                               DBANKSt i - .202E—03 DFAILSt —                       2142E—03 DFAILSt_,
                   (—1.66)                        (—1.52)


   S.C. = .02146            D.W.     1.98        sample: 1/21 — 12/41
                                    —42—

                                 References



Abel, Andrew and Frederic Mishkin, "An Integrated View of Tests of
Rationality, Market Efficiency, and the Short—Run Neutrality of

Monetary Policy", mimeo, 1981.


Barro, Robert, "Unanticipated Money, Output, and the Price Level in
the United States", Journal of Political Econo, 86, no.          (August

1978), 59—8O.


Behrens, Carl, Commercial   Bank Activities in Urban Moe Financ,
New York: N.B.E.R., 1952.



Bernanke, Ben, "Bankruptcy, Liquidity, and Recession", American
Economic Review, 71, no. 2 (May 1981), 155—9.


Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Banki and Monetary

Statistics, 19 43.



Brown, E. Carey, "Fiscal Policy in the 'Thirties:        A Reappraisal",

American Economic Review, Z6, no. 5 (December 1956), 857—79.



Brunner, Karl, ed., The Great    Depression Revisited,   Boston: Martinus

Nijhoff, 1981.



Cagan,   Philip,   Determinants and Effects of Chaes in the Stock of

Mony1875—196O,NewYork:         N.B.E.R., 1965.
                                      — 43




Chandler, Lester, America's      Greatest    1ression, New York: Harper &
Row, 1970.



__________ ,   American Monetary Policy, 1928—1941, New York: Harper &
Row, 1971.



Clark, Evans, ed., The Internal Debts        of the United   States, New York:
MacMillan Co., 1933.



Cone, Kenneth, unpublished dissertation, Stanford University, 1982.



Diamond, Douglas and Philip Dybvig, "Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and
Liquidity", mimeo, 1981.



Evans, Paul, "An Econometric Analysis of the Causes of the Great
Depression in the U.S.", mimeo, 1981.


Fab rican t, Solomon, Pr of i t s, Loss      and Business Asse 1929-1934,
Bulletin 55, N.B.E.R., 1935.



Fama, Eugene, "Banking in the Theory of Finance", Journal of Moneta
Economics, vol. 6, 1980, 39—57.


Federal Reserve Bulletin, various issues.



Fisher, Irving, "The Debt—Deflation Theory of Great Depressions",
Econometrica, 1, no. '       (October 1933), 337—57.


Flood, Robert and Peter Garber, "A Systematic Banking Collapse in a

Perfect Foresight World", N.B.E.R. working paper no. 691.


Frederiksen, D.M., "Two Financial Roads Leading Out of Depression",
Harvard Business    Review, 10,   no. 1 (October 1931), 131-I8.


Friedman, Benjamin, "Debt and Economic Activity in the United States",

N.B.E.R. working paper no. 7Ol, 1981.



Friedman, Milton, and Anna J. Schwartz, A MonetI                  !2.1 2!
United State 1867—1960, Princeton: Princeton U. Press, 1963.


Goldsmith, Raymond, Financial Institutions            in the American Econo
Since   1900,   Princeton:    Princeton U. Press, 1958.



Gordon, Robert J. and James Wilcox, "Monetarist Interpretations of the
Great Depression: An Evaluation and Critique", in Brunner volume


Gurley, John G. and E.S. Shaw, "Financial Aspects of Economic
Development", American Economic        Review, 115,   no.   11 (September 1955),

515—38.



Hart, A.G.——see Twentieth Century Fund


Jaffee, Dwight, and T. Russell, "Imperfect Information and Credit
Rationing", Quarter Journal of Economics, 90, no. L (November 1976),
651—66.



Kennedy, Susan E., The Bank         Crisis   of 1933, Lexington: U. Press of
Kentucky, 1973.



Kimmel, Lewis H., The Availability of Bank Credi 1933-1938, New
York: National Industrial Conference Board, 1939.



Kindleberger, Charles P., Mania Panic and Crashes, New York:
Basic Books, 1978.



K].ebaner, Benjamin, Commercial       Banki in the United States:      A


History, Hinadale, Illinois: Dryden Press, 1971.


Lucas, Robert E., Jr., "Expectations and the Neutrality of Money",
Journal   of Economic Th eo,   1972, 103- 1 2 .


—           , Studies   in Business    le Theo, Cambridge:         M.I.T.
Press, 1981.



Lutz, Friedrich, Corporate Cash Balanc 191L_Z3, New York:
N.B.E.R., 1915.



McKinnon, Ronald J., Mon and Cital In Economic              Develrnent,
Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 1973.
                                     —146—

Merwin, Charles L., Finano1 Small Corporations, N.B.E.R., 19142.


Minsky, Hyman P., "A Theory of Systematic Fragility", in E.I. Altman
and   A.W.     Sametz,    eds., Financial Crises, New York:
Wiley—Interscience, 1977.



Mishkin,     Frederic, "The Household Balance Sheet and the Great
Depression",    Journal of   Economic H1st1, 38, no. 14 (December 1978),
918—37.



___             "Does    Anticipated Money Matter?     An Econometric
Investigation", Journal of      Political Econo,     90, no.   1
                                                                   (February

1982), 22—51.



National Industrial Conference Board, The Availablli of Bank Credit,
New York, 1932.



Nugent,    Rolf, Consumer Credit and Economic Stabi1i, New York:
Russell Sage Foundation, 1939.



O'Hara, Maureen and David Easley, "The Postal Savings System in
Depression", Journal of Economic H1sto, 39, no. 3 (September 1979),
7141—53.



Persons, Charles E., "Credit Expansion, 1920 to 1929 and Its Lessons",

Quarter Journal of Economics, 145, no. 1 (November 1930), 914-130.
                                       — 117_


Safrian,   A.E., The Canadian Eonoj in the Great s1on, Toronto:
U. of Toronto Press, 1959.



Sargent, Thomas 1., "A Classical Macroeconometric Model for the United
States", Journal of Political       Econ2Z,     8i, no. 2 (April 1976), 207—38.


Stiglitz, Joseph E. and Andrew Weiss, "Credit Rationing in Markets

with Imperfect Information", American Economic RevIew, 71, no.3 (June
1981), 393Z$10.



Stoddard, W.L., "Small Business Wants Capital", Harvard Business
Review, 18, no. 3 (Spring 19110), 265—7'4.



Surv of Current Business, v a rio u s I ss u e s.



Temin, Peter, Did Moneta Forces Cause the Great !ression?, New
York: W.W. Norton, 1976.



Twentieth Century Fund, Debts and Recov 1929-1937, New York, 1938
(written by A.G. Hart).



U.S. Department of Commerce, Historical Statistics of the UnIted
States, 1975.



             National Income, 19511.



_____        The Un i   ted   States in the World Ec2, 19117.
Upham, Cyril B. arid Edwin Lamk.e, Closed and Distres.2..

in   Public Administration,   Washington,   D.C.:   The Brookings

Institution, 1931t.
                                   — L9 —

                                  Notes


1.   This is documented more carefully in   Sections   11.3 and V below.



2.    This paper does not address the causes of the initial 1929—30
downturn. Friedman and Schwartz (1963) have stressed the importance
of the Federal Reserve's "anti—speculative" monetary tightening.
Others, such as Temin (1976) and Gordon and Wilcox (1981), have
pointed out autonomous expenditure effects.



3.   See Brunner (1981) for a useful overview of contemporary theories
of   the Depression.   Also, see Lucas and Rapping's article in Lucas
(1981).


. This is especially true of the more recent work, which tends to
ignore the non—monetary effects of the financial crisis. Older
writers often seemed to take the disruptive impact of the financial
breakdown for granted.



5.    We do not deny the possible importance of irrationality in
economic life; however it seems   that the best research strategy is to
push the rationality postulate as far as it will go.


6. See especially Chandler (1970,1971) and Friedman and Schwartz.


7.    Hart (1938) describes the problems of the building—and—loans. An
interesting sidelight here is the additional strain on housing lenders
                                   —50—

caused by the existence of the postal Savings System: see OHara and

Easley (1979).


8. According to Goldsmith (1957), commercial banks held 39.6% of the
assets of all financial intermediaries, broadly defined, in 1929. See
his Table 11.



9.    Upham and Lamke (1931k), p. 2I7.    Since smaller banks were more

likely to fail, the fraction of deposits represented by suspended
banks is somewhat less.     Eventual recovery by depositors was about

75%; see Friedman and Schwartz, p. 38.


10.    Kiebaner (197L) gives a good brief history of U.S. commercial

banking.



11.    Upham and Lamke, p. 2L7, report that approximately 2—3% of all
banks in operation failed in each year of the 1920s.


12.    Diamond and Dybvig (1982) formalize this argument.      For an
alternative analysis of the phenomenon of runs, see Flood and Garber

(1981).



13.    For example, equity—like instruments, such as those used by
modern money—market mutual funds, could have been used as the
transactions medium. See Cone (1982).


14. Diamond and Dybvig derive this point formally, with some caveats.
                                      —51—



15. Finding an explanation for the lack of indexed debt during the
deflationary 1930s——as in the inflationary 1970s——is a point on which
we stumble.



16.   Twentieth Century Fund (1938), p. 164, reporting the results of
t h e Financial   Surv of   Urban   Hous1.

17.   Ibid., p. 138.



18. Ibid., p. 225.


19. Chandler (1971), p. 102.


20. Page 311.


21.   Judging by Table 1, the failure of this recovery seems to be
unrelated to financial sector difficulties. However, accounts from
the time suggest that the banking crisis of late 1932 and early 1933
(which ended in the banking holiday) was In fact quite severe; see
Kennedy (1973). The relatively low reported rate of bank failures at
this time may be an artifact of state moratoria, restrictions on
withdrawals, and other interventions.


22. It should be noted that the phenomena emphasized by Friedman and
Schwartz——the effects of the contraction of the banking system on the
quantity of the transactions medium and on real output—-are also
                                  —52—

impossible in a complete—markets world.



23.   To concentrate on credit intermediation, we neglect the
transactions and other services performed by banks.


24.   See Jaffee and Russell (1976) and Stiglitz and Weiss (1981) on
the way banks induce favorable borrower self—selection.



25. Since intermediation resources could have been shifted out of the

beleaguered banking sector (given enough time), ours is basically a

costs—of—adjustment argument.


26. A problem with this series is that loans wiped out by default are
included in the measure of credit contraction.     Note, however, that

for our purposes looking at the change in loans is preferable to
considering the stock of real loans outstanding:      In a regime of

nominally contracted debt and sharp unanticipated deflation, stability

of the stock of real debt does not signal a comfortable situation for

borrowers.



27. National Industrial Conference Board, p. 28.


28. See Chandler (1971), pp. 233—39.



29. Klebaner, p.


30. Nugent (1939), pp. 11ZI_16.
                                   —53—



31. Merwin (19L$2), p. 5 and p. 75.



32. Twentieth Century Fund, p. 163.


33. Frederiksen (1931), p. 139.


34.    Safarian   (1959), ch. 7.



35. A notable exception is Mishkin (1981).


36. Principal alternatives tried were 1) the use of anticipated as
well as unanticipated quantities as explanatory variables; and 2)
re—estimation of some equations by the more efficient but
computationally more complex method of Abel and Mishkin (1981).



37.  The first—stage regressions were unsurprising and, for the sake
of space, are not reported.

38. Federal Reserve Bulletin, 1937, pp. 866—7.

39. Actually, a similar criticism might be made of   Barro's work and
our   own money and price regressions.

ZO.  Cagan (1965) makes this point; see pp. 216, 227—8. The 1920—22
recession, for example, did not generate any banking problems.
41. See Chandler (1970), ch. 15, Friedman and Schwartz, oh. 8.


42. Brown (1956) has argued that New Deal fiscal policy was not very
constructive.   A paper by Michael Weinstein in the Brunner volume
(exact reference to be found) pointed out counterproductive aspects of
the N.R.A.



43. These passages are quoted in Stoddard (1940).


44. Ibid.


45. See Chandler (1970), pp. 150—51.


46. Historical Statistics,   series   N301.



47. Ibid., N282.


48. Ibid., N278 and N283.


49. U.S. Department of Commerce (1949), pp. 29—31.
