NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND MACROECONOMIC DYNAMICS
WITH HETEROGENEOUS FIRMS
Fabio Ghironi
Marc. J. Melitz
Working Paper 10540
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10540
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2004

For helpful comments, we thank Philippe Bacchetta, Marianne Baxter, Paul Bergin, Giancarlo Corsetti,
Pierre- Olivier Gourinchas, Gene Grossman, Elhanan Helpman, Andreas Hornstein, Jean Imbs, Paolo Pesenti,
Kenneth Rogo., and seminar and conference participants at Bank of Canada, Bank of England, Berkeley,
Boston College, Boston Fed, Boston University, CEPR Economic Geography 2004, Cleveland Fed, CSEFSalerno, Davis, ECB, ES Summer 2003, EUI, Fed Board, Harvard, IMF, LSE, McMaster, NBER IFM March
2004, NBER ITI December 2003, NYU, Princeton, Queen Mary, Richmond Fed, San Francisco Fed, SED
2003, Stanford, Trinity College, UCLA, and Yale. We are grateful to Kolver Hernandez for excellent research
assistance. Remaining errors are our responsibility. Ghironi gratefully acknowledges the hospitality of the
European University Institute in the spring of 2004 and funding from Boston College through a 2002
Summer-Fall Research Expense Grant, a 2003 Research Incentive Grant, and the Richard W. Tresch Junior
Faculty Fund of the Department of Economics. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Fabio Ghironi and Marc J. Melitz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

International Trade and Macroeconomic Dynamics with Heterogeneous Firms
Fabio Ghironi and Marc J. Melitz
NBER Working Paper No. 10540
May 2004
JEL No. F12, F41
ABSTRACT
We develop a stochastic, general equilibrium, two-country model of trade and macroeconomic
dynamics. Productivity differs across individual, monopolistically competitive firms in each country.
Firms face a sunk entry cost in the domestic market and both fixed and per-unit export costs. Only
relatively more productive firms export. Exogenous shocks to aggregate productivity and entry or
trade costs induce firms to enter and exit both their domestic and export markets, thus altering the
composition of consumption baskets across countries over time. In a world of flexible prices, our
model generates endogenously persistent deviations from PPP that would not exist absent our
microeconomic structure with heterogeneous firms. It provides an endogenous, microfounded
explanation for a Harrod-Balassa-Samuelson effect in response to aggregate productivity
differentials and deregulation. Finally, the model successfully matches several moments of U.S. and
international business cycles.
Fabio Ghironi
Department of Economics
Boston College
140 Commonwealth Avenue
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467-3859
fabio.ghironi@bc.edu
Marc J. Melitz
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center 120
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
mmelitz@harvard.edu

1

Introduction

Formal models of international macroeconomic dynamics do not usually address or incorporate the
determinants and evolution of trade patterns. The vast majority of such macroeconomic models take
the pattern of international trade and the structure of markets for goods and factors of production
as given.1 The determinants of such trade patterns are, in turn, analyzed within methodologically
distinct models that are generally limited to comparisons of long-run positions or growth dynamics
after changes in some determinants of trade. These models do not consider short- to medium-run
business cycle dynamics and their eﬀect on the pattern of trade over time. This separation between
modern models of international macroeconomics and trade theory is somewhat unnatural. Modern
international macroeconomics prides itself on its microfoundations. Yet, it neglects to analyze the
eﬀects of macro phenomena on its microeconomic underpinnings. Similarly, much of trade theory
does not recognize the aggregate feedback eﬀects of micro-level adjustments over time.2
This paper contributes to bridging the gap between international macroeconomics and trade
theory. We use Melitz’s (2003) model of trade with monopolistic competition and heterogeneous
firms as the microeconomic underpinning of a two-country, dynamic, stochastic, general equilibrium
(DSGE) model of international trade and macroeconomics.3 Firms face some initial uncertainty
concerning their future productivity when making an irreversible investment to enter the domestic
market. Post-entry, firms produce with diﬀerent productivity levels. In addition to the sunk entry
cost, firms face both fixed and per-unit export costs.4 Forward-looking firms formulate entry and
export decisions based on expectations of future market conditions. Only a subset of relatively
more productive firms export, while the remaining, less productive firms only serve their domestic
market. This microeconomic structure endogenously determines the extent of the traded sector
and the composition of consumption baskets in both countries. Exogenous shocks to aggregate
productivity, or entry and trade costs induce firms to enter and exit both their domestic and
export markets, thus altering the composition of consumption baskets across countries over time.
1

See Lane (2001) for a survey of the recent literature. We discuss the relation between our work and some
exceptions to this trend in international macroeconomics below.
2
Baldwin and Lyons (1994) and Dumas (1992) are two notable exceptions. They analyze general equilibrium
models that describe the dynamic interactions between costly trade and the real exchange rate. We incorporate
microfoundations into such a model.
3
Melitz (2003) focuses on the analysis of steady-state eﬀects of trade.
4
Recent empirical micro-level studies have documented the relevance of plant-level fixed export costs. See Bernard
and Jensen (2001) (for the U.S.), Bernard and Wagner (2001) (for Germany), Das, Roberts, and Tybout (2001) (for
Colombia), and Roberts and Tybout (1997) (for Colombia). These fixed costs include market research, advertising,
and regulatory (such as testing, packaging, labeling requirements) expenses incurred by plants exporting diﬀerentiated
products.

1

This introduces a new and potentially important channel for the transmission of macroeconomic
shocks and their propagation over time.
We first introduce this microeconomic structure in a flexible-price model with no international
trade in financial assets — and focus on the role of goods market dynamics. We show that the
microeconomic features of our model have important consequences for macroeconomic variables.
Macroeconomic dynamics, in turn, feed back into firm-level decisions, further altering the pattern of
trade over time. Our model generates deviations from purchasing power parity (PPP) that would
not exist absent our microeconomic structure with heterogeneous firms. It provides an endogenous, microfounded explanation for a Harrod-Balassa-Samuelson (HBS) eﬀect: More productive
economies, or less regulated ones (phenomena that aﬀect all firms in the economy), exhibit higher
average prices relative to their trading partners. We then show how, under fully flexible prices,
deviations from PPP display substantial endogenous persistence in response to transitory aggregate
shocks (for very plausible calibrated parameters).5 Since the micro-level adjustments we analyze
occur within sectors, our model also explains how these deviations from PPP are manifested in
sector-level prices — even for sectors considered “traded.”
Next, we extend our model to allow for international bond trading. In this setup, we show
that permanently more productive economies, or less regulated ones, also run persistent foreign
debt positions to finance the accelerated entry of firms into the relatively more favorable business
environment. A stochastic exercise shows that the model matches several important moments of
the U.S. and international business cycle quite well. In contrast to benchmark international real
business cycle (RBC) models, our setup generates positive GDP correlation across countries; it does
not automatically produce high correlation between relative consumption and the real exchange
rate; and it substantially reduces the “consumption-output anomaly” associated with standard
models.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the HBS eﬀect and contrasts
our approach to the related literature. Section 3 describes the benchmark model with financial
autarky. Section 4 presents results on the determinants of the real exchange rate in our setup.
These results guide our interpretation of the impulse responses in Section 5, which analyzes the
dynamic responses to shocks aﬀecting aggregate productivity and sunk entry costs (interpreted
as changes in domestic market regulation). Section 6 introduces international bond trading and
5
More generally, the introduction of micro dynamics motivated by heterogeneity, and entry and trade costs significantly improves the ability of our model to generate endogenously persistent dynamics — a stumbling bloc for many
well-known DSGE macro models.

2

discusses its implications. It also presents results on second-moment properties of the model.
Section 7 concludes.

2

The HBS Literature and Our Modeling Approach

Textbook analysis of the HBS eﬀect assumes an exogenously defined non-traded sector and some
favorable productivity shocks aﬀecting only the traded sector. These shocks cause the relative price
of non-traded goods to increase, leading to a real exchange rate appreciation (relative to trading
partners). An aggregate productivity increase (across all sectors) would have no eﬀect on the real
exchange rate. Although the cross-country correlation between development (usually measured as
GDP per capita) and price levels is robust and pervasive, the evidence linking this correlation to
productivity diﬀerentials across traded and non-traded sectors is much weaker and controversial
(see Rogoﬀ, 1996, sections 6A-B). Our model explains the former without relying on the latter; it
also explains why persistent deviations from PPP also show up in cross-country price diﬀerences
for tradeable goods as documented by Engel (1993, 1999).
One potential problem with the textbook HBS eﬀect is the reliance on the law of one price
for traded goods. If these are diﬀerentiated, then productivity shocks to either the traded or nontraded sectors engender movements in the terms of trade across countries. Recently, Fitzgerald
(2003) and MacDonald and Ricci (2002) have shown how product diﬀerentiation within tradeables
aﬀects the measurement of HBS — and have found indirect evidence for such terms of trade eﬀects.
Our model incorporates these eﬀects, but additionally addresses a more fundamental inconsistency
with the textbook HBS eﬀect highlighted by recent micro-level studies of plant export behavior:
Most goods in the tradeable sector are not traded. Moreover, this division between traded and
non-traded occurs within narrowly defined sectors (on the demand side) and substantially evolves
over time. For example, in the U.S., only 21 percent of manufacturing plants export (Bernard,
Eaton, Jensen, and Kortum, 2003) — and roughly 13 percent of plants switch their export status
in a given year (Bernard and Jensen, 2004).6 It therefore seems improbable — as required for the
“textbook” HBS eﬀect — that some productivity shocks only aﬀect the (time varying) proportion
of exporting firms within each sector.
Our model captures the eﬀects of aggregate shocks on both the determination of the set of traded
6

Similar patterns hold for many other countries. Bernard et al (2003) further report that the partitioning between
exporters and non-exporters is pervasive across narrowly defined 4-digit manufacturing sectors. Bernard and Jensen
(2004) also document the important aggregate eﬀects of new exporters: In the U.S., 38 percent of the export growth
between 1987 and 1992 was driven by entry of new exporters.

3

goods and their terms of trade. As previously mentioned, these changes occur within sectors and
generate persistent deviations in sector-level prices. Although we do not explicitly model multiple
sectors, our framework nevertheless highlights the micro-level characteristics of sectors (the level of
product diﬀerentiation, firm entry and exit rates, levels of sunk costs and trade costs) that would
generate diﬀerences in persistence rates for cross-country sector-level price diﬀerentials. Imbs,
Mumtaz, Ravn, and Rey (2002) and Cheung, Chinn, and Fujii (2001) both document that sectorlevel price diﬀerentials can be very persistent (across countries), and that the persistence levels
are quite heterogeneous across sectors. Cheung et al (2001) further find that sectors with more
intra-industry trade exhibit higher persistence levels — a finding that is broadly consistent with the
forces in our model.
Dornbusch, Fischer, and Samuelson (DFS, 1977) first analyzed the endogenous determination
of non-traded sectors — and pointed out how aggregate productivity shocks could lead to average
price diﬀerentials across countries. Bergin and Glick (2003a,b) embed this structure into a dynamic
framework where endogenous non-tradeability further arises from diﬀerences in trade costs across
sectors.7 Whereas this line of research analyzes cross-sectoral variations in tradeability, we focus
on the within-sector determination of “tradedness” based on firm-level decisions: All goods are
tradeable in our model; some are non-traded as a consequence of firm decisions. We believe that the
endogenous determination of both intra-sectoral non-tradedness and inter-sectoral non-tradeability
are important, and we view these lines of research as complementary.
Other contributions to the international macroeconomic literature have emphasized the role of
trade costs and non-traded intermediate services in the propagation of shocks. Already Backus,
Kehoe, and Kydland (1992) showed that the inclusion of trade frictions improves the quantitative
performance of an international RBC model. Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (2001) present simple models in
which the addition of per-unit trade costs and the potentially endogenous nature of tradedness help
explain a number of puzzles in international macroeconomics. Burstein, Neves, and Rebelo (2003)
and Burstein, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2002) focus on the role of the non-traded distribution
sector and composition eﬀects in the CPI.
Several recent papers study the consequences of firm entry or endogenous non-tradedness. Ricci
(1997) focuses on the eﬀect of the exchange rate regime on the location choice of monopolistically
competitive firms under sticky prices and wages. Corsetti, Martin, and Pesenti (2003) explore the
7
Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (1996, Ch. 4), Kehoe and Ruhl (2002), and Kraay and Ventura (2002) also develop dynamic
extensions of the DFS model that capture changes in the pattern of trade (and tradeability) over time.

4

implications of entry for the transmission of monetary shocks in a two-country, sticky-wage model
in which all goods are traded. Bergin, Glick, and Taylor (2003) use a model with monopolistic
competition, fixed export costs, and heterogeneous productivity (but an exogenous number of
producers) in their analysis of the HBS eﬀect. Betts and Kehoe (2001) introduce heterogeneous,
per-unit trade costs in a multi-country, trade and macro model with complete asset markets and
diﬀerentiated goods. Our approach is distinguished by its focus on fixed costs, heterogeneous
productivity, and endogenous entry into both domestic and export markets.8

3

The Model

We begin by developing a version of our model under financial autarky.
Household Preferences and Intratemporal Choices
The world consists of two countries, home and foreign. We denote foreign variables with a superscript star. Each country is populated by a unit mass of atomistic households. All contracts and
prices in the world economy are written in nominal terms. Prices are flexible. Thus, we only solve
for the real variables in the model. However, as the composition of consumption baskets in the two
countries changes over time (aﬀecting the definitions of the consumption-based price indexes), we
introduce money as a convenient unit of account for contracts. Money plays no other role in the
economy. For this reason, we do not model the demand for cash currency, and resort to a cashless
economy as in Woodford (2003).
The representative home household supplies L units of labor inelastically in each period at the
nominal wage rate Wt , denominated in units of home currency. The household maximizes expected
hP
i
∞
s−t C 1−γ / (1 − γ) , where β ∈ (0, 1) is the
β
intertemporal utility from consumption (C): Et
s
s=t

subjective discount factor and γ > 0 is the inverse of the intertemporal elasticity of substitution.

At time t, the household consumes the basket of goods Ct , defined over a continuum of goods Ω:
³R
´θ/(θ−1)
, where θ > 1 is the symmetric elasticity of substitution across
Ct = ω∈Ω ct (ω)θ−1/θ dω
goods. At any given time t, only a subset of goods Ωt ⊂ Ω is available. Let pt (ω) denote the home

currency price of a good ω ∈ Ωt . The consumption-based price index for the home economy is
³R
´1/(1−θ)
, and the household’s demand for each individual good ω is
then Pt = ω∈Ωt pt (ω)1−θ dω
8

Alessandria and Choi (2003), Ruhl (2003), and Russ (2003) develop models that are closest to ours. In contrast
to our model, Alessandria and Choi assume that firm-specific productivity displays no persistence; Ruhl uses a model
that includes an exogenously non-traded good; and Russ includes foreign direct investment and nominal stickiness.

5

ct (ω) = (pt (ω) /Pt )−θ Ct .
The foreign household supplies L∗ units of labor inelastically in each period in the foreign labor
market at the nominal wage rate Wt∗ , denominated in units of foreign currency. It maximizes
a similar utility function, with identical parameters and a similarly defined consumption basket.
Crucially, the subset of goods available for consumption in the foreign economy during period t is
Ω∗t ⊂ Ω and can diﬀer from the subset of goods that are available in the home economy.
Firms
There is a continuum of firms in each country, each producing a diﬀerent variety ω ∈ Ω. Production
requires only one factor, labor. Aggregate labor productivity is indexed by Zt (Zt∗ ), which represents
the eﬀectiveness of one unit of home (foreign) labor. Firms are heterogeneous as they produce with
diﬀerent technologies indexed by relative productivity z. A home firm with relative productivity
z produces Zt z units of output per unit of labor employed. Productivity diﬀerences across firms
therefore translate into diﬀerences in the unit cost of production. This cost, measured in units of
the consumption good Ct , is wt / (Zt z), where wt ≡ Wt /Pt is the real wage. Similarly, foreign firms
are indexed by their productivity z and unit cost (measured in units of the foreign consumption
good) wt∗ / (Zt∗ z), where wt∗ ≡ Wt∗ /Pt∗ is the real wage of foreign workers.9
∗ ) eﬀective labor units,
Prior to entry, firms are identical and face a sunk entry cost of fE,t (fE,t
∗ /Z ∗ ) units of the home (foreign) consumption good. Upon entry, home
equal to wt fE,t /Zt (wt∗ fE,t
t

firms draw their productivity level z from a common distribution G(z) with support on [zmin , ∞).
Foreign firms draw their productivity level from an identical distribution. This relative productivity
level remains fixed thereafter. Since there are no fixed production costs, all firms produce in every
period, until they are hit with a “death” shock, which occurs with probability δ ∈ (0, 1) in every
period. This exit inducing shock is independent of the firm’s productivity level, so G(z) also
represents the productivity distribution of all producing firms.
Home and foreign firms can serve both their domestic market as well as the export market.
Exporting is costly, and involves both a melting-iceberg trade cost τt ≥ 1 (τt∗ ≥ 1) as well as a fixed
∗ ) (measured in units of eﬀective labor). We assume that firms hire workers from their
cost fX,t (fX,t

respective domestic labor markets to cover these fixed costs. These costs, in real terms, are then
∗ /Z ∗ for foreign firms
wt fX,t /Zt for home firms (in units of the home consumption good) and wt∗ fX,t
t
9
We use the same index z for both home and foreign firms as this variable only captures firm productivity relative
to the distribution of firms in that country.

6

(in units of the foreign consumption good). The fixed export costs are paid on a period-by-period
basis rather than sunk upon entry in the export market.10
All firms face a residual demand curve with constant elasticity θ in both markets, and they set
flexible prices that reflect the same proportional markup θ/ (θ − 1) over marginal cost. Let pD,t (z)
and pX,t (z) denote the nominal domestic and export prices of a home firm. We assume that export
prices are denominated in the currency of the export market. Prices, in real terms relative to the
price index in the destination market, are then given by:
ρD,t (z) ≡

pD,t (z)
θ wt
,
=
Pt
θ − 1 Zt z

ρX,t (z) ≡

pX,t (z)
= Q−1
t τt ρD,t (z) ,
Pt∗

(1)

where Qt ≡ εt Pt∗ /Pt is the consumption-based real exchange rate (units of home consumption per
unit of foreign consumption; εt is the nominal exchange rate, units of home currency per unit of
foreign).11 However, due to the fixed export cost, firms with low productivity levels z may decide
not to export in any given period. When making this decision, a firm decomposes its total profit
dt (z) (d∗t (z)) (returned to households as dividends) into portions earned from domestic sales dD,t (z)
(d∗D,t (z)) and from potential export sales dX,t (z) (d∗X,t (z)). All these profit levels (dividends) are
expressed in real terms in units of the consumption basket in the firm’s location.12 In the case of
a home firm, total profits in period t are given by dt (z) = dD,t (z) + dX,t (z), where
1
dD,t (z) = [ρD,t (z)]1−θ Ct ,
θ

dX,t (z) =

⎧
⎨

Qt
θ

⎩ 0

[ρX,t (z)]1−θ Ct∗ −

wt fX,t
Zt

if firm z exports,
otherwise.

Foreign firms behave in a similar way.13 As expected, more productive firms earn higher profits
(relative to less productive firms), although they set lower prices (see (1)).14 A firm will export
if and only if it would earn non-negative profit from doing so. For home firms, this will be the
case so long as productivity z is above a cutoﬀ level zX,t = inf {z : dX,t (z) > 0} . A similar cutoﬀ
10

Although a substantial portion of fixed export costs are probably sunk upon market entry, we do not model the
sunk nature of these costs explicitly. We do this for simplicity, as sunk export market entry costs would complicate the
solution method considerably while leaving the main message of the paper unaﬀected. We conjecture that introducing
these costs would enhance the persistence properties of our model.
11
Similar price equations hold for foreign firms. Note that ρ∗X,t (z) ≡ p∗X,t (z)/Pt = Qt τt∗ ρ∗D,t (z).
12
Note that an exporter’s relative price ρX,t (z) (ρ∗X,t (z)) is expressed in units of Ct∗ (Ct ) (the consumption good
at the location of sales) but the profits from export sales dX,t (z) (d∗X,t (z)) are expressed in units of Ct (Ct∗ ) (the
consumption basket in the firm’s location).
 ∗
1−θ
13
∗
ρX,t (z)
A foreign firm earns export profits d∗X,t (z) = Q−1
Ct /θ − wt∗ fX,t
/Zt∗ if it sells output in the home
t
country.
14
We think of firm prices as adjusted for product quality. Our model is isomorphic to one where firms produce the
diﬀerentiated goods with diﬀerent quality levels.

7

n
o
∗
level zX,t
= inf z : d∗X,t (z) > 0 holds for foreign exporters. We assume that the lower bound

∗ are both above z
productivity zmin is low enough relative to the export costs that zX,t and zX,t
min .

This ensures the existence of an endogenously determined non-traded sector: the set of firms who
could export, but decide not to. These firms, with productivity levels between zmin and the export
cutoﬀ level, only produce for their domestic market. This set of firms fluctuates over time with
∗ .
changes in the profitability of the export market, inducing changes in the cutoﬀ levels zX,t and zX,t

Firm Averages
∗ ) of firms produces in the home (foreign) country. These firms
In every period, a mass ND,t (ND,t

have a distribution of productivity levels over [zmin , ∞) given by G(z). Among these firms, there
h
i
∗ = 1 − G(z ∗ ) N ∗ exporters. Following Melitz (2003),
are NX,t = [1 − G(zX,t )] ND,t and NX,t
X,t
D,t
we define two special “average” productivity levels – an average z̃D for all producing firms (in

each country), and an average z̃X,t for all home exporters:

z̃D ≡

∙Z

∞

zmin

¸ 1
θ−1
θ−1
z dG(z)
,

z̃X,t

"

1
≡
1 − G(zX,t )

Z

∞

zX,t

#

z θ−1 dG(z)

1
θ−1

.

∗ is analogous to that of z̃
(The definition of z̃X,t
X,t .) As shown in Melitz (2003), these productivity

averages — based on weights proportional to relative firm output shares — summarize all the information on the productivity distributions relevant for all macroeconomic variables. In essence, our
∗ ) firms with productivity level z̃ produce in the home
model is isomorphic to one where ND,t (ND,t
D
∗ ) firms with productivity level z̃
∗
(foreign) country and NX,t (NX,t
X,t (z̃X,t ) export to the foreign

(home) market.
In particular, p̃D,t ≡ pD,t (z̃D ) (p̃∗D,t ≡ p∗D,t (z̃D )) represents the average nominal price of
∗ )) reprehome (foreign) firms in their domestic market, and p̃X,t ≡ pX,t (z̃X,t ) (p̃∗X,t ≡ p∗X,t (z̃X,t

sents the average nominal price of home (foreign) exporters in the export market. The price
index at home therefore reflects the prices of the ND,t home firms (with average price p̃D,t ) and
∗
foreign exporters to the home market (with average price p̃∗X,t ). The home price inthe NX,t
∙
³
´1−θ ¸1/(1−θ)
1−θ
∗
∗
dex can thus be written as Pt = ND,t (p̃D,t )
+ NX,t p̃X,t
. This is equivalent to
³
´1−θ
∗
∗ ) represent the avND,t (ρ̃D,t )1−θ + NX,t
ρ̃∗X,t
= 1, where ρ̃D,t ≡ ρD,t (z̃D ) and ρ̃∗X,t ≡ ρ∗X,t (z̃X,t

erage relative prices of home producers and foreign exporters in the home market. Similar equations
hold for the foreign price index.

8

∗ are constructed in such a way that d˜
The productivity averages z̃D , z̃X,t , and z̃X,t
D,t ≡ dD,t (z̃D )

(d˜∗D,t ≡ d∗D,t (z̃D )) represents the average firm profit earned from domestic sales for all home (foreign)

∗ )) represents the average firm export profits for
producers; and d˜X,t ≡ dX,t (z̃X,t ) (d˜∗X,t ≡ d∗X,t (z̃X,t
h
i
∗ ) d˜∗
all home (foreign) exporters. Thus, d˜t ≡ d˜D,t + [1 − G(zX,t )] d˜X,t and d˜∗t ≡ d˜∗D,t + 1 − G(zX,t
X,t
∗ )
represent the average total profits of home and foreign firms, since 1 − G(zX,t ) and 1 − G(zX,t

represent the proportion of home and foreign firms that export and earn export profits.15
Firm Entry and Exit
In every period, there is an unbounded mass of prospective entrants in both countries. These
entrants are forward looking, and correctly anticipate their future expected profits d˜t (d˜∗t ) in every
period (the pre-entry expected profit is equal to post-entry average profit) as well as the probability
δ (in every period) of incurring the exit-inducing shock. We assume that entrants at time t only
start producing at time t + 1, which introduces a one-period time-to-build lag in the model. The
exogenous exit shock occurs at the very end of the time period (after production and entry). A
proportion δ of new entrants will therefore never produce. Prospective home entrants in period t
compute their expected post-entry value given by the present discounted value of their expected
stream of profits {d˜s }∞
s=t+1 :
ṽt = Et

∞
X

s=t+1

s−t

[β (1 − δ)]

µ

Ct+s
Ct

¶−γ

d˜s .

(2)

This also represents the average value of incumbent firms after production has occurred (since both
new entrants and incumbents then face the same probability 1 − δ of survival and production in the
subsequent period). Firms discount future profits using the household’s stochastic discount factor,
adjusted for the probability of firm survival 1 − δ. Entry occurs until the average firm value is
equalized with the entry cost, leading to the free entry condition ṽt = wt fE,t /Zt . This condition
holds so long as the mass NE,t of entrants is positive. We assume that macroeconomic shocks are
small enough for this condition to hold in every period. Finally, the timing of entry and production
we have assumed implies that the number of home producing firms during period t is given by
ND,t = (1 − δ) (ND,t−1 + NE,t−1 ). Similar free entry condition, requirement on the size of shocks,
and law of motion for the number of producing firms hold in the foreign country.
d˜t and d˜∗t represent average firm profit levels in the sense that d˜t =
See Melitz (2003) for proofs.
15

9

U∞

zmin

dt (z)dG(z) and d˜∗t =

U∞

zmin

d∗t (z)dG(z).

Parametrization of Productivity Draws
In order to solve our model, we parametrize the distribution of firm productivity draws G(z). We
assume that productivity z is distributed Pareto with lower bound zmin and shape parameter k >
θ −1: G(z) = 1−(zmin /z)k . The assumption of a Pareto distribution for productivity induces a size
distribution of firms that is also Pareto, which fits firm-level data quite well. k indexes the dispersion
of productivity draws: Dispersion decreases as k increases and the firm productivity levels are
increasingly concentrated toward their lower bound zmin .16 Letting ν ≡ {k/ [k − (θ − 1)]}1/(θ−1) ,
the average productivities z̃D and z̃X,t are given by z̃D = νzmin and z̃X,t = νzX,t . The share of
home exporting firms is then NX,t /ND,t = 1 − G(zX,t ) = (νzmin /z̃X,t )k , and the zero export profit
condition (for the cutoﬀ firm), dX,t (zX,t ) = 0, implies that average export profits must satisfy
¡
¢
∗ , N ∗ /N ∗ , and d˜∗ .
d˜X,t = (θ − 1) ν θ−1 /k wt fX,t /Zt . Analogous results hold for z̃X,t
X,t
D,t
X,t
Household Budget Constraint and Intertemporal Choices
Households in each country hold two types of assets: shares in a mutual fund of domestic firms and
domestic, risk-free bonds. (We assume that bonds pay risk-free, consumption-based real returns.)
We now focus on the home economy. Let xt be the share in the mutual fund of home firms held
by the representative home household entering period t. The mutual fund pays a total profit in
each period (in units of home currency) that is equal to the average total profit of all home firms
that produce in that period, Pt d˜t ND,t . During period t, the representative home household buys
xt+1 shares in a mutual fund of NH,t ≡ ND,t + NE,t home firms (those already operating at time t
and the new entrants). Only ND,t+1 = (1 − δ) NH,t firms will produce and pay dividends at time
t + 1. Since the household does not know which firms will be hit by the exogenous exit shock δ at
the very end of period t, it finances the continuing operation of all pre-existing home firms and all
new entrants during period t. The date t price (in units of home currency) of a claim to the future
profit stream of the mutual fund of NH,t firms is equal to the average nominal price of claims to
future profits of home firms, Pt ṽt .
The household enters period t with bond holdings Bt in units of consumption and mutual
fund share holdings xt . It receives gross interest income on bond holdings, dividend income on
mutual fund share holdings and the value of selling its initial share position, and labor income.
The household allocates these resources between purchases of bonds and shares to be carried into
16

The standard deviation of log productivity is equal to 1/k. The condition that k > θ −1 ensures that the variance
of firm size is finite.

10

next period and consumption. The period budget constraint (in units of consumption) is:
³
´
Bt+1 + ṽt NH,t xt+1 + Ct = (1 + rt )Bt + d˜t + ṽt ND,t xt + wt L,

(3)

where rt is the consumption-based interest rate on holdings of bonds between t − 1 and t (known
with certainty as of t−1). The home household maximizes its expected intertemporal utility subject
to (3).
The Euler equations for bond and share holdings are:
−γ

(Ct )

£
¤
= β (1 + rt+1 ) Et (Ct+1 )−γ ,

and ṽt = β (1 − δ) Et

"µ

Ct+1
Ct

#
¶−γ ³
´
ṽt+1 + d˜t+1 .

As expected, forward iteration of the equation for share holdings and absence of speculative bubbles
yield the asset price solution in equation (2).17
Aggregate Accounting and Balanced Trade
Aggregating the budget constraint (3) across (symmetric) home households and imposing the equilibrium conditions under financial autarky (Bt+1 = Bt = 0 and xt+1 = xt = 1) yields the aggregate
accounting equation Ct = wt L + ND,t d˜t − NE,t ṽt . A similar equation holds abroad. Consumption
in each period must equal labor income plus investment income net of the cost of investing in new
firms. Since this cost, NE,t ṽt , is the value of home investment in new firms, aggregate accounting
also states the familiar equality of spending (consumption plus investment) and income (labor plus
dividend) that must hold under financial autarky. To close the model, observe that financial autarky implies balanced trade: The value of home exports must equal the value of foreign exports.
³
´1−θ
∗
ρ̃∗X,t
Ct .
Hence, Qt NX,t (ρ̃X,t )1−θ Ct∗ = NX,t
Summary
Table 1 summarizes the main equilibrium conditions of the model. The equations in the table
∗ , z̃
constitute a system of 19 equations in 19 endogenous variables: wt , wt∗ , d˜t , d˜∗t , NE,t , NE,t
X,t ,
∗ , N
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
z̃X,t
D,t , ND,t , NX,t , NX,t , rt , rt , ṽt , ṽt , Ct , Ct , Qt . Of these endogenous variables, 4 are
∗ , and
predetermined as of time t: the total numbers of firms at home and abroad, ND,t and ND,t
17

We omit the transversality conditions for bonds and shares that must be satisfied to ensure optimality. The
foreign household maximizes its utility function subject to a similar budget constraint, resulting in analogous Euler
equations and transversality conditions.

11

the risk-free interest rates, rt and rt∗ . Additionally, the model features 8 exogenous variables:
∗ , f
∗
∗
the aggregate productivities Zt and Zt∗ , and the policy variables fE,t , fE,t
X,t , fX,t , τt , τt . We
∗ as changes in market regulation facing a country’s firms in the
interpret changes in fE,t and fE,t
∗ , τ , and τ ∗ as changes in trade policy. Since
respective domestic markets and changes in fX,t , fX,t
t
t

fX,t and τt are trade costs facing home firms, they are best interpreted as the foreign government’s
trade policy instruments.

4

The Real Exchange Rate and the Harrod-Balassa-Samuelson Eﬀect

Up to now, we have used a definition of the real exchange rate, Qt ≡ εt Pt∗ /Pt , computed using
welfare-based price indexes (Pt and Pt∗ ). Under C.E.S. product diﬀerentiation, it is well known
that these price indexes can be decomposed into components reflecting average prices and product
³
´
1/(1−θ)
∗
∗ +N
Nt∗ ≡ ND,t
P̃t and Pt∗ = (Nt∗ )1/(1−θ) P̃t∗ , where Nt ≡ ND,t + NX,t
variety: Pt = Nt
X,t
³ ´
reflects product variety at home (foreign) and P̃t P̃t∗ is an average nominal price for all varieties
´
³
sold in home (foreign).18 These average prices P̃t , P̃t∗ correspond much more closely to empirical
measures such as the CPI then the welfare-based indexes.19 Thus, we define Q̃t ≡ εt P̃t∗ /P̃t as

the theoretical counterpart to the empirical real exchange rate — since the latter relates CPI levels
best represented by P̃t and P̃t∗ . This real exchange rate deviates from the previously defined
welfare-based measure Qt due to relative changes in product variety: Qt = (Nt /Nt∗ )1/(θ−1) Q̃t . The
diﬀerences between these two exchange rates can best be described using an example: Q̃t < 1
implies that average prices (expressed in a common currency) are higher in the home market. On
the other hand, Qt measures diﬀerences in a consumer’s welfare derived from spending a given
nominal amount in each market (where the amount is converted at nominal exchange rates). It is
then possible for Qt > 1 even if Q̃t < 1, which implies that the consumer derives higher utility from
spending the same amount in the home market with higher prices. This would be the case so long
as product variety in the home market Nt is suﬃciently above that in the foreign market Nt∗ . Our
simulations will highlight such divergences between the real exchange rate (comparing CPI levels)
and the welfare-based measure — driven by the crucial contribution of product variety diﬀerentials
P̃t is a weighted average of p̃D,t and p̃∗X,t , the average prices of domestic goods and imports paid by home
consumers, where the weights are proportional to the relative consumption levels of both types of goods. Similarly,
P̃t∗ is a weighted average of p̃∗D,t and p̃X,t .
19
Feenstra (1994) develops a similar decomposition (also allowing for preference asymmetries between varieties) to
address empirically the impact of increasing product variety. Broda and Weinstein (2003) also use this decomposition
for U.S. import prices and find that increases in imported product variety significantly contribute to unmeasured
welfare benefits for U.S. consumers.
18

12

across countries.
As we highlighted in the introduction, we will analyze our model’s predictions for deviations
(both permanent and transitory) from PPP in response to aggregate shocks. These will be given
by the impulse responses for Q̃t . In order to understand how and why Q̃t may deviate from 1, we
use the price index equations to write it in the following way:

=
Q̃1−θ
t

³
´1−θ
N
D
τt z̃z̃X,t
(T OLt )1−θ + NX,t
∗
t
³
´1−θ ,
∗
NX,t
ND,t
∗ z̃D
T
OL
+
τ
t t z̃ ∗
Nt
Nt

∗
ND,t
Nt∗

(4)

X,t

defining T OLt ≡ εt (Wt∗ /Zt∗ ) / (Wt /Zt ) as the “terms of labor.”20 T OLt measures the relative cost
of eﬀective units of labor across countries. A decrease in T OLt indicates an appreciation of home
eﬀective labor relative to foreign: If T OLt < 1, a firm with given productivity z could produce any
amount of output at lower cost in the foreign country than in home. Note that, absent trade costs,
PPP would always hold: Q̃t = 1, ∀t.21
Dropping time subscripts to denote a variable’s level in steady state, we assume fE = fE∗ ,
∗ , τ = τ ∗ , L = L∗ = 1, Z = Z ∗ = 1. In a technical appendix available on request, we
fX = fX

demonstrate existence and uniqueness of a symmetric steady state under these assumptions where
Q̃ = Q = T OL = 1. Using sans-serif fonts to denote percentage deviations from this steady state,
log-linearizing (4) yields:
¢
£¡ ∗
¤
z̃X,t − z̃X,t − (t∗t − tt )
µ
¶
£¡ ∗
¢ ¡
¢¤
ND
1
ND,t − NX,t − ND,t − N∗X,t , (5)
− sD
+
θ − 1 ND + NX

Q̃t = (2sD − 1) TOLt + (1 − sD )

where sD is the steady-state share of spending on domestic goods (sD,t ≡ ND,t (ρ̃D,t )1−θ ) and tt
(t∗t ) denotes the percentage deviation of τt (τt∗ ) from the steady state. Equation (5) highlights three
important channels for real exchange rate changes: 1) Given the existence of a non-traded sector
20

This is related to the double factorial terms of trade. The two concepts are distinct because our measure adjusts
for the productivity of all labor, not just the productivity in the export and import sectors (which are endogenous
in our model).
21
∗
∗
∗
When fX,t = fX,t
= 0, all firms export: NX,t = ND,t and NX,t
= ND,t
. If, in addition, τt = τt∗ = 1, it
is immediate from (4) that Q̃t = 1 (and hence Qt = 1). Note that this property does not imply that there can
be no movements in the terms of trade. Absent trade costs, balanced trade under financial autarky would imply
∗
T̃tθ−1 (Ct /Ct∗ ) = ND,t /ND,t
, where T̃t ≡ εt p̃X,t /p̃∗X,t denotes the average terms of trade. With constant numbers of
firms at home and abroad, as in more standard macroeconomic models, T̃tθ−1 (Ct /Ct∗ ) is constant. Hence, shocks
that cause the consumption diﬀerential Ct /Ct∗ to increase (such as an increase in home productivity) always result in
a deterioration of the terms of trade — leaving Q̃t = Qt = 1, ∀t. In our model, firm entry dampens this deterioration
of the terms of trade. (We discuss terms of trade dynamics in our model in Section 5.)

13

under costly trade (which implies sD > 1/2), changes in the relative cost of labor (T OLt ) lead
to relative price diﬀerences for non-traded goods across countries. 2) Changes in relative import
prices. These can happen exogenously when tariﬀs change, but more importantly, these relative
prices endogenously change with relative changes in the export productivity cutoﬀs (driven by
entry and exit decisions for the export market).22 3) An expenditure switching channel. Plausible
parameter values imply ND / (ND + NX ) > sD in the symmetric steady state. This will be the
case whenever average prices p̃D = p̃∗D , which include the high prices of the least productive firms
that do not export, are higher than average import prices p̃X = p̃∗X .23 Changes in the relative
∗ and N ∗ /N
availability of domestic and imported varieties (ND,t /NX,t
X,t ) then induce expenditure
D,t

switching eﬀects for the real exchange rate.
The endogenous HBS eﬀect mentioned in the introduction occurs through all three of these
channels, reinforcing the real exchange rate appreciation in response to increases in aggregate productivity or deregulation. Before analyzing the full response path of Q̃t and other key endogenous
variables to these shocks, we first describe the long-run eﬀects of permanent changes in productivity
and deregulation. These eﬀects also highlight steady-state diﬀerences for an asymmetric version of
our model.
Consider a permanent increase in home productivity Zt or a permanent decrease in home
entry costs fE,t (which we interpret as permanent deregulation as in Blanchard and Giavazzi,
2003). Relative to the old steady state, the home market becomes a more attractive location for
prospective entrants. (When productivity increases, the home market becomes more attractive due
to its increased size. The standard “home market eﬀect” of new trade theory models with trade costs
then implies that home attracts a bigger share of firms than its relative size in the world economy.24 )
Absent any change in the relative cost of eﬀective labor (T OLt ), all new firms would only enter the
home market (there would be no new entrants into the foreign market). Thus, in the new long-run
equilibrium, home eﬀective labor units must appreciate (T OLt decreases) in order to keep foreign
labor employed.25 This causes the relative price of non-traded goods at home to increase relative
to foreign (the first channel for real exchange rate appreciation). The higher relative labor costs at
22

Since the average export productivity level z̃X,t is proportional to the cutoﬀ zX,t , their percentage changes from
∗
∗
steady-state levels are identical. The same holds for z̃X,t
and zX,t
.
23
This condition is equivalent to z̃X > τ z̃D : The productivity advantage of exporters is larger than the iceberg
export cost.
24
Without trade costs, entry in the home economy relative to foreign in the new long-run equilibrium would be
directly proportional to the change in relative market size.
25
Absent entry into the foreign country, the number of foreign producing firms would steadily decrease with the
death shock.

14

home reduce the export profitability of home firms, and conversely increase that of foreign firms.
Hence, the export cutoﬀ for home firms, zX,t , rises (only relatively more productive home firms
∗ , drops (relatively less productive foreign firms can
export) and the cutoﬀ for foreign firms, zX,t

now profitably export). This induces an increase in the average price of home imports relative to
the average price of foreign imports (the second channel for appreciation).26 Lastly, the increase in
the number of domestic varieties relative to foreign ones available to home consumers (generated
by entry into the more attractive market) induces those consumers to switch their expenditures
toward home produced goods (whose prices, on average, are higher than imported goods). This is
the third channel for real exchange rate appreciation.27
All three channels generating the endogenous HBS eﬀect in our model critically depend on the
incorporation of endogenous entry (and the associated endogenous location of new firms across
countries). It is this key feature that generates the appreciation of home labor in response to the
accelerated entry of firms in the relatively more favorable business environment at home. Without
this feature, home eﬀective labor would depreciate in response to a favorable aggregate productivity
shock at home (when the number of firms is fixed, the increased demand by home consumers
for foreign varieties — whose productivity remains unchanged — leads to an excess demand for
foreign labor). We highlight this property in our dynamic simulations. Although our model also
captures an additional channel for real exchange rate appreciation via endogenous non-tradedness,
the appreciation of home eﬀective labor along with an exogenous non-traded sector is enough to
generate real exchange rate appreciation and the HBS eﬀect.
We conclude this section with two important observations. First, when product variety is endogenous, an appreciation in average relative prices (Q̃t decreases) need not lead to an appreciation
of the welfare-based real exchange rate Qt : The simulations described in the next section show that
the relative increase in product variety at home overwhelmingly dominates the increase in average
prices, leading to a depreciation of this welfare-based index. Second, equation (4) and its log-linear
counterpart (5) do not depend on the assumption of financial autarky. In particular, these equations still hold when we introduce international bond trading — and would hold also under other
assumptions on asset markets. The international-bond-trading scenario will thus feature the same
26

After an increase in home productivity, the total number of home exporters NX,t is higher in the new long-run
equilibrium (compared to the initial steady state). However, relatively less productive home exporters have dropped
out of the export market.
27
Foreign consumers also switch their expenditures between domestic and imported varieties. The direction depends
on the type of shock (productivity increase versus deregulation) but the eﬀect is always dominated by the expenditure
switching for home consumers.

15

three channels for real exchange rate dynamics.

5

International Trade and Macroeconomic Dynamics

We now analyze the full response path of the real exchange rate and other key variables in response
to permanent and transitory shocks to productivity, and permanent deregulation.28 To do so, we
log-linearize the system of equilibrium conditions in Table 1 around the unique symmetric steady
state under assumptions of log-normality and homoskedasticity of exogenous stochastic shocks.
We calibrate parameters, compute the implied steady-state levels of endogenous variables, and
numerically solve for the dynamic responses to exogenous shocks using the method of undetermined
coeﬃcients.
Calibration
We calibrate parameters as follows. We interpret periods as quarters and set β = .99 and γ = 2
— both standard choices for quarterly business cycle models. We set the size of the exogenous
firm exit shock δ = .025 to match the U.S. empirical level of 10 percent job destruction per year.
We use the value of θ from Bernard, Eaton, Jensen, and Kortum (BEJK, 2003) and set θ = 3.8,
which was calibrated to fit U.S. plant and macro trade data. BEJK also reports that the standard
deviation of log U.S. plant sales is 1.67. In our theoretical model, this standard deviation is equal to
1/ (k − θ + 1). The choice of θ = 3.8 then implies k = 3.4 (this satisfies the requirement k > θ − 1).
We postulate τ = 1.3, roughly in line with Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (2001), and set the steady-state
fixed export cost fX such that the proportion of exporting plants matches the number reported in
BEJK (21 percent). This leads to a fixed export cost fX equal to 23.5 percent of the per-period,
amortized flow value of the entry cost, [1 − β (1 − δ)] / [β (1 − δ)] fE .29 Changing the entry cost
fE while maintaining the same ratio fX /fE does not aﬀect any of the impulse responses.30 We
therefore set fE to 1 without loss of generality. For similar reasons, we normalize zmin to 1. Our
calibration implies that exporters are on average 58.2 percent more productive than non-exporters.
The steady-state share of expenditure on domestic goods is .733, and the share of expenditure
28

We discuss the consequences of worldwide trade liberalization in the appendix.
We tried using diﬀerent values of τ (1.1, 1.2, 1.25) and recalculated fX relative to fE to match the 21 percent of
exporting plants. The impulse responses were very similar in all cases.
30
The total number of firms in steady state is inversely proportional to fE — and the size and value of all firms are
similarly proportional to fE . Basically, changing fE for given ratio fX /fE amounts to changing the unit of measure
for output and number of firms.
29

16

on non-traded domestic goods is .176. The relative size diﬀerential of exporters relative to nonexporters in the domestic market is 3.61.
It may be argued that the value of θ results in a steady-state markup that is too high relative
to the evidence. A standard choice in the macro literature is θ = 6 to deliver a 20 percent markup
of price over marginal cost (Rotemberg and Woodford, 1992). However, it is important to observe
that, in models without any fixed cost, θ/ (θ − 1) is a measure of both markup over marginal cost
and average cost. In our model with entry costs, free entry ensures that, on average, firms earn zero
profits net of the entry cost. This means that, on average, firms price at average cost (inclusive
of the entry cost). The markup over average cost increases with firm productivity. The firm with
productivity zmin always prices below average cost: The net present value of its profits does not
cover the entry cost. Thus, although θ = 3.8 implies a fairly high markup over marginal cost, our
parametrization delivers reasonable markups over average costs.
Impulse Responses
Figures 1 and 2 show the responses (percent deviations from steady state) to a permanent 1 percent
increase in home productivity and a permanent 1 percent decrease in home entry costs. The number
of years after the shock is on the horizontal axis. Consider first the long-run eﬀects in the new
steady state. As was previously described, the home market becomes a relatively more attractive
business environment, drawing a permanently higher number of entrants, which translates into
a permanently higher number of producers. This induces the new steady state for T OLt below
1. This appreciation of home labor costs (which raises the relative costs of home exporters and
∗ .
decreases those of foreign exporters) leads to a long-run increase in zX,t and a decrease in zX,t

These eﬀects combine to induce a long-run appreciation of the real exchange rate Q̃t . However, our
simulations suggest that the increase in product variety for home consumers dominates this average
price appreciation, leading to a depreciation of the welfare-based index Qt . Thus, consumers in
both countries would rather spend a given nominal expenditure in the home market, even though
average prices there are relatively higher.31
We now describe the transitional changes in response to the permanent home productivity
increase (summarized by the impulse responses in Figure 1). Absent sunk entry costs, and the
associated time-to-build lag before production starts, the number of producing firms ND,t would
31

We have experimented with numerous diﬀerent parameter choices, and always obtained this long-run dichotomy
between the real exchange rate Q̃t and its welfare-based counterpart Qt .

17

immediately adjust to its new steady-state level. Sunk costs and time-to-build transform ND,t
into a state variable that behaves very much like a capital stock: The number of entrants NE,t
represents the home consumers’ investment, which translates into increases in the stock ND,t over
time. The immediate impact of the productivity increase on T OLt (which increases) is typical
of open economy, macroeconomic models without entry (with or without capital): There is an
immediate increase in demand for all existing goods (domestic and foreign) sold in the home market.
The increase in home labor productivity then translates into an excess supply of home eﬀective labor
units relative to foreign – whose productivity is unchanged. The resulting short-run depreciation
of home labor then leads to a short-run decrease in the home export cutoﬀ zX,t and a short-run
depreciation of the real exchange rate Q̃t . The foreign export cutoﬀ falls nonetheless, as the shortrun increase in the foreign exporters’ relative cost is dominated by the increase in home demand
(for all existing goods, including imports). The numbers of home and foreign exporters, NX,t and
∗ , increase on impact as the export productivity cutoﬀs fall. From this point on, the number
NX,t

of home producers ND,t steadily increases; this steadily shifts the increase in home demand toward
domestic varieties (and away from foreign varieties). The eﬀect of endogenous entry is crucial, as
the labor demand generated by a greater number of home firms translates into an appreciation
of home labor units, reversing the initial change in T OLt , zX,t , and the real exchange rate Q̃t .
Entry of new domestic firms pushes NX,t upward, but the reversal in the dynamics of zX,t has the
opposite eﬀect. The net result is that NX,t settles at a higher level than in the initial steady state:
The larger number of more productive home firms ensures that NX,t is higher even if relatively
less productive exporters have dropped out. Yet, the long-run response of NX,t is smaller than the
short-run eﬀect as the less productive exporters drop out during the transition.
The path of endogenous variables in Figure 1 highlights the importance of the microeconomic
dynamics in our model relative to the standard setup with a constant number of firms: Absent
entry, T OLt would remain depreciated in the long run, as would Q̃t .32 Note that, even though
prices are fully flexible, the real exchange rate appreciation takes a long time to unfold, reaching
less than half of its long-run appreciation within 5 years of the permanent productivity increase.
In our model, endogenous entry also crucially aﬀects the evolution of the terms of trade. In
models with constant number of firms, the induced excess demand for foreign labor and depreciation
in T OLt are also manifested in a strong deterioration of home’s terms of trade. This prediction
32
When we allow for international trade in bonds, the accelerated entry of firms in the home market financed by
borrowing causes T OLt to appreciate also in the short run. There is then no reversal in the paths of T OLt , zX,t ,
and Q̃t . We describe this in further detail in the following section.

18

is hard to square with the empirical evidence that suggests a link between productivity gains and
improvements in a country’s terms of trade.33 Our model shows how the entry of new producers
and varieties in the more productive economy may dampen or even reverse the deterioration in
the terms of trade. In particular, for any given home and foreign exporters with productivity
z and z ∗ (whose trade status does not change with the productivity shock), the relative price
increases (due to the appreciation in T OLt ) –
Tt ≡ εt pX,t (z)/p∗X,t (z ∗ ) = (z ∗ /z) (τt /τt∗ ) T OL−1
t
except initially.34
We now turn to the transitional changes in response to permanent deregulation (summarized
by the impulse responses in Figure 2). In contrast to the previous scenario, deregulation does not
increase the available supply of eﬀective labor units for production in the home market. Thus, there
is no short-run excess supply of home eﬀective labor units, and T OLt steadily appreciates over time
with the increase in home labor demand generated by entry (the appreciation in T OLt is therefore
amplified relative to the productivity scenario). There is thus no reversal in the paths of T OLt ,
zX,t , and Q̃t . The response in the number of home exporters NX,t reflects the opposing eﬀects
of the increase in the total number of producers ND,t and the increase in the export productivity
cutoﬀ zX,t . The immediate increase in the latter causes NX,t to fall on impact. Subsequently,
since the increase in zX,t is amplified relative to the productivity scenario (due to the amplified
appreciation in T OLt ), its eﬀect dominates the eﬀect of higher ND,t , leading to a further decrease
in NX,t . Another major diﬀerence in the current scenario is that home consumption decreases in
the short run, in order to finance the entry of new firms (this requires a much greater reallocation
of eﬀective labor units away from production as the supply of these labor units is unaﬀected by
deregulation). The initial decrease in home import demand leads to an initial increase in the foreign
∗ and an associated decrease in the number of foreign exporters. These
export productivity cutoﬀ zX,t

changes are reversed as home consumption recovers. As was the case with the productivity increase,
we note that the real exchange rate appreciation is slow to unfold. Again, less than half of the
long-run appreciation occurs within 5 years of the permanent deregulation shock.
We further illustrate the endogenous persistence properties of our model by showing the impulse
responses to a transitory increase in home productivity. These responses are illustrated in Figure
33

For instance, see Corsetti, Dedola, and Leduc (2004).
The initial deterioration of Tt ismuch shorter-lived
when the productivity increase is not permanent. The average

∗
terms of trade T̃t ≡ εt p̃X,t /p̃∗X,t = z̃X,t
/z̃X,t (τt /τt∗ ) T OL−1
decreases in our exercise due to the dominating eﬀect
t
∗
of the change in the composition of exports (driven by the changes in the cutoﬀs zX,t and zX,t
). Nevertheless, as
previously mentioned, this deterioration is dampened relative to the case where the number of home producers is
fixed. Gagnon (2003) finds strong empirical support for the positive eﬀect of entry on the terms of trade, first analyzed
by Krugman (1989).
34

19

3, where Zt = .9Zt−1 , ∀t > 0. As the responses clearly show, the shock has no permanent eﬀect
since all endogenous variables are stationary in response to stationary exogenous shocks. However,
the responses also clearly highlight the substantial persistence of key endogenous variables — well
beyond the exogenous .9 persistence of the productivity shock. Approximately 84 percent of the
initial increase in productivity has been reabsorbed 10 years after the shock. At that point in
time, the real exchange rate Q̃t still needs to cover roughly half the distance between the peak
appreciation (which happens approximately 4 years after the shock) and the steady state.35
A large literature has developed in the past few years striving to explain empirical real exchange
rate movements with models that feature nominal rigidity and local currency pricing (see Chari,
Kehoe, and McGrattan, 2002, and references therein). The success has been, at best, mixed
(especially for models with monopolistic competition that — like ours — are best interpreted as onesector models and should thus explain persistence in sectoral relative prices). Plausible degrees of
nominal rigidity and local currency pricing (supported by the assumption of market segmentation)
succeed in generating volatile real exchange rates, but only special assumptions deliver persistence
in line with the data. Benigno (2004) highlights inertia in endogenous interest rate setting by central
banks and diﬀerences in nominal rigidity as sources of real exchange rate persistence. Burstein,
Neves, and Rebelo (2003) and Corsetti and Dedola (2002) incorporate a non-traded distribution
sector, pointing to structural features beyond nominal rigidity that matter for real exchange rate
dynamics. We propose a diﬀerent mechanism that delivers substantial real exchange rate persistence
in response to transitory shocks: firm entry and reallocation in and out of markets in a world of
flexible prices.

6

International Trade in Bonds

We now extend the model of Section 3 to allow for international trade in bonds. We study how
international bond trading aﬀects the results we have previously described and how our new microeconomic dynamics aﬀect the current account. Since the extension to international borrowing
and lending does not involve especially innovative features relative to the financial autarky setup,
we herein limit ourselves to describing its main ingredients in words and present the relevant model
35

Although persistence .9 is already low by RBC standards, this result is robust to lower persistence of the productivity shock. If Zt = .5Zt−1 , ∀t > 0, 99 percent of the shock has died out within two years, while Q̃t still needs to
cover more than half the distance to the steady state after five years. Q̃t is roughly half-way to the steady state even
five years after a zero-persistence shock. The result also does not depend on the presence of a steady-state iceberg
cost τ = τ ∗ 6= 1. A similarly persistent deviation from PPP happens if τ = τ ∗ = 1.

20

equations in the appendix.
We assume that agents can trade bonds domestically and internationally. Home bonds, issued
by home households, are denominated in home currency. Foreign bonds, issued by foreign households, are denominated in foreign currency. We maintain the assumption that nominal returns are
indexed to inflation in each country, so that bonds issued by each country provide a risk-free, real
return in units of that country’s consumption basket. International asset markets are incomplete,
as only risk-free bonds are traded across countries. In the absence of any other change to our
model, this would imply indeterminacy of steady-state net foreign assets and non-stationarity. The
choice of initial conditions would then become a matter of convenience, and all shocks would have
permanent consequences via wealth reallocation across countries (regardless of the nature of the
disturbances). Such a setup would undermine the reliability of log-linear approximation and the
validity of stochastic analysis. (Ghironi, 2000, discusses the issue in detail.) To solve this problem,
we assume that agents must pay fees to domestic financial intermediaries when adjusting their bond
holdings. We assume these fees are a quadratic function of the stock of bonds. This convenient
specification is suﬃcient to uniquely pin down the steady state and deliver stationary model dynamics in response to temporary shocks. Realistic choices of parameter values imply that the cost
of adjusting bond holdings has a very small impact on model dynamics, other than pinning down
the steady state and ensuring mean reversion in the long run when shocks are transitory.36
We assume that financial intermediaries rebate the revenues from bond-adjustment fees to
domestic households. In equilibrium, the markets for home and foreign bonds clear, and each
country’s net foreign assets entering period t + 1 depend on interest income from asset holdings
entering period t, labor income, net investment income, and consumption during period t. The
change in asset holdings between t and t + 1 is the country’s current account. Home and foreign
current accounts add to zero when expressed in units of the same consumption basket. There
are now three Euler equations in each country: the Euler equation for share holdings, which is
unchanged, and Euler equations for holdings of domestic and foreign bonds. The fees for adjusting
bond holdings imply that the Euler equations for bond holdings feature a term that depends on the
stock of bonds — a key ingredient delivering determinacy of the steady state and model stationarity.
Euler equations for bond holdings in each country imply a no-arbitrage condition between bonds.
In the log-linear model, this no-arbitrage condition relates (in a standard fashion) the real interest
36
Under financial autarky, introducing costs of adjusting bond holdings of the type we consider would have no
eﬀect on the system of equilibrium conditions in Table 1, since holdings of bonds are always zero in equilibrium.

21

rate diﬀerential across countries to expected depreciation of the consumption-based real exchange
rate.
The balanced trade condition closed the model under financial autarky. Since trade is no longer
balanced under international bond trading, we must explicitly impose labor market clearing conditions in both countries.37 These conditions state that the amount of labor used in production and
to cover entry costs and fixed export costs in each country must equal labor supply in that country
in each period. The costs of adjusting bond holdings imply zero holdings (of both domestic and
foreign bonds) in the unique symmetric steady state. Thus, the extended model with international
bond trading features exactly the same steady state as the model under financial autarky. As before, we log-linearize the system and solve it using the method of undetermined coeﬃcients.38 We
set the scale parameter for the bond adjustment cost to .0025 — suﬃcient to generate stationarity
in response to transitory shocks but small enough to avoid overstating the role of this friction in
determining the dynamics of our model.
Impulse Responses
We consider the same productivity and deregulation shocks as under financial autarky. Figure 4
shows impulse responses to a permanent 1 percent increase in home productivity. The response
of several key variables to the shock is qualitatively similar to that under financial autarky. The
permanent nature of the shock implies that home households do not have an incentive to adjust
their net foreign asset position to smooth the eﬀect of a transitory fluctuation in income. The path
of C is therefore very similar to that in Figure 1.
The home economy runs a current account deficit in response to the shock and accumulates net
foreign debt.39 Home households borrow from abroad to finance higher initial investment (relative
to autarky) in new home firms. This is apparent in the diﬀerent responses of NE,t in the initial
years after the shock (Figure 4 relative to 1). The home household’s incentive to front-load entry
of more productive firms is mirrored by the foreign household’s desire to invest savings in the more
attractive economy. Although foreign households cannot hold shares in the mutual portfolio of
37

In the technical appendix, we show that, under financial autarky, balanced trade implies labor market clearing
in each country.
38
Since steady-state holdings of bonds are zero, the percentage deviations of bond stocks from the steady state (used
in the log-linearization) are normalized using the steady-state level of consumption (for instance, Bt+1 ≡ dBt+1 /C).
Similar normalizations are applied for the current account and the trade balance.
39
In Figure 4, ca denotes the current account. The impulse response of the asset stock a cumulates holdings of
domestic and foreign bonds. It shows the level of a at the end of each period. The response of the trade balance
(omitted) is similar to that of the current account in all the examples we consider.

22

home firms (since only bonds can be traded across countries), the return on bond holdings is tied
to the return on holdings of shares in home firms by no-arbitrage between bonds and shares within
the home economy. Therefore, foreign households share the benefits of higher home productivity
via lending.40
As in the case of financial autarky, T OL must decrease in the long run (home eﬀective labor must
relatively appreciate) — otherwise, all new entrants would choose to locate in the home economy.
The accelerated entry of new home firms induces an immediate relative increase in home labor
demand and T OLt no longer depreciates in the short run. Thus, the real exchange rate Q̃t also
appreciates in the short run – in response to the appreciation of T OLt and the relative increase in
average home import prices (which now occurs also in the short run): The opening of the economy
to international asset trading does not qualitatively change the functioning of the endogenous HBS
mechanism in our model. As in the case of financial autarky, the welfare-based relative price index
depreciates due to the dominating eﬀect of increased product variety at home (relative to foreign).
Figure 5 shows impulse responses to deregulation of the home market. The comparison with the
case of financial autarky in Figure 2 is similar to what we described concerning a productivity shock.
Home households borrow from abroad to front-load entry of new firms in the more favorable home
market. The home country runs a current account deficit, and accumulates foreign debt. Home
consumption initially declines and is permanently higher in the long run. Foreign consumption
moves by more than in Figure 2 as foreign households initially save in the form of foreign lending
and then receive income from their positive asset position. The terms of labor, T OLt , and the
real exchange rate Q̃t appreciate in both the short run and the long run. Again, the welfare-based
relative price index Qt depreciates.
Dynamics in response to a productivity shock with persistence .9 are qualitatively similar to
those under financial autarky — thus, we omit the figure. As in the case of a permanent shock, an
important diﬀerence is the absence of an initial depreciation of the terms of labor, again motivated
by faster entry of new firms into the home economy. Home households borrow initially to finance
faster entry. However, borrowing is quickly reversed, and home runs current account surpluses for
approximately seven years after the initial response. The path of the current account is such that
home’s net foreign assets are actually above the steady state throughout the transition, except in the
initial few quarters. When the shock is not permanent, lending abroad to smooth the consequences
40
Note that foreign lending also entails less investment in the foreign market, and a consequent larger initial drop
∗
in the number of new foreign entrants NE,t
.

23

of a temporary, favorable shock on consumption becomes the main determinant of net foreign asset
dynamics.
International Business Cycles
Backus, Kehoe, and Kydland (BKK, 1992) show that introducing trade costs in an international
RBC model improves its ability to replicate second moments of U.S. and international data. They
specify a resource cost of trade as a quadratic function of net exports. However, the introduction of
such trade costs in their model does not resolve the counter-factual prediction that consumption is
more strongly correlated across countries than aggregate output (the consumption-output anomaly).
Backus and Smith (1993) show that international RBC models with complete asset markets tie the
cross-country consumption diﬀerential to the real exchange rate through international risk sharing.
Contrary to this prediction of perfect positive correlation between relative consumption and the
real exchange rate, they document that no clear pattern emerges from the data (the consumptionreal exchange rate anomaly). Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (CKM, 2002) report evidence of
negative correlation between relative consumption and the real exchange rate for the U.S. relative
to Europe. Their sticky-price model does better than BKK concerning the consumption-output
anomaly but does not resolve the consumption-real exchange rate anomaly (and also does not
generate the empirical persistence of the latter). Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (2001) argue that introducing
iceberg trade costs helps explain a variety of puzzles in international comovements, including the
BKK consumption-output anomaly. They observe that trade costs and incomplete asset markets
can explain the consumption-real exchange rate anomaly.41 Our model features trade costs and
incomplete asset markets. Here, we investigate its ability to reproduce key features of international
business cycles — including the resolution of the puzzles highlighted above.
The model includes only one source of fluctuations at business cycle frequency, the shocks to
aggregate productivities Zt and Zt∗ . In this section, we assume that the percentage deviations of
Zt and Zt∗ from the steady state follow the bivariate process
⎡
⎣

Zt
Z∗t

⎤

⎡

⎦=⎣

φZ

φZZ ∗

φZ ∗ Z

φZ ∗

⎤⎡
⎦⎣

Zt−1
Z∗t−1

⎤

⎡

⎦+⎣

ξtZ
ξtZ

∗

⎤

⎦,

(6)

where the persistence parameters φZ and φZ ∗ are in the unit interval, the spillover parameters φZZ ∗
41

Benigno and Thoenissen (2003) show that international asset market incompleteness plays a central role in
dealing with the Backus-Smith puzzle in a model in which intermediate goods are traded and households consume
only non-traded goods.

24

∗

and φZ ∗ Z are non-negative, and ξtZ and ξtZ are normally distributed, zero-mean innovations. For
purposes of comparison, we use the symmetrized estimate of the bivariate productivity process for
the U.S. and an aggregate of European economies in BKK and set
⎡
⎣

φZ

φZZ ∗

φZ ∗ Z

φZ ∗

⎤

⎡

⎦=⎣

.906 .088
.088 .906

⎤

⎦.

This matrix implies a small, positive productivity spillover across countries, such that, if home
productivity rises during period t, foreign productivity will also increase at t + 1. We set the
standard deviation of the productivity innovations to .00852 (a .73 percent variance) and the
correlation to .258 (corresponding to a .19 percent covariance), as estimated by BKK. We calculate
the implied second moments of endogenous variables (percent deviations from steady state) using
the frequency domain technique described in Uhlig (1999), and we compare the model-generated
moments with those of U.S. and international data computed in BKK and reported in Table 2 for
the reader’s convenience.42 For consistency with BKK and CKM, who focus on the high-frequency
properties of business cycles in the U.S. and abroad, we report second moments of Hodrick-Prescott
(HP)-filtered variables.43
We previously argued that empirical price deflators are best represented by the average prices
P̃t and P̃t∗ in our model (as opposed to the welfare based price indices Pt and Pt∗ ). As with the
real exchange rate, we thus focus on the second moments of real variables deflated by the average
prices P̃t and P̃t∗ . To obtain such measures, for any variable Xt in units of consumption, we define
the corresponding real variable deflated by the average price index as XR,t ≡ Pt Xt /P̃t .44
As we previously discussed, new entrants embody the investment by households — and the
stock of firms represents the capital accumulated by such investments. For comparison with the
investment and capital variables from BKK, we compute second moments for NE,t and ND,t as
well as for their overall values in terms of average firm valuation deflated by the average price
E and ṽ D , where ṽ E ≡ ṽ
D
index (ṽR,t
R,t NE,t and ṽR,t ≡ ṽR,t ND,t ). Consistent with BKK, we define
R,t
R,t
42

Results based on model simulation are similar. Benigno (2004) and CKM are the sources on the empirical
properties of the real exchange rate. Benigno reports averages of data in Bergin and Feenstra (BF, 2001) and CKM.
43
The productivity process has eigenvalues .994 and .818. A stationary process for productivity and model stationarity imply that all endogenous variables of interest are stationary. However, productivity and key endogenous
state variables — such as the number of firms and asset stocks — are persistent enough that model-generated moments
calculated without HP filtering pick up low frequency fluctuations that are not featured in the HP-filtered data in
BKK.
44
Unless noted, the main results are unaﬀected when we consider second moments of variables including the variety
eﬀect.

25

saving (in units of consumption) as the diﬀerence between GDP and consumption, yt − Ct , where

GDP yt is defined by yt ≡ wt L + ND,t d˜D,t . We investigate the correlation between the saving rate
E /y
(1 − CR,t /yR,t ) and the investment rate (ṽR,t
R,t ) relative to the data.

Table 3 reports our results. The model underpredicts the standard deviation of aggregate
output (measured by GNP in BKK) and overpredicts that of consumption, although it is successful
at generating less volatile consumption than GDP. The ratio of the standard deviation of CR,t to
yR,t is roughly .59, ten percent higher than the consumption-output volatility ratio in BKK’s data.
Like fixed investment in the data, investment in new firms is substantially more volatile than GDP.
The ratio of trade balance (T BR ) to GDP is much more volatile than the net exports/output ratio
in the data. The trade costs in our model do not prevent the trade balance/GDP ratio from being
quite volatile as the BKK specification does by penalizing trade balance movements directly.45
Instead, the real exchange rate is clearly less volatile than in the data.
The model is quite successful at reproducing the autocorrelation function of key U.S. aggregate
variables with output: The autocorrelation functions for output itself, consumption, investment
in new firms, the stock of productive firms, and the trade balance in Table 3 all reproduce the
qualitative pattern in Table 2. In the cases of output, consumption, and investment success is also
reasonable, if not striking, on quantitative grounds.
The BKK model does not deliver positive correlation between home and foreign output. A
puzzling negative cross-country correlation of aggregate outputs is a standard result of the international RBC literature. Our model successfully generates positive correlation between foreign and
domestic GDPs. However, as the BKK setup, ours does not generate cross-country consumption
correlation that is smaller than the correlation across GDPs for the same parametrization of productivity. The contemporaneous correlation between saving and investment rates is positive, but
stronger than in the data. The autocorrelation function for the real exchange rate Q̃t displays substantial persistence, with a first-order coeﬃcient equal to .89 roughly in line with the evidence. The
correlation between relative consumption spending and the real exchange rate Q̃t is negative — as
in the CKM data — but too large in absolute value. The correlation between relative consumption
(including the variety eﬀect) and the consumption-based real exchange rate — which is 1 in Backus
and Smith’s (1993) complete markets world — is .71.
To verify robustness, we considered an alternative parametrization of the productivity process
(6) and set φZZ ∗ = φZ ∗ Z = 0 and φZZ = φZ ∗ Z ∗ = .999, consistent with evidence described in
45

Note, however, that the volatility of the trade balance itself is much smaller.

26

Baxter (1995) and Baxter and Farr (2001). As in Baxter’s (1995) exercise, we kept the same
variance-covariance matrix of the productivity innovations as in BKK. Several key features of our
results do not change in this scenario relative to the BKK productivity process.46 In particular, the
model continues to perform well on the persistence dimension. The real exchange rate is somewhat
less persistent, but its volatility increases. Most importantly, the consumption-output anomaly
∗ is only slightly larger than that
is substantially weaker: The correlation between CR and CR
∗ (.46 versus .44, respectively), and the correlation between C and C ∗ becomes
between yR and yR

smaller than that between y and y∗ (.30 versus .32, respectively). When productivity spillovers
are present, the response of foreign consumption to a home shock is larger, as foreign households
anticipate that foreign productivity will rise too. When we remove the spillovers, the increase in
foreign consumption following a home shock is muted, significantly ameliorating the anomaly. The
correlation between saving and investment rates is now in the same range as in the data (.47). As
∗ and Q̃ is negative, but
in the case of the BKK productivity process, the correlation between CR /CR

too large in absolute value (−.98). Importantly, the correlation between C/C ∗ and Q now drops
to .13.47
Overall, we interpret the results of the stochastic exercise of this section as supportive of the
novel features of our model as a mechanism for the propagation of business cycles across countries
and over time. Even after HP filtering (and thus removing low-frequency fluctuations that are
arguably important for medium- to long-run transmission), the model is successful at generating
persistent dynamics of endogenous variables and matching several key moments of the data quite
well for plausible parameter values — chosen to match micro-level data — and a standard productivity
process. Consistent with Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ’s (2001) arguments, the introduction of trade costs
and market incompleteness pushes results in the right direction with respect to important puzzles
in international macroeconomics, although assumptions about the exogenous shock process also
play an important role.

7

Conclusions

We developed a two-country, stochastic, general equilibrium model of international trade and macroeconomic dynamics. Relative to existing international macro models, ours has the advantage of
matching several features of empirical evidence in the micro, trade literature. It does so while
46
47

We omit details, but they are available on request.
Setting the scale parameter for the costs of adjusting bond holdings to .01 leaves most results unaﬀected.

27

preserving substantial tractability and the ability to provide intuitions for the main results.
We assumed that firms face some uncertainty about their future productivity when they make
the decision whether or not to sink the resources necessary to enter the domestic market. Consistent
with overwhelming empirical evidence, we assumed that firms face fixed costs as well as per-unit
costs when they export. As a consequence of the fixed export cost, only the relatively more
productive firms self-select into the export market. Aggregate productivity shocks, changes in
domestic market regulation, and changes in trade policy cause firms to enter and exit markets and
generate deviations from PPP that would not exist absent our microeconomic structure.
Our model provides a fully microfounded, endogenous explanation for the HBS eﬀect. All
goods are tradeable in our setup, while some are non-traded in equilibrium: This non-tradedness
margin then changes over time. In contrast to the textbook treatment of the HBS eﬀect, shocks are
aggregate rather than sector-specific. Our model predicts that more productive economies, or less
regulated ones, exhibit higher average prices relative to their trading partners. This real exchange
rate appreciation is driven by entry and endogenous non-tradedness, the two key new features of
our setup. Entry also has a positive eﬀect on a country’s terms of trade in response to productivity
advantages. The same new features of our model result in substantial persistence of key endogenous
variables in response to transitory exogenous shocks. In particular, our model results in persistent
PPP deviations in a world of flexible prices.
When we allow for international borrowing and lending, the model predicts that more productive, or less regulated, economies will experience HBS real appreciation and run persistent foreign
debt positions to finance faster entry of new firms in the economy. Thus, our framework provides
a novel perspective on recent stylized facts for the U.S. economy that are broadly in line with
these predictions. In addition, the model matches several important moments of the U.S. and
international business cycle quite well for reasonable assumptions about parameters and productivity. In particular, it generates positive GDP correlation across countries, it does not constrain
the correlation between relative consumption and the real exchange rate to being perfect, and it
improves on the standard international RBC setup as far as cross-country correlations of consumption and GDP are concerned, confirming Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ’s (2001) argument that trade costs
help explain international macroeconomic puzzles.
Importantly, our model suggests a dichotomy between the behavior of relative CPIs as currently
measured by the data and a welfare-based measure of the real exchange rate that accounts for
availability of new varieties. Rather than appreciating, the latter depreciates as a consequence of a
28

productivity advantage or deregulation. This raises the issue of PPP adjustments in international
statistics, which may contain substantial biases due to the omission of variety eﬀects. The policy
relevance of this implication is apparent, since international agencies use these PPP adjustments
to compare per capita income levels that determine crucial international policy decisions such as
the allocation of aid.

References
[1] Alessandria, G., and H. Choi (2003): “Export Decisions and International Business Cycles,”
mimeo, Ohio State University and University of Auckland.
[2] Backus, D. K., P. J. Kehoe, and F. E. Kydland (1992): “International Real Business Cycles,”
Journal of Political Economy 100: 745-775.
[3] Backus, D. K., and G. W. Smith (1993): “Consumption and Real Exchange Rates in Dynamic
Economies with Non-Traded Goods,” Journal of International Economics 35: 297-316.
[4] Baldwin, R. E., and R. K. Lyons (1994): “Exchange Rate Hysteresis? Large Versus Small
Policy Misalignments,” European Economic Review 38: 1-22.
[5] Baxter, M. (1995): “International Trade and Business Cycles,” in G. M. Grossman and K. Rogoﬀ (eds.), Handbook of International Economics, vol. 3, pp. 1801-1864, Amsterdam: Elsevier.
[6] Baxter, M., and D. D. Farr (2001): “Variable Factor Utilization and International Business
Cycles,” NBER WP 8392.
[7] Benigno, G. (2004): “Real Exchange Rate Persistence with Endogenous Monetary Policy,”
Journal of Monetary Economics 51: 473-502.
[8] Benigno, G., and C. Thoenissen (2003): “On the Consumption-Real Exchange Rate Anomaly,”
mimeo, London School of Economics and University of St. Andrews.
[9] Bergin, P. R., and R. C. Feenstra (2001): “Pricing to Market, Staggered Contracts, and Real
Exchange Rate Persistence,” Journal of International Economics 54: 333-359.
[10] Bergin, P. R., and R. Glick (2003a): “A Model of Endogenous Nontradability and Its Implications for the Current Account,” mimeo, University of California, Davis and Federal Reserve
Bank of San Francisco.
29

[11] Bergin, P. R., and R. Glick (2003b): “Endogenous Nontradability and Macroeconomic Implications,” NBER WP 9739.
[12] Bergin, P. R., R. Glick, and A. Taylor (2003): “Productivity, Tradability, and the Great Divergence,” mimeo, University of California, Davis and Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.
[13] Bernard, A. B., J. Eaton, J. B. Jensen, and S. Kortum (2003): “Plants and Productivity in
International Trade,” American Economic Review 93: 1268-1290.
[14] Bernard, A. B., and J. B. Jensen (2001): “Why Some Firms Export,” NBER WP 8349.
[15] Bernard, A. B., and J. B. Jensen (2004): “Entry, Expansion, and Intensity in the U.S. Export
Boom, 1987-1992,” International Economic Review, forthcoming.
[16] Bernard, A. B., and J. Wagner (2001): “Export Entry and Exit by German Firms,”
Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv - Review of World Economics 137: 105-123.
[17] Betts, C. M., and T. J. Kehoe (2001): “Tradability of Goods and Real Exchange Rate Fluctuations,” mimeo, University of Minnesota and University of Southern California.
[18] Blanchard, O., and F. Giavazzi (2003): “Macroeconomic Eﬀects of Regulation and Deregulation
in Goods and Labor Markets,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118: 879-907.
[19] Broda, C., and D. E. Weinstein (2003): “Globalization and the Gains from Variety,” mimeo,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York and Columbia University.
[20] Burstein, A. T., M. Eichenbaum, and S. Rebelo (2002): “Why Are Rates of Inflation So Low
After Large Devaluations?” NBER WP 8748.
[21] Burstein, A. T., J. C. Neves, and S. Rebelo (2003): “Distribution Costs and Real Exchange
Rate Dynamics during Exchange-Rate-Based Stabilizations,” Journal of Monetary Economics
50: 1189-1214.
[22] Chari, V. V., P. J. Kehoe, and E. R. McGrattan (2002): “Can Sticky Price Models Generate
Volatile and Persistent Real Exchange Rates?” Review of Economic Studies 69: 533-563.
[23] Cheung, Y., M. Chinn, and E. Fujii (2001): “Market Structure and the Persistence of Sectoral
Real Exchange Rates,” International Journal of Finance and Economics 6: 95-114.

30

[24] Corsetti, G., and L. Dedola (2002): “Macroeconomics of International Price Discrimination,”
mimeo, University of Rome III and Bank of Italy.
[25] Corsetti, G., L. Dedola, and S. Leduc (2004): “International Risk-Sharing and the Transmission
of Productivity Shocks,” ECB WP 308.
[26] Corsetti, G., P. Martin, and P. Pesenti (2003): “Globalization and the Transmission Mechanism,” mimeo, University of Rome III, University of Paris-1, and Federal Reserve Bank of
New York.
[27] Das, S., M. J. Roberts, and J. R. Tybout (2001): “Market Entry Costs, Producer Heterogeneity
and Export Dynamics,” mimeo, Pennsylvania State University.
[28] Dornbusch, R., S. Fischer, and P. A. Samuelson (1977): “Comparative Advantage, Trade, and
Payments in a Ricardian Model with a Continuum of Goods,” American Economic Review 67:
823-839.
[29] Dumas, B. (1992): “Dynamic Equilibrium and the Real Exchange Rate in a Spatially Separated
World,” Review of Financial Studies 5: 153-180.
[30] Engel, C. (1993): “Real Exchange Rates and Relative Prices: An Empirical Investigation,”
Journal of Monetary Economics 32: 35-50.
[31] Engel, C. (1999): “Accounting for U.S. Real Exchange Rate Changes,” Journal of Political
Economy 107: 507-538.
[32] Feenstra, R. C. (1994): “New Product Varieties and the Measurement of International Prices,”
American Economic Review 84: 157-177.
[33] Fitzgerald, D. (2003): “Terms-of-Trade Eﬀects, Interdependence and Cross-Country Diﬀerences in Price Levels,” mimeo, University of California, Santa Cruz.
[34] Gagnon, J. E. (2003): “Productive Capacity, Product Varieties, and the Elasticities Approach
to the Trade Balance,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, International Finance DP 781.
[35] Ghironi, F. (2000): “Macroeconomic Interdependence under Incomplete Markets,” WP 471,
Department of Economics, Boston College.

31

[36] Imbs, J., H. Mumtaz, M. O. Ravn, and H. Rey (2002): “PPP Strikes Back: Aggregation and
the Real Exchange Rate,” NBER WP 9372.
[37] Kehoe, T. J., and K. J. Ruhl (2002): “How Important Is the New Goods Margin in International Trade?” mimeo, University of Minnesota.
[38] Kraay, A., and J. Ventura (2002): “Trade Integration and Risk Sharing,” European Economic
Review 46: 1023-1048.
[39] Krugman, P. (1989): “Diﬀerences in Income Elasticities and Trends in Real Exchange Rates,”
European Economic Review 33: 1055-1085.
[40] Lane, P. R. (2001): “The New Open Economy Macroeconomics: A Survey,” Journal of International Economics 54: 235-266.
[41] MacDonald, R., and L. Ricci (2002): “Purchasing Power Parity and New Trade Theory,” IMF
WP 02/32.
[42] Melitz, M. J. (2003): “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
Industry Productivity,” Econometrica 71: 1695-1725.
[43] Obstfeld, M., and K. S. Rogoﬀ (1996): Foundations of International Macroeconomics, Cambridge: MIT Press.
[44] Obstfeld, M., and K. S. Rogoﬀ (2001): “The Six Major Puzzles in International Macroeconomics: Is There a Common Cause?” in Bernanke, B. S., and K. S. Rogoﬀ (eds.), NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 2000, Cambridge: MIT Press, pp. 339-390.
[45] Ricci, L. (1997): “Exchange Rate Regimes and Location,” IMF WP 97/69.
[46] Roberts, M. J., and J. R. Tybout (1997): “The Decision to Export in Colombia: An Empirical
Model of Entry with Sunk Costs,” American Economic Review 87: 545-564.
[47] Rogoﬀ, K. S. (1996): “The Purchasing Power Parity Puzzle,” Journal of Economic Literature
34: 647-668.
[48] Rotemberg, J. J., and M. Woodford (1992): “Oligopolistic Pricing and the Eﬀects of Aggregate
Demand on Economic Activity,” Journal of Political Economy 100: 1153-1207.

32

[49] Ruhl, K. J. (2003): “Solving the Elasticity Puzzle in International Economics,” mimeo, University of Minnesota.
[50] Russ, K. N. (2003): “The Endogeneity of the Exchange Rate as a Determinant of FDI: A
Model of Money, Entry, and Multinational Firms,” mimeo, Johns Hopkins University.
[51] Uhlig, H. (1999): “A Toolkit for Analyzing Nonlinear Dynamic Stochastic Models Easily,” in
Marimon, R., and A. Scott, eds., Computational Methods for the Study of Dynamic Economies,
Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 30-61.
[52] Woodford, M. (2003): Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy,
Princeton: Princeton University Press.

33

Table 1. Model summary, financial autarky

Price indexes

Profits

Free entry

Zero-profit export cutoﬀs

Share of exporting firms

Number of firms

Euler equation (bonds)

Euler equation (shares)

³
´1−θ
∗
ρ̃∗X,t
=1
ND,t (ρ̃D,t )1−θ + NX,t
³
´1−θ
∗
ρ̃∗D,t
+ NX,t (ρ̃X,t )1−θ = 1
ND,t

d˜t = d˜D,t +

d˜∗t = d˜∗D,t +

NX,t ˜
ND,t dX,t
∗
NX,t
˜∗
∗ dX,t
ND,t

fE,t
Zt
∗
fE,t
∗
∗
ṽt = wt Z ∗
t
fX,t θ−1
˜
dX,t = wt Zt k−(θ−1)
f∗
θ−1
d˜∗X,t = wt∗ ZX,t
∗
t k−(θ−1)

ṽt = wt

NX,t
ND,t
∗
NX,t
∗
ND,t

h
i k
θ−1
k
= (zmin )k (z̃X,t )−k k−(θ−1)
³
´−k h
i k
θ−1
k
∗
= (zmin )k z̃X,t
k−(θ−1)

ND,t = (1 − δ) (ND,t−1 + NE,t−1 )
´
³
∗ = (1 − δ) N ∗
∗
ND,t
D,t−1 + NE,t−1
£
¤
(Ct )−γ = β (1 + rt+1 ) Et (Ct+1 )−γ
¡
¢ h¡ ∗ ¢−γ i
∗
(Ct∗ )−γ = β 1 + rt+1
Et Ct+1
∙³
´−γ ³
´¸
Ct+1
˜
ṽt = β (1 − δ) Et
ṽt+1 + dt+1
Ct
∙³
´
³
´¸
∗
−γ
Ct+1
∗
∗
˜
ṽ
+
d
ṽ ∗ = β (1 − δ) Et
∗
t

Aggregate accounting
Balanced trade

Ct

t+1

t+1

Ct = wt L + ND,t d˜t − NE,t ṽt

∗ d˜∗ − N ∗ ṽ ∗
Ct∗ = wt∗ L∗ + ND,t
t
E,t t
³
´1−θ
∗
ρ̃∗X,t
Qt NX,t (ρ̃X,t )1−θ Ct∗ = NX,t
Ct

Notes: (1) In the equations above, it must be understood that the average real prices and profits/dividends are functions of the average productivity levels (as previously defined): ρ̃D,t ≡
ρD,t (z̃D ), ρ̃X,t ≡ ρX,t (z̃X,t ), d˜D,t ≡ dD,t (z̃D ), d˜X,t ≡ dX,t (z̃X,t ). The same applies for the average foreign real prices and profits/dividends. (2) The zero-profit export cutoﬀ conditions hold only
∗ are strictly positive. If all firms export (i.e., if f
∗
when fX,t and fX,t
X,t = fX,t = 0), then these
∗
conditions must be replaced with z̃X,t = z̃X,t = z̃D . The same is true in the bond trading case.

34

Table 2. Business cycle data
U.S.

Standard deviation

Variable

Percentage

Relative to output

1.71

1.00

.84

.49

5.38

3.15

Capital stock

.63

.37

Net exports/output

.45

Output
Consumption
Investment

Corr(Variablet+j ,Outputt ), j = −5, ..., 5
Variable ↓

−5

−4

−3

−2

−1

0

1

2

3

4

5

−.03

.15

.38

.63

.85

1.00

.85

.63

.38

.15

−.03

Consumption

.20

.38

.53

.67

.77

.76

.63

.46

.27

.06

−.12

Investment

.09

.25

.44

.64

.83

.90

.81

.60

.35

.08

−.14

Capital stock

−.60

−.60

−.54

−.43

−.24

.01

.24

.46

.62

.71

.72

Net exports/output

−.51

−.51

−.48

−.43

−.37

−.28

−.17

.00

.17

.30

.38

Output

International: Contemporaneous cross correlation
with U.S.
Country

within country

Output

Consumption

Saving-investment rate

Net exports/output-output

Austria

.31

.07

.29

−.42

Finland

.02

−.01

.09

−.36

France

.22

−.18

−.04

−.17

Germany

.42

.39

.42

−.27

Italy

.39

.25

.06

−.62

Switzerland

.27

.25

.38

−.66

United Kingdom

.48

.43

.07

−.21

Europe

.70

.46

1.00

1.00

.68

−.36

U.S.
Real exchange rate
Source

First-order autocorr.

Std. dev. (ratio to output)

Corr. with relative consumption

CKM

.83

5.50

−.35

BF

.80

4.81

Source: Backus, Kehoe, and Kydland (1992) unless otherwise noted.

35

Table 3. Model-generated moments
Standard deviation
Variable

Percentage

Relative to yR

yR

.7950

1.00

CR

.4681

.5888

E
ṽR

3.5002

4.5754

NE

3.6314

D
ṽR

.3795

ND

.2697

T BR /yR

.4773

1.0178

T BR

.2968

.3733

Q̃

.0278

.035

Corr(Variablet+j , yR,t ), j = −5, ..., 5
Variable ↓

−5

−4

−3

−2

−1

0

1

2

yR

−.02

.10

.27

.47

.71

1.00

.71

.47

.27

.10

−.02

CR

−.08

.03

.18

.37

.59

.87

.66

.48

.32

.19

.08

E
ṽR

.08

.18

.31

.46

.65

.86

.49

.22

.02

−.12

−.21

NE

.07

.17

.29

.44

.62

.84

.49

.23

.04

−.10

−.19

D
ṽR

−.34

−.37

−.39

−.39

−.37

−.33

.06

.30

.45

.51

.52

ND

−.41

−.38

−.31

−.21

−.05

.16

.44

.59

.65

.65

.60

T BR /yR

−.01

−.13

−.29

−.48

−.71

−.99

−.66

−.41

−.20

−.05

.07

T BR

−.05

−.13

−.23

−.36

−.50

−.67

−.33

−.10

.05

.14

.18

Corr(Q̃t+j , Q̃t ), j = −5, ..., 5
−5

−4

−3

−2

−1

0

1

2

3

4

5

.19

.37

.55

.73

.89

1.00

.89

.73

.55

.37

.19

Contemporaneous cross correlation
∗,y
yR
R

∗,C
CR
R

E /y
1 − CR /yR , ṽR
R

∗ , Q̃
CR /CR

C/C ∗ , Q

.21

.86

.95

−.99

.71

36

3

4

5

Figure 1: Response to permanent Z shock (financial autarky).

37

−0.05

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

−0.15

−0.1

−0.05

0

0.05

−0.15

−0.1

−0.05

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

0

0

0

0

Q

zX*

zX

C

5

5

5

5

10

Z shock

10

Z shock

10

Z shock

10

Z shock

15

15

15

15

20

20

20

20

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

−0.05

0

0.05

0

0

0

NX*

NX

C*

5

5

5

10

Z shock

10

Z shock

10

Z shock

15

15

15

20

20

20

−0.05

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

−0.05

0

0.05

0

0.5

1

1.5

0

0

0

TOL

NE*

NE

5

5

5

10

Z shock

10

Z shock

10

Z shock

15

15

15

20

20

20

−0.15

−0.1

−0.05

0

0.05

−0.05

0

0.05

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

0

0

0

Q~

ND*

ND

5

5

5

10

Z shock

10

Z shock

10

Z shock

15

15

15

20

20

20

Figure 2: Response to permanent fE shock (financial autarky).

38

−0.04

−0.02

0

0.02

0.04

0.06

−0.05

0

0.05

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

−0.1

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0

0

0

0

Q

zX*

zX

C

5

5

5

5

10

fE shock

10

fE shock

10

fE shock

10

fE shock

15

15

15

15

20

20

20

20

−0.06

−0.04

−0.02

0

0.02

0.04

−0.2

−0.15

−0.1

−0.05

0

0.05

−0.05

0

0.05

0

0

0

NX*

NX

C*

5

5

5

10

fE shock

10

fE shock

10

fE shock

15

15

15

20

20

20

−0.25

−0.2

−0.15

−0.1

−0.05

0

0.05

−0.05

0

0.05

0

0.5

1

1.5

0

0

0

TOL

NE*

NE

5

5

5

10

fE shock

10

fE shock

10

fE shock

15

15

15

20

20

20

−0.2

−0.15

−0.1

−0.05

0

0.05

−0.05

0

0.05

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

0

0

0

Q~

ND*

ND

5

5

5

10

fE shock

10

fE shock

10

fE shock

15

15

15

20

20

20

Figure 3: Response to transitory Z shock (financial autarky).

39

−0.05

0

0.05

−0.05

0

0.05

−0.05

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0

0

0

0

Q

zX*

zX

C

5

5

5

5

10

Z shock

10

Z shock

10

Z shock

10

Z shock

15

15

15

15

20

20

20

20

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

−0.05

0

0.05

0.1

−0.05

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

−0.05

0

0.05

0

0

0

0

Z

NX*

NX

C*

5

5

5

5

10

Z shock

10

Z shock

10

Z shock

10

Z shock

15

15

15

15

20

20

20

20

−0.1

−0.05

0

0.05

−0.05

0

0.05

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

0

0

0

TOL

NE*

NE

5

5

5

10

Z shock

10

Z shock

10

Z shock

15

15

15

20

20

20

−0.1

−0.08

−0.06

−0.04

−0.02

0

0.02

0.04

−0.05

0

0.05

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0

0

0

Q~

ND*

ND

5

5

5

10

Z shock

10

Z shock

10

Z shock

15

15

15

20

20

20

Figure 4: Response to permanent Z shock (international bond trading).

40
Z shock

10

Z shock

10

15

15

15

15

20

20

20

20

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

−0.2

−0.1

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

−0.05

0

0.05

0

5

10

−1.5

−1

−0.5

5

5

Z shock

10

0.1

Q

zX*

zX

5

−0.04

−0.02

0

0.02

0

0

0

0

C

0.04

0.06

0.15

−0.3

−0.25

−0.2

−0.15

−0.1

−0.05

0

0.05

−0.05

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

Z shock

0

0

0

0

a

NX*

NX

C*

5

5

5

5

10

Z shock

10

Z shock

10

Z shock

10

Z shock

15

15

15

15

20

20

20

20

3

−0.35

−0.3

−0.25

−0.2

−0.15

−0.1

−0.05

0

0.05

−0.06

−0.04

−0.02

0

0.02

0.04

−1.5

−1

−0.5

0

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

0

0

0

0

ca

TOL

NE*

NE

5

5

5

5

10

Z shock

10

Z shock

10

Z shock

10

Z shock

15

15

15

15

20

20

20

20

−0.15

−0.1

−0.05

0

0.05

−0.2

−0.15

−0.1

−0.05

0

0.05

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

0

0

0

Q~

ND*

ND

5

5

5

10

Z shock

10

Z shock

10

Z shock

15

15

15

20

20

20

Figure 5: Response to permanent fE shock (international bond trading).

41

−0.08

−0.06

−0.04

−0.02

0

0.02

0.04

0.06

−0.15

−0.1

−0.05

0

0.05

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

−0.1

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0

0

0

0

Q

zX*

zX

C

5

5

5

5

10

fE shock

10

fE shock

10

fE shock

10

fE shock

15

15

15

15

20

20

20

20

−1.5

−1

−0.5

0

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

−0.8

−0.6

−0.4

−0.2

0

−0.05

0

0.05

0

0

0

0

a

NX*

NX

C*

5

5

5

5

10

fE shock

10

fE shock

10

fE shock

10

fE shock

15

15

15

15

20

20

20

20

3

−0.3

−0.25

−0.2

−0.15

−0.1

−0.05

0

0.05

−0.25

−0.2

−0.15

−0.1

−0.05

0

0.05

−1.5

−1

−0.5

0

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

0

0

0

0

ca

TOL

NE*

NE

5

5

5

5

10

fE shock

10

fE shock

10

fE shock

10

fE shock

15

15

15

15

20

20

20

20

−0.2

−0.15

−0.1

−0.05

0

0.05

−0.15

−0.1

−0.05

0

0.05

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

0

0

0

Q~

ND*

ND

5

5

5

10

fE shock

10

fE shock

10

fE shock

15

15

15

20

20

20

Appendix
Trade Policy
In this appendix, we investigate the eﬀects of changes in exogenous trade costs. We focus on the
consequences of trade liberalization: a symmetric, worldwide decrease in the iceberg costs τt = τt∗ or
∗ . The impulse responses are in figures A.1 and A.2. Since the shocks
fixed export costs fX,t = fX,t

are symmetric, there are no movements in relative, cross-country variables such as the terms of
labor, the terms of trade, and the real exchange rate. Thus, only home variables are represented,
as the responses of all foreign variables are identical to their home counterparts. In both scenarios,
trade liberalization induces a substantial increase in the number of exporting firms, along with a
decrease in the export productivity cutoﬀ (exporting becomes more profitable for all firms). The
increased export competition induces a small downward adjustment in the number of domestic
firms. However, product variety Nt = ND,t + NX,t increases in both countries as the increase in
the number of exporters dominates this small reduction in the number of domestic firms.48 As
expected, the welfare gains from a decrease in the iceberg cost (which aﬀects the trade costs for all
export production) are greater than those generated from a decrease in fixed cost (which does not
aﬀect any marginal trade costs). As documented in many micro-level studies of trade liberalization,
our simulation results highlight the feature that a substantial portion of the increase in overall trade
comes from the extensive margin (more exporting firms).

International Bond Trading
The budget constraint of the representative home household, in units of the home consumption
basket, is now:

Bt+1 + Qt B∗,t+1 +

η
η
(Bt+1 )2 + Qt (B∗,t+1 )2 + ṽt NH,t xt+1 + Ct
2
2

´
³
= (1 + rt )Bt + Qt (1 + rt∗ ) B∗,t + d˜t + ṽt ND,t xt + Ttf + wt L,

where Bt+1 denotes holdings of home bonds, B∗,t+1 denotes holdings of foreign bonds, (η/2) (Bt+1 )2
is the cost of adjusting holdings of home bonds, (η/2) (B∗,t+1 )2 is the cost of adjusting holdings of
48
To see this based on the impulse responses for ND,t and NX,t , recall that the steady-state ratio of exporting firms
is calibrated to the U.S. empirical share of NX /ND = .21. The impulse responses clearly show that the increase in
NX,t is much greater than 5 times (1/.21) the decrease in ND,t .

A-1

foreign bonds (in units of foreign consumption), Ttf is the fee rebate, taken as given by the househ
i
hold, and equal to (η/2) (Bt+1 )2 + Qt (B∗,t+1 )2 in equilibrium. For simplicity, we assume that

the scale parameter η > 0 is identical across costs of adjusting holdings of home and foreign bonds.
Also, there is no cost of adjusting equity holdings. The justification for this is that, in equilibrium,

bond holdings diﬀer from zero only because of transactions with a foreign counterpart. As a consequence, in equilibrium, bond-adjustment fees actually capture fees on international transactions,
which we assume absent from domestic transactions such as those involving equity to avoid adding
unnecessary complication.49
The representative foreign household faces a similar constraint, in units of foreign consumption:
¡ ∗ ¢2
∗
Bt+1
η Bt+1
η ¡ ∗ ¢2
∗
∗
+ B∗,t+1 +
+
+ ṽt∗ NF,t
x∗t+1 + Ct∗
B
Qt
2 Qt
2 ∗,t+1
´
³
(1 + rt ) ∗
∗
∗
=
Bt + (1 + rt∗ ) B∗,t
+ d˜∗t + ṽt∗ ND,t
x∗t + Ttf ∗ + wt∗ L∗ ,
Qt
∗
∗
where Bt+1
denotes holdings of the home bond, B∗,t+1
denotes holdings of the foreign bond, and
i
h¡
¢
¢
¡
2
2
∗
∗
in equilibrium.
/Qt + B∗,t+1
Ttf ∗ = (η/2) Bt+1

Home and foreign households maximize the respective intertemporal utility functions subject

to the respective constraints. The first-order conditions for the choices of share holdings in mutual
portfolios of domestic firms at home and abroad are unchanged relative to the case of financial
autarky. Instead, we have the following Euler equations for bond holdings. At home:
£
¤
(Ct )−γ (1 + ηBt+1 ) = β (1 + rt+1 ) Et (Ct+1 )−γ ,
∙
¸
¡
¢
Qt+1
−γ
−γ
∗
.
(Ct+1 )
(Ct ) (1 + ηB∗,t+1 ) = β 1 + rt+1 Et
Qt
Abroad:
¸
Qt ¡ ∗ ¢−γ
,
C
Qt+1 t+1
¡
¢
¡
¢ h¡ ∗ ¢−γ i
∗
∗
= β 1 + rt+1
Et Ct+1
.
(Ct∗ )−γ 1 + ηB∗,t+1
(Ct∗ )−γ

¡
¢
∗
1 + ηBt+1
= β (1 + rt+1 ) Et

∙

49
We also experimented with a specification of the cost of adjusting bond holdings as a function of overall assets:
(η 0 /2) (At+1 )2 , where At+1 ≡ Bt+1 + Qt B∗,t+1 . The specification we use has the advantage of pinning down uniquely
the steady-state levels and dynamics of Bt+1 and B∗,t+1 as well as of their aggregate. The alternative specification
only pins down the latter. It is possible to verify that the two specifications yield identical log-linear dynamics under
the assumptions that the steady-state levels of Bt+1 and B∗,t+1 are zero when the cost (η 0 /2) (At+1 )2 is used and
η 0 = (1/2) η.

A-2

The presence of the terms that depend on the stock of bonds in the left-hand side of these
equations is crucial for determinacy of the steady state and model stationarity. It ensures that zero
holdings of bonds are the unique steady state in which the product of β times the gross interest rate
equals 1 in each country, so that economies return to this initial position after temporary shocks.
If we had perfect foresight and η = 0, Euler equations for bond holdings at home and abroad
¡
¢
∗
= Qt+1 /Qt . This is the familiar
would imply the no-arbitrage condition (1 + rt+1 ) / 1 + rt+1

condition that says that the real interest rate diﬀerential must be equal to expected depreciation

of the consumption-based real exchange rate for agents to be indiﬀerent between home and foreign
bonds. With perfect foresight and η > 0, no-arbitrage conditions for home and foreign households
imply:
∗
Qt+1 1 + ηBt+1
Qt+1 1 + ηBt+1
1 + rt+1
=
=
.
∗
∗
1 + rt+1
Qt 1 + ηB∗,t+1
Qt 1 + ηB∗,t+1

(7)

Equilibrium requires that home and foreign bonds be in zero net supply worldwide:
∗
= 0,
Bt+1 + Bt+1

(8)

∗
= 0.
B∗,t+1 + B∗,t+1

(9)

Home and foreign holdings of each individual bond must add up to zero because each country is
populated by a unitary mass of identical households that make identical equilibrium choices and only
the home (foreign) country issues home (foreign) currency bonds. Using (8) and (9) in conjunction
∗
∗
= B∗,t+1
with the second equality in (7) makes it possible to show that Bt+1 = B∗,t+1 and Bt+1

at an optimum under perfect foresight. Since households face quadratic costs of adjusting bond
holdings with identical scale parameters across bonds, it is optimal to adjust holdings of diﬀerent
bonds equally so as to spread the cost evenly. The same result holds in the log-linear version of the
stochastic model.
Aggregate accounting implies the following laws of motion for net foreign assets at home and
abroad:
Bt+1 + Qt B∗,t+1 = (1 + rt )Bt + Qt (1 + rt∗ ) B∗,t + wt L + ND,t d˜t − NE,t ṽt − Ct ,
∗
Bt+1

Qt

∗
+ B∗,t+1
=

(1 + rt ) ∗
∗
∗ ˜∗
∗
Bt + (1 + rt∗ ) B∗,t
+ wt∗ L∗ + ND,t
ṽt∗ − Ct∗ ,
dt − NE,t
Qt

(10)
(11)

where holdings of individual bonds across countries are tied by the equilibrium conditions (8) and
(9). Given these conditions, multiplying (11) times Qt and subtracting the resulting equation
A-3

from (10) yields an expression for home net foreign asset accumulation as a function of interest
income and of the cross-country diﬀerentials between labor income, net investment income, and
consumption:
1
Bt+1 + Qt B∗,t+1 = (1 + rt )Bt + Qt (1 + rt∗ ) B∗,t + (wt L − Qt wt∗ L∗ )
2
´ 1¡
¢ 1
1³
∗
∗
ND,t d˜t − ND,t
Qt d˜∗t −
Qt ṽt∗ − (Ct − Qt Ct∗ ) .
+
NE,t ṽt − NE,t
2
2
2
Current accounts are by definition equal to the changes in aggregate bond holdings in the two
countries:
CAt ≡ Bt+1 − Bt + Qt (B∗,t+1 − B∗,t ) ,
CA∗t ≡

∗ − B∗
Bt+1
t
∗
∗
+ B∗,t+1
− B∗,t
.
Qt

It is straightforward to verify that the bond-market clearing conditions (8) and (9) imply CAt +
Qt CA∗t = 0 (a country’s borrowing must equal the other country’s lending) and Ct + Qt Ct∗ =
´
³
∗ Q d˜∗ − N
∗
∗ (since the world as a whole is a closed
wt L + Qt wt∗ L∗ + ND,t d˜t + ND,t
t t
E,t ṽt + NE,t Qt ṽt
economy, world consumption must equal world labor income plus world net investment income).
Labor market clearing conditions at home and abroad require:
´
θ−1³
ND,t d˜D,t + NX,t d˜X,t +
wt
´
θ − 1 ³ ∗ ˜∗
∗ ˜∗
L∗ =
+
N
d
d
N
D,t D,t
X,t X,t +
wt∗
L=

1
(θNX,t fX,t + NE,t fE,t ) ,
Zt
¢
1 ¡ ∗ ∗
∗
∗
fE,t
θNX,t fX,t + NE,t
.
∗
Zt

∗ , z̃
∗
∗
We thus have 23 endogenous variables: wt , wt∗ , d˜t , d˜∗t , NE,t , NE,t
X,t , z̃X,t , ND,t , ND,t , NX,t ,
∗ , r , r ∗ , ṽ , ṽ ∗ , C , C ∗ , Q , B , B , B ∗ , B ∗ . Of these, 8 are predetermined as of time t: the
NX,t
t
t
t
t
t
∗,t
t
t
t
t
∗,t
∗ , the risk-free interest rates, r and r ∗ ,
total numbers of firms at home and abroad, ND,t and ND,t
t
t
∗ . The model features the same 8 exogenous variables
and the stocks of bonds, Bt , B∗,t , Bt∗ , and B∗,t

as in the financial autarky case. The 23 endogenous variables above are determined by a system of
23 equations that is identical to the system in Table 1 in the following blocs: Price Indexes, Profits,
Free entry, Zero-profit export cutoﬀs, Share of exporting firms, Number of firms, Euler equation
(shares). The 5 equations in Euler equation (bonds), Aggregate accounting, and Balanced trade
are replaced by the 9 equations in Table A.1.50
50

Of course, we apply again the functions at the bottom of Table 1.

A-4

Table A.1. Model summary, bond trading

Euler equations (bonds)

Net foreign assets

Bond market equilibrium

Labor market equilibrium

£
¤
(Ct )−γ (1 + ηBt+1 ) = β (1 + rt+1 ) Et (Ct+1 )−γ
i
¡
¢ h Qt+1
∗
(Ct )−γ (1 + ηB∗,t+1 ) = β 1 + rt+1
Et Qt (Ct+1 )−γ
h
¡
¢
¡ ∗ ¢−γ i
∗
t
= β (1 + rt+1 ) Et QQt+1
Ct+1
(Ct∗ )−γ 1 + ηBt+1
h¡
¡
¢
¡
¢
¢−γ i
∗
∗
∗
(Ct∗ )−γ 1 + ηB∗,t+1
= β 1 + rt+1
Et Ct+1

Bt+1 + Qt B∗,t+1 = (1 + rt )Bt + Qt (1 + rt∗ ) B∗,t
³
´
∗ Q d˜∗
+ 12 (wt L − Qt wt∗ L∗ ) + 12 ND,t d˜D,t − ND,t
t D,t
³
´
∗ Q d˜∗
+ 12 NX,t d˜X,t − NX,t
t X,t
³
´
∗ Q ṽ ∗ − 1 (C − Q C ∗ )
− 12 NE,t ṽt − NE,t
t t
t
t t
2
∗
Bt+1 + Bt+1
=0

∗
=0
B∗,t+1 + B∗,t+1
³
´
1
˜
˜
L = θ−1
N
+
N
d
d
D,t D,t
X,t X,t + Zt (θNX,t fX,t + NE,t fE,t )
wt
³
´
³
´
1
∗ d˜∗ + N ∗ d˜∗
∗ f∗ + N∗ f∗
N
+
θN
L∗ = θ−1
∗
∗
D,t
D,t
X,t
X,t
X,t
X,t
E,t
E,t
w
Z
t

t

A-5

tau shock

tau shock

C

0.3

tau shock

0.05
0.04

0.25

0

0.02

−0.05

−0.02

0

0.2
0.15

ND

−0.04
−0.1

0.1

−0.06

0.05

−0.08

−0.15

−0.1

0
−0.2

−0.05
0

5

10

15

20

NE
0

tau shock

−0.12
5

15

20

0

5

10

15

20

tau shock

NX

0

10

2

−0.1
−0.2

1.5

−0.3
1

−0.4
−0.5

0.5
−0.6

zX

−0.7
0

0
5

10

15

20

0

5

10

15

20

Figure A.1: Response to permanent τ = τ ∗ shock.

fX shock

fX shock

0.05

fX shock

0.05

0.05

0

0

C
0

ND

NE

−0.05

−0.05
0

5

10

15

20

−0.05
0

fX shock

5

15

20

15

20

0

fX shock

NX

0.05

10

1

0
−0.05

0.8

−0.1
0.6

−0.15
−0.2

0.4

−0.25

0.2

−0.3
0

zX

0
5

10

15

20

0

5

10

Figure A.2: Response to permanent fx = fx∗ shock.

A-6

5

10

15

20

