NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EARNINGS MANIPULATION AND MANAGERIAL
INVESTMENT DECISIONS:
EVIDENCE FROM SPONSORED PENSION PLANS
Daniel Bergstresser
Mihir A. Desai
Joshua Rauh
Working Paper 10543
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10543
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2004

The authors thank Shlomo Benartzi, David Cutler, David Hawkins, Caroline Hoxby, Dirk Jenter, André
Perold, James Poterba, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy Stein and various seminar participants for helpful comments.
Conversations and email exchanges with Ron Gebhardtsbauer of the American Academy of Actuaries, James
Marple of Watson Wyatt, and Jerrold Levy of Mercer Consulting were particularly helpful. The Division of
Research at Harvard Business School provided generous financial support. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Daniel Bergstresser, Mihir A. Desai, and Joshua Rauh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Earnings Manipulation and Managerial Investment Decisions:
Evidence from Sponsored Pension Plans
Daniel Bergstresser, Mihir A. Desai, and Joshua Rauh
NBER Working Paper No. 10543
June 2004
JEL No. M41, M52, G23, G30, G11
ABSTRACT
Managers appear to manipulate firm earnings when they characterize pension assets to capital
markets and alter investment decisions to justify, and capitalize on, these manipulations. We
construct a measure of the sensitivity of reported earnings to the assumed long-term rate of return
on pension assets. Managers are more aggressive with assumed long-term rates of return when their
assumptions have a greater impact on reported earnings. Managers also increase assumed rates of
return as they prepare to acquire other firms and as they exercise stock options, further confirming
the opportunistic nature of these increases. Decisions about assumed rates of return, in turn,
influence asset allocation within pension plans. Instrumental variables results suggest that a 25 basis
point increase in the assumed rate of return is associated with a 5% increase in equity allocation.
Taken together, these results suggest that earnings manipulation arising from managerial motivations
influences significant managerial investment decisions.
Daniel Bergstresser
Harvard Business School
Morgan 391
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
dbergstresser@hbs.edu

Mihir A. Desai
Harvard Business School
Morgan 363
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
mdesai@hbs.edu

Joshua Rauh
MIT
Department of Economics
E52-300
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
rauh@mit.edu

1.

Introduction
Manipulation of reported earnings can be a powerful tool for managers to inflate their

stock prices. Studies of earnings manipulation typically emphasize aggregate measures such as
accruals and, consequently, struggle to link earnings manipulation to investment decisions. In
this paper, we identify a simple mechanism for earnings manipulation, describe how
manipulation through this channel is linked to CEOs’ incentives, and show that firms change
investment decisions in order to justify, and capitalize on, this type of earnings manipulation.
Specifically, we find that managers opportunistically choose assumed rates of return on pension
assets, and we examine how these distorted reporting decisions interact with option exercises,
merger activity and asset allocation decisions within pension plans.
The size of defined-benefit pension plans and managers’ wide latitude in characterizing
them to capital markets make pension accounting a fertile area for earnings manipulation. Many
firms have pension plans that are large enough to allow them to substantially increase reported
earnings in the short run by changing the assumed long-term rate of return for the pension assets
they manage for their workers. Managers who perceive that manipulating this assumption can
influence their firms’ stock price, as was apparently the case during the 1990s, face strong
incentives to set this long-term rate of return assumption opportunistically.
Some capital market observers have viewed the actions of IBM, under CEO Louis
Gerstner, Jr., as an example of how firms can use pension accounting to manipulate earnings.1
IBM sponsors a large defined benefit pension plan, with over $57 billion in assets at the end of
2002. Table 1 outlines the operating performance of IBM, the performance of its DB pension
plan, and the CEO’s option grants and exercises. Changes in the long-term rate of return
(LTROR) that IBM assumes on its DB pension plan assets are of particular interest. IBM
changed its assumed long-term rate of return four times during this period: a twenty-five basis
point reduction in 1995, a twenty-five basis point increase in 1997, a fifty basis point increase in
2000, and a fifty basis point reduction in 2002. As we describe more fully in the sections that
follow, IBM’s assumed rates of return throughout this period exceeded those used by most firms.
The frequent changes are also notable given the long run nature of these assets and assumptions.
1

See Maclean (2002).
1

While IBM reacted to poor actual performance in its pension plan in the mid-1990s by reducing
the assumed long-term rate of return, the opposite occurred in 2000. Despite poor equity market
returns and declining bond yields during that year, IBM raised its long-term rate of return
assumption by fifty basis points. Nearly five percent of IBM’s income before tax in 2000 and
2001 resulted from the increase in the assumed long-term rate of return from 9.25% to 10.00%.
More generally, IBM’s reported pretax income grew at a compound annual growth rate of 6.7%
from 1995 to 2001; without these changes, income would have grown at only a 5.6% rate. As
Table 1 shows, these changes in pension assumptions coincided with deteriorating operating
performance.
This example illustrates how senior managers can use pension accounting to boost their
firms’ reported profits. Coronado and Sharpe (2003) present evidence that investors did not
‘pierce the veil’ of pension finance accounting during the 1990s; they show that earnings
associated with changed pension assumptions were capitalized into prices to the same degree as
operating earnings.2 Their results suggest that managers can boost both reported profits and
stock prices through the simple mechanism of pension accounting. We investigate the degree to
which managers are opportunistic with these assumed returns and evaluate the extent to which
choices on assumed returns interact with their own option exercises and with the merger activity
of their firms. Finally, we examine whether managers alter asset allocation within pension plans
to justify these assumed returns.
In order to identify the relative incentive to use this lever of earnings manipulation, we
begin by constructing a measure of the sensitivity of a firm’s overall profits to the assumed longtem rate of return on pension assets. We show that this sensitivity measure is an important
determinant of the levels of, and changes in, assumed rates of return. Specifically, a firm whose
pension assets are twice as large relative to its operating income as the median firm in our
sample makes a long-term rate of return assumption that is, on average, approximately ten basis
points higher than the median. A firm in the 90th percentile of sensitivity, on average, has a longterm rate of return assumption that is 40 basis points higher than a firm in the 10th percentile.
These differences in return assumptions can have an economically meaningful impact on
2

In a related vein, Franzoni and Marin (2003) conclude that firms with underfunded plans are overvalued by the
market.
2

reported earnings for many firms: at the 90th percentile of pension sensitivity, a 40 basis point
increase in the LTROR assumption will raise a firm’s reported earnings by 1.2%. The estimated
impact of these measures of pension sensitivity on rate of return assumptions grew significantly
during the 1990s.
Having identified the opportunistic nature of these assumptions, the paper investigates the
links between this form of earnings manipulation and firm and managerial investment decisions.
We show that firms make particularly high return assumptions in periods leading up to the
acquisition of other firms. This relationship is particularly strong for firms whose reported
income is the most sensitive to pension assumptions. Assumed long-term rates of return are
approximately 30 basis points higher for firms acquiring other firms. We show that this
acquisition result cannot be explained by variation in actual lagged pension asset returns or by
proxies for the optimism or aggressiveness of firms’ CEOs. In addition, years in which CEOs
choose to exercise options also are characterized by higher return assumptions. A one standarddeviation increase in option exercise at the median firm is associated with a 4 basis point
increase in the assumed long-term rate of return. As managers prepare for acquisitions and for
large exercises, they have an increased incentive to produce higher earnings and share prices and
they appear to increase their assumed rates of return in order to do so.
The asset allocation decision within pension plans is another investment decision that
might reflect this earnings manipulation. Allocations to equity vary considerably across
organizational form and across firms, with equity allocations in firm-sponsored pension funds
exceeding those in public and union-sponsored funds. Indeed, the large equity allocation in most
firm pension plans is a persistent puzzle; our analysis suggests that the interaction of managerial
opportunism and pension accounting may help explain part of this phenomenon as managers
increase equity allocations to justify rate of return assumptions. Our empirical strategy is to
regress equity allocation on the long-term rate of return assumption, using acquisitions as an
instrument for the long-term pension asset return assumption. This method aims to address the
concern that assumed rates and asset allocation decisions may be correlated for reasons unrelated
to managerial motivations. Because it is unlikely that the variation in equity allocations is
independently correlated with firm acquisition activity, this empirical approach provides a useful
source of identification. The results from this IV analysis indicate that changed assumed rates

3

lead to changed asset allocation decisions. Specifically, we find that 25 basis point increases in
assumed rates are associated with 5% increases in equity allocation. These results seem
reasonable given that they are consistent with an assumed market risk premium of 5%.
We conclude by framing our investigation of earnings manipulation within the debate on
whether earnings manipulation reflects an agency concern or is beneficial to current
shareholders. We show that managers who are the least constrained by their shareholders — as
measured by an index of corporate governance — appear to be the most aggressive with their
rate of return assumptions. This evidence suggests that the earnings manipulation investigated
here does not benefit current shareholders. We go on to speculate on the magnitude of these
effects by returning to the case of IBM. We estimate that between $12 and $76 million of
compensation accrued to Gerstner from these changed assumptions alone.
Earnings manipulation is not the only factor that may affect firms’ long-term rate of
return assumptions. As discussed in Amir and Benartzi (1998), assumed rates of return might
simply reflect the composition of pension plan assets, with higher assumed rates reflecting higher
allocations to equity. However, Amir and Benartzi (1998) also suggest that this explanation for
reported rates of returns is incomplete, and our robustness checks confirm this. A second
possibility is that managers adjust the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets to be close
to recent actual returns on plan assets, following a form of excessive extrapolation based on
recent history (Benartzi (2001)). We find that lagged actual pension returns are positively
correlated with the return assumption, but that the effects of acquisitions and earnings sensitivity
are not attenuated in the presence of controls for this extrapolation effect. Third, it is possible
that variation in assumed rates of return partly reflects heterogeneity in managerial optimism,
with more optimistic managers and firms making higher rate of return assumptions. While we
cannot reject the hypothesis that heterogeneous disposition might influence the distribution of the
expected long-term rate of return assumption, we show that our sensitivity and acquisition results
are robust to plausible controls for this factor — particularly pension fund asset allocations and
the extent to which CEO compensation comes from option grants.
This work relates closely to the existing work on earnings management, summarized in
Healy and Whalen (1999). Sloan (1996) finds evidence that the market ‘misprices’ accruals

4

components of earnings, meaning that periods where accruals make up a large part of earnings
are followed by low returns. Xie (2001) finds evidence that this result comes largely from
discretionary components of earnings, suggesting that Sloan’s result is related to managerial
manipulation of earnings.3 Teoh, Welch, and Wong (1998a, 1998b) focus on discretionary
accruals at times that firms are selling shares, and find additional evidence consistent with
opportunistic managerial manipulation of accruals components of earnings.
In contrast to much of the existing work on earnings manipulation and managerial
incentives, our analysis of the assumed rate of return on pension assets isolates a specific action
that is otherwise unrelated to the core business of a firm. This approach avoids measures of
earnings manipulation that are based on aggregate accounting variables, such as the difference
between a firm’s cash flow and its reported earnings. Such measures, because they are often
correlated with firm growth rates, can lead to potentially spurious correlations with other
variables related to firm growth rates. Our focus on pension accounting isolates earnings
manipulation in a way that is less likely to be associated with a firm’s core activities, and avoids
these potential spurious correlations. Additionally, the results reported are robust to the
inclusion of industry-year controls, and firm and year fixed effects, thereby supporting the
underlying link we identify between managerial opportunism and earnings manipulation.
Finally, additional robustness checks demonstrate that alternative theories of how firms set longterm rate of return assumptions — e.g. that these choices reflect equity allocations, excessive
extrapolation from past returns, or managerial optimism — cannot explain our results.
In addition to the literature on the motivations for earnings manipulation, this paper
relates to both the literature on incentive compensation and managerial incentives and to the
literature on the asset allocation decisions and reporting of pension plans. As detailed in Hall
and Murphy (2003), the growth of incentive compensation is one of the most notable
developments in corporate practices through the 1990s. Recently, more attention has been paid
to the less beneficial effects of such practices, as in Bebchuk, Fried and Walker (2002) and
Bergstresser and Philippon’s (2003) study of accrual accounting. Our evidence that firms make

3

Chan, Chan, Jegadeesh, and Lakonishok (2001) focus on market evaluation of accruals components. Their
evidence suggests that, even without earnings manipulation, the market misjudges the importance of key accruals
components. For instance, reductions in accounts payable (which reduce accruals) forecast positive returns.
5

more aggressive pension accounting decisions during periods where their CEOs are exercising
stock options is consistent with the patterns of evidence documented in the papers listed above.
Academic work on pension plans has typically focused on whether or not firms
incorporate pension plans into their own capital structure and investment decisions (as in
Friedman (1983) and Bodie et al. (1985)), how unfunded pension liabilities are priced by the
market (see for example Feldstein and Seligman (1981) and Feldstein and Mørck (1983)), and
how firms react to the guarantee of pension liabilities provided through the Pension Benefit
Guarantee Corporation. Some studies have examined latitude in setting the rate used to discount
pension liabilities in accounting regimes where this flexibility was considerable.4 Several studies
have examined asset allocation decisions (eg. Papke (1992)) and their relationship to tax
incentives, as in Frank (2002). The earlier-mentioned paper by Amir and Benartzi (1998)
examines expected rate of return assumptions and find them weakly related to equity shares and
unrelated to future performance of pension fund assets. Gold (2003) conjectures that the puzzle
of high equity allocations in defined-benefit pension plans reflects managerial incentives created
by accounting rules and our results investigate and confirm this conjecture.
Section 2 motivates our analysis with an example that illustrates how the defined-benefit
pension plan long-term rate of return assumption can affect reported income. Section 3 describes
recent patterns on assumed rates and asset allocation and reviews the data employed in the
subsequent analysis. Section 4 analyzes the determinants of assumed rates of return with
particular emphasis on the role of merger activity and incentive compensation. Section 5 relates
decisions on assumed returns on pension assets to equity allocation decisions through and
instrumental variables analysis. Section 6 discusses the consequences of these results for the
evolving debate on how managerial manipulations reallocate value amongst current
shareholders, potential shareholders and managers. Section 7 concludes.
2.

A motivating example
A firm that sponsors a DB pension plan creates a liability equal to the present value of all

future payments due their employees. Firms fund these liabilities with devoted pension assets,
4

Feldstein and Mørck (1983) consider these assumptions in the US before SFAS 87, which placed significant
restrictions on discount rates. Obinata (2000) considers Japanese firms.
6

which by law are to be managed in the interest of the employee-beneficiaries. These assets and
obligations, however, are accounted for on the firm’s financial statements. Explicit rules dictate
contribution and funding decisions, such as minimum funding requirements and restrictions
designed to prevent substantial overfunding of plans. Yet firms have significant latitude to make
assumptions when they report to capital markets the cost of sponsoring the plan, as well as the
value of the plan’s assets and liabilities.5 We focus on these assumptions and their impact on
asset allocation in the sections that follow.
Firms make three main calculations when characterizing the annual cost of their DB
plans — a service cost, an interest cost, and an offsetting assumed return on plan assets. The
service cost is the present value of benefits earned by the firm’s employees during the current
period. This cost is the change in the value of the firm’s promises to its employees that comes
from an additional year of employment.6 Firms also report an interest cost corresponding to the
change in the present discounted value of the pension obligations arising from the approach of
the discharging of these obligations. Holding constant the nominal value of the obligations,
bringing these obligations a year closer increases their present discounted value. The interest
cost would also include the change in the present discounted value of pension obligations due to
changing interest rates. Industry observers suggest that individual firms have relatively limited
discretion over their reported service and interest costs.7
The final component of pension expense, the assumed return on plan assets, offsets the
interest and service costs. This return is an assumed return rather than the realized rate of return
on the plan’s assets. Using an assumption insulates annual earnings from year-to-year
fluctuations in the market performance of pension assets. Managers enjoy significant discretion
5

For a detailed discussion of these accounting rules, see Hawkins (2001) and Zion and Carcache (2002). For a
broader discussion of the legal rules surrounding DB plans, see Langbein and Wolk (2000).
6
When an employee’s wages grow with tenure, and when the promised benefits of the DB plan are a function of
wages in the final years of employment, the reported service cost captures the cost arising from an additional year of
wage growth for covered employees.
7
See Zion and Carcache (2002). In 1993, the SEC’s Chief Accountant determined that the discount rate for pension
liabilities should be based on the Moody's Aa interest rate index. While some discretion remains, based, for instance
on the interaction between the slope of the yield curve and demographic differences across firms (differences in the
age structure of pension plan participants give pension liabilities different effective durations across firms), discount
rates since that ruling have been much more tightly bunched than was previously the case. Recent steep declines in
these rates have raised liabilities while asset values of equity-heavy pension funds have fallen, a situation industry
insiders call the “Perfect Storm”.

7

in setting the assumed long-term rate of return used for financial reporting purposes.8 The
reconciliation between the assumed and actual rates of return happens over time, with potentially
very long amortization periods.9 This arrangement provides managers of firms with large
pension funds relative to the size of operating earnings with a substantial opportunity to manage
earnings.
As a simple example, consider a firm with $100 of operating assets, a 4% ($4) return on
these operating assets, and $20 of pension assets. If this firm changes the assumed rate of return
from 10% to 11%, it can immediately increase net income by 5% (or $0.20). As this example
illustrates, the scope for increasing profits in this manner is a function of the size of pension
assets relative to operating income.
Table 2 presents a matrix, showing for different levels of pension sensitivity (across the
columns) and different long-term rate of return assumptions (down the rows) the share of nonpension operating income that arises from the assumed return on pension assets. Our measure of
pension sensitivity is the ratio of pension assets to firm operating income, and the long-term rate
of return is the one reported in the firm’s financial statements. The particular row entries in the
table reflect the distribution of long-term rates of return in the Compustat-based sample used in
the empirical work that follows; the fifth percentile is 7 percent, while the median is 9 percent
and the 95th percentile is 10 percent. The column entries in the table reflect the distribution of
pension sensitivity; at the median firm in our sample, pension assets amount to 71.6 percent of
firm operating income.

8

The firm can actually make different long-term rate of return assumptions for a given year, depending on the
audience: firms’ actuaries choose the long-term rate of return assumption used to determine its minimum pension
funding requirements under federal law. This long-term rate of return assumption is not reported to financial
markets and has no impact on the firm’s reported earnings. The long-term rate of return assumptions used in firms’
financial reports are chosen by the firms themselves, rather than their actuaries. These long-term rate of return
assumptions affect the firms’ reported earnings, and conversations with industry participants suggest that these longterm rate of return assumptions have been higher than the long-term rate of return assumptions chosen by the firm’s
actuaries for determining compliance with federal pension funding standards.
9
Any deviation between actual realized returns and the actuarial assumption enters an off-balance sheet item
‘unrecognized gain or loss’. The rules for amortization of this unrecognized component are based on a ‘corridor’
approach; as long as the unrecognized component is less than 10 percent of the PBO, there is no need to amortize
any part of the difference. When the unrecognized component is beyond 10 percent of the PBO, a firm is required to
amortize a share of the difference between their position and the 10 percent ‘corridor’ boundary. The required share
is based on the expected future service of the plan’s participants.

8

For the firms with small plans, even large changes in the assumed rate of return make
only small differences in net earnings. For instance, at the 10th percentile of pension sensitivity,
at which plan assets amount to 5.8 percent of firm operating income, changing the assumed rate
of return from 7 percent to 10 percent would boost reported income by only 2 tenths of a percent.
However, at the 50th percentile of pension sensitivity, the same increase in the assumed rate of
return would increase reported income by over 2 percent. At the 90th percentile of pension
sensitivity, reported firm income would rise by almost 9 percent. Firms with large pension plans,
such as IBM, can significantly change their reported performance by adjusting this assumed
long-term rate of return.10
The desire to manipulate assumed rates of return may have an influence on pension asset
allocations. Extreme rate of return assumptions may be easier to justify in a setting where
expected returns are more uncertain. In particular, the uncertainty involved in equity returns
means that a firm with a large equity allocation enjoys greater leeway in estimating expected
returns than a firm whose investments are entirely in fixed-income securities. In short, higher
assumed returns may be more easily rationalized with higher equity allocations. The following
sections explore the link between long-term rate of return assumptions and managerial
motivations in order to identify the role of opportunism relative to alternative explanations in
determining reporting decisions. In particular, we focus on the incentives to raise reported
earnings in periods around option exercise and in periods when firms are purchasing other
companies.
3.

Data and descriptive statistics
To examine the links among managers’ motivations and pension reporting and asset

allocation decisions, we compile data from several sources. Firm non-pension income, nonpension assets, pension fund size, pension liability size, and long-term rate of return assumptions
for pension assets come from the Compustat dataset for the years 1991-2002. Compustat
Executive Compensation provides information on CEO option exercise for a subsample of
Compustat firms from 1992-2002. We take data on firm acquisitions from the Securities Data
10

Not all firms with large pension plans actively change their assumed rates of return. Appendix Table 1 details the
assumed rates of returns for the ten largest DB sponsors, other than IBM, as provided in their 10-Ks. This table

9

Company (SDC) database of mergers and acquisitions and are available for the entire sample
period.
Pension fund asset allocation data come from two sources. First, an annual survey
conducted by Pensions and Investments covers the asset allocation of the largest US pension
funds from 1991-2002.11 Second, firms sponsoring pension plans with more than 100 employees
must file a Form 5500 for each plan with the IRS on an annual basis; the full set of these forms
are publicly available in electronic form through 1998 and contain asset allocation data. For
firms with multiple plans we aggregate the IRS 5500 filings from the plan-year level to firm-year
observations. We do not use asset allocation data from a firm’s 5500 filings if that pension
fund’s assets are held in trusts or other opaque investment vehicles; for these observations it is
impossible to precisely identify equity allocations. The combination of the Pensions and
Investments and IRS 5500 sources provides equity allocation information for approximately
3,200 firm-year observations, and approximately equal numbers of firm-year observations come
from each of the two sources.12
The analysis that follows uses three different samples; the second and third are subsets of
the first. Our primary sample includes all Compustat firms for which pension assets, operating
income, and assumed long-term rates of return on pension investments are available.13 This
sample has 19,325 observations for 3,247 defined-benefit plan sponsors during this period. We
use this sample to investigate the relationships among pension sensitivity, firm acquisitions, and
assumed rates of return on pension assets. The second sample includes the 7,075 firm-year
observations from the first sample that can be linked to the Compustat Executive Compensation
database. We use this smaller sample to investigate the role of executive option exercises. The
third sample includes the 3,202 firm-year observations from the first sample for which we also
demonstrates that several of these large firms never change their rates of return and others change their assumed
rates of return often.
11
The Pensions and Investments survey data begins in 1988 but the years 1988-1990 are not used in this study as the
Compustat pension data does not begin until 1991.
12
The initial size of the P&I sample is 200 pension sponsors for each year 1988-1996 and 1000 sponsors for 19972002. Approximately 45% of the entities in each year of the P&I are corporate (as opposed to public, union, or
nonprofit) sponsors of DB plans. The requisite data from Compustat (in particular the long-term rate of return) are
available for approximately two-thirds of those observations, leaving about 1,700 P&I observations at the firm-year
level. The IRS 5500 filings add the remaining 1,500 observations during the period 1990-1998, which is also the
period for which the Pensions & Investments sample is smaller.

10

observe pension fund asset allocations, either from the Pensions and Investments data or from
the IRS 5500 filings. We use this sample to investigate the relationship between long-term rate
of return assumptions and pension fund asset allocations.
Defined benefit pension plans are quite large in aggregate, and represent a significant part
of overall assets for corporate sponsors. These assets also represent a large part of the pool of
liquid financial assets in the economy. Table 3 describes the sizes of these plans among the
firms in our sample. The aggregate ratio of pension assets to operating assets peaked at 10.31%
in 1997 when pension assets totaled $1.156 trillion for the 1,630 firms in the sample. The mean
firm in our sample, in that year, had $709.4 million in pension assets. The distribution is highly
skewed, however; the median in 1997 year was $77 million and the 95th percentile was $414.6
million.
The market value of pension fund assets declined recently along with broader equity
markets. In 2002, the total pension fund assets for the 1,502 sample firms totaled $1.094 trillion,
an amount equal to 5.7 percent of balance sheet assets. This reduction in the value of pension
assets coincided with increasing plan liability values due to falling bond yields, a situation that
has caused the deterioration in the funding status of our sample of defined benefit pension plans
documented in Figure 1.14 This figure shows the mean, median, and 25th and 75th percentile
funding status among our sample of funds, measured along the left axis.
In 1991 the mean and median funds were both overfunded, as the value of pension assets
exceeded the estimated value of pension liabilities. At the 25th percentile fund, the extent of
underfunding amounted to over 10 percent of plan liabilities. At the height of the market peak in
1999, the 75th percentile plan was 30 percent overfunded, and the 50th percentile plan was more
than 10 percent overfunded. While at the end of 1999 recent equity returns had been very high,
the impact of these returns on pension plan funding status was partially offset by increases in
pension liabilities due to falling bond yields. By 2002, several years of poor equity market
performance and declining bond yields had degraded the funding status of defined benefit
pension plans; in this year, the median and mean pension plans in the sample were almost 25
13

This sample includes only those firms for which the log ratio of pension fund size to firm operating income can be
computed.

11

percent underfunded. This underfunding has raised policy concerns given the role that the
federally-sponsored Pension Benefit Guarantee Corporation plays in insuring pension plan
participants, as well as the cash drains that required contributions represent to firms with
underfunded plans.15
Asset allocations for the firms in our sample have shifted over time. Figure 2 plots the
allocations to equity among the firms in our sample, as well as additional samples of unionsponsored and public-sponsored pension plans covered in the Pensions and Investments annual
surveys. Two distinct patterns emerge. First, the mean allocation to equity in each of the three
types of pension funds increased fairly dramatically over the period. Among the corporatesponsored plans in our sample, the mean allocation to equity rises from 35 percent to
approximately 65 percent between 1991 and 2000, before retreating in 2001 and 2002. The
second pattern is that the increase in equity allocations at corporate-sponsored pension plans has
been particularly dramatic relative to union or public plans. Obviously, greater exposure to
equities has contributed to the current funding crisis apparent in Figure 1. Section 5 of this paper
explores the relationship between managerial incentives and the shift of pension assets towards
equity over the 1990s.
The cross-sectional distribution of long-term rate of return assumptions has been
relatively constant during this period of changing yields and shifting returns. Figure 3
documents the median long-term asset rate of return assumptions in our sample of pension funds.
The median assumed return is constant at 9 percent until the last period of the sample, when it
falls to 8.5 percent. The mean, 25th percentile, and 75th percentiles of the distribution have also
been roughly constant through the period. This stable distribution of long-term rate of return
assumptions is striking because yields on Treasury securities have been declining; the lowest line
on Figure 3 shows the yield on 10-year government bonds over the period. Because firms
generally hold a mix of equity and fixed-income securities, this constant median LTROR
assumption has implied increasing optimism about the contribution to total returns from the
equity components of firm pension plans. The top line on Figure 3 gives the implied assumed
expected return on the equity securities held in a pension fund that is 40 percent equity 60
14

We use the projected benefit obligation (PBO) as our measure of liabilities and compute funding status as the
difference between plan assets and plan liability scaled by plan liabilities.

12

percent bonds and that assumes an aggregate long-term rate of return of 9 percent; at this ratio,
the implied expected return on equity, based on bond yields, was approaching 16 percent by
2002.16 A forward-looking expected return of 16 percent on an equity portfolio is optimistic by
most measures.17
The constant cross-sectional distribution of long-term rate of return assumptions over this
period does not mean that individual firms’ assumptions have been fixed. Table 4 documents the
pattern of increases and decreases to long-term rate of return assumptions over our sample
period. Roughly 30 percent of the firm-year observations over this period see either a decrease
or an increase in the assumed long-term rate of return. Increases in the assumed long-term rate
of return are more common during the late 1990s, while decreases are more common in the early
1990s and 2001 and 2002. Nonetheless, the fact that increases and decreases are represented in
all years is indicative of the latitude exercised by managers in setting this rate. Even in the
difficult market environment of 2000-2002, a significant fraction of firms increased their rate of
return assumption.
In order to assess the role of managerial opportunism, we begin by emphasizing the
measure of pension sensitivity developed earlier — the logarithm of the ratio of pension assets to
operating income in a firm year. This measure excludes observations with negative operating
income; employing the log of the ratio also collapses the influence of outlying observations and
brings the distribution of pension sensitivity closer to that of a normally distributed random
variable. This measure has the advantage of capturing the variation across firm-year
observations in the incentive to manipulate the long-term rate of return. Unfortunately, because
the numerator of this measure reflects, in part, realized returns to pension assets, it may be linked
mechanically to assumed returns. Specifically, firms with abnormally high returns, and thus
pension assets, may use these realized returns as a basis for increasing assumed returns. Given
that this feedback mechanism need not be a reflection of managerial opportunism, we employ
two alternative measures of pension sensitivity that are not susceptible to this bias. Specifically,
the second measure of pension sensitivity uses the ratio of the firm’s average pension assets, over
15

See Rauh (2003).
Among the firm-year observations in 2002 for which we observe equity allocation and for which that allocation
lies between 0 and 40 percent, 9.0 percent is the median long-term rate of return assumption.

16

13

the 1991-2000 period, to operating income. Annual observations of this measure will not be
driven by differences in the return to pension assets across years. The third measure of pension
sensitivity is the log of the ratio of pension liabilities to firm operating income. Using pension
liabilities rather than assets completely removes the impact of pension asset returns on the
sensitivity measure, and also addresses potential feedback from the size of the pension fund to
the long-term rate of return assumption.
Table 5 describes these variables as well as the others used in the empirical analysis. At
the mean, pension assets are $653 million and operating assets are $7,302.5; because of the
skewness of the size distribution of firms these means are substantially higher than the median
pension assets ($65.5 million) and operating assets ($911.7 million). At the median, pension
assets are 71.6 percent of operating income and 8.6 percent of operating assets. The next rows in
Table 4 describe our three measures of pension sensitivity. For the first measure of pension
sensitivity, the log ratio of pension assets to operating income, the median is –0.334 and the
mean is –0.440. The distributions of the other two pension sensitivity measures are roughly
similar; the mean of the second measure is –0.446 and the mean of the third is –0.382.
The next several rows of Table 5 describe our acquirer indicator and CEO option exercise
variables. We use these variables in our analysis of firms’ motivations for aggressive long-term
rate of return assumptions, looking in particular at the level of the LTROR assumptions during
periods where firms’ CEOs may particularly want to boost reported earnings. We classify 26.1
percent of our firm-year observations as ‘acquirers.’ Our timing convention is to identify a firmyear observation as an ‘acquirer’ if that firm reports the acquisition of another firm in that year.
We use this timing convention because firms’ LTROR assumptions are set prior to the fiscal
year, and will begin impacting reported earnings starting with the first quarter of the fiscal year.
In addition, the LTROR assumption may begin impacting firms’ prices immediately through the
earnings ‘guidance’ that firms give to analysts throughout the year.
Among the 7,075 firm-year observations that we are able to link to Compustat Executive
Compensation data, CEO option exercises as a share of firm market value averages 30 basis
points. About 32 percent of firm-year observations see CEO option exercise; among these
17

Welch (2001) surveys 510 finance and economics professors and reports that the mean 30-year stock market

14

observations, the median option exercise value as a share of the firm’s value is 24 basis points.
In addition to scaling the value of CEO option exercise by the market value of the firm’s equity,
we also present results that scale CEO option exercise (and grants) by the CEO’s own option
holdings. The goal in this approach is to provide an additional control for cross-firm
heterogeneity in the importance of option compensation. The number of options exercised by
the CEO in a year, as a share of the total held, averages 10.5 percent among the CEOs in our
sample. The number of options granted as a share of the number of options held averages 26.4
percent in our sample.
4.

The determinants of assumed returns
The empirical work in this section assesses the determinants of long-term rate of return

assumptions with particular emphasis on the links to the sensitivity measure and on the periods
around mergers and large option exercises by senior managers. Table 6 reports the results of
linear regressions of firm-year assumed long-term rates of return on covariates, including
pension sensitivity measures and year and industry controls. These regressions focus on
assessing whether reported long-term rates of returns are higher at those firms where reported
earnings are more sensitive to the rate of return assumption.

( 1 ) Assumed Rate of Returni ,t = α + β* Log Pension Sensitivityi ,t + X i' ,t Γ + εi ,t
We correct reported standard errors for clustering at the firm level. The first column of Table 6
reports the results of an OLS regression of assumed long-term rates of return on the first measure
of pension sensitivity, the log ratio of annual pension fund assets to annual firm operating
income. With no covariates, the coefficient on the pension sensitivity measure is 0.113. This
implies that a movement from the 25th percentile of log pension sensitivity (-1.21) to the 75th
percentile (0.40) would be associated with an 18 basis point increase in a firm’s reported longterm rate of return. The second column of Table 6 includes a time trend and the interaction of
the time trend with pension sensitivity. The results in this column suggest that the impact of
sensitivity on the long-term rate of return assumption increases over the sample: the implied

return forecast in this group is 9.1 percent; responses to this survey bunch tightly between 8 and 10.5 percent.
15

impact of pension sensitivity is 0.072 in the first year of the sample and 0.171 by the end of the
sample.
Columns 3 through 6 of Table 6 explore the robustness of the relationship between
pension sensitivity and the long-term rate of return assumption to controls for year effects,
industry effects, year and industry effects, and year-by-industry effects. Of these, column 6 has
the most generous control structure, allowing a separate dummy variable for each of 48 industry
groups in each year. The estimated coefficients on our first measure of pension sensitivity are
not affected by these additional controls. The point estimate of the coefficient ranges from 0.109
in the specification with year fixed effects to 0.123 in the specification with 48 industry effects.
The final two columns of Table 6 explore the two other measures of pension sensitivity
and provides for industry-by-year effects as in column 6. Column 7 uses the average of pension
asset size over the period as a numerator in the measure of sensitivity, and provides a coefficient
roughly similar to those produced in the specifications presented in columns 1 through 6.
Finally, column 8 uses the log ratio of pension liability size to firm operating income. The
results are not statistically distinguishable from the results using our main sensitivity measure,
suggesting that the effect we observe is not merely the result of managers adjusting the long term
rate of return to correspond with recent past actual investment returns.
If managerial opportunism is important in determining assumed long term rates of return,
this relationship should be heightened when managers are most interested in inflating profits and
stock prices. Figure 4 presents a preliminary exploration of the relationship between takeover
activity and long-term rate of return assumptions, describing the pattern of return assumptions
around periods that firms undertake merger. Each point on the figure corresponds to a separate
regression (with 2-standard error bands on either side); these regressions fit firm-year long-term
rate of return assumptions on dummy variables for calendar year as well as an additional dummy
variable capturing takeover activity. Each date on the graph corresponds to a separate regression
with a different dummy variable; the date (-5), for instance, corresponds to a regression with a
dummy variable set equal to 1 if the firm is not doing a takeover in this year, but will do a
takeover in 5 years. The date (0) corresponds to a regression where the dummy variable is equal
to one for all firms that take over other firms in that year. This marks only a preliminary

16

exploration of the data, but the results are revealing. First, firms that will eventually engage in
merger activity do appear different from other firms. Conditional only on takeover activity in 5
years and none in the current year, long-term rate of return assumptions are almost 15 basis
points higher than their unconditional expectation in the complementary group of firms.
However, firm long-term rate of return assumptions are almost 30 basis points higher during
merger years than during other years.
Table 7 pursues this line of investigation further, reporting results with different sets of
control variables. We use a dummy variable that is set equal to one when the firm makes an
acquisition of another publicly-traded firm in that year. This dummy variable captures potential
managerial motivations to inflate reported earnings in order to boost their companies’ share
prices prior to acquisition activity. In addition, we include the interaction of our acquirer dummy
with pension sensitivity. The motivation behind including these variables is to explore long-term
rate of return assumption during periods when firms have particularly strong incentives to inflate
their earnings, and the interaction identifies the effect at firms where the assumption could have a
larger impact on reported income prior to an acquisition.
Equation 2 gives the estimated empirical model for the analysis in Table 7:
( 2 ) Assumed Rate of Returni ,t = α + β* Log Pensions Sensitivityi ,t + δ* Acquiror Dummyi ,t
+ λ* ( Log Pensions Sensitivityi ,t * Acquiror Dummyi ,t ) + X i' ,t Γ + εi ,t
The results in Table 7 suggest that firms make more aggressive long-term rate of return
assumptions during periods when they are acquiring other firms. The magnitude of this effect
among firms within an industry-year is large. Firms that are one period before making an
acquisition on average have assumed a long-term rate of return that is around 30 basis points
higher than other firms in all of the specifications. In the fixed effects specification, this effect is
smaller, but is still statistically significant, with a point estimate of 3.5 basis points on the
acquirer dummy and a point estimate of 3.7 basis points on the interaction term. With firm and
year effects, δ has a point estimate of 4.6 basis points and λ a point estimate of 4.6 basis points.
These results support the hypothesis that the tendency to raise the return assumption is
greater for firms where changes in the LTROR assumption have a higher impact on operating

17

income. At firms where the pension sensitivity is higher, the marginal impact of the acquisition
dummy is also greater. The coefficient on the interaction term is between 0.037 and 0.072 and
statistically significant in each of the specifications. Taking an estimated coefficient of 0.06
would imply that the marginal impact of the acquisition dummy on the rate of return assumption
is 10 basis points higher at the 75th percentile of log pension sensitivity than at the 25th
percentile.
For the specifications with industry-by-year effects, the point estimates on the takeover
dummy and the interaction term imply that at the 25th percentile of pension sensitivity, the longterm rate of return assumption is 25 basis points higher in the period before acquisitions. At the
75th percentile of the distribution of pension sensitivity, the estimates suggest that the return
assumption is 37 basis points higher in the period before an acquisition. For the specifications
that include both year and firm fixed effects, reported in column 6 of Table 7, the estimates
appear smaller in magnitude. At the 25th percentile of the pension sensitivity measure, the longterm rate of return assumption is about the same as usual during the acquisition period under the
specification with firm and year fixed effects. At the 75th percentile of the distribution of
pension sensitivity, the return assumption in the acquisition year is estimated to be six basis
points higher than firm average. At the 90th percentile, the coefficients suggest that the return
assumption is nine basis points higher.
While the point estimates in the specifications with fixed effects may appear small in
magnitude, these estimates are consistent with opportunistic adjustments to the long-term rate of
return assumptions that are economically meaningful. First, while the standard deviation of the
long-term rate of return assumption in the entire sample is 111 basis points, the within-firm
standard deviation is only 63 basis points. The magnitude of estimated coefficients in
specifications with firm fixed effects should be compared to the within-firm rather than the
cross-sectional standard deviation of the long-term rate of return assumption. Second, increases
in the LTROR most commonly occur in 25 basis point increments. A point estimate of six basis
points at the 75th percentile of sensitivity is consistent with a given firm of that sensitivity having
a higher LTROR for one in four acquisitions. Third, the fact that the magnitude of the estimated
effect is higher at firms with higher pension sensitivity implies that the earnings generated by
opportunistic adjustments to the LTROR assumption around acquisitions are greater than would

18

be the case if the magnitude of the effect was the same across different levels of pension
sensitivity. Finally, specifications with firm fixed effects effectively remove all cross-firm
variation and consider only the effect of within firm variation in the acquisition indicator on the
long-term rate of return assumptions. Specifications that include industry-by-year effects instead
of firm-fixed effects allow some inference in the cross section. Comparing two firms in the same
industry and the same year, one of which makes an acquisition and the other of which does not,
the result says that the acquirer’s expected long-term rate of return is 34 basis points larger.
Table 8 presents specifications designed to test the robustness of the acquisition results.
There are three pairs of specifications. Within each pair, the specification to the left includes
industry-by-year controls and the specification to the right includes firm level fixed effects.
Columns (1) and (2) assess the robustness of the acquisition results to the inclusion of a variable
capturing the share of the pension fund assets allocated to equity. An indicator variable set equal
to one if the equity share variable is unavailable for that observation is included, as well as its
interaction with the sensitivity variable are included in this specification (coefficients not
shown). For every additional ten percentage points of pension fund assets allocated to equity,
the assumed long-term rate of return is 8.5 basis points higher in the specification that controls
for industry-by-year effects. In the within-firm specification, the coefficient on the equity share
is not significantly different from zero. Most importantly, however, the coefficients on the
acquisitions variables are essentially unchanged relative to the comparable results from Table 7
(columns (2) and (6)).
Columns (3) and (4) of Table 8 test the robustness of the results to the inclusion of
lagged 12-month actual returns on pension assets. We use a procedure similar to columns (1)
and (2), with an indicator variable included if the data item is missing.18 In column (3) an
additional ten percentage points of lagged actual return is correlated with an assumed long-term
rate of return that is 10 basis points higher. However, this effect is again not present in the
within-firm specification, and in both specifications the point estimates on the acquisitions
variables are very close to the comparable results from Table 7.

18

This variable is present in Compustat (data item 333) for most observations in our sample, but is incorrect starting
in 1998 and therefore must be assumed missing for 1998-2003. Starting in 1998, data item 333 represents the
expected earnings on plan assets, not the actual.
19

Columns (5) and (6) of Table 8 examine the robustness of the results to a control for the
optimism or aggressiveness of the firm’s senior management. Specifically, we include CEO
option grants as a share of the CEO’s total salary. Our intuition in doing so is that a higher
weight on options in a CEO’s compensation package may be correlated with aggressive and
optimistic managerial disposition. There is in fact a small positive correlation between this
measure and the long-term rate of return assumption, although this disappears in the presence of
firm fixed effects. The size of the acquirer coefficient is 50% smaller in column (5) than in
columns (1) and (3), and the difference is statistically significant; but the acquirer coefficient in
the fixed-effects specification is statistically the same as in columns (2) and (4).19
Given the emphasis on changes in assumed rates of returns, it useful to analyze these
decisions directly with discrete dependent variables. Table 9 reports results of ordered probit
regressions, where the dependent variables are categorical variables that reflect changes in
assumed long-term rates of return. In the first two columns, the specification of the dependent
variable is coarse: (–1) if the firm decreases the long-term rate of return assumption in that year,
(0) if it is unchanged, and (1) if the firm increases its rate of return assumption. This ordered
probit model is based on a latent regression model of the following form:
( 3 ) ∆Assumed Rate of Returni ,t = α + β* Log Pensions Sensitivityi ,t + δ* Acquiror Dummyi ,t
+ λ* ( Log Pensions Sensitivityi ,t * Acquiror Dummyi ,t ) + X i' ,t Γ + εi ,t
The latent propensity to change the long-term rate of return assumption is unobserved, but we do
observe the actual changes:
( 3') SIGN( Assumed RORi ,t − Assumed RORi ,t −1 ) = −1 if ∆Assumed RORi*,t ≤ 0
0 if 0 < ∆Assumed RORi*,t ≤ µ1
1 if µ1 < ∆Assumed RORi*,t
The results in column 1 suggest that firms are more likely to increase their long-term rate
of return assumption in periods where the pension sensitivity measure is highest; the results in
19

The results are similarly robust when the magnitude of CEO share ownership in millions of dollars is used as a
control.
20

column 2 suggest that firms are likely to increase their long-term rate of return assumptions
when they are making acquisitions. In particular, the acquirer coefficients can be translated into
marginal effects for the probability of each action (increase, decrease, and no change). Firms are
1.2 percentage points less likely to reduce their long-term rate of return the year before an
acquisition; 0.3 percentage points more likely to keep it the same; and 0.9 percentage points
more likely to raise the rate. In the context of an overall 9.2% probability of a rate increase and a
14.1% probability of a rate decrease, these magnitudes are rather significant. Columns 3 and 4
of Table 9 use a more nuanced, but still discrete, dependent variable: the variable takes on one of
11 different categories, ranging from large decreases in the assumed long term rate of return to
large increases. The results are consistent with those in the first two columns. The standard
errors for these results are clustered at the firm-level.
The results in columns 5 and 6 of Table 9 use our second measure of pension sensitivity
as the independent variable: the measure used, for each firm-year observation, is the log ratio of
the average pension fund size for that firm over the 11 years of the sample to the firm’s operating
income in that year. In these regressions, both the pension sensitivity measure and the takeover
variable remain statistically significant. Similarly, the final two columns use the third definition
of sensitivity, namely the log ratio of pension liabilities to the firm’s operating income in a given
year. The sensitivity variable does not predict changes in the long-term rate of return in this
specification, but firms about to make acquisitions are more likely to raise their rate of return
assumptions. The magnitude of the acquirer effect and the marginal effects are roughly constant
across the specifications using different measures of the sensitivity.20
In order to further identify the role of managerial motivations, we turn finally to the link
between option exercises and assumed rates of return. Table 10 and Figure 5 shift to a smaller
sample of firms for which we observe executive compensation and option exercise data in
addition to data on pension assets and rate of return assumptions. As with our analysis of merger
20

We further considered the possibility that particular types of mergers – stock financed mergers – would be more
closely associated with increases in assumed returns. This investigation is clouded by empirical and conceptual
difficulties. First, our source on merger data has coarse groupings on the type of financing and manual inspection of
the data for one company, IBM, relative to their 10-K’s suggests only a crude mapping between the two sources.
Second, as Fama and French (2003) point out, equity issuance through mergers is isomorphic with other forms of
equity issuance and may be associated with additional monitoring costs further clouding the predicted relationship
between merger financing and pension decision-making. The results do not indicate a distinctive pattern of assumed
rates of return for stock-financed mergers.
21

activity, we begin with a graphical depiction of our results in Figure 5. This figure, as with
Figure 4, presents the coefficients from regressions of long-term rate of return on a dummy
variable for CEO option exercise as well as calendar year dummy variables. The CEO option
exercise dummy variables are set equal to 0 or 1 depending on whether options will be exercised
at the appropriate lead or lag. While not as pronounced as Figure 4, the results do suggest a
spike in long-term rate of return assumptions around periods of option exercise; at firms where
the CEO is exercising options in the current year, long-term rate of return assumptions are 12
basis points higher than at other firms.
The first columns of Table 10 refine this analysis by estimating equations that allow us
to incorporate different sets of control variables. The linear regression models reported in this
table estimate equation 4 below:
( 4 ) Assumed RORi ,t = α + β* Log Pensions Sensitivityi ,t + δ*
+ λ* ( Log Pensions Sensitivityi ,t *

CEO Option Exercise Value
Firm Equity Value
i ,t

CEO Option Exercise Value
) + X i' ,t Γ + εi ,t
Firm Equity Value
i ,t

Again, we correct the standard errors in the table for clustering at the firm level. The results
suggest that firms make aggressive long-term rate of return assumptions during periods when
CEOs are exercising large amounts of stock options. Column (1) presents results with industry
and year fixed effects, column (2) results with firm fixed effects, and column (3) results with
firm and year fixed effects. The specification with firm fixed effects is designed to address the
potential critique that the firms that use substantial option compensation are cross-sectionally
different from other firms, and different in a way that is correlated with reported optimism about
long-term rate of return assumptions.
The coefficient estimates range from 0.014 in the specification with firm fixed effects to
0.028 in the specification with industry by year effects. A coefficient estimate of 0.020 would
imply that a one-standard deviation increase in exercise (1.780) would be associated with a 3.5
basis point increase in the assumed rate of return on pension assets. Again the marginal effect is
larger at firms where pension sensitivity is larger; in the first specification, the coefficient of
0.013 on the interaction term implies that at the 25th percentile of pension sensitivity the

22

marginal effect of CEO option exercise is 0.013. At the 75th percentile of pension sensitivity
estimated marginal effect of CEO option exercise is 0.032.
The remaining two columns explore a different way to control for potentially spurious
correlation between firms’ propensity to compensate executives through options and firms’
optimism about long-term rates of return. These columns use measures of CEO option exercise
and grants that are normalized by the number of options held by the CEO. The goal here is to
control for cross-sectional differences in firms’ tastes for option compensation. Column (4) uses
these independent variables in a specification with firm and year fixed effects. In this
specification the coefficient on normalized option exercise, 0.041, is positive and statistically
significant, and the coefficient on option grants is negative with a t-statistic of 1.55. This
suggests that long-term rate of return assumptions are unusually high at firm-year observations
where the CEO is exercising a large share of his options, and may be low in periods of large
option grants. Columns (6) and (7) adds firm and year fixed effects. The result on normalized
CEO option exercise is a bit weaker in these specifications, though the coefficient remains
significant at the 10 percent level.
Taken together, the results in Tables 6 through 9 and Figures 4 and 5 suggest that
managerial opportunism — as measured by the importance of pension earnings to operating
earnings, the timing of merger activity and the timing of option exercises — is one determinant
of the choice of assumed rates of return. That managers capitalize on inflated earnings through
increased merger activity and greater exercises further suggests that other managerial decisions
are impacted by the potential manipulation of pension earnings.
5.

The determinants of asset allocation decisions

The managerial incentives we have identified may have effects not just on financial
reporting and investment decisions by firms and managers but also on asset allocation decisions
within pension plans. This section investigates the possibility that managers shift pension assets
towards equity in order to justify a higher long-term rate of return assumptions in periods around
mergers. To investigate this possibility, we use the sample that can be merged with DB pension
equity allocation data. This sample, as described in section 3, contains 3,202 firm-year
observations. Our empirical approach is to fit two stage least squares regressions of equity

23

allocation share on the long-term rate of return, with the long-term rate of return instrumented
with the acquisition dummy variable used in the previous section.21
The first two columns of Table 10 show the results of an OLS regression of equity shares
on the assumed long-term rate of return. In the first column, for each percentage point higher the
long-term rate of return assumption is, the percentage of the pension fund allocated to equity is 6
percentage points higher. The second column adds a full set of industry-by-year controls and
this effect becomes 4.5 percentage points. There are a number of potential reasons we might
observe a correlation between these two variables. One is that mangers increase the allocation of
risky assets in their pension funds to justify increases long-term rates of return, but there are
several alternatives. It might be the case that the long-term rate of return assumption responds to
shorter term increases in the actual rate of return on pension assets, a variety of excessive
extrapolation (see Benartzi (2001)). Alternatively, pension plans with higher equity allocations
might have higher assumed rates given greater exposure to assets that earn risk premia.
In the third and fourth columns we attempt to address these endogeneity concerns by
estimating the relationship between the equity allocation and the long-term rate of return using
instrumental variables. We estimate the system of equations below:
(5' ) Equity allocationi ,t = a 0 + a1 * Log Pension Sensitivity i ,t + a 2 * Assumed RORi ,t + X i ,t ' Γ + ε i ,t
(5' ' ) Assumed RORi ,t = β 0 + β 1 * Log Pension Sensitivity i ,t + β 2 * Acquiror Dummyi ,t
+ β 3 * ( Log Pension Sensitivity i ,t * Acquiror Dummyi ,t ) + X i ,t ' Λ + ν i ,t

by two-stage least squares. The first stage equation (5'') is analogous to specifications in the first
through third columns of Table 7, although we are now focusing on the smaller asset allocation
sample. The terms represented by the matrix X are included in the fourth column specification
only and represent industry-by-year controls.22

21

We have also explored using CEO option exercise as an instrument for the long-term rate of return assumption.
The joint requirement of Compustat Executive Compensation data and data on the equity share in pension assets
leads to a sample size of about 1,500, and results using this smaller sample are not statistically significant. A similar
situation arises when we use the controls for actual 12-month past pension returns used in Table 8 as controls. The
results are robust when dummies are included for the missing observations, but the tests do not have sufficient
statistical power when the number of sample observations is reduced by this magnitude.
22
Due to the fact that our equity allocation data is compiled from two separate sources which each have different
samples over different time periods, we do not move to the full firm-fixed effects specification.
24

The identifying assumption behind this specification is that the merger decision affects
equity shares in the pension fund only through its effect on the assumed long-term rate of return.
Instrumenting in this manner provides a much larger effect of the long-term rate of return on the
equity share. The specification in column 3 suggests that one percentage point difference in the
assumed long-term rate of return (such as from 8.00% at the 25th percentile to 9.00% at the 75th
percentile) is associated with an increase of 28 percentage points in the equity allocation. The
inclusion of industry-year effects only modestly reduces this effect to a 20 percentage point
increase in response to a one percentage point increase in assumed returns. While these
magnitudes seem large, it useful to remember that most one-time changes in assumed rates are
considerably more modest than a one percentage point change. As such, it is useful to scale
these effects for modest assumed rate of return changes and view them as associating 25 basis
point changes in assumed rates with five percentage point changes in equity allocation.
6.

Managerial Opportunism and Shareholder Interests

Our results on earnings manipulation and pension decision-making illustrate how
managerial actions can redistribute value between current shareholders, managers and potential
shareholders. If managers are inflating profits and stock prices and then acquiring other firms
with inflated stock, then current shareholders could benefit from this opportunism as value is
redistributed to them from future shareholders. This would be consistent with the view of
optimal incentive contracts of Bolton, Scheinkman, and Xiong (2003) and the view of stockfinanced mergers in Shleifer and Vishny (2003).23 If, instead, managers are inflating profits to
enable empire-building and self-enrichment through option exercises, then value is likely being
transferred from current shareholders toward managers. This view would be consistent with the
managerial power view of Bebchuk, Fried and Walker (2002) and others.24
We frame our discussion of managerial opportunism and pension decision-making within
this debate by investigating the relationship between assumed rates of return and the corporate
23

An earlier literature similarly suggested that managerial manipulation of earnings can benefit current shareholders.
In Stein (1988, 1989), myopic managerial actions arise in markets that are rational but imperfectly informed.
Managers, averse to even temporarily undervalued equity, inflate reported earnings, and the market's conjectured
relationship between reported and true earnings holds in equilibrium. Shleifer and Vishny (1990) similarly suggest
that costly arbitrage can also lead to a short-term bias in the absence of an agency problem.
24
For example, Yermack (1997) and Bertrand and Mullainathan (2001) note that various aspects of compensation
arrangements do not correspond purely to incentive purposes, suggesting that managers use incentive compensation
to extract these rents.
25

governance environment of the firm. Specifically, we expect that if current shareholders are the
beneficiaries of managerial opportunism in setting pension return assumptions, then high
assumptions will be more prevalent in firms where managers are more constrained to behave in
the interest of shareholders. Alternatively, if firms where managers are least constrained by
shareholder interests indulge in aggressive assumed rates of return, this would be more
supportive of the rent-extraction view.
Figure 6 provides evidence that long-term rate of return assumptions on pension assets
are substantially higher at firms where current shareholders have weaker control over managers.
Firm-year observations are sorted on the basis of the nearest preceding measure of the Gompers,
Ishii, and Metrick (2003) corporate governance index. This index aggregates 24 different
dummy variables representing mechanisms that firms can employ to insulate managers from
shareholders. These include devices like staggered board elections, which impose delays on any
contestant seeking to take over board seats. We aggregate observations into categories ranging
from 1, those where shareholders have the most control over mangers, to 6, those where
managers are the most insulated from shareholders. There is a substantial increase in long-term
rates of return as managers become more insulated from current shareholders. At the most
democratic firms, assumed long-term rates of return are below 8.5 percent, while at the most
dictatorial, they are above 9 percent. While the analysis of Figure 6 is only suggestive, it does
indicate that managerial opportunism in pension decision-making does not appear to be guided
by shareholder interests.
Finally, it is useful to consider the potential magnitude of these redistributive effects for a
specific example. We return to IBM to consider the effects of the inflated stock prices arising
from inflated pension earnings. Specifically, we attempt to outline the scale of managerial
enrichment during that period due to pension decision-making. While this exercise is necessarily
speculative, it is useful for scaling the potential redistribution in this instance. The first panel of
Table 12 provides information on IBM market values and acquisition activity from 1997 to 2001,
the period emphasized in Table 1. This period saw an increase in market value of almost $100
billion as well as robust acquisition activity. IBM made 41 acquisitions during this period valued
at over $4 billion. The second panel combines the estimates from Table 1 regarding the effect of
the deviations from an assumed rate of return of 9.25% on income with the Coronado and Sharpe
(2003) estimates suggesting that pension earnings are capitalized in the same manner as
26

operating earnings. This assumption gives an estimated stock price in the absence of those
deviations from the 9.25% long-term rate of return assumption. Finally, Gerstner’s option
exercise activity is employed to arrive at an estimate of the dollar value garnered by Gerstner that
arose from the deviations from the 9.25% rate. This estimate totals more than $12 million for the
period.
How reliable is this $12 million estimate? Obviously, it relies on numerous assumptions
— several of which may be construed to be conservative or aggressive. The most aggressive
assumption is the one borrowed from Coronado and Sharpe (2003) — that markets completely
fail to distinguish between pension and operating earnings and capitalize them similarly. Having
said that, the estimate may be quite conservative, particularly if one believes that the reduced
growth rates in the absence of the changed assumptions would have changed the capitalization
rate of all earnings. If this were the case even to a limited degree, the scope of managerial
enrichment resulting from the changed assumptions would be substantially larger. Specifically,
the final column considers an alternative scenario where the capitalization rate of all earnings is
altered by the changed growth rates noted in introduction.25 Under these assumptions, this
estimate rises to nearly $76 million.26
If between $12 million and $76 million from these changed assumptions were directed to
the CEO, where did it come from? This discussion of the gainers and losers from the higher
pension return assumption necessarily even more conjectural. Given the overall scope of market
value gains experienced by IBM shareholders during this period, the amount may be trivial and
may have resulted from an optimal compensation arrangement. Indeed, if merger activity
financed by stock or employee ownership was enabled by these assumptions, preexisting
shareholders may be the beneficiaries of value transfers from these new shareholders.27 Our
reading of their 10-Ks suggest that approximately 25% of the $4 billion of target value was
financed through share issuance. Given that over $10 billion of market capitalization by the end
25

The calculations on the changed capitalization rates require a discount rate and two alternative growth rates. For
these purposes, we use a 12% discount rate and the difference in multiples, using a growing perpetuity formula,
arising from a growth rate changing from 6.7% to 5.6%. Such a calculation is necessarily conjectural but does
provide a useful alternative to the baseline assumption of no changed capitalization effect.
26
It is useful to frame these figures in the context of Gerstner’s overall compensation during the period from 1997 to
2001. Execucomp data indicates that Gerstner received $45 million in cash compensation and $366 in total
compensation, including option exercises, during that period.
27
IBM 10-Ks are somewhat unclear on the financing of each transaction making it somewhat problematic to
determine the precise degree to which IBM issued shares to finance their acquisitions.
27

of 2001 is calculated to reflect capitalized pension earnings arising from these increases, it does
not appear that a substantial fraction was value transfers accomplished through mergers. Finally,
it is possible that these rate of return changes and resulting incremental compensation was
facilitated to enable exercises of options and transfers of value away from current shareholders
and toward management. Obviously, it is impossible to distinguish with certainty between these
alternatives. Subsequent to Gerstner’s departure, the assumed rate of return was revised
downward to 9.5% in 2002 and IBM’s market value fell by $70 billion during 2002 to return to
1998 levels. These coincident changes, while tantalizing, were undoubtedly related to many
other factors in the capital markets and IBM’s competitive environment.
7.

Conclusion

In a setting where managers have considerable discretion and where manipulated
earnings are capitalized into stock prices, managers appear to exploit their discretion and alter
investment decisions to justify and capitalize on manipulated earnings. The latitude managers
enjoy in pension accounting and the inability of the market to fully distinguish between inflated
pension earnings and operating earnings combine to provide managers with a powerful incentive
to opportunistically characterize pension assets. Managers facing large incentives to manipulate
earnings through pension decisions — either because of the sensitivity of firm earnings to
changed assumptions, impending merger activity, or large incentive compensation contracts —
appear to alter their assumed returns significantly in response to these incentives. The evidence
on merger activity and option exercises confirms the role of earnings manipulation but also
makes clear that reporting distortions induced by managerial motivations can alter manager and
firm investment decisions. Furthermore, rationalizing these higher assumed returns is easier in
the context of higher equity allocations and our IV analysis indicates that higher assumed returns
are, in fact, associated with higher equity allocations.
Previous studies of managerial opportunism and earnings manipulation have emphasized
large indiscretions in small samples, as in Erikson et. al. (2003) on earnings fraud, or on more
aggregated measures of misreporting through accrual accounting, as in Bergstresser and
Philippon (2003). In this paper, we emphasize a simple, transparent but influential reporting
decision that in a large sample appears to be used opportunistically. In addition, we show that

28

this opportunism has further effects in enabling merger activity and option exercises and in
determining asset allocation within those plans.
To the degree that pension earnings are capitalized into market prices, the opportunistic
use of assumed rates of return may lead to aggregate levels of overvaluation, as suggested by
Coronado and Sharpe (2003). Our results on asset allocation add another mechanism by which
pension accounting could have contributed to market overvaluation as increased assumed rates
also appear to be associated with higher equity allocations. While market participants were
capitalizing pension earnings, firms were increasing equity exposures to justify those very
pension earnings.

29

References

Amir, E. and S. Benartzi, 1998. “The expected rate of return on pension funds and asset
allocation as predictors of portfolio performance,” Accounting Review 73 (3), 335-352.
Bebchuck, L. A., J. M. Fried, and D. I. Walker, 2002. “Managerial power and rent extraction in
the design of executive compensation,” University of Chicago Law Review 69 (3), 751846.
Benartzi, S., 2001. “Excessive extrapolation and the allocation of 401(k) accounts to company
stock,” Journal of Finance 56 (5), 1747-1764.
Bergstresser, D. and T. Philippon, 2003. “CEO incentives and earnings management: evidence
from the 1990s,” mimeo, Harvard Business School.
Bertrand, M. and S. Mullainathan, 2001. “Are CEO’s rewarded for luck? The ones without
principals are,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (3), 901-932.
Bodie, Z., J. Light, R. Mørck and R.Taggart, 1985. “Corporate pension policy: An empirical
investigation,” Financial Analysts Journal 41 (5), 10-16.
Bolton, P., J. Scheinkman, and W. Xiong, 2003. “Executive compensation and short-termist
behavior in speculative markets,” Princeton University Working Paper.
Chan, K., L. Chan, N. Jegadeesh, and J. Lakonishok, 2001. “Earnings quality and stock returns,”
NBER working paper #8308.
Coronado, J. and S. Sharpe, 2003. “Did pension plan accounting contribute to a stock market
bubble,” mimeo, Board of Governors of Federal Reserve System.
Erickson, M., M. Hanlon, and E. Maydew, 2003. “How much are nonexistent earnings worth?”
mimeo, University of North Carolina.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French, 2003. “Financing decisions: who issues stock?,” University of
Chicago Working Paper.
Feldstein, M. and R. Mørck, 1983. “Pension funding decisions, interest rate assumptions and
share prices,” Financial Aspects of the U.S. Pension System, eds. Z. Bodie and J. Shoven.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press (1984), 177-210.
Feldstein, M. and S. Seligman, 1981. “Pension Funding, Share Prices, and National Savings.”
Journal of Finance 36 (4): 801-24.
Frank, M., 2002. “The impact of taxes on corporate defined benefit pension plan asset
allocation,” Journal of Accounting Research 40 (4), 1163-1190.
Franzoni, F. and J. M. Marin, 2003. “Pension Plan Funding and Stock Market Efficiency,”
Working Paper, HEC School of Management.

30

Friedman, B., 1983. “Pension funding, pension asset allocation, and corporate finance: Evidence
from individual company data,” Financial Aspects of the U.S. Pension System, eds. Z.
Bodie and J. Shoven. Chicago: University of Chicago Press (1984), 107-147.
Gold, J. 2003, “Accounting/actuarial biases enable equity investment by defined benefit pension
plans,” Working Paper, University of Pennsylvania.
Gompers, P., Ishii, J., and A. Metrick, 2003. “Corporate governance and equity prices,” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (1), 107-155.
Hall, B. and K. Murphy, 2003. “The trouble with executive stock options,” The Journal of
Economic Perspectives 17 (3), 49-70.
Hawkins, D., 2001. “Retiree Benefits,” Harvard Business School case 9-197-021.
Healy, P. and J. Wahlen, 1999. “A review of the earnings management literature and its
implications for standard setting,” Accounting Horizons 13 (4), 365-383.
Langbein, J.H. and B.A. Wolk, 2000. Pension and Employee Benefit Law, 3rd ed. New York,
NY: Foundation Press.
Maclean, B., 2002. “That old financial magic,” Fortune, February 18, 2002.
Obinata, T., 2000, “Choice of pension discount rate in financial accounting and stock prices,”
mimeo, University of Tokyo.
Papke, L., 1992. Trends in Pensions. eds., John Turner and Daniel Beller, Department of Labor
Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration.
Rauh, J., 2003. “Investment and financing constraints: evidence from the funding of corporate
pension plans,” mimeo, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Shleifer, A. and R. W. Vishny, 2003. “Stock market driven acquisitions,” Journal of Financial
Economics 70 (3), 295-311.
Shleifer, A. and R. W. Vishny. 1990. “Equilibrium short horizons of investors and firms,”
American Economic Review 80 (2), 148-153.
Sloan, R.G., 1996. “Do stock prices fully reflect information in accruals and cash flows about
future earnings?” Accounting Review 71 (3), 89-315.
Stein, J. 1988. “Takeover threats and managerial myopia,” Journal of Political Economy 96 (1),
61-80.
Stein, J. 1989. “Efficient firm and inefficient markets,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 104 (4),
655-669.

31

Teoh, S.H., I Welch, and T.J. Wong, 1998a. “Earnings management and the post-issue
performance of seasoned equity offerings,” Journal of Financial Economics 50 (1), 6399.
Teoh, S.H., I. Welch, and T.J. Wong, 1998b. “Earnings management and the long-term market
performance of initial public offerings,” Journal of Finance 53 (6), 1935-1974.
Welch, I. 2001. “The equity premium consensus forecast revisited,” Cowles Foundation
discussion paper 1325. Journal of Business, forthcoming.
Xie, H., 2001. “The mispricing of abnormal accruals,” Accounting Review 76 (3), 357-373.
Yermack, D. 1997. “Good Timing: CEO stock option awards and company news
announcements,” Journal of Finance 52 (2), 449-476.
Zion, D. and B. Carcache, 2002. The Magic of Pension Accounting. Credit Suisse First Boston.

32

Figure 1: End-of-Year Pension Funding Status 1991-2002
0.40

0.30

0.20

0.10

0.00
1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

-0.10

-0.20

-0.30

-0.40

-0.50

25th Percentile

50th Percentile

75th Percentile

Mean

Note. Funding status is the ratio of the difference of Pension Assets and Pension Projected Benefit Obligation to Pension Projected Benefit Obligation. The sample
is firms in Compustat that report LTROR, pension asset size, and positive operating income

Figure 2: Mean Share of Pension Fund Assets Invested in Equity
0.70

0.65

0.60

0.55

0.50

0.45

0.40

0.35

0.30
1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

Corporate

1997

Union

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

Public

Note. Corporate data from Pensions and Investments and IRS 5500 filings. Union and public data from Pensions and Investments. Equity includes domestic,
international, and own-company equity; excludes investments in private equity.

Figure 3: Long Term Rate of Return Assumptions and Implied Equity Returns
0.16

0.14

0.12

0.1

0.08

0.06

0.04
1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

50th Percentile

1996

1997

1998

Implied Expected Equity Return

1999

2000

2001

2002

Yield on 10 year bond

Note. The median long-term rate of return assumption is taken from the sample of firms from Compustat. Yields on 10-year bond from Federal Reserve. The
implied expected equity return is the expected return on equities given a portfolio of 40% equity and 60% bonds with prevailing bond yields and a 9% assumed
return on the portfolio.

Figure 4: Long-Term Rate of Return Assumption Around Mergers, All Firms
0.4

0.35

0.3

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0
-6

-5

-4

-3

LTROR, merging firms

-2

-1

0

1

- 2 standard errors

2

3

4

5

6

+ 2 standard errors

Note. Figure shows long-term rate of return assumptions reported by firms in periods around mergers. These averages are regression-adjusted for calendar-year
effects. The estimate for period 0 is the average assumption for firms reporting acquisitions of another firm in that year. The estimate for period 1 is the average
assumption for firms reporting acquisition of another firm in previous year, but not current year. The estimate for period -1 is the average LTROR assumption for
firms reporting acquisitions of another firm in next year, but not current year. Long-term rate of return assumption data from Compustat.

Figure 5: Long-Term Rate of Return Assumptions around CEO option exercise, All Firms
0.3

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0
-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

-0.05

-0.1
LTROR, option exercise firms

- 2 standard errors

+ 2 standard errors

Note. Figure shows long-term rate of return assumptions reported by firms in periods around CEO option exercise. These averages are regression-adjusted for
calendar year effects. At period 0 is average assumption for firms whose CEOs report option exercise in that year. At period 1 is average assumption for firms whose
CEOs exercise options in previous year, but not current year. At period -1 is average LTROR assumption for firms whose CEOs exercise options in next year, but not
current year. Long-term rate of return assumption data from Compustat.

Figure 6: Rate of Return Assumptions by Quality of Corporate Governance
9.50

9.25

LTROR assumption

9.00

8.75

8.50

8.25

8.00
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Governance Index
LTROR

+2 s.e.

- 2 s.e.

Note. Figure shows long-term rate of return assumptions plotted against a corporate governance index based on Gompers, Ishii and Metrick (2003). The best
governed firms (group 1) scored 1-5 on the G-I-M index, group 2 scored 6-7, group 3 scored 8-9, group 4 scored 10-11, group 5 scored 12-13, and the words governed
firms (group 6) scored 14 or above. Long-term rate of return assumption data from Compustat.

Table 1: Pension Decision Making at IBM, 1993-2001
IBM Pension Plan Reporting and Impact on IBM
Corporate Reporting

IBM Corporate Performance

Year

Revenue Annual
Growth Rate

Income Before
Taxes Annual
Growth Rate

IBM's Assumed
Return on DB
Assets

IBM's Actual
Return on DB
Assets

Share of Income
Before Taxes
Resulting from
Deviation from
9.25%

CEO Option Activity

Stock Options
Granted to
Gerstner (000)

Stock Options
Exercised by
Gerstner (000)

1993

-2.80%

na

9.50%

na

500

0

1994

2.13%

na

9.50%

-1.16%

225

0

1995

12.31%

51.56%

9.25%

20.54%

100

3

1996

5.57%

9.91%

9.25%

15.54%

300

51

1997

3.37%

5.12%

9.50%

18.07%

1.53%

2200

101

1998

4.02%

0.14%

9.50%

13.62%

1.66%

0

301

1999

7.20%

30.06%

9.50%

15.38%

1.42%

0

803

2000

0.97%

-1.90%

10.00%

-3.06%

4.77%

650

703

2001

-2.86%

-5.04%

10.00%

5.39%

4.75%

0

1253

Note: The three panels of the table provide descriptive data on the performance of IBM, IBM's worldwide pension plans, and option activity by IBM's CEO Louis Gerstner, Jr. All data
on IBM corporate performance and pension plan accounting are calculated from data from 10-K filings, and data on option activity are taken from the Compustat Executive
Compensation database. Reported earnings are affected by the rate of return assumption because assumed returns on pension plan assets can be deducted from costs, with differences
between assumed and actual returns amortized over long periods. The "Share of Income Before Taxes Resulting from Deviation from 9.25%" is the product of the difference between
annual assumed rates and 9.25% and worldwide pension assets, divided by annual income before taxes.

Table 2: The Contribution of Assumed Pension Asset Returns to Operating Income, by Rate of Return Assumptions and Pension Sensitivities.
Pension sensitivity

percentile
level
log

5th

10th

25th

Mean

50th

75th

90th

95th

0.013

0.058

0.112

0.299

0.716

1.494

3.042

5.150

-4.370

-2.847

-2.193

-1.209

-0.334

0.401

1.113

1.639

Long-term

percentile

return

rate of

5th

7.00

0.089

0.406

0.781

2.090

5.013

10.458

21.294

36.050

return

10th

7.50

0.095

0.435

0.837

2.240

5.372

11.205

22.815

38.625

assumption

25th

8.00

0.101

0.464

0.893

2.389

5.730

11.952

24.336

41.200

Mean

8.61

0.109

0.499

0.961

2.571

6.166

12.863

26.192

44.342

50th

9.00

0.114

0.522

1.004

2.687

6.446

13.446

27.378

46.350

th

9.40

0.119

0.545

1.049

2.807

6.732

14.044

28.595

48.410

th

10.00

0.127

0.580

1.116

2.986

7.162

14.940

30.420

51.500

th

10.00

0.127

0.580

1.116

2.986

7.162

14.940

30.420

51.500

(LTROR)

75
90
95

Note: The table provides the percentage of operating income attributable to assumed returns on pension assets, by pension sensitivity and assumed long term rate of return assumptions.
Pension sensitivity is the ratio of pension assets to operating income. The distribution provided across columns corresponds to the sample used in the analysis. The long term rate of return
assumption is the assumed rate of return on pension assets in corporate financial reports and the distribution provided along the rows corresponds to the sample used in the analysis. Reported
earnings are affected by the rate of return assumption because assumed returns on pension plan assets can be deducted from costs, with differences between assumed and actual returns
amortized over long periods.

Table 3: The Magnitude of Pension Assets, 1991-2002
Balance Sheet

Pension

Assets of

Assets of

DB Pension

Sample

Firms

Firms

Assets /

Year

Count

in (2) ($bn)

in (2) ($bn)

Total Assets

Mean

25th Percentile

Median

75th Percentile

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

1991

1645

7,061.80

735.1

10.41%

446.9

10.2

46.5

210.1

1992

1725

7,723.50

764.9

9.90%

443.4

10.7

46.7

211.4

1993

1755

8,770.60

879.2

10.02%

501.0

10.9

50.4

236.3

1994

1779

9,798.70

830.6

8.48%

466.9

10.6

48.7

218.5

1995

1741

10,189.70

962.7

9.45%

552.9

11.6

53.5

247.9

1996

1704

10,603.20

1,034.30

9.75%

607.0

13.3

63.1

283.4

1997

1630

11,214.60

1,156.20

10.31%

709.4

16.6

76.6

331.8

1998

1589

12,492.80

1,276.60

10.22%

803.4

17.4

86.0

414.6

1999

1544

14,319.00

1,404.40

9.81%

909.6

19.7

101.1

454.0

2000

1453

14,739.10

1,413.50

9.59%

972.8

20.0

100

482.3

2001

1258

14,957.50

1,067.50

7.14%

848.6

21.5

94.9

443.5

2002

1502

19,249.60

1,093.60

5.68%

728.1

14.9

68.2

333.6

DB Pension Assets ($m)

Note: The table characterizes the magnitude of firm operating and pension assets for firms in Compustat that report long term rates of return, pension asset size,
and positive operating income. The data are from Compustat.

Table 4: Changes in Long-Term Rate of Return Assumptions (1992-2002)

Year
(1)

Mean
Change
(2)

Number
of Increases
(3)

Number
No Change
(4)

Number
of Decreases
(5)

Total
Count
(6)

1992

-0.05

90

1288

198

1576

1993

-0.15

87

1161

358

1606

1994

-0.05

136

1257

257

1650

1995

0.06

186

1277

140

1603

1996

-0.04

172

1288

128

1588

1997

0.02

172

1239

112

1523

1998

-0.03

150

1101

159

1410

1999

0.02

157

1079

140

1376

2000

0.04

177

1049

107

1333

2001

-0.03

98

948

152

1198

2002

-0.31

42

591

508

1141

Note: The table provides the mean change in the long term rate of return and the number of increases, non-changes and
decreases for the sample of firms from Compustat that report pension asset size, positive operating income, and assumed
long term rates of return in the current and previous year.

Table 5: Summary Statistics
Variable
Pension Assets ($m)

Mean

Median

Standard
Deviation

Observations

653.0

65.5

2631.2

19,325

Operating Assets (Book Value, $m)

7302.5

911.7

32577.9

19,325

Pension Assets / Operating Income

4.460

0.716

226.8

19,325

Pension Assets / Operating Assets

0.142

0.086

0.255

19,324

Pension Liabilities ($m)

621.3

67.0

2353.2

19,325

Log Ratio of Annual Pension Assets to
Operating Income

-0.440

-0.334

1.398

19,325

Log Ratio of Average Pension Assets to
Operating Income

-0.446

-0.375

1.357

19,325

Log Ratio of Annual Pension Liabilities to
Operating Income

-0.382

-0.322

1.289

19,263

Assumed long-term rate of return (%)

8.746

9.000

1.115

19,325

Change in long-term rate of return (%)

-0.044

0.000

0.703

16,004

Acquirer Indicator

0.261

0.000

0.439

19,325

CEO option exercise/Equity market value (%)

0.296

0.000

1.780

7,075

CEO # options exercised/ # Options held

0.105

0.000

0.554

5,951

CEO # options granted/ # Options held

0.264

0.200

0.346

5,951

Equity Allocation

0.498

0.575

0.247

3,202

Note: All data on operating performance, pension assets, and pension assumptions are drawn from Compustat for the sample of
firms that report long term rates of return, pension asset size, and positive operating income. Acquisitions data are drawn from the
Securities Data Company (SDC) database of mergers and acquisitions. CEO option data are drawn from the Compustat Executive
Compensation database. Equity allocation data are drawn from both the Pensions and Investments Survey and IRS 5500 filings.
The equity allocation sample excludes firms with assets in opaque trusts

Table 6: The Relationship Between Assumed Long Term Rates of Return and Pension Sensitivities
Dependent Variable: Assumed Long-Term Rate of Return on Pension Assets

Log Ratio of Annual
Pension Assets to Annual
Operating Income

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

0.113 ***
(0.013)

0.072 ***
(0.017)

0.109 ***
(0.013)

0.123 ***
(0.015)

0.119 ***
(0.015)

0.117 ***
(0.015)

Log Ratio of Average
Pension Assets to Annual
Operating Income

(8)

0.114 ***
(0.015)

Log Ratio of Annual
Pension Liabilities to
Annual Operating Income

0.109 ***
(0.015)

Time Trend

-0.043 ***
(0.004)

Time Trend Interacted with
Log Ratio

0.009 ***
(0.003)

Industry Fixed Effects?
Year Effects?
Industry*Year Effects?
Observations
R-Squared
Firms

N
N
N

N
N
N

N
Y
N

Y
N
N

Y
Y
N

N
N
Y

N
N
Y

N
N
Y

19,325
0.02
3,247

19,325
0.03
3,247

19,325
0.04
3,247

19,325
0.06
3,247

19,325
0.07
3,247

19,325
0.10
3,247

19,325
0.09
3,247

19,325
0.09
3,247

Note: The dependent variable in these regressions is the assumed rate of return on pension assets. Standard errors, reported in parentheses are corrected for firm-level clustering. The
sample includes firms in Compustat which report an assumed long-term rate of return on pension plan assets, pension plan asset size, and positive operating income. Data are from
Compustat. *** indicates significance at the 1% level.

Table 7: Assumed Long Term Rates of Return, Sensitivity Measures, and Acquiror Indicators
Dependent Variable: Assumed Long-Term Rate of Return on Pension

Log Ratio of Annual
Pension Assets to Annual
Operating Income

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.103 ***
(0.015)

0.103 ***
(0.016)

Log Ratio of Average
Pension Assets to Annual
Operating Income

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.004
(0.014)

0.00268
(0.014)

0.105 ***
(0.016)

Log Ratio of Annual
Pension Liabilities to
Annual Operating Income

0.094 ***
(0.016)

Acquirer Indicator

0.315 ***
(0.028)

0.338 ***
(0.029)

0.337 ***
(0.029)

0.344 ***
(0.030)

0.035 *** 0.046 ***
(0.014)
(0.014)

Acquirer Indicator
Interacted with Log
Sensitivity

0.060 ***
(0.022)

0.072 ***
(0.021)

0.054 ***
(0.021)

0.083 ***
(0.022)

0.037 *** 0.034 ***
(0.011)
(0.011)

Year Effects?
Industry*Year Effects?
Firm Effects?
Observations
R-Squared
Firms

N
N
N

N
Y
N

N
Y
N

N
Y
N

N
N
Y

Y
N
Y

19,325
0.03
3,247

19,325
0.11
3,247

19,325
0.09
3,247

19,325
0.11
3,247

19,325
0.73
3,247

19325
0.74
3247

Note: The dependent variable in these regressions is the assumed rate of return on pension assets. Standard errors, reported in
parentheses are corrected for firm-level clustering. The sample includes firms in Compustat which report an assumed long-term rate
of return on pension plan assets, pension plan asset size, and positive operating income. Financial and pension data are from
Compustat; acquisitions data are from the Securities Data Company (SDC) database. *** indicates significance at the 1% level.

Table 8: Robustness Checks on Acquisitions Results
Dependent Variable: Expected Long-Term Rate of Return on Pension Assets
lagged actual return
controls
(3)
(4)

equity share controls
(1)
(2)
Log Ratio of Pension Assets to
Operating Income

0.077 *
(0.040)

0.009
(0.024)

Share of Pension Assets
Invested in Equity

0.846 ***
(0.127)

0.000
(0.077)

Share of Pension Assets
Invested in Equity, Interacted
with Log Sensitivity

0.029
(0.076)

0.015
(0.046)

CEO option grants / total
compensation controls
(5)
(6)

0.080 ***
(0.023)

-0.004
(0.016)

12-month Actual Pension Return

2.376 ***
(0.281)

0.108
(0.162)

12-month Actual Pension
Return, Interacted with Log
Sensitivity

0.115
(0.118)

0.049
(0.058)

0.120 ***
0.023

0.049 ***
0.017

CEO option grants / total CEO
compensation

0.026 ***
(0.008)

-0.006
(0.006)

CEO option grants / total CEO
compensation

0.005
(0.006)

-0.002
(0.004)

Acquirer Indicator

0.313 ***
(0.028)

0.045 ***
(0.014)

0.326 ***
(0.029)

0.046 ***
(0.014)

0.207 ***
(0.026)

0.041 ***
(0.014)

Acquirer Indicator Interacted
with Log Sensitivity

0.062 ***
(0.021)

0.033 ***
(0.011)

0.069 ***
(0.021)

0.033 ***
(0.011)

0.051 ***
(0.020)

0.030 ***
(0.011)

Industry Effects?
Year Effects?
Industry*Year Effects?
Firm Effects?
Observations
R-Squared
Firms

N
N
Y
N

N
Y
N
Y

N
N
Y
N

N
Y
N
Y

N
N
Y
N

N
Y
N
Y

19,325
0.117
3,247

19,325
0.743
3,247

19,325
0.118
3,247

19,325
0.743
3,247

19,325
0.137
3,247

19,325
0.743
3,247

Note: The dependent variable in these regressions is the assumed rate of return on pension assets. Standard errors, reported in
parentheses are corrected for firm-level clustering. The sample includes firms in Compustat which report an assumed long-term rate
of return on pension plan assets, pension plan asset size, and positive operating income. Financial and pension data are from
Compustat; acquisitions data are from the Securities Data Company (SDC) database; compensation data are from Execucomp.
Indicator variables are included for missing control variables, i.e. for missing asset allocation in the first two columns, for missing 12month actual equity returns in the middle two columns, and for missing CEO data for the right two columns. 12-month actual pension
returns for 1998-2002 are assumed missing due to incorrect Compustat data for this item during these years. *** and * indicate
significance at the 1% and 10% levels, respectively.

Table 9: Changes in Assumed Long Term Rate of Return, Sensitivity, and Acquisition Indicators
Dependent variable: categorical variable for change in long-term rate of return assumption

Log Ratio of Annual Pension
Assets to Annual Operating
Income

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.018 **
(0.007)

0.015 *
(0.008)

0.019 ***
(0.007)

0.015 *
(0.008)

Log Ratio of Average Pension
Assets to Annual Operating
Income

(5)

(6)

0.009
(0.007)

0.007
(0.008)

Log Ratio of Annual Pension
Liabilities to Annual Operating
Income

Acquirer Indicator

Acquirer Indicator Interacted
with Log Sensitivity
Acquirer Indicator Marginal Effects
Probability of Decrease
Probability of No Chg
Probability of Increase
Dependent Variable
Coarse (3 categories)
Fine (11 categories)
Observations

Y
N
16,004

(7)

(8)

-0.011
(0.008)

-0.013
(0.009)

0.067 ***
(0.023)

0.070 ***
(0.023)

0.065 ***
(0.024)

0.062 ***
(0.023)

0.015
(0.017)

0.018
(0.016)

0.012
(0.017)

0.016
(0.018)

-1.2%
0.3%
0.9%

—
—
—

-1.2%
0.3%
1.0%

-1.2%
0.3%
0.9%

Y
N
16,004

N
Y
16,004

N
Y
16,004

Y
N
16,004

Y
N
16,004

Y
N
16,004

Y
N
16,004

Note. The model estimated is an ordered probit. In regressions with coarse dependent variable, the dependent variable takes one of three values: -1 for decrease in rate of
return assumption, 0 for no change, and 1 for increase. In regressions with the fine dependent variable, the space of changes in the long-term rate of return assumption is
divided into eleven bins. Financial data are from Compustat; acquisitions data are from the Securities Data Company (SDC) database. The sample includes firms in
Compustat which report pension plan asset size, and positive operating income, and assumed long-term rate of return in the current and previous period. Standard errors,
reported in parentheses, are corrected for firm-level clustering. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Table 10: Assumed long term rates of return, sensitivity measures, and CEO option exercise
Dependent Variable: Assumed Long-Term Rate of Return on Pension Assets
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Log Ratio of Annual
Pension Assets to Annual
Operating Income

0.154 ***
(0.021)

0.058 ***
(0.022)

0.031
(0.022)

CEO option exercise as
share of firm equity market

0.028 ***
(0.011)

0.014 ***
(0.004)

0.011 ***
(0.004)

CEO option exercise share
interacted with log
sensitivity

0.013 **
(0.006)

0.005 *
(0.003)

0.005 *
(0.003)

(5)

(5)

0.189 ***
(0.023)

0.069 ***
(0.028)

0.040
(0.027)

CEO option exercise as
share of options held

0.041 *
(0.023)

0.025 *
(0.013)

0.022 *
(0.013)

CEO option exercise as
share of held, interacted
with log sensitivity

0.012
(0.012)

0.011
(0.010)

0.009
(0.010)

CEO option grants as share
of options held

-0.069
(0.045)

0.006
(0.033)

0.009
(0.034)

CEO option grants as share
of held, interacted with log
sensitivity

-0.088 ***
(0.030)

-0.020
(0.024)

-0.014
(0.024)

Industry Effects?
Year Effects?
Industry*Year Effects?
Firm Effects?
Observations
R-Squared
Firms

N
N
Y
N

N
N
N
Y

N
Y
N
Y

N
N
Y
N

N
N
N
Y

N
Y
N
Y

7,075
0.15
1,075

7,075
0.75
1,075

7,075
0.76
1,075

5,951
0.18
1,069

5,951
0.74
1,069

5,951
0.75
1069

Note: The dependent variable is the assumed rate of return on pension assets. Data are from Compustat and Compustat
Executive Compensation. The sample includes firms in Compustat which report assumed long-term rate of return on
pension plan assets, report pension plan asset size, have positive operating income, and have data on executive
compensation. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are corrected for firm-level clustering. ***, **, and * indicate
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Table 11: Equity allocation and assumed long-term rates of return
Dependent Variable: Equity Allocation Share
Ordinary Least Squares
(1)

Instrumental Variables

(2)

(3)

(4)

Assumed long term rate
of return on pension
assets

0.060 ***
(0.009)

0.045 ***
(0.009)

0.280 ***
(0.045)

0.202 ***
(0.050)

Log ratio of annual
pension assets to annual
operating income

0.039 ***
(0.007)

0.034 ***
(0.007)

0.132
(0.009)

0.018 *
(0.099)

Industry*Year Effects

N

Y

N

Y

LTROR Instrumented

N

N

Y

Y

Observations

Acquisition
variables

None

Instrument set

3202

3202

3202

3202

Note: This table presents the results of OLS and IV estimation of models for the pension fund's equity allocation share.
Asset allocation compiled from Pensions and Investments annual reports and IRS 5500 filings. Firms with assets in opaque
trusts are excluded from the sample. The first two columns report the results of linear regressions of equity allocation shares
on LTROR and pension sensitivity. The second two columns use a lagged acquirer indicator as an instrumental variable for
the long-term rate of return assumption. *** and * indicate significance at the 1% and 10% levels, respectively.

Table 12: Managerial Compensation and Pension Decision Making at IBM, 1997-2002

IBM Performance

IBM Pension Plan Reporting and
Impact on IBM Share Price

Gerstner Option Activity

Share Price in
Share of
Absence of
Income
Before Taxes Share Price in Deviations
Resulting
Absence of from 9.25%
from
Deviations
and Lower
Deviation
from 9.25% Capitalization
from 9.25%
($)
($)

Compensation
Derived from
Deviations from
Compensation
9.25% and
Stock Options Derived from
Higher
Exercised by Deviations from Capitalization
($000)
Gerstner (000) 9.25% ($000)

Number of
Shares
Outstanding
(000,000)

Share Price
($)

1997

958.091

104.625

100,240

4

250

1.53%

103.029

84.441

101

162

2,045

1998

915.097

184.375

168,721

9

828

1.66%

181.312

148.601

301

923

10,782

1999

1,784.216

107.875

192,472

17

1,551

1.42%

106.341

87.156

803

1,232

16,641

2000

1,742.900

85.000

148,147

9

511

4.77%

80.942

66.339

703

2,854

13,122

2001

1,723.194

120.960

208,438

2

1,082

4.75%

115.210

94.424

1,253

7,206

33,253

41

4,222

12,377

75,843

Year

IBM Market
Value of
Value
Number of Acquisitions
($000,000) Acquisitions ($000,000)

Totals
2002

1,722.367

77.500

133,483

Note: The three panels of the table provide descriptive data on the performance of IBM, the contributions of deviations in pension rates of return to IBM earnings and stock prices, and option activity b
IBM's CEO Louis Gerstner, Jr. All data on IBM corporate performance and pension plan accounting are calculated from data from 10-K filings amd from Compustat. The "Share of Income Before
Taxes Resulting from Deviation from 9.25%" is the product of the difference between annual assumed rates and 9.25% and worldwide pension assets divided by annual income before taxes. "Share Pric
in Absence of Deviations from 9.25%" assumes that pension earnings are capitalized in the same manner as operating earnings, with reported pretax income growing at a compound annual rate of 6.7%.
"Share Price in Absence of Deviations from 9.25% and Lower Capitalization" assumes that the market capitalizes earnings growth at a rate of only 5.6%, which would have been the growth rate of preta
income without the changes in rate of return assumptions. Data on option activity are taken from Compustat Executive Compensation database. "Compensation Derived from Deviations from 9.25%" is
the difference in share prices under the 9.25% assumption and the actual share price times the number of option exercises. "Compensation Derived from Deviations from 9.25% and Higher
Capitalization" is the difference in share prices under the 9.25% assumption with lower capitalization and the actual share price times the number of option exercises.

Appendix Table 1: Long-Term Rate of Return Assumptions at the Nine Largest Pension Sponsors Other Than IBM

General
Motors
(19922002)

Verizon
(19912002)

General
Electric
(19912002)

Boeing
(19912002)

Ford
(19922002)

Lucent
(19942002)

SBC
(19912002)

Lockheed
(19922002)

AT&T
(19922002)

2002 DB Pension Plan Assets
($bn)

57.3

37.6

37.1

31.1

29.0

28.2

24.9

17.9

15.3

Median Sensitivity

2.72

2.91

2.06

6.47

1.43

7.67

2.17

4.92

2.29

Mean Sensitivity
Average Assumed Long Term
Rate of Return

4.00

2.75

2.14

6.09

1.57

11.93

2.24

6.77

2.24

9.95%

8.67%

9.42%

8.63%

9.16%

9.00%

8.44%

8.98%

9.18%

Standard Deviation of
Assumed LTROR

0.10%

0.54%

0.29%

0.43%

0.28%

0.00%

0.57%

0.67%

0.25%

9.70%
10.00%

7.50%
9.25%

8.50%
9.50%

8.00%
9.25%

8.75%
9.50%

9.00%
9.00%

7.75%
9.50%

8.00%
9.50%

9.00%
9.50%

Minimum
Maximum
Number of Changes
Number of Increases
Number of Decreases

2
2
-

6
6
-

1
1

7
4
3

3
1
2

-

4
3
1

3
3
-

2
1
1

Note: The table provides details on the pension plans and accounting assumptions for the ten largest DB pension plan sponsors other than IBM. The size of the pension plan assets is from the
Pensions and Investments 2002 Survey and is valid as of 30 September 2002. The median sensitivity is the within-firm median value of the ratio of median pension assets to operating income.
The mean sensitivity is the within-firm mean value of the ratio of median pension assets to operating income. Details on assumed returns on pension plan assets are drawn from annual 10-Ks.

