                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        FINANCIAL CONSTRAINTS AND GROWTH:
                      MULTINATIONAL AND LOCAL FIRM RESPONSES
                                TO CURRENCY CRISES

                                             Mihir A. Desai
                                              C. Fritz Foley
                                             Kristin J. Forbes

                                          Working Paper 10545
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10545


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2004




The statistical analysis of firm-level data on U.S. multinational companies was conducted at the International
Investment Division, Bureau of Economic Analysis, U.S. Department of Commerce under arrangements that
maintain legal confidentiality requirements. The views expressed are those of the authors and do not reflect
official positions of the U.S. Department of Commerce. The authors thank Malcolm Baker, Anusha Chari,
Serdar Dinc, Mariassunta Giannetti, Jim Hines, Michael Schill, Andrei Shleifer, Kathy Terrell, Linda Tesar,
Rohan Williamson, Bill Zeile and various seminar and conference participants for helpful comments. Desai
thanks the Division of Research at Harvard Business School for financial support. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Mihir A. Desai, C. Fritz Foley, and Kristin J. Forbes. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Financial Constraints and Growth: Multinational and Local Firm Responses to Currency Crises
Mihir A. Desai, C. Fritz Foley, and Kristin J. Forbes
NBER Working Paper No. 10545
June 2004
JEL No. F23, F31, G15, G31, G32
                                          ABSTRACT

This paper studies the effects of financial constraints on firm growth by investigating if large

depreciations differentially impact multinational affiliates and local firms in emerging markets. U.S.

multinational affiliates increase sales, assets and investment significantly more than local firms

during, and subsequent to, currency crises. The enhanced relative performance of multinationals is

traced to their ability to use internal capital markets to capitalize on the competitiveness benefits of

large depreciations. Investment specifications indicate that increases in leverage resulting from sharp

depreciations constrain local firms from capitalizing on these investment opportunities, but do not

constrain multinational affiliates. Multinational parents also infuse new capital in their affiliates after

currency crises. These results indicate another role for foreign direct investment in emerging markets

– multinational affiliates expand economic activity during currency crises when local firms are most

constrained.

Mihir A. Desai                      C. Fritz Foley                      Kristin J. Forbes
Harvard Business School             University of Michigan              MIT-Sloan School
Morgan 363                          Business School                     Room E52-455
Soldiers Field                      701 Tappan Street                   50 Memorial Drive
Boston, MA 02163                    Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234            Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER                            ffoley@bus.umich.edu                and NBER
mdesai@hbs.edu                                                          kjforbes@mit.edu
1.     Introduction

       What happens to firm growth when a shock simultaneously improves investment
opportunities and increases leverage and financial constraints? Are firms that have
access to internal capital markets able to circumvent financial constraints and pursue
growth opportunities? This paper investigates these questions by analyzing the response
of U.S. multinational affiliates and local firms to large depreciations. Sharp exchange
rate depreciations can improve the competitiveness of firms in the tradable sector, but in
emerging markets these shocks often do not boost output or investment. This fact raises
the possibility that increased leverage after depreciations (caused by the use of foreign
currency denominated debt and the financial market conditions that frequently
accompany currency crises) prevents firms from taking advantage of profitable growth
opportunities. Unlike local firms, multinational affiliates have the ability (and have been
shown) to use internal capital markets opportunistically when faced with financial
constraints. Consequently, investigating the nature and sources of differential firm
responses to these depreciations can illuminate the link between financial constraints and
investment in unique ways.

       The existing literature on financial constraints and growth struggles with several
identification issues that are mitigated by comparing the responses of two types of firms
to the same shock. For example, many cross-country studies use country level variables
to proxy for financial development and are therefore subject to concerns of omitted
variable bias. Similarly, many analyses of the effects of leverage on investment policies
struggle with endogeneity; a negative relationship between leverage and growth may
merely reflect the fact that managers facing poor growth opportunities choose high levels
of leverage. Increases in leverage also may reflect a response to unobserved variation in
investment opportunities. One way of addressing these concerns is to isolate a situation
within a country in which an economic event that is exogenous to any individual firm
simultaneously (i) improves investment opportunities, (ii) increases firm leverage or
financing constraints, and (iii) increases financing constraints differentially across types
of firms.




                                                                                               1
         Analyzing multinational and local firm responses to currency crises in emerging
markets provides such a setting to investigate the relationship between financial
constraints and investment decisions and the role of internal capital markets. Large
depreciations are shown to improve the competitiveness of both local and multinational
firms. At the same time, depreciations increase the leverage of firms that have borrowed
in foreign currency and are unable to obtain new equity or adjust their capital structure.
Such increases in leverage are observed for local firms, but not multinational affiliates,
since affiliates are able to draw new capital from their parents and circumvent financial
constraints. In addition to providing a test of how leverage influences investment, this
differential reaction illustrates an effect of FDI not previously emphasized. FDI can
mitigate output contractions during currency crises, since multinational affiliates expand
activity precisely when local firms are most constrained.1

         In order to perform the empirical analysis, we pool data on local firms and
multinational affiliates. This new data set permits us to control for a variety of industry
effects and to identify the relative performance of the two types of firms. We first
investigate if multinational firms respond differently than local firms to currency crises
by examining changes in sales, assets, and investment. The results indicate that, after
depreciations, multinational affiliates increase sales and assets 5.4% and 7.5% more,
respectively, than local firms. The improved relative performance of multinational
affiliates is even more striking in investment. Capital expenditures are 34.5% higher for
multinational firms than local firms in the aftermath of large depreciations. These
differences in performance between local firms and multinational affiliates do not appear
to reflect different changes in investment opportunities stemming from differential access
to global product markets or a disproportional reliance on local markets.

         To identify the source of these differential investment responses across the two
types of firms, we also investigate relative changes in operating profitability and
leverage, proxies for how depreciations cause both competitiveness benefits and

1
  Analyses of the consequences of foreign direct investment (FDI) for host economies typically center on
the presence of technology spillovers, the labor and environmental practices of multinational firms, or the
effects of tax competition on the fiscal base of areas hoping to attract foreign direct investment. See, for
example, Aitken and Harrison (1999), Harrison and McMillan (2003), Eskeland and Harrison (2003), and
Figlio and Blonigen (2000).


                                                                                                               2
increased financing constraints. Although operating profitability responds similarly for
the two types of firms before and after currency crises, local firms experience
significantly larger increases in leverage than multinational firms after currency crises.
We refine this analysis by using depreciation episodes as instruments for leverage and
operating profitability in investment specifications. Results indicate that the investment
response to the beneficial competitiveness effects of depreciations is not significantly
different for the two types of firms. The investment response by local firms, however, is
significantly constrained by increases in leverage caused by depreciations. In contrast,
the investment response by multinational firms is not constrained by changes in leverage.
These results suggest that the internal capital markets of multinational firms provide them
with financing to increase investment after depreciations.

         To further isolate how multinational affiliates circumvent local financing
constraints, we examine more detailed multinational data that allow us to identify how
financing patterns change in response to depreciations. The evidence indicates that
multinational parents provide additional financing through intrafirm borrowing and
equity infusions in response to sharp depreciations. These results provide further
evidence that multinational firms overcome the negative consequences of large
depreciations by ameliorating the financial constraints that handicap local firms.

         Although the data set created for this analysis permits a novel approach for
examining the relationship between financial constraints and investment decisions, it also
has several shortcomings. In particular, the possibility of unobserved differences between
local and multinational firms raises two primary concerns. First, we do not observe the
currency denomination of debt. As a result, we are unable to document if local and
multinational firms differentially use foreign currency denominated debt, and therefore
we are unable to determine the extent to which increases in leverage are due to
revaluations or other factors associated with currency crises.2 To overcome this

2
 The existing literature does not provide any direct guidance on whether multinational or local firms might
be more likely to have dollar-denominated debt. Allayannis, Brown and Klapper (2003) study how firms
choose between foreign and local debt but do not distinguish between local firms and multinational
affiliates. This paper also points out how illiquidity in derivative markets might affect the capital structure
and performance of firms during currency crises. Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2003) and Bris and
Koskinen (2002) also indicate theoretically how different investment opportunities might motivate different
currency denominations for financings.


                                                                                                             3
difficulty, our empirical approach uses measures of the total change in leverage in local
currency terms around the time of depreciations to reflect changes in leverage arising
from revaluations. Since we are interested in the effect of changes in leverage on
investment, our identification strategy should be robust to this concern regardless of how
borrowing decisions are denominated.

       Second, it is possible that multinational and local firms differ with respect to their
investment opportunities, particularly around currency crises. The relatively large panel
in this data set, however, allows us to include a variety of fixed effects to control for
investment opportunities specific to industry/years and country/industry/years. We are
unable to use typical market-based measures of investment opportunities for affiliates
since these firms are not publicly traded. Even if they were available, such market-based
measures are particularly unreliable in emerging markets, especially during volatile
periods around the time of currency crises. The primary concern related to not being able
to control for market-based measures of investment opportunities is that the ability to
export or the exposure to local markets may differ across local and affiliate firms.
Robustness tests that restrict the analysis to local firms and affiliates that exclusively
serve the local market, however, suggest that this is not a concern and confirm that
growth and investment patterns differ for these two sets of firms for reasons associated
with financial constraints.

       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 motivates the
subsequent analysis and empirical specifications in the context of a review of the existing
literature. Section 3 identifies the depreciation episodes and describes the data set for
local firms and multinational affiliates. Section 4 presents results on the relative
performance of local and multinational firms around the depreciation episodes and
examines sources of the distinct performance. Section 5 provides a more detailed
analysis of how multinational firms change financing patterns in response to currency
crises. Section 6 concludes.

2.     Related Literature and Empirical Methodology

       Our analysis of the relative performance of multinational and local firms during
currency crises integrates the literature on firm performance during currency crises with


                                                                                             4
the literature on how access to global markets affects firm performance. The literature on
firm performance during currency crises is closely tied to the larger finance literature on
debt overhang and the link between financial constraints and investment. In this section,
we review these literatures and then outline our empirical methodology.

2.1     Firm Performance During Currency Crises

        Sharp depreciations can benefit local firms by raising the price of imports
(causing consumers to substitute toward domestically-produced goods) and by lowering
production costs relative to foreign competitors (providing a cost advantage in export
markets).3 Krueger and Tornell (1999) provide empirical evidence of this
competitiveness effect at the sectoral level, and Aguiar (2002) and Forbes (2002a, 2002b)
provide empirical evidence at the firm-level.4 In particular, Forbes (2002b) shows that
firms with greater foreign sales exposure are more likely to have higher growth in sales,
net income, market capitalization, and assets after depreciations. Evidence on the
aggregate effect of sharp devaluations on output, however, is mixed. For example, both
Agénor and Montiel (1996) and Gupta, Mishra and Sahay (2000) find that currency crises
can have contractionary or expansionary effects, on aggregate, in different countries.
Calvo and Reinhart (2000) distinguish between emerging and developed markets and
conclude that currency crises in emerging markets are more likely to have large
contractionary effects.

        These mixed results, and especially the differential effect of devaluations in
emerging and developed markets, have motivated several papers investigating factors that
might offset the positive competitiveness effects described above. Most of this work
considers how sharp depreciations can increase financial constraints.5 In a costly state
verification model, Bernanke and Gertler (1989) show how deteriorating balance sheets
can play an important role in explaining patterns of macroeconomic activity. When a
large share of liabilities is denominated in a foreign currency, as is common in emerging

3
  An important determinant of the magnitude of these effects is the extent to which exchange rate
movements are “passed through” into local prices. Numerous studies, many of which are summarized in
Goldberg and Knetter (1997), find that exchange rate pass through is incomplete.
4
  Johnson et al. (2000) and Mitton (2002) emphasize the importance of corporate governance in
determining how devaluations affect firm stock prices during the Asian crises.
5
  Several papers, such as Edwards (1989) and Reif (2001), instead focus on how depreciations can raise the
cost of imported inputs, thereby diminishing any positive competitiveness effect on firm performance.


                                                                                                         5
markets, depreciations can aggravate credit constraints and worsen balance sheets,
thereby hindering investment.6

        As noted by Stein (2003), these macroeconomic models are closely related to the
larger literature that links financial constraints, stemming from various factors, to
investment. This literature typically isolates a shock to one part of a firm and examines
how leverage, stock prices or cash flow (as in Lang, Ofek and Stulz (1995), Peek and
Rosengren (1997) and Lamont (1997), respectively) determine a firm’s subsequent
investment behavior. In contrast to these studies, a comparison of the responses of local
and multinational firms has several advantages. First, the shock simultaneously improves
investment opportunities and increases leverage providing more robust identification of
the link between financial constraints and investment. Second, the fact that multinational
firms access internal capital markets (and we can observe these transactions) allows us to
confirm the mechanisms by which firms circumvent financing constraints. Indeed,
Lamont (1997) concludes with the suggestion that sharp depreciations might usefully be
employed to investigate how financing constraints restrict investment.7

        Existing work that investigates currency crises and the interaction of
competitiveness effects and credit constraints has not reached definitive conclusions.
Both Aguiar (2002) and Bleakley and Cowan (2002) attempt to determine which effect
dominates, but the two papers reach opposing conclusions.8 The analysis performed in
this paper of how multinationals and local firms respond differently to currency crises
can provide further insight on this question by comparing how firms with differential


6
  See Aghion, Bachetta and Banerjee (2001) and Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2001) for formal models of
how depreciations can interact with credit constraints to cause large output contractions. For a review of
the extensive evidence on capital market imperfections and investment, see Hubbard (1998).
7
  This link between investment and leverage is modeled as a debt overhang problem in Myers (1977), and
examined empirically in Whited (1992), Lang, Ofek and Stulz (1995) and Hennessy (2003). A related
literature attempts to describe the effect of financing constraints by analyzing investment-cash flow
sensitivities as detailed in Fazzari, Hubbard and Petersen (1988, 2000) and Kaplan and Zingales (1997,
2000). Currency crises provides a setting where investment opportunities improve and, as argued below,
financing constraints are differentially increased across types of firms, thereby circumventing some of the
difficult identification issues described in those papers.
8
  Aguiar (2002) shows that balance-sheet effects significantly constrained investment in Mexican firms
after the 1994 peso crisis. On the other hand, Bleakley and Cowan (2002) find that any balance-sheet
effects are outweighed by the positive competitiveness effects of depreciations for firms from 5 Latin
American countries between 1990 and 1999. In related work, Allayanis, Brown and Klapper (2003) find
no relationship between stock market performance and the use of foreign currency debt.


                                                                                                          6
access to capital respond to the improved investment opportunities that accompany sharp
depreciations.9

2.2     Firm Performance and Access to International Markets

        A large body of work indicates that access to international sources of capital can
allow firms to overcome constraints associated with local capital markets, especially in
emerging markets. Some of this evidence comes from changes in financial openness.
Stulz (1999) shows that financial market liberalizations can reduce the cost of capital for
local firms. Henry (2000a) and Bekaert and Harvey (2000) show that liberalizations
increase stock market valuations, and Henry (2000b) shows that they also are associated
with investment booms.

        Access to global capital markets may also affect the relative performance of the
subset of firms in an economy that can access those markets. Desai, Foley and Hines
(2003) analyze how multinationals capitalize affiliates around the world and demonstrate
that multinational affiliates substitute internal borrowing for costly external finance
stemming from adverse capital market conditions. In a related vein, Desai, Foley and
Hines (2004) demonstrate that affiliates of multinationals firms employ internal product
and capital markets to circumvent capital controls in a manner that is unlikely to be
available to local firms.

        Differential access to global markets may also help explain aggregate patterns of
FDI. Froot and Stein (1991) explain the correlation between FDI inflows and currency
devaluations with a model in which capital market imperfections limit the ability of local
firms to access external markets, thus giving foreign firms an advantage in bidding for
assets. Aguiar and Gopinath (2003) study the frequency and terms of cross-border
mergers and acquisitions subsequent to currency crises in Asia. They present evidence
that foreign firms buy assets at times that local firms may be liquidity constrained.
Blonigen (1997) provides evidence that firm-specific assets (such as intangibles) become
more highly valued by foreign acquirers during depreciations, since product market

9
  By comparing the investment responses of firms differentially impacted by leverage within a given
industry, this empirical strategy mirrors that of examining entry by supermarket chains in regions
dominated by LBO-supermarkets in Chevalier (1995). As with the results in that paper, our results indicate
that differential changes in leverage lead to changes in the competitive environment of firms.


                                                                                                         7
imperfections allow these acquirers to better mobilize those assets abroad in the more
highly valued currency. This series of papers suggests that access to global markets may
be an important determinant of firm performance, and could benefit multinational firms
more than local firms during currency crises.

2.3          Empirical Methodology

             If multinationals are able to access internal capital markets in order to capitalize
on competitiveness effects, then these firms should be able to increase their output and
the scale of their activity more than local firms in the wake of depreciations. Therefore,
we begin our empirical analysis by evaluating firm sales, assets, and investment using the
following specification:

      Yi , j ,k ,t = θ1 Depreciation( t-1 )k ,t + θ2 Depreciation( t )k ,t + θ3 Depreciation( t+1 )k ,t + θ4 Depreciation( t+2 )k ,t
(1) +θ5 Multinationali * Depreciation( t-1 )k ,t + θ6 Multinationali * Depreciation( t )k ,t
      +θ7 Multinationali * Depreciation( t+1 )k ,t + θ8 Multinationali * Depreciation( t+2 )k ,t
      +θ9 X i , j ,k ,t + η j ,t + αi + εi ,t

where i is a subscript for each firm, j is a subscript for each industry, k is a subscript for
each country, t is a subscript for each year; Yi,j,k,t is a measure of operating activity (such
as sales growth or capital expenditures); the depreciation dummy variables are
respectively set equal to 1 for observations from one year before (t-1), the year of (t), one
year after (t+1), and two years after (t+2) a depreciation in country k; Multinationali is a
dummy variable equal to 1 if company i is a multinational affiliate; Xi,j,k,t is a set of firm-
specific, time-varying controls including variables that account for producer-price
inflation; ηj,t is a set of industry-year dummy fixed effects; αi is a firm-specific effect;
and εi,t is an error term. Industries are defined at the three-digit SIC level. All standard
errors are clustered at the firm level to correct for serial correlation.10

             The key variables of interest are the coefficients on the depreciation dummy
variables and on these dummies interacted with the dummy variable for multinational

10
  See Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan (2004). Results are qualitatively similar if standard errors are
clustered by country. As a robustness test, we also estimate specifications which include
country/industry/year fixed effects, using industry groupings similar to two-digit SIC codes. In these
specifications, it is only possible to identify a set of depreciation dummies that capture the difference
between the response of multinationals and local firms to depreciations, and the sample only includes firms
in countries that experience depreciations. These specifications confirm the results presented in the paper.


                                                                                                                                       8
affiliates. The depreciation dummies measure the response of local firms to
depreciations, and the interaction terms capture the incremental performance of
multinational affiliates relative to local firms. To facilitate calculations of the persistent
effects of depreciations, we also estimate some specifications with only two depreciation
dummies; the first is equal to one for observations in the year before a depreciation, and
the second is equal to one for observations in the year of and each of the two years
following a depreciation. Following Evans (1987a) and other empirical work on the
growth of firms, we include the initial value of the relevant measure of operating activity
when the dependent variable is measured as a growth rate.11 All specifications include a
fixed effect for each industry/year pair in order to control for time varying patterns in
industry performance and investment opportunities.

          Evidence of distinct responses for multinational and local firms does not, by itself,
indicate the extent to which competitiveness benefits or changes in financial constraints
explain differences in performance. As a first step in untangling these effects, we use
measures of operating profits and leverage as dependent variables in specifications that
are similar to equation (1). These specifications allow us to test if either competitiveness
effects or financial constraints change for local and multinational firms around currency
crises.

          Next, we link changes in operating profits and leverage to changes in investment
through a specification that builds closely on the debt overhang specification in Lang,
Ofek, and Stulz (1995). Since investment, leverage, and operating profits may be jointly
determined, we employ depreciation episode dummies and these dummies interacted with
the multinational dummy as instruments for changes in leverage and operating profits in
order to obtain unbiased estimates. Firm investment in a particular year is the dependent
variable in this specification, and predicted values of operating profits and leverage are
independent variables. Predicted values are based on specifications using equation (1).
These instruments should be valid if depreciations impact investment exclusively through
changes in competitiveness and financing constraints, as suggested in the literature.12 In


11
  For other work on the growth of firms, see Evans (1987b) and Hall (1987).
12
  One potential shortcoming of this setup is that operating profits may not adequately capture investment
opportunities. If local firms increase leverage because they face poor investment opportunities, then the


                                                                                                            9
these specifications, the coefficient on operating profits indicates the importance of
changed investment opportunities arising from competitiveness effects, and the
coefficient on leverage indicates the changed importance of financing constraints. As in
the specification outlined in equation (1), we also include interactions with a dummy
variable for multinational firms to isolate any distinct financing constraints and
competitiveness effects for multinational firms.

         Finally, we employ more detailed data on multinational affiliates to examine if
changed financing patterns might explain the distinct reactions to currency crises. The
empirical setup is similar to the one outlined in equation (1), with the exception that the
dependent variables are measures of intrafirm financing – such as related party lending
and paid-in capital. There are also no multinational dummy variables since similar data
are not available for local firms.

3.       The Firm-level Dataset and Depreciation Episodes

3.1.     The Firm-Level Dataset

         The firm-level data set used in this paper is compiled from two major sources: the
Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), which provides information on affiliates of U.S.
multinationals, and Worldscope, which provides information on local firms. The Bureau
of Economic Analysis (BEA) annual survey of U.S. Direct Investment Abroad from 1991
through 1999 provides a panel of data on the financial and operating characteristics of
U.S. firms operating abroad. These surveys ask reporters to file detailed financial and
operating items for each affiliate, as well as information on the value of transactions
between U.S. parents and their foreign affiliates. The International Investment and Trade
in Services Survey Act governs the collection of the data. The Act ensures that “use of an
individual company’s data for tax, investigative, or regulatory purposes is prohibited.”
Willful noncompliance with the Act can result in penalties of up to $10,000 or a prison
term of one year. As a result of these assurances and penalties, BEA believes that
coverage is close to complete and levels of accuracy are high.



coefficient on leverage may simply reflect the choice of leverage in response to competitiveness effects and
not the consequences of changed financial constraints. This is unlikely to be the case since depreciations
should boost the competitiveness of the tradable sector, thus creating limited incentive to increase leverage.


                                                                                                           10
         U.S. direct investment abroad is defined as the direct or indirect ownership or
control by a single U.S. legal entity of at least ten percent of the voting securities of an
incorporated foreign business enterprise, or the equivalent interest in an unincorporated
foreign business enterprise. A U.S. multinational entity is the combination of a single
U.S. legal entity that has made the direct investment, called the U.S. parent, and at least
one foreign business enterprise, called the foreign affiliate.13 The foreign affiliate survey
forms that U.S. multinational firms are required to complete vary depending on the year,
the size of the affiliate, and the U.S. parent’s percentage of ownership of the affiliate.
The most extensive data are available for 1994 and 1999, when BEA conducted
Benchmark Surveys.14 BEA collects identifiers linking affiliates through time, thereby
permitting the creation of a panel.

         The second major source of firm-level data is the Worldscope database produced
by Thompson Financial. This database provides information on local firms and contains
annual balance sheet, income statement, cash flow, and general company information for
companies based around the world. Firms are identified as local based on the country in
which they are incorporated. Since the database is derived from publicly-available
information, virtually all of the sample consists of publicly-traded companies, so that
smaller and government-owned companies are underrepresented.15 Worldscope coverage
of public companies, however, is fairly extensive. For example, the September 2002 CD-
ROM includes information for over 20,000 firms from 55 countries, representing over
13
   In order to be considered as a legitimate foreign affiliate, the foreign business enterprise should be paying
foreign income taxes, have a substantial physical presence abroad, have separate financial records, and
should take title to the goods it sells and receive revenue from the sale. In order to determine ownership
stakes in the presence of indirect ownership, BEA determines the percentage of parent ownership at each
link and then multiplies these percentages to compute the parent’s total effective ownership.
14
   In non-benchmark years, reporting exemption levels were higher and less information is collected.
Although wholly-owned and majority-owned affiliates report many accounting items and information
concerning operations each year, minority-owned affiliates need only file information about sales, net
income, assets, employment, employment compensation, and trade with the United States in non-
benchmark years. Majority-owned affiliates are foreign affiliates in which the combined direct and indirect
ownership claim by a U.S. parent exceeds 50 percent.
15
   There are several limitations with this data. First, although Worldscope attempts to correct for major
differences in cross-country accounting standards, significant differences may still exist for certain
variables. The analysis below addresses this problem by controlling for firm fixed effects. Second, there
are a number of extreme and unrealistic outliers that undoubtedly represent reporting errors. The analysis
below addresses this problem by performing an extensive set of sensitivity tests that includes removing
outliers. Third, there is some chance that local firms are actually affiliates of multinationals based
elsewhere in the world. Since U.S. parents wholly own more than 80% of their affiliates and affiliates are
rarely publicly traded, however, there is little chance that firms classified as local are in fact U.S. MNEs.


                                                                                                             11
96% of global market capitalization. While most of the Worldscope data used in this
paper are drawn from the September 2002 CD-ROM, we augment these data with
information from the September 1997 CD-ROM, since Worldscope reports no more than
10 years of historical company information on each CD-ROM.16

         We merge the Worldscope and BEA data. Then we create a common set of
industry codes by translating the SIC codes in the Worldscope data into the ISI codes
used by the BEA, which are roughly equivalent to three-digit SIC codes. In order to limit
the sample to those firms that are likely to experience competitiveness effects from
depreciations, we exclude all firms that produce non-tradable goods and services.17 We
also limit the sample to data from 1991 through 1999, which is the time period available
for both data sources. Finally, we exclude firms missing information for key variables,
such as sales.

3.2.     Depreciation Episodes

         In order to identify how depreciations affect multinational affiliates and local
firms, it is necessary to identify a series of depreciation episodes in emerging markets.
We compute real exchange rates by first obtaining daily U.S. dollar exchange rates
reported by Datastream for all available emerging markets from January 1990 through
January 2000. Then we adjust these nominal exchange rates for inflation differentials
using interpolated price data drawn from the IMF (2003).18 We define depreciation
episodes as periods when the real exchange rate increases by over 25% compared to the
value of the exchange rate one year earlier.19 Therefore, depreciation episodes include not


16
   We match companies across datasets based on company numbers, sedol numbers, and/or company
names. Then we test if the time series across the two datasets is consistent for seven data series: cash and
equivalents, total assets, total liabilities, equity, sales, net income, and sales in U.S. dollars. If the time
series for each of these variables is not consistent across the two CD-ROMs, the company is not treated as a
“match” across the two data sources.
17
   More specifically, the resulting sample includes firms whose main BEA industry classification is in any
industry between 010 and 0390 except for 070, 108, 124, 138, 148, and 150. The sample therefore includes
firms that are active in the following broad categories of activity: agriculture, forestry, and fishing; mining;
and manufacturing.
18
   Price adjustments are based on annual producer prices (line 63..zf) whenever possible. If producer prices
are not available, we use consumer prices (line 64..zf), or the most relevant price data available. Quarterly
or monthly price information is not available for a majority of countries in the sample.
19
   If a country experiences a depreciation episode in a given year, the next year is excluded, so that a
country can experience, at most, one depreciation event in any 2-year period. Moderate adjustments to the
cutoff to qualify as a depreciation episode do not significantly affect the key results.


                                                                                                             12
only “currency crises” when a country’s real exchange rate depreciates abruptly by at
least 25% within a short window of time, but also periods when a country’s exchange rate
depreciates slowly for a cumulative depreciation of at least 25% within a year.20

         This method of identifying depreciation episodes has two advantages over the
strategies frequently used in past work. First, by focusing on depreciations over longer
periods of time, it captures any large depreciations that occur in small increments (such
as a 5 percent depreciation each month for several months) rather than just one-time large
depreciations. Second, previous work using high frequency exchange rate data has not
directly accounted for inflation. Studies often just exclude high-inflation countries, since
large nominal depreciations combined with high inflation can be poor measures of real
changes in competitiveness. By focusing on longer depreciation windows it is possible to
adjust for differences in relative price movements and thereby calculate real, instead of
nominal, depreciations. Moreover, since this analysis focuses on testing how
depreciations affect firm activities, real depreciations are more relevant than nominal
ones.

         Next, in order to identify which countries are emerging markets, we use the
classification from the back of the Economist.21 We then exclude all countries for which
there is no information in either of the two sources of firm-level data. Finally, we also
exclude any country-years in which a country experiences inflation of over 100 percent,
because it is difficult to accurately measure firm operating activity during periods of
hyperinflation.

3.3.     Summary Information

         The resulting sample includes firms in 25 emerging markets, 15 of which
experience a depreciation episode. Table 1 provides information on country coverage
and the share of firms drawn from the BEA and Worldscope samples. The first column

20
   Many other macroeconomic changes often accompany currency crises. For example, Beck, Demirguc-
Kunt, and Levine (2003) and Caprio and Klingebiel (1999) demonstrate that banking crises often occur at
the same time as currency crises in emerging markets. We emphasize large depreciations in order to
identify events when firms in the tradable sector have incentives to expand, but local financial conditions
may prevent firms from capitalizing on those new investment opportunities.
21
   The only exception is the Slovak Republic that is not included in the section on emerging markets or
developed countries in the back of the Economist. We classify the Slovak Republic as an emerging market
(which is the same classification as the Czech Republic).


                                                                                                          13
of the table shows that there is a strong clustering in depreciation episodes, with several
depreciations around the time of the 1994 Mexican Peso Crisis, and another set of
depreciations around the 1997-98 Asian/Russian crises.

       The right-hand columns in Table 1 also show that there are roughly equal
numbers of local and multinational firms across the sample period. In the group of
countries that experience depreciations, 49% of the sample is classified as local firms. In
the control group of countries (which do not experience depreciations), 45% of the
sample is classified as local firms. No more than 15% of the total observations are drawn
from any single country. Although multinational affiliates dominate the samples in
Mexico and Venezuela, local firms and multinational affiliates each comprise at least
20% of the sample in every other country.

       Table 2 provides descriptive statistics for the variables used in the empirical
analysis, separated for local firms and multinational affiliates. The bottom of Table 2
also reports descriptive statistics for the variables only available for multinational
affiliates and used in Section 5. Appendix Table 1 provides information on the number
of affiliates and local firms by industry.

4.     Firm Performance during Currency Crises

       In order to investigate the relative performance of multinational affiliates and
local firms during currency crises, we begin with a simple, bivariate comparison of their
differential reactions. Figure 1 suggests that the response of multinationals to
depreciations, as measured by the growth in sales and assets, is quite distinctive from that
of local firms. Panel A shows that the median sales growth of multinational affiliates is
almost identical to that of local firms in the year prior to depreciations. In the year of,
and each of the two years following depreciations, however, the median sales growth of
multinational affiliates exceeds that of local firms by considerable margins. While
median sales growth for multinational affiliates is higher after depreciations than before,
median sales growth for local firms is lower after depreciations than before.

       Panel B illustrates similar patterns for median asset growth rates. Although
multinational affiliates have slightly lower asset growth than local firms in the year
before depreciations, multinational affiliates have median asset growth more than twice


                                                                                              14
as large as local firm asset growth in the year of and the two years after depreciations.
The asset growth of multinational affiliates exceeds its pre-depreciation level in the year
of and the two years after depreciations, but the asset growth of local firms increases by
only a modest amount in the year of a depreciation, and then falls below its pre-
depreciation levels.

        A similar analysis of leverage and operating profitability presented in Figure 2
also shows substantial differences across the two types of firms. These patterns support a
potential role for both financing constraints and competitiveness benefits in explaining
why affiliates increase assets and sales more than local firms during depreciations.
Leverage is measured as the ratio of current liabilities and long term debt to assets and
Panel A shows that affiliates have slightly lower levels of leverage than local firms in the
year before depreciations. Although local firms experience increases in leverage in the
year of a depreciation that persist in the following two years, affiliates experience only a
temporary increase in leverage in the year of a depreciation.

        Panel B of Figure 2 shows patterns in operating profitability, which is defined as
the ratio of sales less operating expenses to sales.22 It shows that in the year before
depreciations, affiliates experience operating profitability that is approximately 1
percentage point greater than local firms. Operating profitability increases for both types
of firms in the year of depreciations, suggesting that companies immediately benefit from
competitiveness effects. In the year following depreciations, median operating
profitability of both types of firms contracts, but remains above pre-depreciation levels.
The descriptive data for the two years after depreciations indicate that the operating
profitability of local firms and affiliates diverge. Since firms drop in and out of the
sample in this bivariate analysis, it is critical to employ firm fixed effects in the following
regression framework to see if these patterns persist in a more thorough analysis.

4.1     Do Multinational Affiliates Perform Differently During Currency Crises?

        Table 3 analyzes the levels and growth of sales and assets around the time of
depreciations using the specification in equation (1). The dependent variable in columns

22
  Operating expenses include selling, general, and administrative expenses but exclude interest expenses.
Therefore, they do not reflect financing costs but do include some fixed costs.


                                                                                                        15
1 and 2 is the log of sales (measured in nominal local currency units), so that the
coefficients on the depreciation dummies are interpreted as the value of sales relative to
mean firm sales, after controlling for individual industry/year fixed effects. The
coefficient estimates in column 1 indicate that sales of local firms increase slightly at the
time of depreciations, and then fall below their pre-depreciation levels in the year after
and two years after a depreciation. The coefficient estimates of -0.0787 and -0.1270 on
the depreciationt+1 and depreciationt+2 dummies imply, relative to the -0.0712 coefficient
on the depreciation t-1 dummy, that sales are 0.7 and 5.6 percentage points lower in the
year following and two years following a depreciation, as compared to the year before a
depreciation. An F-test indicates that the difference between the level of local firm sales
in the year before a depreciation and the level two years after a depreciation is only
marginally significant at the 10% level. The coefficients on the multinational
depreciation interactions, however, indicate that sales of multinational affiliates do not
decline after depreciations. The large, positive and significant coefficients on the post
depreciation dummies for multinationals imply that affiliate sales increase relative to the
sales of local firms after depreciations.

         Column 2 of Table 3 presents results for the same specification as in Column 1,
except the dummies for the year of a depreciation and the two subsequent years are
combined into a single dummy variable that is equal to one for all three of these years.
The -0.0852 coefficient on the post depreciation dummy is slightly less than the dummy
capturing the pre-depreciation level of sales, indicating a small but statistically
insignificant decline in sales for local firms, on average, after depreciations. The level of
sales of multinational affiliates is indistinguishable from that of local firms in the year
before a depreciation. The 0.0841 coefficient on the interaction between the multinational
and post depreciation dummy, however, implies that the sales of affiliates are 8.4
percentage points higher than the sales of local firms after depreciations.

         Columns 3 and 4 of Table 3 analyze sales’ growth rates (measured as the
difference in log values) instead of the level of sales.23 This approach has the advantage


23
  Since lagged values are required to compute growth rates, all observations from 1991 and all other
observations of local firms and multinational affiliates that did not report in the previous period are dropped
from the analysis.


                                                                                                            16
of automatically excluding multinational affiliates that are extremely small and only
appear in benchmark years, thereby ensuring that the results are not merely a byproduct
of large changes in small affiliates. The coefficient estimates are deviations from average
growth rates. The estimates suggest that multinational affiliates have faster sales growth
than local firms after depreciations. More specifically, column 3 indicates that in the year
of and year after depreciations, local firms experience significantly lower average sales
growth than before depreciations. In contrast, multinational affiliates have higher sales
growth than local firms after depreciations, and this difference is highly significant in the
year following depreciations. These patterns are even clearer in Column 4 when the years
following depreciations are considered jointly. Local firms have significantly lower sales
growth after depreciations while the sales growth of multinational affiliates is 5.4
percentage points faster than that of local firms following depreciations.

       The last four columns of Table 3 repeat this analysis but employ the log of assets
instead of sales as the dependent variable. Using firm size, as measured by assets, allows
us to investigate if the output effects identified above are also associated with greater firm
scale. The results indicate that multinationals expand assets more than local firms
subsequent to depreciations. Column 5 shows that local firms’ asset levels increase in the
year of a depreciation, and then contract in the two subsequent years, so that after a
depreciation asset levels for local firms are statistically indistinguishable from their pre-
depreciation levels. In contrast, multinational affiliates’ asset levels increase significantly
after depreciations and remain significantly above their pre-depreciation levels in the two
years after depreciations. The results in column 6 confirm that the asset base of
multinational affiliates expands by significantly more than the asset base of local firms
after depreciations.

       The last two columns in Table 3 employ asset growth as the dependent variable,
instead of the log of assets. Column 7 suggests that average asset growth for local firms
was slightly higher in the year of depreciations than before, but significantly below
average (by 6.2 and 5.0 percentage points, respectively) in the two years following
depreciations. In contrast, asset growth for multinational affiliates significantly exceeded
that for local firms in the year of depreciations. The difference in growth rates is a
statistically significant 15 percentage points. Column 8 confirms that the asset growth of

                                                                                            17
multinational affiliates was significantly greater than that of local firms in the period
during and after depreciations.

       Table 4 analyzes the investment behavior of local and multinational firms during
depreciations. It uses two measures of investment as dependent variables: the log of
capital expenditures and capital expenditures scaled by net property plant and equipment.
Column 1 shows that although capital expenditures are not significantly different from
their mean levels for local firms in the year before or year of depreciations, investment
falls significantly in the two years following depreciations. In contrast, capital
expenditures increase significantly for multinational firms in the two years after
depreciations. The results in column 2, using a single post-depreciation dummy, confirm
these conclusions. Investment by local firms is 41 percentage points below pre-
depreciations levels after depreciations. Investment by multinational affiliates after
depreciations, however, is 34 percentage points higher than investment by local firms,
and F-tests indicate that the level of affiliate capital expenditures in the year of and year
following a depreciation differ from the level in the year before a depreciation by
amounts that are statistically significant at the 5% level.

       Different levels of investment between multinational affiliates and local firms
may simply reflect differences in their scope of activity following depreciations, instead
of differences in the investment responses of entities of a similar size. To rule out this
possibility, Columns 3 and 4 of Table 4 use capital expenditures scaled by end-of-period
net property, plant and equipment (PPE) as the dependent variable. The results confirm
those reported in columns 1 and 2. After scaling by net PPE, local firm investment falls
below pre-depreciation levels after depreciations, but multinational affiliate investment
does not.

4.2    The Determinants of Differential Investment Responses

       The evidence presented in Tables 3 and 4 demonstrates the differential reaction of
multinational affiliates and local firms to currency crises. As discussed in Section 2, the
competitiveness benefits of sharp depreciations would be expected to boost firm sales,
assets and investment, but these effects could be outweighed by changed financing
constraints. The results showing the distinctive response to currency crises between these


                                                                                                18
two types of firms are consistent with two alternative hypotheses. First, it is possible that
both types of firms benefit from competitiveness effects, but local firms experience large
changes in financial constraints that counteract any competitiveness effects from
depreciations. Alternatively, competitiveness effects may be stronger for multinational
affiliates, and these effects alone may drive the differences in relative performance.

         In order to disentangle these alternative explanations, we begin by examining the
effect of depreciations on operating profits, which is a measure of competitiveness
effects, and leverage, which is a measure of changed financing constraints. The
specifications in columns 1 and 2 of Table 5 employ the log of operating profits as the
dependent variable in specifications similar to those presented in Tables 3 and 4. The
results indicate that in the year of and two years after depreciations, operating profits of
local firms exceed their pre-depreciation levels.24 The operating profits of multinational
affiliates also increase after depreciations, but are not significantly different from the
levels for local firms in the year before, the year of, and the year after depreciations. In
short, sharp depreciations are associated with significant improvements in operating
profits for both local firms and multinational affiliates, suggesting that competitiveness
effects are important for both sets of firms.25 These results contrast with the distinctive
performance of multinational and local firms documented in Tables 3 and 4 with respect
to sales, assets, and investment.

         To test for the presence of distinctive changes in financial constraints across the
two sets of firms, columns 3 and 4 of Table 5 employ leverage as the dependent variable
in specifications similar to the specifications in columns 1 and 2. Leverage is measured
as the ratio of a firm’s current liabilities and long term debt to assets. The leverage of
local firms increases significantly in the year of depreciations, but the leverage of
multinational affiliates does not. In fact, local firm leverage increases to levels higher
than both average and pre-depreciation levels in the year of and each of the two years

24
   F-tests indicate that these differences are significant at the 1% level for the year of depreciations, 10%
level for the year after depreciations, and 5% level for the second year after depreciations.
25
   Since the results in Table 3 indicate that the sizes of local firms and affiliates change around the time of
depreciations, it is informative to examine local firm and affiliate operating profitability, or operating
profits scaled by sales. These results are broadly consistent with those presented for operating profits.
Similarly, gross profits, a measure of profits that does not incorporate overhead expenses but is only
available for local firms, also provides evidence of increased profitability subsequent to depreciations.


                                                                                                              19
following depreciations. These increases are expected if firms borrow in foreign
currency and are not able to improve their balance sheets after a currency crisis. The
coefficients on the interaction terms with the multinational dummy variables, however,
show that leverage does not increase for affiliates. While both types of firms appear to
experience similar competitiveness benefits after depreciations (as measured by changes
in operating profits), only local firms experience large changes in leverage. This suggests
that financing constraints are limiting local firm responses, but not multinational affiliate
responses, to depreciations.

         To more rigorously test this interpretation, we extend the above analysis by
linking the changed operating profits and leverage arising from depreciations to observed
patterns of investment. As discussed above, investment, leverage, and operating profits
may be jointly determined. Therefore, we employ depreciation episode dummies and
these dummies interacted with the multinational dummies as instruments for changes in
leverage and operating profits. The log of capital expenditures is the dependent variable
in this specification, and predicted values of operating profits and leverage are
independent variables. The first stage specifications used to obtain predicted values are
the same as the specifications presented in Table 5. In the specifications provided in
Table 6, the coefficient on operating profits indicates the importance of changed
investment opportunities arising from competitiveness effects and the coefficient on
leverage indicates the importance of changed financing constraints.26 The interactions
with a dummy variable for multinational firms isolate the distinct effect of financing
constraints and competitiveness benefits for multinational firms.

         We first estimate specifications that only include controls for either leverage or
operating profits plus the standard controls for the prices, industry/year fixed effects and
firm fixed effects. Column 1 of Table 6 indicates that firms with higher leverage after

26
  Tobin’s Q is often used in investment specifications to characterize investment opportunities. Not only is
this measure problematic—especially in emerging markets where stock market valuations may not reflect
underlying fundamentals—but clean measures of Tobin’s Q are unavailable for multinational affiliates
since these firms are not publicly traded. Therefore, we rely on operating profits and industry/year fixed
effects to proxy for changed investment opportunities. As a robustness test, we have also included fixed
effects for each country/industry/year to capture investment opportunities more precisely. Specifications
with these fixed effects are estimated using only firms in crisis countries and leverage and competitiveness
effects are identified off of differences in the responses of local firms and affiliates. The results also show
that changes in leverage induced by depreciations constrain investment.


                                                                                                             20
depreciations tend to have significantly lower levels of investment. Column 2 shows that
firms with higher operating profits after depreciations tend to have significantly higher
levels of investment. Column 3 controls for both effects simultaneously. The –2.04
coefficient on leverage implies that when depreciations increase the ratio of debt to assets
by 10 percentage points, investment declines by more than 20%. The 0.98 coefficient on
the log of operating profits implies that when depreciations increase operating profits by
10%, capital expenditures increase by 9.8%.

        Columns 4-6 repeat the specifications from columns 1-3, but allow the
coefficients on leverage and/or operating profits to vary across multinational and local
firms. The results in column 6 demonstrate that changes in leverage inhibit investment
for local firms, but not for multinational affiliates. The effect of operating profits is
positive and significant for local firms, and is statistically indistinguishable for
multinational affiliates. Results are similar if we scale capital expenditures by end-of-
period net property, plant and equipment, or if we use operating profitability instead of
operating profits. These results provide further support for the implications of the
previous analysis. Both multinational affiliates and local firms receive competitiveness
benefits after depreciations. These benefits motivate increases in investment, but leverage
constrains the ability of local firms (but not multinational affiliates) to take advantage of
these benefits and actually increase investment.

4.3.    Robustness Checks

        This evidence that multinational firms expand output after depreciations while
local firms contract may reflect unobserved differences in investment opportunities
between local firms and multinational affiliates, rather than the differential impact of
financial constraints. This could occur, for example, if multinational affiliates are better
able to take advantage of the depreciation because they tend to be more oriented to
exports. Similarly, if the local economy contracts and local firms are more directly tied
to local demand conditions, then the differential response of local firms might simply
reflect this differential set of investment opportunities. These alternative explanations,
however, are not consistent with the evidence presented above showing similar changes
in operating profits for local firms and multinational affiliates. The similar coefficients



                                                                                              21
on operating profits and the distinct coefficients on leverage changes in the instrumental
variables analysis also are not consistent with these alternative explanations.
Nonetheless, this section conducts additional tests that provide more evidence that these
alternative explanations are not driving our results.

         The most direct test involves isolating those multinational affiliates that serve
only local markets throughout the sample period and comparing those affiliates with local
firms.27 Restricting the multinational affiliate sample in this way has the advantage of
isolating more cleanly multinational affiliates that are tied to local market conditions.
The evidence indicates that these locally-focused affiliates increase investment more than
local firms during and after currency crises. In addition, we repeat the analysis in Tables
3 through 6 using country/industry/year fixed effects rather than industry/year fixed
effects in order to more precisely control for country-specific changes in investment
opportunities.28 The results on the differential effects of depreciations are robust to these
alternative controls which also control for local economic growth. This series of tests
suggests that distinctive changes in investment opportunities for the two types of firms do
not account for the differential performance of local firms and multinational affiliates.

         It is also possible that the relative performance of multinational affiliates and local
firms reflects other factors associated with the two types of firms. First, the differential
response of multinational firms could reflect over-investment by multinational firms in
the aftermath of currency crises rather than constrained under-investment by local firms.
In this case, the operating profitability of affiliates would likely fall relative to the
operating profitability of local firms. This does not appear to be the case, however,
through the sample period. It is also possible that reduced investment by local firms
reflects the corporate governance deficiencies of local firms. Johnson et al. (2000) model
this possibility and, in their model, stealing increases as investment becomes less
profitable through the crisis. We find that investment opportunities improve for the firms
in our sample during the currency crises, however, so governance problems as modeled
27
   The degree to which firms export or serve the local markets is only available for the multinational
affiliates. If some local firms export, than this comparison between fully locally-focused multinational
affiliates and local firms should be expected to show local firms outperforming multinational firms if
distinctive investment opportunities associated with the export sector are driving the results.
28
   Specifications that employ country/industry/year controls use more aggregated definitions of industries in
order to obviate computational constraints.


                                                                                                          22
by Johnson et al. (2000) are unlikely to be driving our results. Although it is difficult to
completely reject these alternative possibilities, our robustness tests and the links between
changes in leverage and investment in the instrumental variables analysis suggest that it
is primarily the impact of financial constraints that explain the differential investment
responses documented above.

5.      The Financing of Multinational Affiliates During Currency Crises

        While more granular data on local firms is not available, a closer look at the
behavior of multinational affiliates provides further evidence on precisely how they
circumvent financing constraints. Table 7 presents regressions that examine growth in
different components of affiliate financing subsequent to depreciations. The results in
columns 1-3 demonstrate that local debt, foreign debt (debt borrowed from non-local
persons), and related party debt (debt borrowed from an affiliate’s parent) all increase
significantly in the year of depreciations. There are two interpretations of these results.
First, new capital may flow to affiliates in one of these forms of debt. Second, if debt is
denominated in foreign currency, then the reported increase in debt may simply reflect a
revaluation of existing loans to reflect the depreciation. This revaluation of existing debt
would not necessarily include any new flows of capital. Since increases in debt occur in
the year of depreciations and are larger for debt from foreign sources (which is more
likely to be denominated in foreign currency), this revaluation effect may explain at least
some part of the growth in debt to multinational affiliates.

        Examining changes in paid-in-capital provides cleaner measures of new capital
infusions from the parents of affiliates. Paid-in-capital consists of the initial capital stock
of an affiliate and any new equity infusions. This measure does not include retained
earnings. Since this component of financing is measured in dollars, using historic
exchange rates for translation when necessary, changes in the growth of paid-in-capital
cannot be explained by changes in currency valuations.

        Column 4 of Table 7 reports regression results where the dependent variable is the
growth in paid-in-capital. The paid-in-capital of multinational affiliates increases in the
years following depreciations, although this increase is only significant in the year after a
depreciation. The coefficient estimates suggest that the paid-in-capital of multinational


                                                                                              23
affiliates increases by 10.8% in the year after depreciations. This result provides direct
evidence that new equity infusions from parent companies enable multinational affiliates
in emerging markets to capitalize on investment opportunities after depreciations. In
combination with the evidence provided on changes in leverage and its role in
influencing investment, this evidence further confirms the role of internal capital markets
in allowing multinational firms to overcome financial constraints that handicap local
firms.

6.       Conclusion

         This paper provides evidence on the effects of financial constraints on firm
growth by examining the differential performance of multinational affiliates and local
firms during currency crises in emerging markets. Affiliates of multinational firms
expand sales, assets and investment subsequent to depreciations, while local firms show
little change (or a decrease) in each of these measures of operating activity. Local firms
and multinational affiliates experience similar changes in operating profits after currency
crises, indicating that the competitiveness benefits from depreciations are similar for the
two types of firms. Local firms, but not multinational affiliates, tend to experience large
increases in leverage, indicating that local firms are more vulnerable to financing
constraints after depreciations. Investment specifications that employ depreciation
dummies as instruments demonstrate that changes in local firm financial constraints
induced by depreciations cause the different investment performance of local firms
relative to multinational affiliates. A more detailed analysis of multinational affiliates
also demonstrates that multinationals receive equity infusions from their parent
companies after depreciations. This evidence further confirms the importance of internal
capital markets to multinationals in overcoming the financing constraints that hinder local
firms in the aftermath of currency crises.

         These findings point to an underappreciated effect of foreign direct investment in
emerging markets. The internal capital markets of multinational firms allow their
affiliates to expand output after severe depreciations, precisely when economies are
fragile and prone to severe economic contractions. As a consequence, multinational
affiliates can mitigate some of the aggregate effects of currency crises. This analysis,



                                                                                             24
however, does not explore the long-run distributional consequences of this differential
impact of currency crises on multinational affiliates. Does increased economic activity
due to multinationals during crises help support local firms through spillover effects such
as increased demand for local inputs, improved access to trade credit, or higher levels of
employment? Or does increased multinational investment crowd out activity by local
firms, with potentially persistent effects? While multinational firms appear to mitigate
the contractionary output effects of severe depreciations, the longer term effects on local
firms remain an open question.




                                                                                           25
References

Agénor, Pierre-Richard and Peter Montiel. (1996). Development Macroeconomics.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Aghion, Philippe, Philippe Bachetta and Abhijit Banerjee. (2001). “Currency Crises and
Monetary Policy in an Economy with Credit Constraints.” European Economic Review
45:1121-1150.

Aitken, Brian, and Ann E. Harrison. (1999). “Do Domestic Firms Benefit from Direct
Foreign Investment? Evidence from Venezuela.” American Economic Review 89:605-
618.

Aguiar, Mark. (2002). “Investment, Devaluation, and Foreign Currency Exposure: The
Case of Mexico.” University of Chicago, Working Paper.

Aguiar, Mark and Gita Gopinath. (2003). “Fire-Sale FDI.” University of Chicago,
Working Paper.

Allayannis, George, Gregory W. Brown, and Leora F. Klapper (2003). Capital structure
and financial risk: Evidence from foreign debt use in East Asia, Journal of Finance,
58:2667-2710.

Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirguc-Kunt, and Ross Levine. (2003). “Bank Concentration and
Crises.” NBER Working Paper No. 9921.

Bekaert, Geert and Campbell R. Harvey. (2000). “Foreign Speculators and Emerging
Equity Markets.” Journal of Finance 55:565-613.

Bernanke, Benjamin and Mark Gertler. (1989). “Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business
Fluctuations.” American Economic Review 79:14-31.

Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. (2004). “How Much
Should We Trust Differences-in-Differences Estimates.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, forthcoming.

Bleakley, Hoyt and Kevin Cowan. (2002). “Corporate Dollar Debt and Devaluations:
Much Ado About Nothing?” University of Chicago and Federal Reserve Bank of
Boston, Working Paper.

Blonigen, Bruce. (1997). "Firm-Specific Assets and the Link Between Exchange Rates
and Foreign Direct Investment." American Economic Review 87:447-465.

Bris, Arturo and Yrjö Koskinen. (2002). “Corporate Leverage and Currency Crises.”
Journal of Financial Economics 63:275-310.




                                                                                       26
Caballero, Ricardo J. and Arvind Krishnamurthy. (2001). “International and Domestic
Collateral Constraints in a Model of Emerging Market Crises.” Journal of Monetary
Economics 48:513-548.

Caballero, Ricardo J. and Arvind Krishnamurthy. (2003). “Excessive Dollar Debt:
Financial Development and Underinsurance.” Journal of Finance 58:867-893.

Calvo, Guillermo and Carmen Reinhart. (2000). “Fixing for your Life.” NBER Working
Paper No. 8006.

Caprio, Gerard, Jr., and Daniela Klingebiel. (1999). “Episodes of Systematic and
Borderline Financial Distress.” The World Bank, Working Paper.

Chevalier, Judith A. (1995) “Capital Structure and Product Market Competition:
Empirical Evidence from the Supermarket Industry” American Economic Review 85:
415-435.

Desai, Mihir A., C. Fritz Foley and James R. Hines Jr. (2003). “A Multinational
Perspective on Capital Structure Choice and Internal Capital Markets.” Journal of
Finance, forthcoming.

Desai, Mihir A., C. Fritz Foley and James R. Hines Jr. (2004). “Capital Controls,
Liberalizations, and Foreign Direct Investment.” NBER Working Paper No. 10337.

Edwards, Sebastian. (1989). Real Exchange Rates, Devaluation and Adjustment.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Eskeland, Gunnar S., and Ann E. Harrison. (2003). “Moving to Greener Pastures?
Multinationals and the Pollution Haven Hypothesis.” Journal of Development
Economics, forthcoming.

Evans, David S. (1987a). “The Relationship Between Firm Growth, Size, and Age:
Estimates for 100 Manufacturing Industries.” Journal of Industrial Economics 35:567-
581.

Evans, David S. (1987b). “Tests of Alternative Theories of Firm Growth.” Journal of
Political Economy 95:657-674.

Fazzari, Steven M., R. Glenn Hubbard and Bruce C. Petersen. (1988) “Financing
Constraints and Corporate Investment,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 141-
195.

Fazzari, Steven M., R. Glenn Hubbard and Bruce C. Petersen. (2000) “Investment-Cash
Flow Sensitivities Are Useful,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115:695-705.

Figlio, David N. and Bruce A. Blonigen. (2000). “The Effects of Foreign Direct
Investment on Local Communities.” Journal of Urban Economics 48:338-363.



                                                                                       27
Forbes, Kristin J. (2002a). “Cheap Labor Meets Costly Capital: The Impact of
Devaluations on Commodity Firms.” Journal of Development Economics 69:35-365.

Forbes, Kristin J. (2002b). “How do Large Depreciations Affect Firm Performance?”
IMF Staff Papers 49:214-238.

Froot, Kenneth and Jeremy Stein. (1991). “Exchange Rates and Foreign Direct
Investment: An Imperfect Capital Markets Approach.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
106:1191-1217.

Goldberg, Pinelopi and Michael Knetter. (1997). “Goods Prices and Exchange Rates:
What Have We Learned?” Journal of Economic Literature 35:273-296.

Gupta, Poonam, Deepak Mishra and Ratna Sahay. (2000). “Output Response During
Currency Crises.” IMF, Working Paper.

Harrison, Ann E., and Margaret S. McMillan. (2003). “Does Direct Foreign Investment
Affect Domestic Firms Credit Constraints?” Journal of International Economics,
forthcoming.

Hall, Bronwyn H. (1987). “The Relationship Between Firm Size and Firm Growth in the
US Manufacturing Sector.” Journal of Industrial Economics 35:583-606.

Hennessy, Christopher A. (2003). “Tobin’s Q, Debt Overhang, and Investment.” Journal
of Finance, forthcoming.

Henry, Peter Blair. (2000a). “Stock Market Liberalization, Economic Reform, and
Emerging Market Equity Prices.” Journal of Finance 55:529-564.

Henry, Peter Blair. (2000b). “Do Stock Market Liberalizations Cause Investment
Booms?” Journal of Financial Economics 58:301-334.

Hubbard, R. Glenn. (1998). “Capital Market Imperfections and Investment.” Journal of
Economic Literature 36:193-225.

International Monetary Fund. (2003). International Financial Statistics. Database on CD-
ROM. March.

Johnson, Simon, Peter Boone, Alasdair Breach and Eric Friedman. (2000). “Corporate
Governance in the Asian Financial Crisis.” Journal of Financial Economics 58:141-186.

Kaplan, Steven N. and Luigi Zingales. (1997) “Do Investment-Cash Flow Sensitivities
Provide Useful Measures of Financing Constraints,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
112:169-215.

Kaplan, Steven N. and Luigi Zingales. (2000) “Investment-Cash Flow Sensitivities Are
Not Valid Measures of Financing Constraints,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
115:707-712.


                                                                                       28
Krueger, Anne and Aaron Tornell. (1999). “The Role of Bank Restructuring in
Recovering from Crises: Mexico 1995-1998.” NBER Working Paper No. 7042.

Lamont, Owen (1997). “Cash Flow and Investment: Evidence from Internal Capital
Markets.” Journal of Finance 52:83-109.

Lang, Larry, Eli Ofek and René M. Stulz. (1995). “Leverage, Investment and Firm
Growth.” Journal of Financial Economics 40:3-29.

Mitton, Todd. (2002). “A Cross-firm Analysis of the Impact of Corporate Governance on
the East Asian Financial Crisis.” Journal of Financial Economics 64:215-241.

Myers, Stewart. (1977). “Determinants of Corporate Borrowing.” Journal of Financial
Economics 5:147-175.

Peek, Joseph and Eric Rosengren. (1997). “The International Transmission of Financial
Shocks: The Case of Japan,” American Economic Review, 87:495-505.

Reif, Tania. (2001). “The ‘Real’ Side of Currency Crises.” Columbia University,
Working Paper.

Stein, Jeremy. (2003). “Agency, Information and Corporate Investment,” in George
Constantinides, Milt Harris and Rene Stulz (eds.) Handbook of the Economics of Finance
New York: Elsevier, 111-165.

Stulz, René. (1999). “Globalization of Equity Markets and the Cost of Capital.” NBER
Working Paper No. 7021.

Whited, Toni. (1992). “Debt, Liquidity Constraints, and Corporate Investment: Evidence
from Panel Data.” Journal of Finance 47:1425-1461.




                                                                                        29
   Figure 1: The Differential Response of U.S. Multinational Affiliates and Local Firms During Currency Crises

                                                             Panel A: Sales Growth
 0.40


 0.35


 0.30


 0.25


 0.20


 0.15


 0.10


 0.05


 0.00
          One Year Prior to Depreciation          Year of Depreciation            One Year After Depreciation        Two Years After Depreciation




                                                             Panel B: Asset Growth
0.40


0.35


0.30


0.25


0.20


0.15


0.10


0.05


0.00
          One Year Prior to Depreciation          Year of Depreciation            One Year After Depreciation        Two Years After Depreciation


                                                        Local Firms       MNC Affiliates


Note: The panels compare the median growth rates of sales and assets of local firms and U.S. multinational affiliates. In each panel, the pairs of
bars correspond to years relative to a currency crisis. Within each pair, the first bar represents the median growth rate for local firms and the second
bar represents the median growth rate for the multinational affiliates.
   Figure 2: Changes in Leverage and Operating Profitability for U.S. Multinational Affiliates and Local Firms
                                          During Currency Crises

                                                                Panel A: Leverage
   60.0%


   55.0%


   50.0%


   45.0%


   40.0%


   35.0%


   30.0%


   25.0%


   20.0%
             One Year Prior to Depreciation          Year of Depreciation          One Year After Depreciation      Two Years After Depreciation



                                                       Panel B: Operating Profitability
    12.0%



    11.0%



    10.0%



     9.0%



     8.0%



     7.0%



     6.0%
             One Year Prior to Depreciation          Year of Depreciation          One Year After Depreciation      Two Years After Depreciation

                                                                 Local Firms     MNC Affiliates

Note: The panels compare the median leverage and the median operating profitability of local firms and U.S. multinational affiliates. In each panel
the pairs of bars correspond to years relative to a currency crisis. Within each pair, the first bar represents the median value for local firms and the
second bar represents the median value for the multinational affiliates.
                                                                         Table 1
                     Sample Composition by Year and by Type of Firm for Emerging Markets with Currency Crises and Control Countries

                                                                                   Number of Observations                                                                    % of Sample
                                1991          1992         1993         1994         1995      1996       1997                1998         1999          All Years       Worldscope BEA

Depreciation Countries          1,224        1,555         1,740        2,674        2,342         2,466        2,569        2,935         4,085          21,590             49%          51%

Brazil (1999)                      0            0             0            0          284           276          292          341           489            1,682             35%          65%
China (1994)                      32           42            57          176          150           191          243          281           413            1,585             26%          74%
India (1991)                      41          191           227          261          302           325          312          319           353            2,331             81%          19%
Indonesia (1997)                 109          121           121          193          132           143          145          148           189            1,301             54%          46%
Malaysia (1997)                  119          152           159          214          229           252          255          253           284            1,917             67%          33%
Mexico (1994)                    277          284           289          578          275           290          297          343           585            3,218             14%          86%
Peru (1993)                        0           23            33           49           30            37           38           47            70             327              56%          44%
Philippines (1997)                53           63            65          108           83            86           84           84           118             744              41%          59%
Russia (1998)                      0            0             0            0            0             7           13           47            63             130              29%          71%
Singapore (1997)                 110          121           127          215          163           180          186          189           242            1,533             38%          62%
South Africa (1998)              123          130           143          171          147           126          112          195           226            1,373             63%          37%
South Korea (1997)               143          154           202          281          236           229          241          301           568            2,355             70%          30%
Thailand (1997)                   93          140           165          219          175           177          178          185           230            1,562             64%          36%
Turkey (1994)                     54           63            77           89           67            77           96          109           139             771              58%          42%
Venezuela (1996)                  70           71            75          120           69            70           77           93           116             761              13%          87%

Control Group                    283          419           508          847          792           900          955          992          1,247           6,943             45%          55%
Argentina                         72           79            89          139          105           109          123          133           174            1,023             22%          78%
Chile                             50           59            64          103           78            82           88          100           151             775              48%          52%
Colombia                          52           60            64          104           66            67           72           71            87             643              20%          80%
Czech Republic                     0            0             0            0           29            56           60           61            81             287              40%          60%
Hong Kong                          0           89            92          153          159           214          196          201           244            1,348             57%          43%
Hungary                            0            0            21           40           31            41           44           48            66             291              28%          72%
Israel                            16           35            41           61           37            34           48           50            74             396              44%          56%
Poland                             0            0            26           42           58            65           73           83           106             453              39%          61%
Slovak Republic                    0            0             0            5            2             7           17           17            22              70              54%          46%
Taiwan                            93           97           111          200          227           225          234          228           242            1,657             64%          36%

Note: The sample includes data on U.S. multinational affiliates and local firms from all of the listed countries over the 1991-1999 period. The top panel provides sample information on the number
of entities operating in emerging markets that undergo depreciations and the share of these entities that are drawn from Worldscope and BEA data. The bottom panel provides similar information
on entities operating in emerging markets that do not undergo depreciations. Years in which countries experience “hyperinflation” of over 100% and country/year observations for which inflation
or exchange rate data is unavailable are excluded. Country/years that are removed from the sample due to either of these criteria are: Brazil (1991-94), Czech Republic (1991-94), Hong Kong
(1991), Hungary (1991-92), Peru (1991), Poland (1991-92), Russia (1991-95), Slovak Republic (1991-93). Depreciation episodes are defined as any real depreciation of the U.S. dollar exchange
rate over 25% during any one-year period from January 1991 through December 1999. Nominal exchange rates are adjusted for inflation differentials using producer prices (whenever possible). If a
country experiences a depreciation episode in the current year, the next year is excluded as a possible episode.
                                                          Table 2
                            Descriptive Statistics for Local Firms and Multinational Affiliates

                                                             Local Firms                                Multinational Affiliates
                                                              Standard                                         Standard
                                                 Mean         Deviation         Median               Mean     Deviation      Median

Log of Sales                                      15.0488           3.0231        14.5613             13.3198           2.9091        12.8418

Sales Growth                                       0.1266           0.3144          0.1096             0.1969           0.3759          0.1494

Log of Assets                                     15.4664           2.9699        14.9050             13.5045           2.7861        12.8514
Asset Growth                                       0.1460           0.2448          0.1128             0.1689           0.2958          0.1405
Log of Capital Expenditures                       12.4075           3.1360        12.0052             10.2501           3.0486          9.7854

Capital Expenditures/ Net PPE                      0.1967           0.1697          0.1522             0.2303           0.2259          0.1696

Log of Operating Profits                          13.0989           3.1087        12.4497             12.0271           2.9005        11.4914
Operating Profitability                            0.0939           0.1629          0.0877             0.1201           0.1699          0.1083
Leverage                                           0.4730           0.2307          0.4617             0.4559           0.2672          0.4168
Price Index                                     115.3496          75.1014        103.2000           115.8554          67.7326        100.0000

Inflation                                          0.0796           0.1272          0.0459             0.1082           0.1434          0.0656

Growth in Local Debt                                                                                   0.1401           0.6110          0.1291

Growth in Foreign Debt                                                                                 0.1228           0.7418          0.0690

Growth in Related Party Debt                                                                           0.0852           0.8119          0.0000

Growth in Paid in Capital                                                                              0.0624           0.3446          0.0000

Note: Values of sales, assets, capital expenditures, net PPE, operating revenues, local sales, foreign sales, related party sales, local debt,
foreign debt, and related party debt are measured in thousands of local currency units. The growth rates are calculated as differences in log
values. Operating profits are the difference between sales and operating expenses. Operating Profitability is the ratio of the difference
between sales and operating expenses to sales. Leverage is the ratio of debt to assets. The price index and inflation are taken from
Datastream and measure prices and changes in prices in the host country. Local debt is borrowing by an affiliate from persons in the
affiliate's host country. Foreign debt is borrowing by an affiliate from person's outside the affiliate's host country. Related party debt is
borrowing by an affiliate from the affiliate's parent. Paid in capital includes equity capital investments in an affiliate, and this item is
measured in U.S. dollars.
                                                                  Table 3
                                      Responses of Multinationals and Local Firms to Currency Crises

Dependent Variable:                       Log of Sales                        Sales Growth                        Log of Assets                       Asset Growth

                                         (1)             (2)                 (3)             (4)                 (5)              (6)                (7)              (8)
Constant                               12.8621          12.8581             1.3997           1.4149             12.8046         12.8235              2.8180          2.9006
                                      (0.6518)         (0.6531)           (0.4276)         (0.4269)            (0.7287)        (0.7511)            (0.3849)        (0.4061)
Price index                             0.0048           0.0049                                                  0.0044          0.0043
                                      (0.0003)         (0.0003)                                                (0.0002)        (0.0002)
Inflation                                                                   0.7361           0.7236                                                  0.2050          0.1456
                                                                          (0.0534)         (0.0528)                                                (0.0375)        (0.0374)
Lag of Sales                                                               -0.1419          -0.1424
                                                                          (0.0200)         (0.0200)
Lag of Assets                                                                                                                                       -0.2181         -0.2275
                                                                                                                                                   (0.0112)        (0.0114)
Depreciationt-1                        -0.0712          -0.0782            -0.0185          -0.0147             -0.0286         -0.0265             -0.0223         -0.0217
                                      (0.0265)         (0.0262)           (0.0146)         (0.0145)            (0.0188)        (0.0186)            (0.0111)        (0.0111)
Depreciationt                          -0.0437                             -0.0284                               0.0376                              0.0199
                                      (0.0283)                            (0.0154)                             (0.0209)                            (0.0127)
Depreciationt+1                        -0.0787                             -0.0845                              -0.0219                             -0.0624
                                      (0.0316)                            (0.0179)                             (0.0228)                            (0.0136)
Depreciationt+2                        -0.1270                             -0.0247                              -0.0579                             -0.0499
                                      (0.0327)                            (0.0144)                             (0.0242)                            (0.0114)
Post Depreciation                                       -0.0852                             -0.0414                             -0.0143                             -0.0266
                                                       (0.0272)                            (0.0114)                            (0.0207)                            (0.0098)
Multinational*                          0.0073           0.0174            -0.0580          -0.0593             -0.0147         -0.0168             -0.0147         -0.0218
Depreciationt-1                       (0.0404)         (0.0397)           (0.0193)         (0.0192)            (0.0243)        (0.0240)            (0.0162)        (0.0163)
Multinational*                         -0.0447                              0.0248                               0.1256                              0.1488
Depreciationt                         (0.0528)                            (0.0210)                             (0.0285)                            (0.0183)
Multinational*                          0.1466                              0.1415                               0.1019                              0.0104
Depreciationt+1                       (0.0546)                            (0.0251)                             (0.0327)                            (0.0197)
Multinational*                          0.1898                              0.0088                               0.0779                              0.0250
Depreciationt+2                       (0.0580)                            (0.0242)                             (0.0362)                            (0.0176)
Multinational* Post                                      0.0841                              0.0544                              0.1130                              0.0753
Depreciation                                           (0.0456)                            (0.0158)                            (0.0278)                            (0.0136)
Industry/Year Fixed
Effects?                                  Y               Y                   Y               Y                   Y                Y                  Y                Y
Firm Fixed Effects?                       Y               Y                   Y               Y                   Y                Y                  Y                Y
No. of Obs.                              27,969          27,969              19,627          19,627              27,767           27,767             19,476           19,476
R-Squared                                0.9684          0.9683              0.5250          0.5235              0.9898           0.9898             0.5345           0.5221
Note: The dependent variable is the logarithm of sales in columns (1) and (2), growth in sales in columns (3) and (4), the logarithm of assets in columns (5) and (6), and
growth in assets in columns (7) and (8). The sample used in all specifications includes U.S. multinational and local firms operating in emerging markets. Each
specification includes industry/year and firm fixed effects. "Price index" is an index of producer prices (or consumer prices if producer prices are unavailable) in the host
country; the base year of 1995 has a price index of 100. "Inflation" is the change in the producer price index over the period. Changes in consumer price indices are used
if changes in producer price indices are not available. "Lag of Sales" is the log of sales in the previous period, and "Lag of Assets" is the log of beginning of period assets.
The time sub-scripted "Depreciation" variables are a set of dummies equal to one in the year prior to, the year of, and the two years following a depreciation. "Post
Depreciation" is a dummy equal to one in the year of and the two years following a depreciation. "Multinational" is a dummy set equal to one for affiliates of U.S.
multinationals. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors that correct for clustering of errors by firm appear in parentheses.
                                                      Table 4
                     Investment Responses of Multinationals and Local Firms to Currency Crises
                                                                                                        Capital                Capital
Dependent Variable:                                Log of Capital        Log of Capital               Expenditures/          Expenditures/
                                                   Expenditures          Expenditures                   Net PPE                Net PPE
                                                          (1)                    (2)                         (3)                    (4)
Constant                                                      7.5609                 7.6623                      0.2267                 0.2228
                                                            (0.9240)               (0.9401)                    (0.2081)               (0.2162)
Price Index                                                   0.0048                 0.0047                      0.0001                 0.0001
                                                            (0.0004)               (0.0004)                    (0.0000)               (0.0000)
Depreciationt-1                                               0.0362                 0.0253                      0.0122                 0.0103
                                                            (0.0522)               (0.0518)                    (0.0074)               (0.0073)
Depreciationt                                                 0.0650                                             0.0070
                                                            (0.0570)                                           (0.0072)
Depreciationt+1                                              -0.2820                                            -0.0326
                                                            (0.0604)                                           (0.0073)
Depreciationt+2                                              -0.3942                                            -0.0373
                                                            (0.0625)                                           (0.0071)
Post Depreciation                                                                   -0.2101                                            -0.0220
                                                                                   (0.0506)                                           (0.0058)
Multinational*Depreciation t-1                               -0.0173                -0.0011                     -0.0031                -0.0003
                                                            (0.0719)               (0.0711)                    (0.0111)               (0.0110)
Multinational*Depreciationt                                   0.0790                                            -0.0215
                                                            (0.0797)                                           (0.0116)
Multinational*Depreciationt+1                                 0.5311                                             0.0619
                                                            (0.0887)                                           (0.0136)
Multinational*Depreciationt+2                                 0.4133                                             0.0460
                                                            (0.0934)                                           (0.0122)
Multinational*Post Depreciation                                                      0.3448                                             0.0257
                                                                                   (0.0700)                                           (0.0095)
Industry/Year Fixed Effects?                               Y                     Y                            Y                      Y
Firm Fixed Effects?                                        Y                     Y                            Y                      Y
No. of Obs.                                                     23,950                 23,950                      25,524                 25,524
R-Squared                                                       0.9382                 0.9379                      0.5817                 0.5801
Note: The dependent variable in columns (1) and (2) is the log of capital expenditures, and the dependent variable in columns (3) and (4) is
capital expenditures scaled by net property, plant, and equipment. The sample used in all specifications includes U.S. multinational and local
firms operating in emerging markets. Each specification includes industry/year and firm fixed effects. "Price index" is an index of producer
prices (or consumer prices if producer prices are unavailable) in the host country; the base year of 1995 has a price index of 100. The time
sub-scripted "Depreciation" variables are a set of dummies equal to one in the year prior to, the year of, and the two years following a
depreciation. "Post Depreciation" is a dummy equal to one in the year of and the two years following a depreciation. "Multinational" is a
dummy set equal to one for affiliates of U.S. multinationals. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors that correct for clustering of errors
by firm appear in parentheses.
                                                     Table 5
                                     The Determinants of Investment Responses

Dependent Variable:                        Log of Operating Profits                                      Leverage

                                             (1)                     (2)                         (3)                    (4)
Constant                                        14.2066                 14.1739                     -0.0616                -0.0575
                                               (0.5273)                (0.5251)                    (0.2092)               (0.2132)
Price Index                                      0.0043                  0.0043                      0.0001                 0.0001
                                               (0.0004)                (0.0004)                    (0.0000)               (0.0000)
Depreciationt-1                                 -0.0953                 -0.1026                      0.0240                 0.0245
                                               (0.0453)                (0.0444)                    (0.0056)               (0.0056)
Depreciationt                                    0.0790                                              0.0753
                                               (0.0452)                                            (0.0068)
Depreciationt+1                                  0.0035                                              0.0825
                                               (0.0453)                                            (0.0082)
Depreciationt+2                                  0.0315                                              0.0521
                                               (0.0434)                                            (0.0092)
Post Depreciation                                                        0.0366                                             0.0703
                                                                       (0.0348)                                           (0.0068)
Multinational*                                  -0.0029                  0.0056                     -0.0311                -0.0312
Depreciationt-1                                (0.0654)                (0.0643)                    (0.0104)               (0.0102)
Multinational*                                  -0.0256                                             -0.0750
Depreciationt                                  (0.0713)                                            (0.0134)
Multinational*                                   0.0684                                             -0.1118
Depreciationt+1                                (0.0838)                                            (0.0154)
Multinational*                                   0.1292                                             -0.0812
Depreciationt+2                                (0.0840)                                            (0.0167)
Multinational* Post                                                      0.0505                                            -0.0865
Depreciation                                                           (0.0602)                                           (0.0120)
Industry/Year Fixed
Effects?                                      Y                      Y                           Y                       Y
Firm Fixed Effects?                           Y                      Y                           Y                       Y
No. of Obs.                                        16,562                  16,562                      19,642                 19,642
R-Squared                                          0.9648                  0.9647                      0.7926                 0.7921
Note: The dependent variable is the log of operating revenues in columns (1) and (2), operating profitability in columns (3) and
(4), and leverage in columns (5) and (6). Operating profits are equal to sales less operating expenses, and operating profitability
is the ratio of operating profits to sales. Leverage is measured as the ratio of current liabilites and long term debt to assets. The
sample used in all specifications includes U.S. multinational and local firms operating in emerging markets. Each specification
includes industry/year and firm fixed effects. "Price index" is an index of producer prices (or consumer prices if producer prices
are unavailable) in the host country; the base year of 1995 has a price index of 100. The time sub-scripted "Depreciation"
variables are a set of dummies equal to one in the year prior to, the year of, and the two years following a depreciation. "Post
Depreciation" is a dummy equal to one in the year of and the two years following a depreciation. "Multinational" is a dummy set
equal to one for affiliates of U.S. multinationals. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors that correct for clustering of
errors by firm appear in parentheses.
                                                       Table 6
                    Instrumental Variables Analysis of the Determinants of Investment Responses

Dependent Variable:                                                          Log Capital Expenditures

                                                 (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)
Constant                                         12.1656           1.3634          -1.7350          11.9299           3.4188          -1.4944
                                                (1.3820)         (3.5442)         (4.6111)         (1.5090)         (3.5846)         (5.5624)

Leverage                                         -2.5728                           -2.0398          -2.5126                           -2.3131
                                                (0.3989)                          (0.5254)         (0.4292)                          (0.7461)

Multinational * Leverage                                                                            -1.0830                            9.1130
                                                                                                   (2.5082)                          (4.2359)

Log Operating Profits                                              0.7352           0.9847                            0.4556           1.0366
                                                                 (0.2667)         (0.3139)                          (0.2923)         (0.4492)

Multinational * Log Operating                                                                                         0.3670           0.1467
Profits                                                                                                             (0.1770)         (0.3158)

Price Index                                       0.0049           0.0003          -0.0008           0.0049           0.0007          -0.0015
                                                (0.0003)         (0.0015)         (0.0018)         (0.0003)         (0.0015)         (0.0021)
IV using Depreciation
Episodes?                                         Y                Y                Y                Y                Y                Y
Industry/Year Fixed Effects?                      Y                Y                Y                Y                Y                Y
Firm Fixed Effects?                               Y                Y                Y                Y                Y                Y
No. of Obs.                                       18,089           15,470           15,223           18,089           15,470           15,223

Note: The dependent variable in columns (1) through (6) is the log of capital expenditures, and the dependent variable in columns (7) through
(12) is capital expenditures scaled by net property, plant, and equipment. The sample used in all specifications includes U.S. multinational
and local firms operating in emerging markets. Each specification includes industry/year and firm fixed effects. Leverage is measured as the
ratio of current liabilites and long term debt to assets. Operating profits are equal to sales less operating expenses, and operating profitability
is the ratio of operating profits to sales. "Multinational" is a dummy set equal to one for affiliates of U.S. multinationals. All columns employ
a set of dummies equal to one in the year prior to, the year of, and the two years following a depreciation, and the multinational dummy
interacted with each of these time dummies as instruments for leverage, the log of operating profits, and operating profitability, and these
variables interacted with the multinational dummy. "Price index" is an index of producer prices (or consumer prices if producer prices are
unavailable) in the host country; the base year of 1995 has a price index of 100. Standard errors appear in parentheses.
                                                                  Table 7
                                Financing Responses of Multinationals to Currency Crises
                                                                                                  Growth in
Dependent Variable:                        Growth in                   Growth in                 Related Party              Growth in Paid
                                           Local Debt                 Foreign Debt                   Debt                     in Capital

                                                (1)                         (2)                         (3)                         (4)
Constant                                           1.1335                     -0.6397                     0.6131                      0.3137
                                                 (0.4222)                    (0.4869)                   (0.4159)                    (0.3391)
Lagged Value                                      -0.0787                     -0.0597                    -0.0663                     -0.0915
                                                 (0.0282)                    (0.0175)                   (0.0164)                    (0.0283)
Inflation                                          0.5428                      0.1361                     0.3679                      0.0300
                                                 (0.3385)                    (0.4265)                   (0.4013)                    (0.1034)
Depreciationt-1                                   -0.0165                     -0.0427                    -0.0774                     -0.0077
                                                 (0.0687)                    (0.0895)                   (0.0937)                    (0.0288)
Depreciationt                                      0.1798                      0.3517                     0.2480                      0.0276
                                                 (0.0792)                    (0.1055)                   (0.1160)                    (0.0298)
Depreciationt+1                                   -0.1092                     -0.0472                    -0.1568                      0.1079
                                                 (0.0952)                    (0.1187)                   (0.1223)                    (0.0411)
Depreciationt+2                                    0.0092                      0.0135                    -0.0504                      0.0281
                                                 (0.0971)                    (0.1167)                   (0.1370)                    (0.0436)
Industry/Year Fixed
Effects?                                         Y                           Y                           Y                          Y
Firm Fixed Effects?                              Y                           Y                           Y                          Y
No. of Obs.                                           3,153                       3,153                       3,153                       4,377
R-Squared                                          0.5127                      0.4912                      0.4644                     0.4310

Note: The dependent variable is the growth in debt borrowed from local persons in column (1), the growth in debt borrowed from foreign
persons in column (2), the growth in debt borrowed from related parties in column (3), and the growth in paid in capital in column (4).
The sample used in all specifications is comprised of U.S. multinationals operating in emerging markets. Each specification includes
industry/year and firm fixed effects. "Lagged Value" is the log of the value of the component of sales or financial capital in the previous
period. "Inflation" is the change in the producer price index over the period. Changes in consumer price indices are used if changes in
producer price indices are not available. The time sub-scripted "Depreciation" variables are a set of dummies equal to one in the year prior
to, year of, and the two years following a depreciation. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors that correct for clustering of errors by
firm appear in parentheses.
                                         Appendix Table 1
                           Sample Information By Industry and Data Source
                                                                        % in BEA   % in WS
Industry name                                           Total Obs         sample   sample
Agricultural production-crops                              206            53%        47%
Agricultural production--livestock and animal              122            25%        75%
Forestry                                                   107            16%        84%
Fishing, hunting, and trapping                              22            14%        86%
Iron ores mining                                            34            12%        88%
Copper, lead, zinc, gold, and silver ores mining           539            33%        67%
Other metallic ores mining                                 134            19%        81%
Coal mining                                                 78            32%        68%
Crude petroleum (no refining) and natural gas              873            82%        18%
Nonmetallic minerals mining, except fuels                  142            24%        76%
Meat products Mfg                                          139            35%        65%
Dairy products Mfg                                         179            51%        49%
Preserved fruits and vegetables Mfg                        323            71%        29%
Grain mill products Mfg                                    723            58%        42%
Bakery products Mfg                                         71            56%        44%
Beverages Mfg                                              815            52%        48%
Other food and kindred products Mfg                       1328            43%        57%
Tobacco products Mfg                                       282            55%        45%
Textile mill products Mfg                                 1022            10%        90%
Apparel and other textile products Mfg                     474            37%        63%
Lumber and wood products Mfg                               236            14%        86%
Furniture and fixtures Mfg                                 244            65%        35%
Pulp, paper, and board mills Mfg                           330            22%        78%
Other paper and allied products Mfg                        680            64%        36%
Newspapers Mfg                                             144             8%        92%
Miscellaneous publishing Mfg                               164            70%        30%
Commercial printing and services Mfg                       124            47%        53%
Industrial chemicals and synthetics Mfg                   1964            59%        41%
Drugs Mfg                                                 1308            67%        33%
Soap, cleaners, and toilet goods Mfg                       909            91%         9%
Agricultural chemicals Mfg                                 467            41%        59%
Chemical products, nec Mfg                                 829            76%        24%
Integrated petroleum refining and extraction               189             9%        91%
Petroleum refining without extraction                      100           100%         0%
Petroleum and coal products, nec                           117            69%        31%
Rubber products Mfg                                        580            48%        52%
Miscellaneous plastics products Mfg                        590            62%        38%
Leather and leather products Mfg                           130            18%        82%
Glass products Mfg                                         362            52%        48%
Stone, clay, concrete, gypsum, etc. Mfg                    973             9%        91%
Ferrous Metals Mfg                                         766            11%        89%
Nonferrous Metals Mfg                                      531            22%        78%
Metal cans, forgings, and stampings Mfg                    378            56%        44%
Cutlery, hardware, and screw products Mfg                  172            90%        10%
Heating equipment, plumbing fixtures, etc Mfg              201            45%        55%
Metal services, ordnance, & fabricated metal Mfg           213            68%        32%
Engines and turbines Mfg                                   113            59%        41%
Farm and garden machinery Mfg                               62            50%        50%
Construction, mining, & materials handling Mfg             396            80%        20%
Metalworking machinery Mfg                                 104            36%        64%
                                          Appendix Table 1
                            Sample Information By Industry and Data Source
                                                                                           % in BEA        % in WS
Industry name                                                        Total Obs              sample         sample
Special industry machinery Mfg                                           179                  59%             41%
General industrial machinery Mfg                                         197                  55%             45%
Computer and office equipment Mfg                                        579                  59%             41%
Refrigeration and service industry machinery Mfg                         267                  77%             23%
Industrial machinery and equipment, nec Mfg                              111                  76%             24%
Household appliances Mfg                                                 296                  52%             48%
Household audio & video, & communications Mfg                            655                  26%             74%
Electronic components and accessories Mfg                               1737                  68%             32%
Electronic and other electric equipment, nec Mfg                         771                  52%             48%
Motor vehicles and equipment Mfg                                        1451                  68%             32%
Other transportation equipment, nec Mfg                                  283                  29%             71%
Measuring, scientific, & optical instruments Mfg                         232                  49%             51%
Medical instruments & supplies & ophthalmic Mfg                          310                  89%             11%
Photographic equipment and supplies Mfg                                   80                  73%             28%
Miscellaneous manufacturing industries                                   396                  65%             35%


Note: The table provides the number of firm observations in each industry covered in the sample. The share in the BEA
sample indicates the share of observations that are observations of multinational affiliates while the share in the WS
sample refers to the share of observations of locally owned firms taken from Worldscope.
