NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WELFARE REFORM AND HEALTH
Marianne Bitler
Jonah Gelbach
Hilary Hoynes
Working Paper 10549
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10549
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2004

We thank Amy Cox, Janet Currie, Jon Gruber, Steven Haider, Jacob Klerman, Darius Lakdawalla, Peter
Mariolis, Bob Mills, Shino Oba, Sondra Reese, Jeanne Ringel, Lara Shore-Sheppard, Steve Stillman, and
members of the NBER Summer Institute, the RAND Brown Bag, and attendees at the 2003 annual conference
of the RWJ Scholars in Health Policy Program for their helpful comments and/or for information about health
insurance data. We also thank Aaron Yelowitz for providing data on Medicaid expansions and Kitt Carpenter
for help with the BRFSS. Excellent research assistance was provided by Jared Rodecker. Bitler gratefully
acknowledges the financial support of the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development and
the National Institute on Aging. The views and conclusions are those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent those of the RAND Corporation, NIA, or NICHD. Gelbach gratefully acknowledges financial
support from the Robert Woods Johnson Foundation's Scholars in Health Policy Program. Correspondence
to Hoynes at hwhoynes@ucdavis.edu; Gelbach at gelbach@glue.umd.edu; or Bitler at bitler@rand.org. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2004 by Marianne Bitler, Jonah Gelbach, and Hilary Hoynes. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Welfare Reform and Health
Marianne Bitler, Jonah Gelbach, and Hilary Hoynes
NBER Working Paper No. 10549
June 2004
JEL No. I3, I1
ABSTRACT
We investigate the relationship between welfare reform and health insurance, health care utilization,
and self-reported measures of health status for women aged 20-45, using nationally representative
data from the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System. We present estimates from both
difference-in-difference models (applied to single women and single women with children) and
difference-in-difference-in-difference models (using married women and single women without
children as comparison groups). We find that welfare reform is associated with reductions in health
insurance coverage and specific measures of health care utilization, as well as an increase in the
likelihood of needing care but finding it unaffordable. We find no statistically significant effects of
reform on health status. Overall, effects are somewhat larger for Hispanics compared to blacks and
low educated women.
Marianne Bitler
RAND Corporation
1700 Main Street
P.O. Box 2138
Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138
bitler@rand.org

Jonah Gelbach
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
gelbach@glue.umd.edu

Hilary Hoynes
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
1152 Social Sciences and
Humanities Bldg
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616-8578
and NBER
hwhoynes@ucdavis.edu

1

Introduction

Evaluating the impacts of state and federal welfare reform is the subject of a large and growing
literature. The recent welfare reform period in the United States started with state waivers from the
former Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) program in the early 1990s. This period of
active state experimentation culminated in the passage of the 1996 Personal Responsibility and Work
Opportunity Act (PRWORA) which eliminated AFDC and replaced it with Temporary Assistance for
Needy Families (TANF). This federal reform dramatically changed the economic incentives facing lowincome individuals with children or considering having children. In particular, these reforms imposed
lifetime time limits, strengthened work requirements, and limited the eligible population.
A number of recent studies have shown that state waivers and TANF implementation have played
a role in the dramatic declines in welfare caseloads and increases in the employment of less skilled
women.1 Now that this first wave of research has established these important results, there is increasing
interest in broadening our evaluation of welfare reform by examining the impacts on family well-being.
Our paper makes an important contribution by examining the impact of welfare reform on health
utilization and health status of adult women.
Little is known about the effects of welfare reform on health care utilization and overall health
status. Several recent studies do, however, examine the impact of welfare reform on health insurance
coverage using data from the Current Population Survey (CPS). Kaestner & Kaushal (2003) find that
welfare reform led to a decrease in Medicaid coverage. The overall (negative) effects of reform on health
insurance coverage were attenuated, they find, due to increases in private health insurance coverage.
In a closely related literature, several papers examine state expansions in Medicaid eligibility for
immigrants and parents that occurred around the time of PRWORA. Borjas (2003) and Royer (2003)
find that more restrictive Medicaid policies did not lead to substantially reduced health insurance
coverage among immigrants, because the loss in public coverage was offset by substantial increases in
private insurance coverage. Busch & Duchovny (2003) and Aizer & Grogger (2003) find that parental
Medicaid expansions led to increases in overall coverage, with small changes in private coverage. The
results in these studies inform our analysis in two ways. First, while the focus of our analysis is
the largely unexplored area of health status and health care utilization, we begin by analyzing the
impacts of reform on health insurance coverage. Second, our models include controls for these and
1

The welfare reform literature that has developed in the last several years is enormous. For comprehensive summaries
of this research, see the excellent reviews by Blank (2002), Grogger, Karoly & Klerman (2002), and Moffitt (2002).

1

other changes to state Medicaid and non-Medicaid public health insurance programs.
There are likely many pathways through which welfare reform can affect health. First, as illustrated above, welfare reform may lead to a decline in Medicaid coverage. This is consistent with
the observation that families leaving the welfare rolls also stop receiving Medicaid and Food Stamps
even when they remain eligible for these programs.2 This loss in public coverage may be offset by
increased private coverage either due to increases in mother’s employment or coverage from another
family member. These changes in insurance may subsequently impact health care utilization and
health outcomes.
Second, welfare reform may impact families’ economic resources. While the evidence is more mixed
on this point, a number of researchers have found that welfare reform has led to an increase in the
average incomes of low-skill families.3 These changes in families’ economic circumstances could then
affect health care utilization and health status directly. Third, reform-induced increases in employment
will change parents’ time endowment, which may affect choices about health care utilization, diet, and
health. Fourth, welfare reform could lead to increases (or decreases) in stress, which is associated with
health outcomes.
To examine this issue, we use data from the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS),
a monthly individual survey conducted by states in partnership with the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention (CDC). The BRFSS is designed to produce uniform, state-representative data on
preventive health practices and risky behaviors and covers all civilian, noninstitutionalized persons
age 18 and over. It is thus important to note that the BRFSS is limited to the adult population; as a
consequence we cannot use it to examine the impact of reform on child health. We use the BRFSS data
to analyze the impacts of reform on women aged 20–45 over the period 1990–2000. This time period
allows for examination of both state AFDC waivers and state implementation of federal welfare reform
(PRWORA). We are able to construct a wide range of health measures including preventive health care
utilization (e.g., checkups, breast exams, Pap smears), and measures of physical and mental health
status (self-rated overall health status, days limited from usual activities, and days mental health is
not good).4
We estimate pooled cross-section models where the impacts of welfare reform are captured by
2

For a summary of these “welfare-leaver” studies, see Dion & Pavetti (2000) and Families USA Foundation (1999).
See the reviews cited above. As noted below, in Bitler, Gelbach & Hoynes (2003a) we find considerable heterogeneity
in the effects of Connecticut’s Jobs First waiver on earnings, transfer payments, and income.
4
BRFSS data have been used recently in studies of disability and employment (Carpenter (2003)); drinking (Dee
(2001), Ruhm (2000), and Ruhm & Black (2002)); smoking (Evans, Ringel & Stech (1999) and Gruber & Zinman
(2001)); risky behaviors (Dee & Evans (2001); and health care utilization and health status (Busch & Duchovny (2003)).
3

2

dummy variables for state implementation of welfare waivers and TANF. To focus our analysis on
groups likely to be impacted, we present results for two groups: all single women and single women
with children.5 We further refine these groups by presenting results separately for blacks, Hispanics,
and low-education (high school education or less) women. All empirical models include controls for
state, year, and month fixed effects; state labor market variables; and state programs affecting health
care coverage (Medicaid, SCHIP, other state-funded programs). The impacts of welfare reform in
this standard difference-in-differences (DD) framework are identified through variation in the timing
and incidence of reform across states. To control for the possible correlation of state welfare policies
with unmeasured state trends in health, we introduce comparison groups and estimate differencein-differences-in-differences (DDD) models. We present estimates using several different comparison
groups including married women and single women without children.
Our results generally show that welfare reform is associated with decreases in health insurance
coverage and health care utilization, as well as an increase in the likelihood of needing care but finding
it unaffordable. We generally find no statistically significant association between welfare reform and
health status. These effects are typically, though not uniformly, robust to choice of sample (single
women or single women with children) and source of identification (DD or DDD). An exception to
the overall robustness is that the results for low-education single women with children are almost all
insignificant. For health insurance, our results generally suggest that welfare waivers (and sometimes
TANF) are associated with a reduced probability of simultaneous employment and insurance coverage.
Unfortunately, we do not have a satisfactory explanation for this result, which runs contrary to what
we would expect. Overall, the findings suggest that TANF had larger effects than waivers, and that
impacts for Hispanics were somewhat larger than impacts for blacks and low-education women. Efforts
to relate these larger effects among Hispanics to immigration policy reforms are suggestive but not
conclusive.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the changes in welfare programs
and their expected effects on health insurance and health outcomes. In section 3, we discuss previous
literature on welfare reform and health. In section 4 and section 5, we describe our data and discuss
our empirical model. We report results in section 6 and then conclude in section 7.
5

We examine impacts both on all single women and on the more natural welfare-eligible group of single women with
children because the BRFSS has incomplete data on the presence of children. This issue will be explained more fully
below.

3

2

Welfare reform in the 1990s and implications for health

Beginning in the early 1990s, many states were granted waivers to make changes to their AFDC
programs. As shown in the top panel of Table 1, about half of the states implemented some sort of
welfare waiver between 1993 and 1995. On the heels of this state experimentation, PRWORA was
enacted in 1996, replacing AFDC with TANF. While waiver and TANF policies varied considerably
across states, overall the reforms are viewed as welfare-tightening and pro-work. More specifically,
the welfare-tightening elements of reform include work requirements, financial sanctions, time limits,
family caps, and residency requirements.6 The loosening aspects of reform include liberalized earnings
disregards (which promote work by lowering the tax rate on earned income while on welfare), increased
asset limits, and expanded eligibility for two-parent families.
During this same period, public health insurance for low-income families was expanding. Historically, eligibility for Medicaid for the non-elderly and non-disabled was tied one-for-one to receipt of
cash public assistance. In particular, the AFDC income eligibility limits adopted by a state would also
be used for Medicaid, and AFDC conferred automatic or adjunctive eligibility for Medicaid. Thus, a
family that received AFDC benefits would also be be eligible for health insurance through Medicaid.
Conversely, if a family left AFDC, its members also would lose Medicaid coverage.7 However, in a
series of federal legislative acts beginning in 1984, states were required to expand Medicaid coverage
for infants, children, and pregnant women beyond the AFDC income limits, leading to large increases
in eligibility (Gruber (1997)).
PRWORA further weakened the link between AFDC and Medicaid by requiring states to cover
any family that meets the pre-PRWORA AFDC income, resource, and family composition eligibility
guidelines (Haskins (2001)). This so-called 1931 program (named after the relevant section of the
Social Security Act, as amended by PRWORA) also allowed states to expand eligibility for parents
beyond the 1996 AFDC/Medicaid limits. Aizer & Grogger (2003) report that by 2001 about half
the states had taken advantage of this program and expanded Medicaid access for parents above the
welfare income cutoffs. PRWORA also contained language restricting immigrant access to meanstested transfer programs (including Medicaid). As discussed in Borjas (2003), many states responded
6
Family cap policies prevent welfare benefits from increasing when a woman gives birth while receiving aid. Residencyrequirement policies mandate that unmarried teen parents who receive aid must live in the household of a parent or
other guardian.
7
This is not precisely correct. States could and did set up Medically Needy programs that allowed states to provide
Medicaid benefits to families above the AFDC income cutoff if they had high medical expenses. States were also required
to provide transitional Medicaid coverage for families leaving AFDC due to an increase in earnings.

4

by providing immigrant access to Medicaid using newly created, state-funded “fill-in” programs. In
1997, Congress established the State Children’s Health Insurance program (SCHIP), which allows
states to provide public health insurance to children up to 200 percent of the poverty level (and
subsequently to higher levels). Our empirical model includes controls for these expansions.
In the context of these dramatic changes in the U.S. social safety net, we start by discussing the expected effects of these reforms on our target population—women potentially eligible for welfare. There
are many pathways through which welfare reform may affect health outcomes. One representation of
these pathways is presented in Figure 1.
First, welfare reform reduces welfare caseloads, leading to a decline in Medicaid coverage. The
AFDC caseload has declined more than 60 percent since its peak in 1994 (U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services (2002)). During this time period, the number of nondisabled adults and children
on Medicaid also fell. Between 1995 and 1997, the number of nondisabled adults on Medicaid fell by
10.6 percent, with larger reductions among cash welfare recipients (Ku & Bruen (1999)). The noncash
Medicaid caseload (especially children), on the other hand, grew, reflecting the separation of AFDC
eligibility from Medicaid eligibility described above.
This expected loss in public coverage may be offset by increased private coverage due to increases
in mother’s employment or coverage from another family member. However, these low-skill workers
are likely to be employed in industry-occupation cells with traditionally low rates of employer-provided
health insurance (e.g., Currie & Yelowitz (2000)). In sum, the first prediction is that welfare reform
should be associated with a decrease in Medicaid coverage, an increase in private insurance, and likely
a decrease in overall insurance. A decline in insurance can lead to less health service utilization—for
example less preventive care and prenatal care (Nathan & Thompson (1999), Lyons (1999))—and may
subsequently impact health outcomes.
Second, welfare reform may impact families’ economic resources. While the evidence is less clear
on this topic, research suggests that welfare reform has led to an overall increase in the incomes of
low-skill families.8 However, Bitler et al. (2003a) use experimental data and show that reform has
heterogeneous impacts across the income distribution, with some evidence of reductions at the lowest
income levels. These changes in a family’s economic well-being could then have direct impacts on
health care utilization and health status.
Third, increases in employment lead to changes in a parent’s time endowment which in turn can
8

For recent summaries of the experimental and nonexperimental studies of welfare reform and family income, see the
reviews by Blank (2002), Grogger et al. (2002), and Moffitt (2002).

5

affect choices about health care utilization, diet, and health. Fourth, welfare reform could lead to
increases (or decreases) in stress, which in turn can affect health.

3

Literature Review

As noted above, the welfare reform literature is very large and is well reviewed elsewhere (Blank (2002),
Grogger et al. (2002), and Moffitt (2002)). Here, we focus on the much smaller literature on welfare
reform and health. Most studies in this area examine the impacts on health insurance while little is
known about impacts on health utilization and health status more broadly. The literature comes from
three sources: randomized experimental analyses of state AFDC waivers, welfare leaver studies, and
nonexperimental analyses of administrative and household survey data.
The first source is experimental analyses of changes to state AFDC programs (waivers). The
results in these studies compare outcomes for families randomized into the existing AFDC program to
families randomized into the waiver program. In their review of the experimental literature, Grogger
et al. (2002) conclude that in the majority of studies, reform is associated with decreases in women’s
health insurance coverage, with smaller declines for children. Findings vary, however, with some
studies reporting an increase or no statistically significant change in health insurance. Some studies
examine health utilization and health status for children (e.g., Fraker, Ross, Stapulonis, Olsen, Kovac,
Dion & Rangarajan (2002) and Morris, Huston, Duncan, Crosby & Bos (2001)) but little evidence
is available for women. The main limitations of experimental studies are the inability to obtain
nationally representative estimates and to account for effects of changes in entry behavior that result
from welfare reform. Further, information on health outcomes come almost exclusively from surveys
that are conducted on subsamples of the experimental sample and can have low response rates.
The second source of information on welfare reform and health is leaver studies—national-level or
state-level studies that examine the characteristics of families leaving welfare. The studies uniformly
show that welfare leavers experience a decline in insurance coverage. While private insurance coverage
increases, public health insurance (e.g., Medicaid) declines more, leading to an increase in the percent
uninsured.9 These leaver studies provide an excellent snapshot of the experiences of those families
that have left welfare. However, as discussed in Blank (2002), such studies cannot identify causal
impacts of welfare reform for several reasons. First, leavers are a selected sample. The typical leaver
9
Leaver studies that examine health insurance are reviewed in Greenberg (1998) and include Ellwood & Lewis (1999),
Loprest (1999), Danziger, Corcoran, Danziger & Heflin (2000), Garrett & Holahan (2000), and Tweedie (2001).

6

study examines families leaving welfare in the mid-1990s after welfare caseloads have already fallen by
20 to 30 percent. Second, leaver studies cannot examine the impacts on nonentrants—those families
that would have gone on aid prior to welfare reform but did not. Recent work suggests that this is an
important channel through which the caseload has fallen (Grogger, Haider & Klerman (2003)). Third,
one cannot tell why families left welfare and who would have left absent reform. Fourth, examining a
single cohort of leavers makes it impossible to separately identify impacts of leaving welfare from other
events occurring at the same time such as the strengthening labor market and other policy changes
(e.g., expansion of the EITC).
The last source of information uses nonexperimental methods to examine the impact of reform on
health insurance using administrative or household survey data. Following the literature on welfare
reform and AFDC/TANF caseloads, Ku & Garrett (2000) examine the impact of welfare reform
on Medicaid caseloads. In particular, they pool state-level administrative data on Medicaid caseloads
from the pre-PRWORA period and examine the impact of welfare waivers on adult and child Medicaid
caseloads. The results show that AFDC waivers lead to a (statistically insignificant) decline in the
Medicaid caseload.10
Several recent studies use the Current Population Survey (CPS) to examine the impact of welfare
reform, and other changes to Medicaid, on health insurance coverage. Kaestner & Kaushal (2003)
find that declines in the AFDC caseload are associated with reductions in Medicaid, increases in
employer-provided health insurance, and overall increases in uninsurance. DeLeire, Levine & Levy
(2003) examine low-education women and find that waivers from the AFDC program and TANF
implementation in states that formerly had waivers are associated with increases in health insurance.
Borjas (2003) uses a DDD strategy to examine the impacts of welfare reform on health insurance
in the immigrant population. His source of identification rests on cross-sectional differences in the
generosity of state-only “fill-in” programs to replace benefits for immigrants made ineligible for federalfunded public assistance programs. Borjas finds that immigrants who are not citizens and lived in
less-generous fill-in states were considerably less likely to be covered by Medicaid in the post-reform era.
However, this decrease in Medicaid coverage was accompanied by a significant increase in employerprovided coverage, resulting in no overall decline in insurance for immigrants over the time period.
Royer (2003) has a similar finding in an analysis of pregnant immigrants. Royer also uses Natality
10

Currie & Grogger (2002), using Natality data for 1990–1996, find that declines in welfare caseloads are associated
with declines in prenatal care. Also using Natality data, Kaestner & Lee (2003) find that reform is associated with a
small decline in the use of prenatal care and a small increase in the incidence of low birthweight for low-education women.

7

data to look at health care utilization and health status and finds a temporary reduction in prenatal
care, but no affect on birth outcomes.
Aizer & Grogger (2003) and Busch & Duchovny (2003) use the CPS to examine parental Medicaid
expansions through the 1931 program. Aizer & Grogger (2003) find that these Medicaid expansions
led to increases in health coverage of women (with some crowdout of private insurance coverage).
They also find that expanding parental coverage leads to increases in the health insurance coverage
of children—possibly arising from an increase in benefits relative to costs associated with taking up
coverage. Busch & Duchovny (2003), in one of the only papers to use the BRFSS, find that these
parental Medicaid expansions led to increases in health care utilization, with no significant effects on
health status.11
Overall, while the evidence is somewhat mixed, it generally suggests that health insurance coverage
declines with reform. Below, we replicate this finding and then extend the literature to examine the
impacts on health utilization and health status.

4

Data

4.1

BRFSS

We analyze the impact of welfare reform on the health of adult women using data from the Behavioral
Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS). The BRFSS is a nationally-representative telephone survey
of the civilian, noninstitutionalized adult population conducted by the CDC in partnership with the
states, Washington, D.C., and some territories. The BRFSS provides detailed information on health
care utilization and health status as well as limited data on health insurance coverage. The BRFSS
also has the range of demographic variables usually provided on household and individual survey data,
including age, race and ethnicity, marital status, and education.
Few household or individual survey datasets cover health utilization and health status. For example, the CPS, which is often used in nonexperimental analyses, provides detailed economic and
demographic data, but beyond health insurance coverage, it has little health information that spans
the period of recent welfare reforms.12 The National Health Insurance Survey (NHIS) has much
more information on health, but the public-use data files do not include the state identifiers that are
11

More than a year after completing our first draft, we received a copy of Kaestner & Tarlov’s (2003) paper, which
uses the BRFSS to examine the impact of welfare reform on health. They find that welfare reform is associated with a
decrease in binge drinking, an increase in exercise, and insignificant effects on overall health status.
12
Self-reported health status questions were not added to the CPS until the middle of the period we examine.

8

necessary to create state welfare reform variables.
The BRFSS was first fielded in 1984 in 20 states but now covers all states and is designed to yield
uniform, state-representative data on risky behavior and preventive health practices by all persons 18
and older.13 The BRFSS is administered monthly, and people are equally likely to be surveyed in
each calendar month. For this reason, we do not drop states for which there are no observations in a
subset of months within a given year. States must follow CDC-approved methods for sampling, and
participating states are required to ask core questions every year. States are also permitted to select
questions from modules that are not asked every year, as well as to propose their own questions. The
BRFSS is a telephone survey, so households with no phones are excluded.14
The BRFSS differs from most other large household or individual surveys along several dimensions.
First, no proxy answers are permitted, and only one adult (aged 18 or older) is interviewed per
household. These factors may lead to a lower response rates than for other surveys. Further, the
BRFSS does not produce fully imputed data, i.e., there is no attempt to allocate responses for persons
who cannot or refuse to answer specific questions. This item non-response is fairly minor for most of
our outcomes of interest, so we simply ignore observations with missing items.
We base our analysis on the sample of women aged 20–45 from survey years 1990–2000.15 For
each outcome variable, we restrict the sample to the set of states that asked each question in every
year. Since some questions were asked only starting in 1991, 1992, or 1993, and since some states do
not include all questions in all years, this selection rule means the set of states in our sample differs
slightly across outcomes. While we would prefer a constant sample, ceteris paribus, the countervailing
advantage of this approach is that we have a balanced panel of states for each outcome. Our estimates
therefore may be interpreted as representing average treatment effects for the states in the sample
(assuming the usual conditions for this result hold; see Heckman & Robb (1985) for a discussion).16
We construct subsamples to reflect groups at higher risk of being impacted by welfare reform.
13
There is a “youth” risk behavioral survey, in which children in grades 9–12 are asked about risky behaviors. Unfortunately, this survey does not ask about health insurance or health care utilization. Furthermore, the nature of
the health-related questions in the youth survey changes from year to year, making it difficult to construct consistent
measures over time.
14
While 95 percent of households in the U.S. have phones, coverage is lower for persons living in the south, for some
racial groups, and for those in lower socioeconomic groups (U.S. Bureau of the Census (1994)).
15
We choose 1990 primarily because the number of participating states increased substantially in that year. As shown
in Table 1, our analysis period contains all years when state welfare reforms were taking place.
16
States that were excluded from all the analysis include D.C. (missing for all of 1995), Rhode Island (missing for all
of 1994), and Wyoming (missing for all of 1993). The last missing year for other states was 1990 for Alaska, 1992 for
Arkansas, 1991 for Kansas, 1991 for Nevada, and 1990 for New Jersey; thus these states are excluded from analysis of
variables that were collected in the years they were missing. Furthermore, states that did not ask a question for part of
the period it was asked in most other states were excluded from those samples. A list of states and years in the sample
for each outcome is available on request.

9

Given welfare-eligibility rules, the treatment group used in most studies is single women with children.
While the BRFSS provides marital-status data for all states in all years, its information on presence
of children is incomplete. First, the only information available for the full 1990–2000 period concerns
the presence of a child aged 5–13 in the household. Given the apparent large effects of welfare reform
on the employment of women with young children (Meyer & Rosenbaum (2000)), dropping women
who coreside with children younger than five is undesirable.17

The number of all children younger

than 18 is available, but only for years 1993–2000. This restricts the sample significantly, especially for
analyzing the waiver period. We take the more comprehensive approach of considering children aged
0–17. This approach does come with a cost, as we have to drop all years without comprehensive data
on children. A second BRFSS shortcoming is that the child variables concern the presence or number
of children in the entire household, rather than by parent, so they do not allow for the identification of
single women living with own children. Because of these issues, we present results both for the full set
of single women (all years for which data are otherwise available) and for the subset of single women
living with children (only 1993–2000, for which complete data on presence of children are available).
We further refine our sample of single women and present separate results for black, Hispanic, and
low-education women.18 Low-education women include those with a high school education or less. An
analysis of single women aged 20–45 using the March CPS in the pre-welfare reform period (1988–1992),
shows that about 24 percent of black single women, 18 percent of Hispanic single women, and 19 percent
of low-education single women had some AFDC income in the previous year. Unfortunately, the
California BRFSS data for 1995 do not include any information on children, and therefore California
is dropped from the sample of single women with children. Because of the importance of California
for the Hispanic sample, we do not present results for the Hispanic subsample of single women with
children.
We construct three sets of outcome variables concerning health insurance coverage, health utilization, and health status. Respondents are asked about their insurance and employment status at the
time of the interview. We use their answers to create three indicator variables: whether the respondent is insured now, whether the respondent is insured and working, and whether the respondent is
17

Tabulations of the pre-reform (1989–1992) period using the March CPS show that about one quarter of single women
with no child aged 5–13 do have a child under 18, and 14 percent of single women with no child aged 5–13 have a child
under 5. Among the group with a child under 18 but no child 5–13, about 20 percent have some AFDC income, compared
to 27 percent among single women with a child aged 5–13. Among the group with a child under 5 and no child 5–13, 30
percent have some AFDC income.
18
The black sample includes all non-Hispanic blacks (Hispanics may be of any race). The low-education sample includes
members of all racial and ethnic groups and therefore includes some of the women in the black and Hispanic samples.

10

insured and not working (thus the first variable is the sum of the other two). We choose these variables
because the BRFSS has no specific questions concerning source of insurance coverage (e.g., Medicaid
or employer-provided health insurance).19
The health care utilization outcomes we analyze include three separate variables indicating whether
a women has had a checkup, breast exam, or Pap smear in the last year. These are important measures
of preventive care for adult women. Further, because checkups and breast exams are conducted in
the clinician’s office and Pap smears require lab work, these measures might respond differentially
to changes in insurance status. Another health care utilization measure we examine is whether a
woman reports having needed care but not having been able to afford it. The health status outcomes
we analyze include whether self-reported health status is fair or poor, the number of days in the last
month the respondent reported that her mental or physical heath limited her from her usual activities,
and the number of days in the last month her mental health was not good. We select these outcomes
both because they were available in a large cross-section of states and because they are potentially
important indicators of health or stress.
We report means for our outcomes and demographic controls in Tables 2 and 3.20 We report means
for our five subgroups: black, Hispanic, and low-education single women, and black and low-education
single women with children. The descriptive data show that the health variables vary considerably
across our subgroups. Black women are more likely to be covered by health insurance, have higher
utilization rates, and are in better health than Hispanic and low-education women. Among single
women with children, 76 percent of blacks have health insurance, compared to 68 percent of loweducation women. A large share of single mothers said they needed to see a doctor in the previous
year and could not afford it (27 percent of the low-education group and 22 percent of blacks).21
19
The BRFSS health insurance survey question differs from the questions in the CPS. In the CPS, respondents are
asked about coverage through different sources and uninsurance is then calculated as a residual. In the BRFSS it is
directly measured. An additional advantage of the BRFSS over the CPS is that the design of the questions has not
changed over this period (Swartz (1997)). Lastly, there is some debate about whether CPS respondents respond as
though the reference period for the health insurance questions is the preceding year or the time of the survey (e.g., see
Swartz (1986) and Bennefield (1996)).
20
Recall that the number of non-missing observations varies across the outcome variables. The means in Tables 2
and 3 are for the superset of observations that are defined for any of the health outcomes of interest and also have data
for all the right-hand side control variables. The number of observations for each health outcome used is reported in the
tables of regression results.
21
One should use caution in using this table to make comparisons between the means for all single women and single
women living with children because the sample period varies across these subgroups, and because California data are
included in the former but not the latter.

11

4.2

Welfare reform variables and other state-level controls

We include two kinds of state-level control variables in our models. Our key variables of interest are
indicators of whether states have implemented welfare reform. We also include a series of state-level
variables in all of our regressions to control for economic opportunities in the state, state welfare
benefit generosity, and state generosity in the provision of public health insurance.
Our welfare reform variables can be classified into two categories: those related to state waivers
in the pre-PRWORA era and those related to post-PRWORA TANF programs. Our main focus is
on simple dummy variables indicating whether or not the given reform—waiver or TANF—is in place
(implemented) in a state. Following the convention in the literature, we code a waiver as being in
place only if it was “major”, in the sense of involving a significant deviation from the state’s AFDC
program, and if it was in effect statewide. Our primary data source for the dating of state reforms is a
set of tables available on the website of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation (ASPE)
for the Department of Health and Human Services.22 For TANF, we construct a dummy variable
indicating whether the state TANF plan has been implemented. In general, we code states as having
implemented a policy in a given month if the policy was implemented by the last day of the previous
month.
Some of our outcomes, namely insurance status and health status, refer to women’s conditions
contemporaneously. For these variables, our welfare reform variables refer to the policy in place at the
beginning of the previous month. By contrast, the health care utilization outcomes measure whether
women obtained (or did not obtain) care during the previous year. For these retrospective questions,
we construct the state welfare reform variables using the 12-month period before the month before
the interview month. If a reform (either waiver or TANF) is implemented at some time during the
12-month recall period, the reform variable is the fraction of the 12 month period that the reform is
in place; otherwise the variable is coded as 0.
To account for variation in economic opportunities, we control for a vector of state-level labor
market variables; these variables include current and one-year lags of unemployment and aggregate
employment growth rates. We also include the real maximum welfare benefit level for a family of
three to control for the state’s public assistance program generosity (holding constant welfare reform
activity). The time periods used to construct these state-level control variables match the reporting
22

Specifically, these tables classify a waiver as “major” only if it related to one of the following policies: termination
time limits, work exemptions, sanctions, increased earnings disregards, family caps, or work requirement time limits
(Crouse (1999)). More specific details regarding our construction of reform variables are available on request in a data
appendix.

12

period for each health outcome variable. For example, current health insurance status regressions
include this year’s benefit level, and this and last year’s unemployment rate. The health utilization
variables (which refer to last year) include last year’s welfare benefit, and one- and two-year lags of
the unemployment rate.
We construct four state-level variables to control for expansions in public health insurance coverage
during this period: (1) the percent of the federal poverty level at which a pregnant woman loses
eligibility for Medicaid coverage; (2) the percent of the federal poverty level at which a 14-year-old
child loses Medicaid eligibility; (3) percent of the federal poverty level at which a parent loses eligibility
under post-PRWORA 1931 expansions; and (4) the percent of the poverty level at which a child of 14
loses eligibility for SCHIP coverage through a separate or combination state plan (states with Medicaid
SCHIP plans are captured with our control for Medicaid eligibility for a child or 14).23 We control for
child health insurance expansions as they may impact women because they reduce the cost of family
(or parent-only) coverage.24
The means of the state-level and demographic variables are provided for our five samples in Table 3.

5

Empirical Model

A standard approach in the nonexperimental welfare reform literature is to use pooled cross-sections
and run regressions of outcome measures on demographic covariates, state-level controls, policy variables, and state and year fixed effects. We follow this basic approach.
We estimate linear regression models where yist indicates an outcome for individual i in state s in
year t and has the following form:25

yist = Xist δ + Lst α + Rst β + γs + νt + ist .
23

(1)

The first two variables control for the Medicaid expansions of the late 1980s through the early 1990s and are based
on National Governor’s Association Maternal and Child Health Updates and information generously provided by Aaron
Yelowitz. The 1931 expansion variable is based on data from Aizer & Grogger (2003), Busch & Duchovny (2003), the
National Governor’s Association, and the State Policy Documentation Project. The SCHIP variable is based on data
from the websites of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid and the National Governor’s Association. State Medicaid
1931 plans that did not expand eligibility above the former AFDC program-eligibility cutoffs are captured by our control
for state-level maximum AFDC/TANF benefits. Benefit levels are quite collinear with the AFDC income-eligibility
thresholds for 1996 and the statutory 1931 minimum eligibility threshold, states’ 1988 AFDC income-eligibility cutoffs.
24
For outcome variables that are measured at the time of the survey, we use the expansion variables measured as of the
policy last month. For the health-utilization variables, which refer to last year, we use the average of the policy variables
over the last year.
25
As described above, the outcome variables examined here are primarily indicator variables such as insurance status
and poor/fair health. Sensitivity checks show that the estimates are not sensitive to the linear probability model
assumptions.

13

Here, Xist is a vector of demographic characteristics, including controls for the person’s age and
its square, race and ethnicity, and dummy variables for her completed education level. Lst is a vector
of the state-level labor market variables described above that control for economic opportunities in
the state. Lst also includes the real maximum welfare benefit level for a family of three and the four
measures of the generosity of state’s public health insurance describe above. The γs terms represent
state fixed effects and the νt terms represent year and calendar month fixed effects. The state (time)
fixed effects control for unobserved factors that differ across states and not over time (over time and
not across states). Unobservable determinants are captured by ist . All regressions are weighted.
Our main focus is on the coefficients of Rst , the welfare reform implementation dummies for the
waiver and TANF programs. For waiver states, when TANF is implemented the waiver dummy is
turned back to 0. Therefore, the reform coefficients represent the treatment effect of reform relative
to the counterfactual, no-reform state of the world.
Some observers object that the simple dummy-variable approach taken here assumes that reform
effects occur instantaneously at the time of implementation. However, this objection is on target
only if one assumes that reform’s effects are constant (over time and across states). In our view, this
assumption would be unreasonable even if instantaneous effects could be presumed. Detailed aspects
of state reforms and economic conditions are difficult to observe. Moreover, there is no reason to think
that different demographic groups will respond to the same reforms in the same way. Given all this,
we strongly believe that the coefficients on Rst should be interpreted as averages of heterogeneous
treatment effects over the post-reform period.
Given this DD model specification, the impacts of welfare reform are identified using differences
across states in the timing and presence of reform. The top panel of Table 1 reports the first year for
which we coded observations in each state as subject to a waiver (the table uses March 1 as the cutoff
date for each year). The table also lists the states that never implemented major statewide waivers
according to ASPE. It is clear from the table, as well as previous literature, that there is substantial
variation in the implementation of state waivers across states and time. Unfortunately for empirical
researchers, variation in TANF implementation was much less extensive—all states implemented their
TANF programs within a 16-month period. The bottom panel of Table 1 shows that for all states,
the first March of TANF implementation occurred in either 1997 or 1998.
This limited variation is a potentially important complication, as discussed in Bitler, Gelbach &
Hoynes (2003b). Estimated TANF effects estimated with the above methodology can be regarded
as the average treatment effect over the 16-month period during which there is variation in TANF
14

implementation status. However, all states implemented by January 1998, so within the treatment
group there is no comparison group, and thus no identifying variation, after this month. This is
unimportant if TANF treatment effects are constant over time, in which case the identified estimate
for the 16-month period is appropriate for all years. But if one believes TANF impacts vary over time,
effect levels or bounds on effects for later years are identified only by making assumptions about secular
time effects after all states have implemented.26 To try to address this problem, we tried using more
detailed measures of reform, rather than simply using implementation dummies, as regressors. We
discuss this latter approach below, noting for now only that it turns out to be largely unilluminating.
In general, we feel that the TANF estimates are best regarded as suggestive, rather than conclusive.
One potential concern that arises in DD-type studies is that even in the absence of policy changes,
underlying trends in the outcome variables of interest could lead to spurious estimates of policy effects.
To try to address this concern, we follow the conventional strategy of introducing comparison groups
of women who should not have been affected by welfare reform. We consider two basic comparison
groups: married women, and single women without children. The advantage of this approach is that
it provides within-state variation in reform. Thus if the comparison groups are valid, then they net
out any within-state trends in health outcomes common to the treatment and comparison groups in
a state. We estimate DDD models in a general way, allowing all parameters in equation (1) to vary
across the treatment and comparison groups. The DDD estimate is the difference in the estimated βs
between the treatment and comparison groups.
Lastly, we note that we adjust our standard errors to allow arbitrary correlation within state-year
cells. Hence, our precision is not spuriously driven by the fact that we use microdata while the policy
variation occurs at the state-year or state-month level.

6

Results

In the next subsection, we report estimates for our first treatment group—all single women in a
given demographic group. We report results for the subset of single women living with children in
subsection 6.2. In subsection 6.3 we briefly discuss the coefficients on variables other than the reform
26

In Bitler et al. (2003b), we argued that with household income, bounds on treatment-effect heterogeneity are identified
because one can reasonably assume that time effects on household income are non-negative (since one would not expect
income in the absence of welfare reform to be falling over the January 1998–March 2000 period, given the very strong
economic performance of that time). Unfortunately, we do not have such strong priors on trends for the outcomes we
consider in this paper. An alternative approach, which we do not pursue here, would be to compare estimated coefficients
on year dummies across the treatment and comparison groups for years after all states have implemented TANF.

15

dummies.

6.1

Results for single women

Results for blacks, low-education women, and Hispanics are reported in Tables 4–6. Each table has
the same structure. Coefficients in rows 1 and 4 are the DD estimates of the waiver (row 1) and
TANF (row 4) dummies in the regressions for single women. Each of the nine columns then provides
estimates for a different outcome variable. Coefficients in rows 2 and 5 are similarly defined estimates
for a separate regression estimated using the comparison group—all married women of the given
demographic group. Rows 3 and 6 provide the DDD estimates. All reported estimates are coefficients
from linear probability models, and we provide the pre-reform means for the treatment and comparison
groups (rows 9 and 10) to help interpret the magnitude of the estimated treatment effects. The model
also includes controls for the age of the woman and its square, race/ethnicity (if applicable), educational
attainment (if applicable), state labor market conditions, state public assistance programs (other than
reform variables), state fixed effects, year fixed effects, and calendar-month fixed effects.
First consider the DD estimates for the sample of black single women (rows 1 and 4 of Table 4).
The results in the first three columns show that among black single women, welfare reform leads to
small negative but statistically insignificant reductions in overall health insurance coverage. The point
estimates imply a larger negative effect for TANF. The negative TANF effect comes from a reduction
in the propensity to be insured and not employed that is larger than the increase in the propensity to
be insured and employed.
The next four columns of the table examine the impacts of reform on health care utilization for
black single women. Three measures correspond to whether the woman has had preventive services in
the past 12 months, including: a checkup, a Pap smear, and a professional breast exam. A positive
coefficient for these measures represents an increase in health care utilization associated with reform.
The final utilization measure is a dummy equal to one if the woman reports she needed to see a doctor
in the past 12 months but that it was unaffordable. Here a positive coefficient suggests an adverse
impact of reform. Looking across the columns, the results consistently show that welfare reform is
associated with reductions in health care utilization. For example, the incidence of breast exams and
Pap smears falls by about 7–10 percent in the reform period relative to baseline. In addition, the
propensity to have needed a doctor’s care but to have found it unaffordable increases 7–16 percent
relative to baseline.
The last three columns report results for the health status variables: self-rated health (equal to
16

one if health is fair or poor), days limited from usual activities, and days in poor mental health. A
positive coefficient for any of these measures implies a adverse impact of reform. The medical-outcomes
literature provides very compelling evidence that self-rated health is an important predictor of health
outcomes (such as mortality). While the mechanism is not clear, it is clear that self-rated health is
an independent predictor of mortality even when controlling for background and other health status
variables (Idler & Benyamini (1997)). The results show no significant effects on health status. About
half the point estimates suggest a deterioration in health with reform while the other half suggest
improvements in health with reform.
Overall, the DD results for single black women show that reform is associated with an insignificant
decline in insurance coverage, significant declines in utilization, and insignificant and mixed impacts on
health status. This pattern of stronger findings for utilization compared to health status is consistent
with the health production model in Grossman (2001). In particular, health is a durable capital stock
that changes slowly with investment (time, nutrition, exercise, health services). Health services, on the
other hand, are goods purchased each period and therefore would be expected to change more quickly
in response to changes in prices, income, etc. These varying results across utilization and health
status have also been found in other recent studies on health and public programs (Royer (2003) and
Kaestner & Tarlov (2003)).
A well-known disadvantage of the dummy-variable approach to measuring welfare reform is that it
does not allow one to discern which aspects of welfare programs are driving the results. For example,
it is possible that increases in earnings disregards lead to increases in employment and income, which
in turn leads to some improvement in self-rated health. Simultaneously, other, more punitive aspects
of welfare reform may drive people off welfare and lead to losses in income and thus self-rated health.
We explored models with separate TANF estimates for states with weak, mixed, and strong work
incentives, as coded by Blank & Schmidt (2001) and used recently in Schoeni & Blank (2003).27 Those
results, not shown here, are largely insignificant and provide no consistent pattern to help identify
specific policy effects. It is possible that some other index of TANF severity/generosity would provide
estimates more in line with expectations. However, in comparing four sets of analysts’ approaches to
characterizing state sanction policies, Grogger et al. (2002) find considerable disagreement: the four
ratings agree for only 25 states; as an extreme example, Pennsylvania is characterized as lenient by
two, moderate by one, and strict by the fourth. Except when there is a very strong theoretical reason
27

Blank and Schmidt code strength of work incentives according to state-benefit generosity as well as state policies on
sanctions, time limits, and work requirements.

17

to believe that a particular policy will affect a given outcome in a known direction, we are pessimistic
that detailed characteristics of reforms can be profitably used in this fashion.
It is possible that the impacts of reform are, to some extent, capturing state trends in health
that are correlated with state waiver and TANF implementation. We estimate models (not shown)
using state-specific linear time trends; the results are quantitatively and qualitatively similar to those
discussed above. As noted, we also estimate DDD models in which the comparison group for single
women is married women. The results for married women as well as the DDD estimates are provided
in Table 4. The DDD results tell much the same story as that for black single women in isolation.
While there are some differences in statistical significance (in both directions), the general pattern of
the results is a decline in health insurance coverage and health utilization, with mixed and insignificant
effects for health status.
Table 5 presents the results for single Hispanic women. Overall, the results for Hispanics show
similar patterns to the results for blacks, with estimated effects being somewhat larger in magnitude.
Using the DD model, waivers are associated with a (statistically significant) 5 percentage-point reduction in insurance for single Hispanic women, and a (statistically insignificant) 2 percentage-point
reduction in the DDD estimates. TANF is associated with a 9 (14) percentage point decline in insurance in the DD (DDD) estimates. Contrary to expectations, however, reform is associated with a
reduction in being employed and insured. Waivers and TANF also lead to reductions in utilization
for Hispanics, although the waiver effects are less consistent and significant in the DDD models. The
larger effects on utilization for TANF are consistent with the larger insurance effects of TANF for this
group. More generally, the relative magnitudes of the utilization effects compared to the insurance
effects seem reasonable. The results in the final three columns show more consistent adverse impacts
on health status, but again the results are not significant.
Comparing the black and Hispanic results, the negative impacts of TANF are somewhat larger for
Hispanics (the waiver results are more similar). This is consistent with the descriptive evidence cited
above on the sharp declines in public insurance coverage among immigrants. It is possible that this
occurs because of changes in welfare and Medicaid policies for recent immigrants. We explore this in
two ways. We cannot use citizenship status (as in Borjas (2003)) because we do not observe citizenship
or immigrant status in the BRFSS. Instead, we re-estimated the models in Table 5 adding interactions
of the reform variables with the share of Hispanic women aged 20–45 in the state-year cell who are
noncitizens (tables not shown here). These shares were calculated from the 1990 Census and 1994-2000
CPS and may be regarded as rough estimates of the probability that a given Hispanic woman in the
18

BRFSS sample is a recent immigrant.28 While the interactions are rarely significant, their sign would
suggest that larger effects are present in states with a large share of noncitizen Hispanics. For example,
the DD model in Table 5 shows that TANF is associated with a 9.2 percentage point reduction in any
insurance coverage. In the interaction model, the estimated TANF reform effect for a hypothetical
state with a noncitizen share of zero is -0.058. Every increase of one percentage point in the noncitizen
share increases the magnitude of this negative effect by 0.00087. Thus a hypothetical state with a
noncitizen share of one would have an estimated effect of -0.145. We also experimented with adding
a control for the state immigrant Medicaid “fill-in” programs that were examined by Borjas (2003)
and Royer (2003).29 Adding this variable, however, did not significantly affect the main coefficients
of interest. The bottom line is that there is some limited evidence that the findings for Hispanics are
explained by the noncitizen share across states. However, because of the lack of data in the BRFSS
on citizenship or immigrant status, this finding is at most suggestive.
The final set of estimates for single women is presented in Table 6, where the sample is all single
women with a high school education or less. These results are qualitatively similar to the results
for black single women. The DD results show insignificant negative impacts on insurance, significant
negative impacts on utilization, and no significant effects for health status. The DDD results are very
similar, although there is some loss in precision in some cases.

6.2

Results for single women living with children

We next turn to our second treatment group—single women with children. For this treatment group,
we consider two comparison groups—married women with children and single women without children.
We remind readers of two cautions before presenting these results. First, the BRFSS measures the
presence of any children in the household rather than the presence of own children. Second, selecting
households with children requires limiting the sample to 1993–2000 and dropping California from the
analysis.30 We do not present results for single Hispanic women with children because of the large
28

The share of women who are not citizens is constructed from the March CPS for 1994–2000, from the 1990 Census
for 1990, and is a linear interpolation of the 1990 and 1994 values for intervening years. The March CPS does not provide
data on citizenship status before 1994.
29
Specifically, Tumlin, Zimmerman & Ost (1999) tabulate state safety-net policies for immigrants after enactment
of PRWORA. We create a dummy variable indicating whether each state has a state-funded Medicaid-like program
for immigrants who entered the U.S. after August 22, 1996 and were thus ineligible for federally-funded Medicaid for
five years or for the state providing state-funded care to some unqualified immigrants also made ineligible for Medicaid
post-PRWORA. These state fill-in plans should have been protective for unqualified immigrants and for entrants after
August 1996.
30
As noted above, the BRFSS does not provide the children-related data we need for California in 1995. Because 1995
is such an important year in a welfare reform study (it comes the year before PRWORA is enacted, at a time when

19

share of Hispanics living in California who are excluded from those regressions.
Results for black single women with children are presented in Tables 7 and 8. Table 7 presents
results with married women with children as a comparison group. These results are quite similar to
the results for single black women. The DDD results show that reform is associated with reductions in
insurance and utilization, and mixed and largely insignificant effects for health status. For example,
waivers are associated with an insignificant 1.9 percentage-point reduction in insurance coverage,
while TANF is associated with a significant 10.5 percentage point reduction in insurance coverage.
Again, however, this reduction in insurance is partially driven by a reduction in the likelihood of
being simultaneously employed and insured. Unfortunately, we do not have a satisfactory explanation
for this result, which runs contrary to what we would expect. Checkups, Pap smears, and breast
exams all decrease with reform, while needing to see a doctor but finding it unaffordable increases
(insignificantly).
Table 8 presents results with black single women living without children as the comparison group.
The results for insurance and health status are very similar to the results using married women with
children as the comparison group. However, because of declines in preventive health care utilization
for the comparison group, the DDD estimates for utilization are somewhat different.
The final results examine impacts on low-education single women with children. We use married
women with children as the comparison group in Table 9 and single women without children for
Table 10. Comparing these tables to the findings for blacks, or for all low-education single women,
leads to several observations. First, most coefficients are statistically insignificant, though a few are
significant. This is true in both the DD and the DDD models. Second, there is no consistent pattern
in the results. Some point estimates imply decreases in insurance and utilization, others imply the
opposite patterns.

6.3

Other state-level controls

We briefly summarize the coefficients on the other controls for insurance coverage, health care utilization, and health status. Appendix Table 1 contains the coefficients on all of the other controls except
for the (state, year, and calendar-month) fixed effects for the insurance coverage regressions estimated
among single black women. For comparison’s sake, this table repeats the point estimates for the main
reform variables. For black single women, expanding Medicaid eligibility beyond AFDC-eligibility
numerous states have recently enacted waivers), we feel it is better to drop California and maintain a balanced panel
than to include the state without this pivotal year.

20

levels via 1931 plans is associated with an increase in coverage. The coefficient has the same sign for
low-education single women (not shown) but is insignificant and opposite-signed for Hispanic single
women (not shown).
Higher Medicaid poverty thresholds are associated with an increased probability of being insured
and employed for black single women; effects are more mixed for the other groups and are generally
insignificant. The other economic and reform variables have no consistent association with insurance
status with the following exceptions: among Hispanics, unemployment rates are strongly negatively
associated with the probability of being insured and working; among both Hispanics and low-education
women, unemployment rates are positively associated with the probability of being insured and not
working.
The demographic patterns are generally consistent with what one would expect. Older women are
more likely, and lower-education women less likely, to have coverage. Among low-education women,
blacks are more likely than women of other groups to be insured, and Hispanics less likely. Whites are
more likely to be working and insured and less likely to be not working and insured.
Findings for health care utilization and health status (not shown) are quite mixed, with one
exception: the number of days in the last month with poor mental health is positively associated
with the unemployment rate for black and Hispanic single women, and negatively associated with the
employment growth rate for low-education women.

7

Conclusion

This paper presents estimates of the impact of welfare reform on health insurance coverage, health
care utilization, and health status during a time of fundamental change in welfare programs, falling
AFDC/TANF caseloads, and declines in Medicaid participation. Despite policymakers’ evident interest in the insurance status and health of low-income families, to date we know little about how health
has been affected by recent state and federal welfare reforms.
We use BRFSS data covering the 1990–2000 period to examine these questions for single women
and single women with children ages 20–45. We estimate models separately for black, Hispanic, and
low-education (high school education or less) subgroups. We examine the impact of state waivers and
TANF implementation on health insurance, preventive health care utilization (e.g., checkups, breast
exams, and Pap smears), self-rated health status, days limited from usual activities, and number of
days with poor mental health.

21

We present two empirical models for identifying the impacts of reform. We present DD estimates
in which the effects of reform are identified through variation in the timing and incidence of reform
across states. To account for possible unobserved state trends in health that might be correlated with
reform, we introduce comparison groups (married women, single women without children) and also
estimate DDD models.
The results are generally consistent across the different treatment groups and models. We find
that welfare reform is associated with a reduction in insurance coverage (though these results do not
conform to expectations when we look at simultaneous coverage and employment). Reform is also
associated with a reduction in health care utilization, and an increase in the likelihood of needing
care but finding it unaffordable. We find no statistically significant effects of reform on health status.
Overall, effects are somewhat larger in magnitude for TANF compared to state waivers, and somewhat
larger in magnitude for Hispanics compared to blacks and low-education women.

References
Aizer, A. & Grogger, J. (2003), Parental Medicaid expansions and health insurance coverage, Working
Paper 9907, NBER.
Bennefield, R. L. (1996), A comparative analysis of health insurance coverage estimates: Data from
the CPS and SIPP. Typescript, U.S. Bureau of the Census.
Bitler, M., Gelbach, J. B. & Hoynes, H. (2003a), What mean impacts miss: Distributional effects of
welfare reform experiments, Working Paper 10121, NBER.
Bitler, M. P., Gelbach, J. B. & Hoynes, H. W. (2003b), ‘Some evidence on race, welfare reform and
household income’, American Economic Review 93(2), 293–8. (Papers and Proceedings).
Blank, R. M. (2002), Evaluating welfare reform in the United States, Working Paper 8983, NBER.
Blank, R. M. & Schmidt, L. (2001), Work, wages, and welfare, in R. M. Blank & R. Haskins, eds,
‘The New World of Welfare’, Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C., pp. 70–96.
Borjas, G. J. (2003), ‘Welfare reform, labor supply, and health insurance in the immigrant population’,
Journal of Health Economics 22(6), 933–58.
Busch, S. H. & Duchovny, N. (2003), Family coverage expansions: Impact on insurance coverage and
health care utilization of parents. Typescript.
Carpenter, C. (2003), The impact of employment protection for obese people. Typescript.
Crouse, G. (1999), State implementation of major changes to welfare policies, 1992–1998. Available
at http://aspe.hhs.gov/hsp/Waiver-Policies99/policy CEA.htm.

22

Currie, J. & Grogger, J. (2002), ‘Medicaid expansions and welfare contractions: Offsetting effects on
maternal behavior and infant health’, Journal of Health Economics 21, 313–335.
Currie, J. & Yelowitz, A. (2000), Health insurance and less skilled workers, in D. Card & R. Blank,
eds, ‘Finding Jobs: Work and Welfare Reform’, Russell Sage Foundation, New York.
Danziger, S., Corcoran, M., Danziger, S. & Heflin, C. (2000), ‘Work, income, and material hardship
after welfare reform’, Journal of Consumer Affairs 34, 6–30.
Dee, T. (2001), ‘Alcohol abuse and economic conditions: Evidence from repeated cross-sections of
individual-level data’, Health Economics 10, 257–270.
Dee, T. & Evans, W. N. (2001), Teens and traffic safety, in J. Gruber, ed., ‘Risky Behavior Among
Youths: An Economic Analysis’, The University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
DeLeire, T., Levine, J. A. & Levy, H. (2003), Welfare reform and the uninsured. Typescript, University
of Chicago.
Dion, M. R. & Pavetti, L. (2000), Access to and participation in Medicaid and the Food Stamp
program. Final report to Administration for Children and Families, Department of Health and
Human Services, Mathematica Policy Research.
Ellwood, M. & Lewis, K. (1999), On and off Medicaid: Enrollment patterns for California and Florida
in 1995, Working Paper O.P. No. 27, Urban Institute.
Evans, W. N., Ringel, J. & Stech, D. (1999), Tobacco taxes and public policy to discourage smoking,
in J. M. Poterba, ed., ‘Tax Policy and the Economy, Volume 13’, MIT Press, Cambridge: MA.
Families USA Foundation (1999), Losing health insurance: The unintended consequences of welfare
reform. Washington, DC.
Fraker, T., Ross, C., Stapulonis, R., Olsen, R., Kovac, M., Dion, M. R. & Rangarajan, A. (2002),
The evaluation of welfare reform in Iowa. Final report 8217-125 and 530, Mathematica Policy
Research.
Garrett, B. & Holahan, J. (2000), Welfare leavers, Medicaid coverage, and private health insurance,
Working Paper B-13, Urban Institute.
Greenberg, M. (1998), Participation in welfare and Medicaid enrollment. Typescript, Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured.
Grogger, J., Haider, S. & Klerman, J. (2003), ‘Why did the welfare rolls fall during the 1990s? The
importance of entry’, American Economic Review . (Papers and Proceedings).
Grogger, J., Karoly, L. A. & Klerman, J. A. (2002), Consequences of welfare reform: A research
synthesis, Working Paper DRU-2676-DHHS, RAND.
Grossman, M. (2001), The human capital model of the demand for health, in J. P. Newhouse & A. J.
Culyer, eds, ‘Handbook of Health Economics’, Elsevier Science, North-Holland.
Gruber, J. (1997), Health insurance for poor women and children over the past decade, in J. M.
Poterba, ed., ‘Tax Policy and the Economy, Volume 11’, MIT Press, Cambridge: MA.

23

Gruber, J. & Zinman, J. (2001), Youth smoking in the U.S.: Evidence and implications, in J. Gruber,
ed., ‘Risky Behavior Among Youths: An Economic Analysis’, The University of Chicago Press,
Chicago.
Haskins, R. (2001), Effects of welfare reform at four years, in G. Duncan & P. Chase-Lansdale, eds,
‘For Better and For Worse: Welfare Reform and the Well-Being of Children and Families’, Russell
Sage Foundation, New York.
Heckman, J. J. & Robb, R. (1985), Alternative methods for evaluating the impact of interventions,
in J. J. Heckman & B. Singer, eds, ‘Longitudinal Analysis of Labor Market Data’, Cambridge
University Press, New York, pp. 156–245.
Idler, E. & Benyamini, Y. (1997), ‘Self-rated health and mortality: A review of twenty-seven community studies’, Journal of Health and Social Behavior 38, 21–37.
Kaestner, R. & Kaushal, N. (2003), ‘Welfare reform and health insurance coverage of low income
families’, Journal of Health Economics 22(6), 959–981.
Kaestner, R. & Lee, W. C. (2003), The effect of welfare reform on prenatal care and birth weight,
Working Paper 9769, NBER.
Kaestner, R. & Tarlov, E. (2003), Changes in the welfare caseload and the health of low-educated
mothers behaviors?, Working Paper 10034, NBER.
Ku, L. & Bruen, B. (1999), The continuing decline of Medicaid coverage, Working Paper A-37, Urban
Institute.
Ku, L. & Garrett, B. (2000), How welfare reform and economic factors affected Medicaid participation:
1984–1996, Working Paper 00-01, Urban Institute.
Loprest, P. (1999), Families who left welfare: Who are they and how are they doing?, Working Paper
99-02, Urban Institute.
Lyons, B. (1999), Health coverage and access to care: Key issues for low-income children and their
families. Typescript, Packard Foundation.
Meyer, B. D. & Rosenbaum, D. (2000), ‘Making single mothers work: Recent tax and welfare policy
and its effects’, National Tax Journal 546(4.2), 1027–1062.
Moffitt, R. (2002), Welfare programs and labor supply, Working Paper 9168, NBER.
Morris, P., Huston, A., Duncan, G., Crosby, D. & Bos, J. (2001), How welfare and work policies affect
children: A synthesis of the literature. Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation.
Nathan, R. & Thompson, F. (1999), The relationship between welfare reform and Medicaid: A preliminary view. Typescript.
Royer, H. (2003), Do rates of health insurance coverage and health care utilization respond to changes
in Medicaid eligibility requirements? Evidence from pregnant immigrant mothers. Typescript.
Ruhm, C. (2000), ‘Are recessions good for your health?’, Quarterly Journal of Economics 115(2), 617–
650.

24

Ruhm, C. & Black, W. (2002), ‘Does drinking really decrease in bad times?’, Journal of Health
Economics 21(4), 659–678.
Schoeni, R. & Blank, R. (2003), ‘Changes in the distribution of child well-being over the 1990s’,
American Economic Review 93(2), 304–8. (Papers and Proceedings).
Swartz, K. (1986), ‘Interpreting the estimates from four national surveys of the number of people
without health insurance’, Journal of Economic and Social Measurement 14(3), 233–43.
Swartz, K. (1997), ‘Changes in the 1995 CPS and estimates of health insurance coverage’, Inquiry
34, 70–79.
Tumlin, K. C., Zimmerman, W. & Ost, J. (1999), State snapshots of public benefits for immigrants:
A supplemental report to “Patchwork policies”, Working Paper O.P. 24, Supplemental Report,
Urban Institute.
Tweedie, J. (2001), Sanctions and exits: What states know about families that leave welfare because
of sanctions and time limits, in G. Duncan & P. Chase-Lansdale, eds, ‘For Better and For Worse:
Welfare Reform and the Well-Being of Children and Families’, Russell Sage Foundation, New
York.
U.S. Bureau of the Census (1994), Phoneless in America. Statistical Brief 94–16.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, A. (2002), U.S. Welfare Caseloads Information.
Available at http://www.acf.dhhs.gov/news/stats/newstat2.shtml.

25

24

Welfare Reform

Other Household Changes:
Time availability
Income
Family Structure

Changes in Health Insurance
Caseload ↓→ Medicaid ↓
Employment ↑→ Priv. Coverage ↑
Overall ??

Figure 1
Expected Effects of Reform on Health

Health/Behavioral
Outcomes

Health Utilization

Table 1: State implementation of AFDC waivers and TANF programs, by March 1

First
Year
for which
Major
Waiver
Implemented
by March 1

1993
California
Michigan
New Jersey
Oregon
Utah

1994
Georgia
Illinois
Iowa

First
Year
for which
TANF
Implemented
by March 1

Note: See text for data sources and explanation.

Ever had a waiver:
1995
1996
Arkansas
Arizona
South Dakota
Connecticut
Vermont
Delaware
Indiana
Massachusetts
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin

1997
Hawaii

1997
Alabama
Florida
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Nevada
New Hampshire
Oklahoma
South Carolina
Wyoming
Arizona
Connecticut
Georgia
Indiana
Iowa
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
North Carolina
Ohio
Oregon
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia

Never had
Waiver
Alabama
Florida
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Nevada
New Hampshire
Oklahoma
South Carolina
Wyoming
Alaska
Colorado
DC
Idaho
Minnesota
New Mexico
New York
North Dakota
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
1998
Alaska
Colorado
DC
Idaho
Minnesota
New Mexico
New York
North Dakota
Pennsylvania
Rhode
Island
Arkansas
California
Delaware
Hawaii
Illinois
Mississippi
New Jersey
Wisconsin

Table 2: BRFSS sample summary statistics for outcome variables, all single women 20–45

Black

Single women
Hispanic
Low ed.

Single women with children
Black
Low ed.

Have any health insurance (private or public)

0.763
(0.425)

0.633
(0.482)

0.673
(0.469)

0.764
(0.425)

0.682
(0.466)

Have HI and employed now

0.544
(0.498)

0.413
(0.492)

0.458
(0.498)

0.527
(0.499)

0.446
(0.497)

Have HI and are not employed now

0.218
(0.413)

0.220
(0.414)

0.213
(0.409)

0.235
(0.424)

0.233
(0.423)

Last checkup was in the last 12 months

0.843
(0.363)

0.699
(0.459)

0.718
(0.450)

0.847
(0.360)

0.737
(0.440)

Needed to see a doctor, could not afford to in the last year 0.207
(0.406)

0.261
(0.439)

0.265
(0.441)

0.218
(0.413)

0.272
(0.445)

Last Pap. smear was in the last year

0.798
(0.402)

0.654
(0.476)

0.691
(0.462)

0.801
(0.400)

0.711
(0.453)

Last professional breast exam was in the last year

0.722
(0.448)

0.566
(0.496)

0.631
(0.482)

0.711
(0.453)

0.638
(0.481)

General health is fair or poor

0.143
(0.350)

0.195
(0.396)

0.172
(0.378)

0.148
(0.355)

0.167
(0.373)

Days in last month poor health kept R from usual activities 1.983
(5.605)

1.922
(5.505)

2.299
(6.139)

2.037
(5.770)

2.284
(6.206)

Days in last month poor mental health

4.575
(8.470)

4.800
(8.321)

5.532
(9.192)

4.740
(8.697)

5.757
(9.477)

Maximum available sample size

26,527

12,680

60,872

13,049

29,004

Note: Tabulations from the BRFSS, 1990–2000 (columns 1–3) or 1993–2000 (columns 4 and 5) with standard errors in parentheses. Weighting is based on finalwt variable. Black subgroups all defined as non-Hispanic. Sample is all single women 20–45
in the subgroup defined in the column label for whom the variables are reported. Child indicator is available only for 1993-2000
and was not reported for California. Child indicator denotes a child under 18 is present in the household. Low-education
denotes high school dropout or high school graduate with no college. Sample size is smaller than maximum possible because
not all states collect data on every question in every year. Actual sample sizes correspond to Ns reported in regression results
for each health outcome. See text for more information.

Table 3: BRFSS sample summary statistics for control variables, all single women 20–45

Black

Single women
Hispanic
Low ed.

Single women with children
Black
Low ed.

Waiver implemented

0.138
(0.345)

0.224
(0.417)

0.154
(0.361)

0.164
(0.370)

0.145
(0.352)

TANF implemented

0.355
(0.478)

0.380
(0.486)

0.344
(0.475)

0.547
(0.498)

0.558
(0.497)

Share of last yr., waiver impl.

0.141
(0.320)

0.228
(0.390)

0.151
(0.330)

0.169
(0.339)

0.147
(0.316)

Share of last year, TANF

0.311
(0.445)

0.334
(0.453)

0.302
(0.442)

0.482
(0.475)

0.494
(0.476)

State has fill-in Med. like program for inel. immigrants

0.185
(0.389)

0.225
(0.417)

0.189
(0.391)

0.270
(0.444)

0.271
(0.444)

Income limit (% of FPL), 1931 or 1115 family Med. elig.

7.4
(33.8)

9.6
(35.8)

10.4
(39.1)

10.5
(41.0)

15.5
(48.4)

Income limit (% of FPL), pregnant women’s Medicaid elig. 173.9
(37.4)

189.4
(41.4)

176.4
(39.0)

176.6
(36.0)

176.1
(35.6)

Income limit (% of FPL), child of 14’s Medicaid elig.

51.6
(74.9)

49.9
(60.1)

51.2
(72.9)

75.9
(81.8)

78.8
(81.6)

Income limit (% of FPL), child of 14’s SCHIP elig.

32.8
(76.2)

50.2
(92.5)

34.8
(79.2)

47.4
(87.3)

49.8
(89.7)

Share of non-citizen women 20–45, rac./ethn. group

0.043
(0.063)

0.409
(0.145)

0.107
(0.174)

0.043
(0.066)

0.085
(0.142)

Real max. AFDC/TANF benefits, family of three

4.485
(1.884)

5.780
(2.261)

5.083
(2.050)

4.026
(1.599)

4.316
(1.649)

State unemployment rate

5.561
(1.413)

6.050
(1.591)

5.674
(1.550)

4.857
(1.007)

4.797
(1.046)

State employment growth rate

1.865
(1.443)

2.029
(1.644)

1.886
(1.564)

2.353
(0.949)

2.456
(1.082)

Age

31.2
(7.5)

29.9
(7.5)

31.0
(7.6)

31.3
(7.2)

31.1
(7.2)

High school dropout, no GED

0.121
(0.326)

0.276
(0.447)

0.263
(0.440)

0.140
(0.347)

0.285
(0.451)

High school diploma or GED only

0.373
(0.484)

0.299
(0.458)

0.737
(0.440)

0.420
(0.494)

0.715
(0.451)

Some college/technical school, no 4 year degree

0.334
(0.472)

0.283
(0.451)

0.000
(0.000)

0.332
(0.471)

0.000
(0.000)

Maximum available sample size

26,527

12,680

60,872

13,049

29,004

Note: Tabulations from the BRFSS, 1990–2000 (columns 1–3) or 1993–2000 (columns 4 and 5) with standard errors in parentheses. Weighting is based on finalwt variable. Black subgroups all defined as non-Hispanic. Sample is all single women 20–45
in the subgroup defined in the column label for whom the variables are reported. Child indicator is available only for 1993-2000
and was not reported for California. Child indicator denotes a child under 18 is present in the household. Low-education
denotes high school dropout or high school graduate with no college. See text for more information.

-0.048
(0.040)

Difference

0.075
(0.060)

-0.039
(0.047)

0.036
(0.037)

-0.037
(0.035)

0.014
(0.029)

-0.023
(0.020)

23,687
10,333

24,381
10,737

-0.052
(0.051)

-0.019
(0.037)

24,087
10,474

0.028
(0.049)

-0.013
(0.037)

0.015
(0.032)

0.031
(0.029)

0.002
(0.022)

0.033∗
(0.019)

21,372
9,309

-0.039
(0.034)

0.041
(0.026)

0.003
(0.021)

0.011
(0.022)

-0.006
(0.017)

0.004
(0.013)

21,284
9,282

-0.283
(0.542)

0.613
(0.458)

0.330
(0.291)

0.103
(0.354)

-0.214
(0.284)

-0.111
(0.212)

21,185
9,233

-0.354
(0.884)

-0.054
(0.677)

-0.407
(0.569)

0.675
(0.532)

-0.341
(0.372)

0.334
(0.380)

0.849
0.809
0.737
0.211
0.143
1.823
4.251
0.857
0.839
0.799
0.167
0.108
1.556
3.126
1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. All figures are OLS coefficients and associated

24,956
10,937

-0.115∗∗
(0.055)

-0.119∗∗
(0.053)

-0.091∗
(0.048)

0.026
(0.038)

0.097∗∗
(0.043)

0.063
(0.040)

-0.077∗∗
(0.035)

-0.067∗∗
(0.032)

-0.071∗∗
(0.036)

0.023
(0.029)

-0.054∗∗∗
(0.021)

0.011
(0.027)

-0.056∗∗∗
(0.017)

-0.064∗∗
(0.029)

-0.035
(0.030)

0.028
(0.025)

-0.006
(0.018)

-0.018
(0.034)

-0.056
(0.035)

0.032
(0.030)

-0.008
(0.024)

0.024
(0.019)

Num. obs.
Single
24,091 22,966
22,966
Married
10,475 10,005
10,005
Pre-reform Mean
Single
0.753
0.522
0.229
Married
0.850
0.658
0.192
Note: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ indicate statistical significance at the
standard errors. See text for list of included covariates.

0.031
(0.033)

Married

-0.017
(0.021)

-0.012
(0.026)

Difference

TANF
Single

0.009
(0.020)

-0.003
(0.016)

Married

Waivers
Single

Table 4: Comparing single women to married women in the black (non-Hispanic) sample
Insurance status
Utilization
Health status
Insured and:
Pap
Breast
Needed care,
Health
Days
Days
Any
Employed Not Employed
Checkup Smear
Exam
Unaffordable
Fair/poor Limited Depressed

-0.020
(0.032)

Difference

0.080∗∗∗
(0.024)
-0.105∗
(0.061)

0.046∗∗
(0.022)

-0.139∗∗∗
(0.041)

Married

Difference

-0.032
(0.043)

-0.035
(0.026)

-0.067∗
(0.034)

-0.025
(0.030)

-0.015
(0.020)

-0.040∗
(0.023)

-0.138∗∗
(0.058)

0.064∗
(0.035)

-0.074
(0.046)

11,409
13,012

-0.135∗∗
(0.065)

0.065
(0.042)

-0.069
(0.050)

-0.040
(0.044)

-0.041
(0.027)

-0.081∗∗
(0.035)

11,719
13,257

0.003
(0.068)

0.047
(0.043)

0.050
(0.052)

0.040
(0.041)

0.038∗
(0.019)

0.078∗∗
(0.036)

10,722
12,059

0.024
(0.040)

-0.042
(0.029)

-0.018
(0.028)

-0.037
(0.033)

-0.010
(0.017)

-0.047
(0.029)

10,667
12,011

0.202
(0.641)

-0.170
(0.422)

0.032
(0.482)

-0.515
(0.621)

0.511
(0.348)

-0.004
(0.514)

10,593
11,941

-0.013
(0.796)

-0.501
(0.535)

-0.514
(0.589)

-0.894
(0.583)

0.188
(0.363)

-0.706
(0.456)

Health status
Health
Days
Days
Fair/poor Limited Depressed

0.668
0.596
0.255
0.160
1.669
5.355
0.729
0.665
0.253
0.167
1.448
3.257
10% levels, respectively. All figures are OLS coefficients and associated

11,563
13,105

-0.082∗
(0.048)

-0.020
(0.026)

-0.102∗∗
(0.041)

0.003
(0.035)

-0.046∗∗
(0.019)

-0.057∗∗
(0.025)
0.007
(0.038)

-0.044
(0.029)

-0.049∗
(0.029)

Num. obs.
Single
11,726
11,648
11,648
11,697
Married
13,258
13,170
13,170
13,328
Pre-reform Mean
Single
0.661
0.408
0.253
0.749
Married
0.691
0.449
0.240
0.759
Note: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and
standard errors. See text for list of included covariates.

-0.025
(0.056)

0.003
(0.031)

-0.014
(0.017)

-0.011
(0.026)

-0.092∗∗∗
(0.035)

TANF
Single

-0.030
(0.020)

-0.050∗∗
(0.025)

Any

Married

Waivers
Single

Table 5: Comparing single women to married women in the Hispanic sample
Insurance status
Utilization
Insured and:
Pap
Breast
Needed care,
Employed Not Employed
Checkup Smear
Exam
Unaffordable

-0.036
(0.025)

Difference

-0.009
(0.021)

-0.018
(0.015)

0.025∗
(0.015)
-0.027
(0.023)

-0.026∗
(0.014)

0.013
(0.014)

-0.010
(0.008)

0.003
(0.011)

-0.002
(0.017)

-0.004
(0.017)

-0.001
(0.010)

-0.004
(0.013)

Num. obs.
Single
54,787 52,979
52,979
Married
73,050 70,653
70,653
Pre-reform Mean
Single
0.692
0.493
0.197
Married
0.818
0.555
0.262
Note: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ indicate statistical significance at the
standard errors. See text for list of included covariates.

0.007
(0.014)

Married

-0.030
(0.021)

0.008
(0.014)

Difference

TANF
Single

-0.010
(0.009)

-0.002
(0.012)

Married

Waivers
Single

54,045
73,120

-0.059
(0.039)

-0.010
(0.022)

54,743
73,009

0.019
(0.037)

0.018
(0.024)

0.037
(0.029)

-0.007
(0.020)

-0.048∗∗
(0.023)

-0.069∗∗
(0.031)

0.022∗∗
(0.011)

0.014
(0.017)

-0.008
(0.013)

-0.056∗∗∗
(0.019)

48,570
63,569

-0.000
(0.019)

-0.012
(0.015)

-0.012
(0.012)

0.004
(0.012)

-0.008
(0.007)

-0.004
(0.009)

48,283
63,374

-0.575
(0.352)

0.173
(0.251)

-0.402
(0.247)

-0.069
(0.251)

0.047
(0.116)

-0.022
(0.223)

47,890
62,891

-0.293
(0.561)

-0.440
(0.301)

-0.734
(0.473)

0.128
(0.405)

-0.156
(0.210)

-0.028
(0.346)

0.725
0.703
0.648
0.255
0.144
2.094
5.393
0.722
0.711
0.696
0.186
0.095
1.464
3.738
1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. All figures are OLS coefficients and associated

53,902
72,106

-0.027
(0.035)

-0.075∗∗
(0.034)

56,165
76,049

-0.025
(0.023)

-0.052∗
(0.027)

0.020
(0.023)

-0.055∗∗
(0.025)

-0.000
(0.021)

-0.024∗
(0.013)

-0.025∗∗
(0.012)
-0.019
(0.018)

-0.025
(0.017)

-0.044∗∗∗
(0.013)

Table 6: Comparing single women to married women in the low-education sample (all races/ethnicities)
Insurance status
Utilization
Health status
Insured and:
Pap
Breast
Needed care,
Health
Days
Days
Any
Employed Not Employed
Checkup Smear Exam
Unaffordable
Fair/poor Limited Depressed

-0.019
(0.030)

Difference

-0.088∗
(0.051)

-0.105∗∗
(0.042)

Difference

-0.014
(0.044)

-0.000
(0.032)
-0.111∗
(0.064)

0.058
(0.057)

-0.053∗
(0.030)

-0.020
(0.032)

0.024
(0.027)

-0.062
(0.062)

0.010
(0.044)

-0.051
(0.044)

-0.034
(0.037)

-0.009
(0.029)

-0.105∗
(0.060)

0.028
(0.046)

-0.077∗∗
(0.039)

-0.090∗∗
(0.042)

0.065∗
(0.033)

0.075
(0.056)

-0.013
(0.043)

0.062∗
(0.036)

0.038
(0.036)

0.012
(0.026)

Num. obs.
Single
13,850
13,232
13,232
13,446
13,679 13,089
13,852
Married
6,897
6,596
6,596
6,668
6,832
6,541
6,896
Pre-reform Mean
Single
0.765
0.492
0.270
0.838
0.800
0.728
0.221
Married
0.844
0.647
0.196
0.831
0.829
0.790
0.169
Note: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. All figures
standard errors. See text for list of included covariates.

0.054
(0.038)

0.058∗
(0.031)

Married

-0.014
(0.030)

0.068∗
(0.037)

-0.090∗∗
(0.035)

-0.034
(0.034)

-0.022
(0.025)

0.045∗
(0.025)

-0.047
(0.029)

TANF
Single

0.019
(0.023)

Married

14,396
7,215

0.352
(0.582)

0.123
(0.459)

0.476
(0.359)

0.705∗
(0.384)

-0.735∗∗∗
(0.283)

14,332
7,182

-1.014
(0.982)

0.770
(0.710)

-0.245
(0.677)

0.504
(0.579)

-0.085
(0.406)

0.148
1.881
4.515
0.112
1.553
3.107
are OLS coefficients and associated

14,457
7,237

-0.021
(0.035)

0.011
(0.024)

-0.011
(0.024)

0.021
(0.024)

-0.025
(0.016)

Table 7: Comparing single women living with children to married women living with children in the black (non-Hispanic) sample
Insurance status
Utilization
Health status
Insured and:
Pap
Breast
Needed care,
Health
Days
Days
Any
Employed Not Employed
Checkup Smear Exam
Unaffordable
Fair/poor Limited
Depressed
Waivers
Single
0.000
-0.045∗
0.046
0.004
-0.043∗ -0.025
0.050∗
-0.004
-0.030
0.419
(0.018) (0.024)
(0.028)
(0.019)
(0.023) (0.025) (0.026)
(0.018)
(0.259)
(0.413)

-0.125∗
(0.070)

-0.116∗
(0.060)

Difference

0.007
(0.043)

-0.022
(0.031)
-0.000
(0.071)

-0.051
(0.056)

-0.078∗
(0.047)
0.026
(0.056)

-0.051
(0.044)

-0.031
(0.040)

-0.012
(0.032)

-0.053∗
(0.030)

0.017
(0.034)

-0.013
(0.029)

-0.008
(0.086)

-0.070
(0.077)

-0.077∗∗
(0.039)

0.038
(0.044)

-0.063∗
(0.037)

0.031
(0.085)

0.031
(0.077)

0.062∗
(0.036)

0.082∗∗
(0.041)

-0.032
(0.032)

Num. obs.
Single
13,850 13,232
13,232
13,446
13,679 13,089
13,852
No children
6,131
5,835
5,835
5,937
6,037
5,786
6,136
Pre-reform Mean
Single
0.765
0.492
0.270
0.838
0.800
0.728
0.221
No children
0.749
0.586
0.160
0.824
0.775
0.733
0.181
Note: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. All figures
standard errors. See text for list of included covariates.

0.092
(0.061)

0.069
(0.053)

-0.014
(0.030)

0.036
(0.037)

-0.087∗∗
(0.042)

-0.034
(0.034)

0.010
(0.024)

0.043
(0.034)

No children

-0.047
(0.029)

-0.038
(0.035)

Difference

TANF
Single

0.039
(0.030)

No children

14,396
6,366

0.419
(0.748)

0.057
(0.657)

0.476
(0.359)

0.064
(0.433)

-0.094
(0.347)

14,332
6,330

0.264
(1.146)

-0.508
(0.924)

-0.245
(0.677)

1.024
(0.700)

-0.605
(0.565)

0.148
1.881
4.515
0.131
1.672
3.712
are OLS coefficients and associated

14,457
6,393

-0.054
(0.036)

0.043
(0.027)

-0.011
(0.024)

-0.031
(0.028)

0.027
(0.021)

Table 8: Comparing single women living with children to single women living without children in the black (non-Hispanic) sample
Insurance status
Utilization
Health status
Insured and:
Pap
Breast
Needed care,
Health
Days
Days
Any
Employed Not Employed
Checkup Smear Exam
Unaffordable
Fair/poor Limited Depressed
Waivers
Single
0.000
-0.045∗
0.046
0.004
-0.043∗ -0.025
0.050∗
-0.004
-0.030
0.419
(0.018) (0.024)
(0.028)
(0.019)
(0.023) (0.025)
(0.026)
(0.018)
(0.259) (0.413)

0.025
(0.019)

Difference

0.042∗∗
(0.020)

0.039∗∗∗
(0.015)

-0.020
(0.027)

Married

Difference

0.029
(0.028)

-0.003
(0.019)

0.025
(0.021)

0.023
(0.020)

-0.007
(0.010)

0.017
(0.017)

0.035
(0.040)

-0.005
(0.025)

0.030
(0.032)

-0.017
(0.022)

0.004
(0.014)

-0.013
(0.018)

Checkup

Num. obs.
Single
30,552
29,585
29,585
29,229
Married
46,604
45,217
45,217
44,492
Pre-reform Mean
Single
0.703
0.476
0.225
0.739
Married
0.822
0.547
0.273
0.712
∗∗∗
∗∗
∗
Note:
, , and indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and
standard errors. See text for list of included covariates.

-0.047
(0.029)

-0.006
(0.021)

-0.002
(0.021)

-0.004
(0.012)

-0.006
(0.017)

0.020
(0.022)

TANF
Single

-0.011
(0.010)

0.014
(0.016)

Any

Married

Waivers
Single

Insurance status
Insured and:
Employed Not Employed

30,529
46,579

-0.003
(0.045)

0.006
(0.031)

0.003
(0.033)

32,089
49,323

0.002
(0.025)

-0.004
(0.018)

-0.002
(0.017)

0.011
(0.014)

-0.012
(0.008)

0.033∗∗
(0.015)
-0.037
(0.025)

-0.001
(0.012)

31,891
49,174

0.170
(0.498)

0.082
(0.251)

0.252
(0.430)

0.348
(0.338)

-0.087
(0.119)

0.261
(0.316)

31,629
48,790

0.152
(0.660)

-0.229
(0.377)

-0.077
(0.542)

0.410
(0.493)

-0.338
(0.241)

0.073
(0.430)

Health status
Health
Days
Days
Fair/poor Limited Depressed

-0.005
(0.020)

Needed care,
Unaffordable

0.719
0.653
0.261
0.149
2.074
5.481
0.701
0.683
0.184
0.091
1.336
3.751
10% levels, respectively. All figures are OLS coefficients and associated

27,971
42,474

-0.037
(0.052)

0.086∗
(0.046)

30,255
46,277

-0.006
(0.029)

-0.042
(0.043)

-0.039
(0.028)

0.003
(0.016)

-0.036
(0.024)

-0.066∗∗∗
(0.025)

0.020
(0.038)

0.029
(0.026)

-0.020
(0.014)

0.009
(0.022)

Utilization
Pap
Breast
Smear
Exam

Table 9: Comparing single women living with children to married women living with children in the low-education sample (all
races/ethnicities)

0.063
(0.040)

Difference

0.002
(0.043)

-0.008
(0.038)

-0.006
(0.021)

-0.005
(0.030)

-0.001
(0.025)

-0.006
(0.017)

30,255
13,644

27,971
12,629

0.029
(0.078)

-0.072
(0.065)

30,529
13,856

-0.013
(0.060)

0.016
(0.050)

0.003
(0.033)

-0.025
(0.033)

0.020
(0.027)

-0.005
(0.020)

Needed care,
Unaffordable

32,089
14,639

0.034
(0.028)

-0.036
(0.022)

-0.002
(0.017)

0.002
(0.019)

-0.003
(0.015)

-0.001
(0.012)

Health
Fair/poor

31,891
14,556

1.608∗∗∗
(0.551)

-1.356∗∗∗
(0.345)

0.252
(0.430)

0.868∗∗
(0.430)

-0.607∗∗
(0.291)

0.261
(0.316)

31,629
14,429

0.270
(0.814)

-0.346
(0.607)

-0.077
(0.542)

0.627
(0.628)

-0.555
(0.457)

0.073
(0.430)

Health status
Days
Days
Limited
Depressed

0.739
0.719
0.653
0.261
0.149
2.074
5.481
0.711
0.674
0.644
0.238
0.132
2.016
4.918
1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. All figures are OLS coefficients and associated

29,229
13,240

0.109∗∗
(0.055)

0.057∗
(0.031)

0.140∗∗
(0.066)

-0.120∗∗
(0.054)

-0.079∗
(0.044)

0.029
(0.040)

0.089∗∗
(0.036)

-0.031
(0.022)

-0.065∗∗
(0.032)

-0.080∗∗∗
(0.029)

-0.042
(0.043)

-0.036
(0.024)

0.009
(0.022)

Utilization
Breast
Exam

0.020
(0.038)

0.019
(0.035)

-0.032
(0.030)

-0.013
(0.018)

Checkup

Pap
Smear

0.030
(0.032)

0.025
(0.021)

0.020
(0.023)

-0.003
(0.016)

0.017
(0.017)

Num. obs.
Single
30,552 29,585
29,585
No children
13,852 13,388
13,388
Pre-reform Mean
Single
0.703
0.476
0.225
No children
0.696
0.569
0.125
∗∗∗
∗∗
∗
Note:
, , and indicate statistical significance at the
standard errors. See text for list of included covariates.

-0.043
(0.034)

No children

0.020
(0.022)

0.025
(0.027)

Difference

TANF
Single

-0.011
(0.022)

0.014
(0.016)

Any

No children

Waivers
Single

Insurance status
Insured and:
Employed Not Employed

Table 10: Comparing single women living with children to single women living without children in the low-education sample (all
races/ethnicities)

Appendix Table 1: Black (non-Hispanic) single-women sample: Health insurance results
Any
Insurance
-0.003
(0.016)

Employed
-0.023
(0.020)

TANF

-0.017
(0.021)

0.036
(0.037)

-0.056
(0.035)

Income limit (multiples of FPL), 1931/1115 family Med. elig.

0.015∗
(0.009)

0.017
(0.018)

-0.001
(0.015)

Income limit (multiples of FPL), pregnant women’s Medicaid elig.

0.019
(0.014)

0.076∗∗
(0.035)

-0.026
(0.029)

Income limit (multiples of FPL), child of 14’s Medicaid elig.

0.013
(0.008)

0.027∗
(0.016)

-0.007
(0.018)

Income limit (multiples of FPL), child of 14’s SCHIP elig.

-0.004
(0.008)

0.001
(0.009)

-0.005
(0.009)

Real max. AFDC/TANF benefits, family of three

-0.002
(0.017)

-0.006
(0.022)

0.008
(0.019)

State unemployment rate

-0.008
(0.009)

-0.008
(0.010)

-0.002
(0.009)

Lagged state unemployment rate

0.001
(0.009)

-0.013
(0.010)

0.015∗
(0.009)

State employment growth rate

-0.005
(0.006)

-0.006
(0.008)

0.002
(0.007)

Lagged state employment growth rate

-0.001
(0.005)

-0.012
(0.007)

0.009
(0.006)

Age

0.016∗∗∗
(0.005)

0.055∗∗∗
(0.006)

-0.038∗∗∗
(0.006)

Age squared

-0.000∗∗
(0.000)

-0.001∗∗∗
(0.000)

0.000∗∗∗
(0.000)

High school dropout, no GED

-0.189∗∗∗
(0.015)

-0.500∗∗∗
(0.015)

0.311∗∗∗
(0.017)

High school diploma or GED only

-0.156∗∗∗
(0.011)

-0.287∗∗∗
(0.014)

0.131∗∗∗
(0.012)

Some college/technical school, no 4-year degree

-0.083∗∗∗
(0.010)

-0.172∗∗∗
(0.013)

0.089∗∗∗
(0.010)

Pre-reform mean of dependent variable

0.767

0.568

0.198

N

24,091

22,966

22,966

Any major waiver

Insured and:
Not Employed
0.024
(0.019)

Note: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. Coefficients are those for
control variables in Table 4, specifications in columns 1–3. All specifications are weighted using BRFSS finalwt variable, with
robust variance estimates to account for state-by-year clustering. Sample includes only single, black, non-Hispanic women aged
20–45. Economic and welfare reform variables refer to the year of the survey. Additional control variables are dummy variables
for year, state, and calendar month.

