NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PROFIT NEUTRALITY IN LICENSING:
THE BOUNDARY BETWEEN ANTITRUST LAW
AND PATENT LAW
Stephen M. Maurer
Suzanne Scotchmer
Working Paper 10546
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10546
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2004

This paper profited from comments received from participants at the Antitrust, Patent and Copyright
Conference held at Ecole des Mines de Paris (CERNA), jointly sponsored by Boalt School of Law, on
January 15-16, 2004, from participants at Harvard Law School, March 23, 2004, and from participants at the
annual meeting of the American Law and Economics Association, May 2004. We especially thank Louis
Kaplow, Marty Adelman, Susan DeSanti, Carl Shapiro, and Mark Lemley for helpful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2004 by Stephen M. Maurer and Suzanne Scotchmer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Profit Neutrality in Licensing: The Boundary between Antitrust Law and Patent Law
Stephen M. Maurer and Suzanne Scotchmer
NBER Working Paper No. 10546
June 2004
JEL No. K21, L12, L24, L41
ABSTRACT
For over a century, courts and commentators have struggled to find principles that reconcile patent
and antitrust law, especially as to patent licensing. We interpret case law and commentary to arrive
at three unifying principles for acceptable terms of license. "Profit neutrality" holds that patent
rewards should not depend on the rightholder's ability to work the patent himself. "Derived reward"
holds that the patent holder's profits should be earned, if at all, from the social value created by the
invention. "Minimalism" holds that licensing contracts should not contain more restrictions than are
necessary to achieve neutrality. We argue that these principles largely rationalize important
decisions of the twentieth century. They also justify the Supreme Court's controversial General
Electric decision, which holds that patentholders can set prices charged by their licensees.
Stephen M. Maurer
2607 Hearst Avenue
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720-7320
maurer@econ.berkeley.edu
Suzanne Scotchmer
2607 Hearst Avenue
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720-7320
and NBER
scotch@socrates.berkeley.edu

1. Introduction
Patent law and antitrust concerns were born side by side.

On the one hand, The

Statute of Monopolies (1623) announced a general ban on monopolies \for the sole
Buying, Selling, Making, Working, or Using of any Thing within this Realm . . ." On
the other, it created new monopolies as an incentive for inventions. The decision to
treat the same legal concept { monopoly { as a crime in one case and a reward in the
other presents unique problems for judges. \[B]ecause the patentee's authority is an
island of permission in a sea of prohibition, there is no area at the edge of permission
toward which the law is indi®erent: what is not authorized is forbidden."

(Baxter

1966). Expanded antitrust enforcement during the twentieth century has made this
problem increasingly acute.
Over the past century, courts and commentators have explored many di®erent
proposals for de¯ning the boundary between intellectual property and antitrust law.
The simplest approach, \inherency," resolves the issue by allowing one body of law to
dominate the other in any con°ict (Adelman and Juenger 1975). Early in the twentieth century, patent law dominated so that restrictive licenses were generally upheld.
During the 1960s, some commentators urged a di®erent version of inherency that
would have made antitrust dominant (Kaplow 1984). Although generally disfavored,
inherency arguments are still being made (Gi®ord 2002; Patterson 2000).
The alternative to inherency is balancing. However, if antitrust and patent law
have di®erent objectives, it is not obvious how to strike a balance. For this reason, most
commentators have advocated balancing according to a single, agreed-upon objective
such as \wealth maximization" or \consumer welfare" (Bork 1965, 1978; Bowman
1973).

But even with a single, common objective, there is no obvious calculation

that courts should use to balance ex ante incentives against ex post deadweight loss.
Almost all cases and commentators argue that courts should infer the correct balance
from Congress's intent as codi¯ed in the patent laws.
There are many di®erent ways to divine intent. Twentieth century judges and

1

scholars have o®ered a bewildering variety of schemes for balancing. In general, there
are two schools.

The earliest, which dates from the 1920s, seeks to develop clear

per se rules that can be applied more or less mechanically.

Courts following this

tradition have approved restrictions on licensees' prices (General Electric 1926), on
licensees' customers (General Talking Pictures 1938; Schlicher 2002) and on licensees's
geographic markets (Hovenkamp, Janis & Lemley 2004).

Over time, the Supreme

Court seems to have lost con¯dence in the per se agenda. In fact, the Court came
within one vote of overruling General Electric in 1948 and again in 1965.

Lower

courts have also adopted exceptions,1 to the point where many commentators argue
that General Electric is a \vestige" that prudent practitioners should not rely on
(Weinschel 2000). Nevertheless, it remains the law of the land.
The second school, dominant since the 1940s, argues for a more °exible \ruleof-reason" standard.2 Courts currently use rule of reason for a wide variety of license
restrictions (Weinschel 2000 at 2:90). However, this program has yet to develop any
widely-recognized principles or rules for deciding cases. At its worst, \rule of reason"
can be little more than a label disguising \amorphous" and \freewheeling" standards.
(Juenger & Adelman 1975) Since the 1980s, however, scholars have thought hard
about the inquiries that any principled rule of reason approach must resolve.
Despite occasional claims of an emerging paradigm (Gi®ord 2002), most commentators agree that current law is unsatisfactory (Kaplow 1984). In the words of one
1

For example, General Electric may not apply to the unpatented product of a patented machine
(Weinschel 2000; Hovenkamp, et. al., 2004), to patentholders with multiple licensees (Weinschel 2000;
Hovenkamp, et. al., 2004), to patentholders who do not manufacture the patented item (Schlicher
2002; Hovenkamp, et. al., 2004; Royal Industries 1969), to licenses that are said to \predominantly
bene¯t" licensees rather than the patentholder (Weinschel 2000; Ethyl 1940), to licenses where the
patent does not \completely cover" the product (Schlicher 2002; Hovenkamp, et. al., 2004), to
patentholders who acquire their rights by purchase rather than internal R&D (Hovenkamp, et. al.,
2004), or to intellectual property rights other than patents (Hovenkamp, et. al., 2004; Interstate
Circuit 1939).
2
Although we ¯nd it convenient to speak of per se and rule of reason approaches as opposites,
the truth is considerably more complicated. The Supreme Court has warned that "there is often
no bright line separating per se from Rule of Reason analysis." (California Dental Assn. 1984).
Instead, judges who apply rule of reason must still be guided by our general knowledge of economic
theory. (Areeda & Hovenkamp, 2003). Conversely, judges must be prepared to change per se rules,
however reluctantly, as knowledge and experience accumulate. (Id.)

2

leading commentator, \[f]rom the decisions, it is clear that the courts lack a clear and
general theory for resolving that inquiry. Thus, individual problems are resolved in a
piecemeal fashion, and it is di±cult to harmonize decisions in one area (such as price
restrictions) with another (such as ¯eld of use restrictions)." (Chisum 2003) This
doctrinal confusion has practical consequences.

Blue ribbon panels have complained

since the 1950s that legal uncertainty deters patentees from licensing their inventions.
(See Hensley 1967.)
In this paper we take a fresh look at the per se agenda, focusing mainly on
the problem posed by General Electric { patent licenses featuring price restrictions.
We start by stating three principles suggested { or at least consistent with { the
case law and commentary that have developed over the past half-century.

We see

these principles as a normative foundation for addressing the patent/antitrust con°ict,
whether to justify per se rules, or to guide a rule-of-reason analysis. Needless to say,
the motivating problem of price ¯xing does not exhaust the list of situations where
antitrust and patent laws collide,3 and our three principles may not be useful in every
instance.

However, we show that they also apply to some provocative cases that

involve improvement patents.
Section 2 explains the three princples, and how they relate to case law and
commentary. In section 3, we analyse the licensing of a product patent, as in General
Electric.

In section 4 we consider product enhancements or additives as in Ethyl

Gasoline and Line Material. In section 5 we list three possible per se rules and analyse
their strengths and weaknesses. In section 6 we compare rule of reason's strengths
and weaknesses with a revived per se approach. Section 7 is a short conclusion.
3

Prominent examples include tying, ¯eld of use and geographic restrictions, package licensing,
post-expiration royalties, grant-back provisions, the ¯rst sale doctrine, restrictions on users' right
to repair patented machines, settlement agreements, and agreements that extend rights beyond the
scope of the antitrust laws.

3

2. The Three Principles
By the 1920s, the Supreme Court had abandoned the inherency view that a patent
holder could impose whatever license restrictions he desired. When the Court concluded that at least one license restriction (tying) violated the antitrust laws, they
opened the door to questioning others. Which restrictions should be legal and which
not? The General Electric opinion announced a new standard: In order to be lawful,
license restrictions would have to be \reasonably adapted to secure pecuniary reward
for the patentee's monopoly." (General Electric 1926) As Kaplow (1984) remarks,
most courts and commentators seem to believe that this phrase entitles the patentee
to a \speci¯c level of aggregate reward." In our view, however, a better and more
plausible interpretation is that courts should ask whether the patentee's methods are
reasonable while remaining agnostic about whether the amount of the reward is reasonable. Commentators have also stressed that an ability to exploit patents through
licensing is needed to reward small independent inventors and businesses, discourage
ine±cient integration, and put production in the hands of the most e±cient manufacturer (Landes & Posner 2003; Bowman 1973).4
We argue that most twentieth-century jurisprudence about licensing can be
summarized in three principles:

pro¯t neutrality, derived-reward, and minimalism.

Together, these principles strike us as a sensible guide for a revitalization of per se
rule-making, but could alternatively be construed as a constraint on the inquiries that
underlie a rule-of-reason analysis.
Pro¯t neutrality is our label for the principle, implicit in General Electric, that
a patent reward should be the same as if the patent holder had the ability to work the
4

To the best of our knowledge, Professor Baxter (1966) is the only commentator who has stated
pro¯t neutrality in substantially the same form adopted here: \[I]t could be said, the economic
value of the invention is best measured by the extent of restriction and pro¯ts that would attend
direct patentee exploitation; and to prevent the patentee from capturing a part of these incremental
pro¯ts by splitting them with licensees on whom he has conferred sheltered positions is to deprive the
patentee of part of that value." After stating it, Baxter rejected this argument because he believed
that companies that held strong patents would always prefer vertical integration to licensing. Hence,
any licenses that did exist were likely to be shams. Baxter's view followed from his conclusion that
licensors could not recover 100% of its licensees' pro¯t. We disagree.

4

patent e±ciently himself. The patent holder's ability to work the patent may depend
on such accidents of history as whether he owns manufacturing facilities, is liquid, or
has access to ¯nancing. Licensing may be the only way to overcome such limitations.
The pro¯t-neutrality principle allows us to measure licenses against the benchmark of
what the rightholder could hypothetically earn through complete vertical integratation
if he controlled the e±cient means of production.
Of course, to evaluate whether a given license term is required for pro¯tneutrality, the court needs to assess the market consequences with and without the
disputed term of license. This is a fallible process. The economic reasoning in General Electric was clearly inadequate. The Court paraphrased the rightholder's goals
as, \Yes, you may make and sell articles under my patent, but not so as to destroy the
pro¯t that I wish to obtain by making them and selling them myself." As Bowman
(1973) has remarked, \surely it is net receipts that should interest General Electric
rather than the sheer accounting joy of attributing pro¯ts to its own manufacturing
operations." Whether or not pro¯t neutrality was in the Court's mind, the justices
certainly lacked the economics modeling tools to implement it.
Derived reward is our label for the principle that the patent holder must earn
her reward, if at all, from the social value of the invention. The Supreme Court has
held that a license cannot be used to create a monopoly on any product other than
the invention itself (Schlicher 2002) and that the patent monopoly should exclude \all
that is not embraced in the invention" (Morton Salt 1942). In fact, any other stance
would be unconstitutional. Neither Congress nor the courts can give a patentee \more
than the rewards of his discovery" (Hensley 1967; see also Line Material 1948 (Douglas
concurring)).
Since the 1960s, commentators have struggled to give a precise economic meaning to these judicial insights. Suggestions include that revenue should be tied to the
utility the patented product provides to users (Baxter 1966), that rewards should
\measure[] the patented product's competitive superiority over substitutes" (Bowman
1973), \never compensat[ing] the patentee beyond the value of his invention to soci-

5

ety" (Adelman & Juenger 1975), and that steps should be taken to \ensure that the
return on intellectual property is related to its value" (Patterson 2000). Among other
things, such interpretations condemn sham licenses. In a sham license, the intellectual property right is an excuse to create a cartel that would be pro¯table even if the
invention had no value.
An important nuance is whether the court should be concerned with the size of
the reward or the source of the reward. Under our derived-reward principle, the court
should consider the source, not the size. If concerned with the size, the court might
allow terms of license that cartelize a pre-existing market, on a theory that such
cartelization is necessary to reimburse the innovator's costs.

Such leniency could

subvert the incentive purpose of the patent grant. If the patentee cannot be rewarded
out of the value created, then the innovation was probably not socially desirable in the
¯rst place. We admit, of course, that even under our derived-reward principle, socially
e±cient innovations may be underrewarded.

If that is too common an occurrence,

then Congress should revise the design of the patent right.
In the 1940s, the Supreme Court became increasingly willing to ¯nd that ¯rms
overstepped the bounds of the patent right, especially in condemning tying, which
seemed to allow patent holders to \leverage" the patent monopoly into new markets.
Although the Court may have been using faulty economics,5 commentators did not
seriously challenge the prohibition on tying until the late 1950s.
Minimalism is our label for the principle that licenses should be limited to as
few restrictions as are necessary to achieve pro¯t neutrality.

Even commentators

who approve of licensing admit that it \substantially increase[s]" the danger that the
parties will organize illegal cartels (Bowman 1973). The General Electric rule, which
o®ers immunity for price ¯xing, would be a particularly handy way for conspirators
to implement collusion disguised as legitimate licensing (Ethyl 1940).
Courts and commentators have implicitly invoked minimalism to strike down
license restrictions that seem super°uous. For example, Shapiro (1979) argued that
5

For a recent discussion of the tying fallacy, see Posner and Landes (2003).

6

the rightholder's power to restrict the sale of patented products should expire the
¯rst time a product is sold because \(t)he patentee can obtain the full reward of the
patent in the ¯rst sale; a right to restrict the goods in more remote channels of trade
is not a traditional part of the patent grant nor is it needed in order for the patentee
to fully enjoy the monopoly of the patent." (emphasis supplied) Stronger versions
of this argument have asserted that most license restrictions are invalid because \[a]
rational patent owner can extract the full monopoly reward of the invention by setting
appropriate royalties." Given this premise, additional restrictions in a license can only
lead to implicit cartelization or bribe competitors not to invent around or challenge
weak patents in court (Neal Report 1969).
Although we think that courts have been fairly clear on these three principles,
we also think that they have sometimes been confused on the economic analysis that
would allow the principles to be implemented.

This discrepancy may account for

much of the confusion and ambiguity in the case law and commentary.

3. Licensing New Products
We start by considering the original General Electric case, which concerned product
patents. Pro¯t neutrality implies that licensing should yield the same reward that a
patentee would earn if all production was performed e±ciently in-house. There are
many reasons why the patent holder may not be situated to serve the whole market,
such as that he cannot raise the money to build production or distribution facilities.
Pro¯t neutrality holds that the rightholder's reward should not depend on ownership
of the plants that produce and distribute his patented product.
We ¯rst analyze a benchmark case, that the rightholder supplies the entire
market directly.

We then show that if all production is licensed to two licensees

who can jointly supply the market e±ciently, the patent holder can achieve the same
pro¯t using only ¯xed fees and per-unit royalties.

Courts routinely approve ¯xed

fees and royalties. We then turn to the intermediate case in which the patent holder
supplies the market in competition with a licensee. This is the case that the Supreme
7

Court faced in General Electric, and also in Line Material, in a slightly di®erent
circumstance. We show below that ¯xed fees and per-unit royalties cannot achieve
e±cient production or pro¯t neutrality when the licensor and licensee compete, and
when marginal cost is increasing. Perhaps surprisingly, it is the licensor's output that
must additionally be constrained in that case, not the licensee's.
In what follows, we assume that the marginal cost of manufacturing is increasing, and that e±cient production requires several plants instead of one. Accounting
for plant setup costs, we assume without loss of generality that the e±cient number
of production facilities is two. Our focus is not on how many facilities will be used
in production, but mainly on how production is distributed between them. Suppose
that the inverse demand curve (the willingness to pay for the marginal unit at quantity q) is de¯ned by p(q) = 1 ¡ q; where q is the total supply of all ¯rms.6

When

two plants supply the market with quantities q1 ; q2 ; the market price will therefore be
p(q1 + q2 ) = 1 ¡ (q1 + q2): In this case the available pro¯t as a function of total output
is
p(q)q ¡ 2

Z

q=2

°(^
q )d^
q

(3.1)

0

where °(¢) is the marginal cost curve in each facility. We ignore the ¯xed costs here,
assuming that they justify the use of two and only two facilities.
3.1. The Benchmark
First suppose that the rightholder owns both facilities, decides how much to supply,
earns all the revenue, and bears all the costs. The pro¯t-maximizing total supply q¤ ,
which maximizes (3.1), satis¯es the condition that marginal revenue equals marginal
6

The easiest interpretation is that each agent buys a ¯xed amount of the good in each period,
which we shall understand as one unit. The potential buyers are indexed by their willingness to pay
µ 2 (0; 1). If agent µ buys the good at price p; his utility is µ ¡ p. If µ is uniformly distributed on
the interval (0; 1); the number of agents for whom µ ¡ p > 0 is 1 ¡ p: If q units of the good are
supplied, the market-clearing price is 1 ¡ q; since that is the price that provides nonnegative utility
to the q buyers with µ > 1 ¡ q, but negative utility to the others.

8

cost:
1 ¡ 2q¤ = °(

q¤
)
2

(3.2)

The pro¯t-maximizing price satis¯es
1
q¤
p(q¤ ) = 1 ¡ q¤ = (1 + °( ))
2
2

(3.3)

and the resulting pro¯t is p(q ¤)q ¤ ¡ 2°(q¤ =2) ¡ 2C; where C is the ¯xed cost of each
production facility. This is the benchmark pro¯t for pro¯t neutrality.
3.2. Licensing Out All Production
Suppose instead that the patent holder relies on two licensees to supply the market.
Pro¯t is determined by the licensees' production decisions and shared with the licensor
through royalties and ¯xed fees, (½; F ): We show that these instruments are su±cient
to achieve pro¯t neutrality.
We consider Cournot competition in which each licensee chooses its supply
optimally assuming that the other ¯rm's supply as given. Our objective is to characterize the equilibrium such that neither ¯rm has an incentive to change its supply.
The equilibrium supplies will depend on the royalty rate ½. We will show that the
following royalty rate supports the pro¯t-maximizing price, with each ¯rm supplying
q ¤ =2:
1
½ = q¤
2

(3.4)

Conditional on the royalty ½, we will write pro¯t of ¯rm 1 as
(p(q1 + q2 ) ¡ ½) q1 ¡

Z

q1

°(^
q )d^
q

(3.5)

0

Firm 1 takes the supply of the other ¯rm, q2 ; as ¯xed, and optimizes by choice of its
own supply, q1 : The optimum satis¯es
q1 =

1
(1 ¡ q2 ¡ ½ ¡ °(q1 ))
2

(3.6)
9

Similarly, ¯rm 2's pro¯t as a function of q2 ; taking q1 as ¯xed, is
(p(q1 + q2 ) ¡ ½) q2 ¡

Z

q2

°(^
q )d^
q

(3.7)

0

and the optimal q2 satis¯es
q2 =

1
(1 ¡ q1 ¡ ½ ¡ °(q2 ))
2

(3.8)

Since the conditions (3:6) and (3.8) are satis¯ed at (q1 ; q2 ) = (q ¤ =2; q ¤=2) when ½ is
de¯ned by (3.4), the pro¯t-maximizing supplies (q ¤=2; q¤ =2) are an equilibrium.
This assumes that the ¯xed fees are such that each licensee makes nonnegative
pro¯t. If (p¤ ¡ ½)(q ¤=2) ¡

R q ¤ =2
0

°(^
q )d^
q > 0 the ¯xed fees can be positive, but otherwise

must be negative. The ¯xed fees together with royalties can thus sustain the pro¯tmaximizing price and transfer all the pro¯t to the patent holder. (If negative fees are
not allowed, an equilibrium with two licensees cannot be sustained.)
Thus, although patent holders have the right to impose quantity restrictions
on their licensees (Schlicher 2002; Hovenkamp, et. al., 2004), pro¯t neutrality does
not generally require such restrictions in cases where the entire supply is contracted
out.
3.3. The Problem: Competition between Patentee and Licensee
We now show that if the patent holder operates one production facility and a licensee
operates another, per-unit ¯xed royalties and ¯xed fees cannot achieve pro¯t neutrality.
Additional license restrictions are required. A positive per-unit royalty is required in
order to keep the price up. But that makes the licensee's \e®ective" marginal cost
higher than that of the patent holder. Facing higher costs, the licensee will produce
less.

Hence the true marginal cost of the last unit produced by the licensee is less

than the marginal cost of the last unit produced by the licensor. Costs could be saved
by decreasing the licensor's production and increasing the licensee's production. In
this sense, the equilibrium does not achieve productive e±ciency.
10

To see this more formally, let ¯rm 1 and ¯rm 2 be respectively the licensor
and licensee. Suppose that the licensee pays (constant) royalty ½. The pro¯t of the
licensor, ¯rm 1, is
p(q1 + q2 )q1 + ½q2 ¡

Z

q1

°(^
q)d^
q

0

If the licensor takes the licensee's output q2 as given, and optimizes with respect to
q1 ; his optimal supply satis¯es
q1 =

1
(1 ¡ q2 ¡ °(q1 ))
2

(3.9)

The pro¯t of the licensee, ¯rm 2, is
(p(q1 + q2 ) ¡ ½) q2 ¡

Z

q2

°(^
q )d^
q

0

If ¯rm 2 takes the licensor's output q1 as given, and optimizes with respect to q2 ; the
licensee's optimal supply satis¯es
q2 =

1
(1 ¡ q1 ¡ °(q2 ) ¡ ½)
2

(3.10)

It follows from (3.9) and (3.10) that, in equilibrium,
q1 + °(q1 ) = q2 + ½ + °(q2 )

(3.11)

Since the two ¯rms will not produce the same quantities, the aggregate supply is not
produced e±ciently at any positive royalty rate. Conditional on (3.11), there may be
a royalty rate that supports the price p(q ¤); but the licensor will still not receive the
maximum pro¯t, due to productive ine±ciency.
Another way to see that the licensor and licensee will supply di®erent quantities
is to notice that after the royalty agreement is in place, the licensor will want to exploit
the licensee. If the licensee supplies half the monopoly output, q ¤=2; as intended, the
royalties and ¯xed fees that the licensor collects from the licensee are ¯xed.
11

An

increase in supply by the licensor will not change them. An increase in supply by the
licensor will impose a loss on the licensee through the fall in price, but this is not his
concern once the agreement is in place. If the licensor increases supply, the licensor
gets all the additional revenue from the increased supply, but bears only half the cost
of the fall in price.
The prospect of such ex post opportunism undermines the licensor's ex ante
pro¯t. The licensee will rationally predict that, after the license is signed, the licensor
will supply more units than the pro¯t-maximizing number of units q ¤=2; and the
market price will be lower than the pro¯t-maximizing price.

The licensee realizes

that the licensor's ex post supply decision will erode his own pro¯t. The terms that
the licensee will accept at the outset will re°ect this prediction. As a consequence,
the licensor cannot charge the ¯xed fees that he could charge if he could commit to
producing only half the monopoly output, q¤ =2. This is a subtle point that courts
and commentators seem to have overlooked. For example, Bowman (1973) remarks
that it \strains credulity" to think that General Electric would adopt a scheme \to
restrain its own trade in patented lamps . . ." In fact, this is exactly what General
Electric must do to ensure pro¯t neutrality.
Given that per-unit royalties and ¯xed fees do not achieve pro¯t neutrality,
additional license restrictions become necessary. We consider the following candidates:
1. Restricting the licensee's output.
2. Fixing the licensee's price.
3. Imposing a price-matching clause, as in General Electric.
4. Restricting the licensor's own output.
5. Allowing the royalty rate to decrease with the licensee's supply.
6. Allowing the royalty rate to decrease with the licensor's supply.

12

We argue that only instruments 1, 3 and 6 provide as much pro¯t as the
benchmark case.
Output Restrictions. The easiest way to ¯x the problem is to allow the licensor
to cap his own output at q¤ =2, as part of the license. Such a commitment improves
the terms of license that the licensee will agree to, since the licensee is then guaranteed
that the market price will be the monopoly price. Since the resulting license would
be pro¯t neutral with respect to the benchmark, we see nothing wrong with such a
commitment. Courts have held that restricting the licensee's output does not pose
an antitrust problem (Weinschel 2000; Hovenkamp, et. al., 2004), but we are unaware
of any case where restricting the licensor's output has been challenged.
Price Restrictions. As we have already pointed out, a solution to the incentive
problem is for the licensor not to produce at all, and to have two licensees. We now
ask whether the General Electric rule can also be a solution when the patent holder
has manufacturing capability. The General Electric price-¯xing exception allows the
licensor to set the price for both the licensor and the licensee.
We should say at the outset that competition is messy when prices can be
¯xed. A standard notion of competition in the study of oligopolies, also used here,
is competition in supply.

With the licensing terms in place, each ¯rm makes an

independent choice of supply, and the market price then adjusts to ensure that all the
units are sold.

With price restrictions, that notion must be modi¯ed, since prices

are not allowed to change endogenously in order to clear the market. For example,
if the total supply exceeds demand at the ¯xed price, then ¯rms will end up with
excess supply. This should not happen in equilibrium, but in order to test whether
the supply decisions are an equilibrium, we need some notion of how output would be
rationed if a ¯rm changed its supply.
For the General Electric price-¯xing rule, we will again assume that ¯rms make
their supply decisions after the licensing terms have been set. The term of license in
General Electric speci¯ed that the licensee must charge the same price as the licensor.
We interpret the rule to mean that the licensor can set the price at which both ¯rms
13

sell.

In addition, the agreement may specify royalties and ¯xed fees.

With this

agreement in place, the ¯rms choose their supplies.
We claim that the licensor can ensure the monopoly outcome by setting the
royalty to be the di®erence between the pro¯t-maximizing price and the cost of the
marginal unit when both ¯rms are producing optimally. That is,
½ = p(q¤ ) ¡ °(

q¤
)
2

(3.12)

The ¯xed fee must be set so that the licensee's pro¯t is zero if both ¯rms produce q ¤=2:
If we can show that neither ¯rm wants to deviate from half the monopoly supply, q ¤=2;
then the licensor gets all the pro¯t and production is e±cient.
We will check whether either ¯rm wants to deviate from the supply q¤ =2, supposing that q ¤=2 is the supply of the other ¯rm. Consider ¯rst the licensee: The licensee cannot bene¯t by reducing supply below q¤ =2. Since each of the inframarginal
units provides him with revenue (price) higher than the royalty plus marginal cost, reducing supply will cause him to lose revenue. (Notice that if the price could increase,
the licensee would typically want to reduce supply. A reduction would cause the price
to increase on all the inframarginal units, while the loss on the marginal unit would be
zero.) The licensee also cannot bene¯t by increasing supply above q¤ =2: The licensor
is also (by hypothesis) supplying q¤ =2: If the licensee increases supply, the market
will have an excess supply at price p(q¤ ): If the licensee does not manage to sell his
marginal units, then he has wasted the cost of producing them. If he does sell them,
he cannot cover costs, since the price is not higher than the royalty plus marginal cost
of the incremental units. That is, p(q¤ ) ¡ (½ + °(q)) < p(q ¤ ) ¡ (½ + °(q ¤=2)) = 0 for

q > q ¤ =2.

What about the licensor? Will he also be content to supply q ¤=2? Keeping
the contractual price ¯xed at p(q¤ ); reducing supply will not increase pro¯t; since he
gives up pro¯t in amount p(q ¤) ¡ °(q) on the marginal units, which is positive for
q · q¤ =2: Suppose instead that he increases supply above q¤ =2: Since the price is

¯xed at p(q¤ ); either the marginal unit crowds out a unit that would otherwise be sold
14

by the licensee, or the marginal unit is not sold at all. If not sold, it wastes the costs
of production. If it crowds out a unit sold by the licensee, then the licensor loses the
royalty ½ on that unit. But using (3.12) and the fact that °(¢) is increasing, it follows
that ½ > p(q¤ ) ¡ °(q) for q > q¤ =2; hence the licensor prefers to collect the royalty
from the licensee than to crowd out that unit and produce it himself.
This proves that with the license terms speci¯ed { a royalty that satis¯es (3.12)
and price ¯xed at p(q¤ ) { there is an equilibrium with pro¯t-maximizing production,
even though the licensor competes with the licensee. The licensor can collect all the
pro¯t through ¯xed fees and royalties.7
This analysis di®ers from that of Landes and Posner (2003) who argue that
price ¯xing only serves \to increase the total costs of manufacture, to the detriment
of the patentee qua patentee," or Baxter (1966) who argues that price and output
restraints are counterproductive because they allow licensees to share in oligopoly
pro¯t. Licensors can recover pro¯ts by charging ¯xed fees as well as royalties.
After eighty years of court decisions and commentary, we have come to a striking conclusion: The General Electric Company endorsed one of the few rules capable
of implementing pro¯t neutrality. Its solution was also \minimalist." We argue in the
appendix (section 8.1) that General Electric could not have achieved the same result
by ¯xing only the price of the licensee.
Nonlinear Royalties. Our ¯nal scheme is to consider nonlinear royalties. Of
course constant royalties and ¯xed fees are a form of nonlinear royalty, but payments of
7

A slight embarrassment, however, is that, depending on how excess supply is rationed, there can
be other equilibria with the property that q1 + q2 = q ¤ (where q1 ; q2 are respectively the supplied
quantities of the licensor and licensee), and q2 < q ¤ =2: Even if such an equilibrium exists, it will
not be preferred by either party to the equilibrium in which the ¯rms supply q1 = q2 = q ¤ =2: By
moving to the equilibrium with equal ouputs, the licensee bene¯ts because the price he receives on
the additional units is larger than the royalty plus marginal cost. The licensor bene¯ts because the
royalty he receives on the units transferred to the licensee is larger than the price net of costs of
his own supply. In economic games with two equilibria, where both parties prefer one equilibrium
to the other, it is easy to ensure that the better equilibrium is played. One of the players can
simply announce that he intends to play his strategy in the preferred equilibrium, and the other
player will follow. No commitments or license terms are required to implement this outcome. It is
self-enforcing.

15

this form will not guarantee pro¯t neutrality when the licensor and licensee compete.
As we showed above, the licensor can pro¯t by committing himself not to
expand output beyond q1 = q¤ =2 once the license is in place: His incentive to expand
output follows from the fact that he earns royalties on the licensee's output in any
case, and can earn even more pro¯t by expanding the market.

Even though his

expansion reduces the market price, the licensee bears half of that loss, while the
licensor continues to collect royalties, and also sells the additional units. The problem
is that, since the licensee can predict this outcome, he will not sign a license agreement
in the ¯rst place that provides monopoly pro¯t to the licensor. Thus, the licensor can
do better by committing not to expand output once the license is in place.
Suppose that instead of imposing a ¯xed royalty, the licensor imposes a royalty
rate ½ that falls with his own output. The fall in royalty rate will punish the licensor
for expanding output, and thus creates a commitment not to do so. This will solve
the problem. In particular, let ½ be the following decreasing function of q1 :
½(q1 ) = q ¤ ¡ q1 :
Then ½(q¤ =2) = q ¤ =2 and ½0 (¢) = ¡1: The higher the licensor's output, the less royalty

he gets, and this will commit him not to increase output beyond q ¤ =2:
Firm 1's pro¯t is
p(q1 + q2 )q1 + ½(q1)q2 ¡

Z

q1

°(^
q)d^
q

0

and the optimal supply q1 ; conditional on ¯rm 2's supply q2 ; satis¯es
q1 =

1
(1 ¡ q2 + ½0 (q1 )q2 ¡ °(q1))
2

Firm 2's pro¯t is
(p(q1 + q2 ) ¡ ½(q1 )) q2 ¡

Z

q2

°(^
q)d^
q

0

16

and ¯rm 2's optimal supply q2 ; conditional on ¯rm 1's supply q1; satis¯es
q2 =

1
(1 ¡ q1 ¡ °(q2 ) ¡ ½(q1 ))
2

At (q1; q2) = (q¤ =2; q¤ =2); neither ¯rm has an incentive to deviate.
Of course this scheme requires that the licensor send a royalty bill to the licensee
based on the licensor's own output.

It might create an enforcement nightmare for

the licensee. The licensor will always want to argue that his supply was lower than
it was, and the licensee will want to argue that it was higher.
Nonlinear royalties based on the licensee's supply are common, and at least
two courts have said that such agreements do not violate the antitrust laws (Stockham
Valves 1966; du Pont 1953).

However, in the model presented here, royalties that

increase or decrease with the licensee's supply will not lead to pro¯t neutrality because
they do not punish the licensor for trying to exploit the licensee once the terms of
license are ¯xed. To punish the licensor for increasing supply beyond that to which
he would like to commit, the royalty must depend on the licensor's supply, not the
licensee's supply. William Baxter (1966) has previously analysed the role that sliding
scale royalties play in partitioning the market between two licensees, but did not
consider the case where a patent holder/manufacturer is substituted for one of the
licensees.
This is a good place to return to our inquiry about minimalism. The point of
stipulating royalties that decline with the licensor's output is to soften the competition
that the licensor provides to the licensee. It is even more direct to write license terms
that restrict the licensor's supply. Many commentators believe, on somewhat slender
case law, that U.S. law permits patent holders to impose minimum output levels on
their licensees (Weinschel 2000; Hovenkamp, et al., 2004), but we know of no cases in
which a licensor's commitment to self-restraint has been at issue.

17

4. Licensing Patents on Enhancements
The Supreme Court has also considered cases where rightholders used price-¯xing
restrictions while licensing a patented enhancement to an existing product.

For

example, in Ethyl Gasoline the patent holder had the rights to an additive (tetraethyl
lead) that raised the gasoline's octane rating. Licensed re¯ners were not allowed to
sell gasoline containing the additive to unlicensed middlemen (\jobbers") and jobbers
who failed to observe the major re¯neries' posted prices were regularly terminated
for displaying poor \business ethics."

The net e®ect was to set the price at which

licensed jobbers could sell high-performance gasoline.

The court struck down the

jobbers' licenses on the ground that they violated the antitrust laws.
In Line Material, Southern States Equipment Corporation held a patent on
an electrical fuse, and Line Material held a patent on an improvement.

A patent

interference proceeding established that Line Material's improvement infringed the
Southern patent, so that neither ¯rm could market the improvement without a license
from the other.

We will argue that the three principles should apply di®erently

to this situation of blocking patents than to the case of a patented enhancement to
an unpatented good as in Ethyl, or to the case of a noninfringing enhancement to a
patented good, for which we have not found a useful motivating case.
We see no evidence in these cases that the courts disagree with our three
principles, although we will argue that the economic analysis in Line Material is
defective and led the court to the wrong conclusion. The court struck down a cross
license with price-¯xing.

As discussed below, we think that for blocking patents,

cross-licensing is justi¯ed by the derived-reward principle, and price-¯xing may be
necessary to remedy a problem of productive e±ciency, just as in General Electric.
Except for the narrow problem of productive e±ciency that was addressed by allowing
price-¯xing in General Electric, we ¯nd no further justi¯cation for price-¯xing in the
circumstance of blocking patents.
In considering proprietary enhancements to existing goods, we will assume that

18

each consumer's willingness to pay for the enhanced product is larger than for the
original product by amount ¢: Applying the derived-reward principle, the inventor
should not receive more than ¢ per unit sold.
As before, we will suppose that the demand for the underlying good, say,
unenhanced gasoline, is given by a function 1 ¡ p; where p is the price, and that the
inverse demand curve is therefore given by 1 ¡ q: Suppose that the marginal cost of
a unit of unenhanced gasoline is c · 1. Then the demand for enhanced gasoline at

price p is 1 + ¢ ¡ p; and the willingness to pay for the q th unit (the inverse demand
curve) becomes p(q) = 1 + ¢ ¡ q:
We will not yet make a distinction between selling the additive at a proprietary
price or licensing the right to produce gasoline that includes the additive.

In both

cases, we will refer to the price or royalty as ½:
We now consider, respectively, proprietary enhancements to competitively supplied goods, proprietary enhancements to proprietary goods, and infringing enhancements to proprietary goods. We argue that one-way licensing with royalties is consistent with our principles in the ¯rst two cases, and that cross-licensing with two-way
royalties is consistent with our principles in the third case. Price ¯xing may also be
consistent with our principles if there is an issue of productive e±ciency.
Patented Enhancements to Competitively Supplied Goods. Assume for simplicity that the resource cost of producing the enhancement (gasoline additive) is zero,
and the unit cost of producing the competitively supplied product (gasoline), whether
enhanced or unenhanced, is c. In a competitive market, the cost of enhanced gasoline
will then be p = c+½ if ½ is the wholesale price of the additive or the royalty for adding
it to the gasoline. If the licensor charges the entire value as royalty, ½ = ¢; the price
of gasoline will go up by ¢; so that sales of the enhanced gasoline are the same as
without the additive.

During the life of the patent, it is the patent holder rather

than user who collects the social value.

This is consistent with the derived-reward

principle that the pro¯t must derive from the social value.

19

We now show that either ¢ is so large that it drives out the competitive product,
or the licensor's optimal royalty is ½ = ¢.
If there were no competitive supply of the unenhanced product, the monopolist
proprietor of the enhancement would choose the supply q that maximizes
(1 + ¢ ¡ q ¡ c)q
The parenthetic term is the sales price when q units of enhanced gasoline are supplied.
The pro¯t-maximizing quantity of enhanced gasoline satis¯es
1
q ¤ (¢) = (1 + ¢ ¡ c)
2

(4.1)

and the corresponding monopoly price is
1
p(q¤ (¢)) = 1 + ¢ ¡ q ¤(¢) = (1 + ¢ + c)
2

(4.2)

If the improvement is large, ¢ > 1 ¡ c; and the improver charges the monopoly
price, then suppliers of the inferior product will drop out of the market even without
licensing.

The case of interest is when the proprietor will have to license to the

competitive suppliers because they will not disappear.

This will occur for small

improvements, ¢ < 1 ¡ c: No distributor would buy the additive at a price greater
than ½ = ¢; so 0 < ½ · ¢: The licensor's pro¯t is ½(1+¢¡½¡c); which is maximized
at ¢ = ½ when 1 ¡ c > ¢: Thus, the licensor will charge a price or royalty equal to
the full value of the additive, and only the enhanced gasoline will be supplied.
Consistent with these observations, it seems clear under the derived-reward
principle that the licensor should be allowed to pro¯t in amount ¢ per unit of gasoline
sold, but not more. This is true even if gasoline suppliers operate as oligopolists in
the distribution of gasoline, rather than as perfect competitors, as discussed in the
appendix, section 8.2. However, the analysis disagrees with Baxter (1966) who argues
that all royalties on the sale of unpatented end-products should be banned because
they allow patent holders to \drain o® the full monopoly potential inherent not in
20

the invention but in the unpatented end product of which the invention is only one of
many inputs." As long as the competitive gasoline suppliers are free to sell unenhanced
gasoline, the gasoline market will not be monopolized. The price of gasoline will only
be higher by the value of the enhancement, ¢:
Of course, the most pro¯table arrangement is to keep unenhanced gasoline o®
the market and sell enhanced gasoline at the monopoly price (4.2) even when ¢ is
relatively small so that without sham licensing the royalty would be ¢ = ½: The
following license terms will support the monopoly price, provided all the gasoline
distributors take the license.
(a) Charge a royalty ½ = p(q¤ (¢))¡ c for producing and using the additive, stipulating that licensees cannot avoid the royalty by selling the unenhanced gasoline.
Share the pro¯t through ¯xed fees.
(b) Charge a ¯xed fee for producing and using the additive, stipulating that the
price of enhanced gasoline must be p(q ¤(¢)), and stipulating that the licensees
cannot sell unenhanced gasoline. Share the pro¯t through ¯xed fees.
To support the monopoly price, a sham license must either stipulate that the
licensee will pay royalties on unenhanced gasoline as well as enhanced gasoline, as in
(a), or that the licensee will sell only enhanced gasoline, as in (b).

Without being

bound in one of those ways, a licensee can pro¯t by selling unenhanced gasoline at a
price between the marginal cost c and the monopoly price p(q¤ (¢)). That will break
the cartel. Because the license terms in (a) and (b) will support a cartel, they should
not be allowed.
Of course, entry will also break the cartel. If there is always a threat of entry
by an unlicensed entrant, the market price for unenhanced gasoline must be p = c;
and the price of enhanced gasoline can be no greater than c + ¢: Higher prices will
elicit entry.
The reader will have no trouble seeing that cost reductions can be analyzed in
the same way as product enhancements.

Instead of adding to the product's value,
21

suppose the innovation reduces the cost of manufacturing it. Whether ¢ is conceived
as a boost to the consumer's willingness to pay for the product or a reduction in the cost
of manufacturing it, the innovation would increase the consumers' surplus available
in a competitive market by ¢ per unit.

For reasons analogous to the ones given

here, allowing the licensor to ¯x prices would allow him to pro¯t from cartelization
instead of from the social value he created, in violation of the derived-reward principle.
Instruments to ¯x the monopoly price will take the same forms as above, i:e:; binding
the licensees to pay royalties regardless of whether they use the patented innovation,
or specifying the price they must charge while preventing them from reverting to the
inferior product.
We conclude that in the case of patented enhancements to unpatented goods,
and also in the case of cost reductions, royalties are a rich enough licensing instrument
to collect the pro¯t that Congress intended. Price-setting power is not only unnecessary, but could allow the licensor to cartelize the market, thus earning pro¯t from
a source (the cartel) not created by the invention. This violates the derived-rewards
principle.
Patented Enhancements to Patented Goods: One-Way Licensing. In the previous section we supposed that the original good (e.g., gasoline) was supplied in an
unprotected market.

We shall now assume that the previous good is itself propri-

etary. In this section we assume that the enhanced good does not infringe the previous
patent, and in the next section we assume that it does.
If the two proprietary goods are noninfringing, is there any reason to allow
licensing at all?

One reason would be to achieve productive e±ciency, as in the

case of product patents discussed in section 3. Our focus here is on another type of
e±ciency. Without licensing, one of the proprietors would supply an inferior product,
even if the marginal cost of producing both products is zero. Depending on prices,
consumers may be better o® if both ¯rms supply the better product. What licensing
terms, if any, should be allowed in order to achieve this result, without undermining
the competition between the patent holders that Congress apparently intended?

22

Suppose, for example, that the two ¯rms write a licensing agreement that
commits the proprietor of the inferior product, whom we shall call ¯rm 1, to stay out
of the market. Then the proprietor of the enhanced product, whom we shall call ¯rm
2, becomes a monopolist. This is presumably the most pro¯table arrangement for the
two ¯rms, and the proprietor of the better good should be willing to pay his potential
competitor to stay out. Most commentators would agree that such an arrangement
would be collusive, but how does that follow from the principles we have articulated?
What licensing terms are consistent with our principles? Can the allowable licensing
terms ensure that only the better product is supplied, while at the same time avoiding
the collusive outcome?
We claim that the only licensing arrangement consistent with the derivedreward principle is a license from ¯rm 1 to ¯rm 2, giving the right to produce the
enhanced product in return for royalties and perhaps other fees A license from ¯rm
2 to ¯rm 1 is not consistent with that principle, since ¯rm 1 has nothing of value
to o®er ¯rm 2.

Cross-licensing is not consistent with the derived-reward principle.

Further, we show that the one-way license will not allow the ¯rms to cartelize the
market. Despite the license, the price of the enhanced product will be constrained by
potential competition from the inferior product.
To make our case, we need to characterize the outcomes of three market arrangements: that the patent holders compete without a license, that ¯rm 2 licenses to
¯rm 1 with royalties and perhaps ¯xed fees, and that the ¯rms ¯nd a way to support
the collusive outcome. We will show that the ¯rst two arrangements are equivalent for
consumers, but the second arrangement, one-way licensing, is more pro¯table for the
¯rms. (There is an e±ciency gain, and the value accrues to the ¯rms.) The collusive
outcome is more pro¯table still, but imposes the monopoly price on consumers. Thus,
one-way licensing achieves the objective of economic e±ciency (all consumers consume
the better good), while avoiding the collusive outcome. That is, the licensing terms
that seem to follow naturally from the derived-reward principle also lead to the desired
outcome. The inferior product is kept o® the market, but the ¯rms still compete in

23

a limited way that falls short of collusion.8
Let pI be the price of the original, inferior good, and let p be the price of the
enhanced good. Then, since each user has willingness to pay ¢ for the enhancement,
prices must satisfy
pI = maxf0; p ¡ ¢g

(4.3)

With these prices, the demand for units of both products is the same as if both ¯rms
supplied the enhanced product at price p: That is, the number of units demanded
is 1 + ¢ ¡ p; but some of the units will be the inferior product, which provides less

utility in amount ¢ and sells at a price pI that is lower by ¢: For simpler calculations,
and because our focus is not on productive e±ciency, we will now assume that the
marginal cost of production is zero.
We will ¯rst characterize the equilibrium prices without licensing. In evaluating its pro¯t opportunities, ¯rm 1 takes as given ¯rm 2's supply of the enhanced
good, q2 . Firm 1's pro¯t as a function of its own supply of the inferior good, q, is
(1 ¡ q ¡ q2) q

(4.4)

and the pro¯t-maximizing quantity satis¯es
q=

1
(1 ¡ q2 )
2

(4.5)

Similarly, ¯rm 2's pro¯t is
(1 + ¢ ¡ q ¡ q2 ) q2

(4.6)

8

The proprietor of the inferior product might argue that these licensing provisions erode his pro¯ts
to the point where he can no longer cover the costs of innovation. If the argument has merit, it is
due to a failing of patent law instead of competition policy. Making the patents blocking instead
of noninfringing would allow both inventors to pro¯t from their innovations. See the next section
and chapter 5 of Scotchmer 2005 for a more systematic discussion of design issues in the context of
cumulative innovation.

24

and its pro¯t-maximizing supply satis¯es
q2 =

1
(1 + ¢ ¡ q)
2

(4.7)

The equilibrium quantities (q; q2) solve (4.5) and (4.7), namely,
1
(1 ¡ ¢)
3
1
(1 + 2¢)
=
3

q =
q2

and therefore the prices are
1
(1 ¡ ¢)
3
1
(1 + 2¢)
p =
3

pI =

We will now show that the second market arrangement, licensing from ¯rm 2
to ¯rm 1, is equivalent for consumers to competition without licensing, and better for
the patent holders. The largest royalty, ½; that would be o®ered or accepted is ½ = ¢:
At a larger royalty, ¯rm 1 would supply the inferior good rather than the enhanced
good under license. The constraint ½ · ¢ is the key ingredient to our conclusion that
licensing creates bene¯ts for patent holders without harming consumers.
In evaluating its pro¯t opportunities, the licensee, ¯rm 1, again takes as given
¯rm 2's supply of the enhanced good, q2 .

Firm 1's pro¯t as a function of its own

supply of the enhanced good, q1, is
(1 + ¢ ¡ q1 ¡ q2 ¡ ½) q1

(4.8)

and the pro¯t-maximizing quantity satis¯es
q1 =

1
(1 + ¢ ¡ q2 ¡ ½)
2

(4.9)

Similarly, ¯rm 2's pro¯t-maximizing supply satis¯es
q2 =

1
(1 + ¢ ¡ q1)
2

(4.10)
25

The equilibrium quantitites (q1 ; q2 ) solve (4.9) and (4.10), namely,
1
(1 + ¢ ¡ 2½)
3
1
=
(1 + ¢ + ½)
3

q1 =
q2

Therefore the price will be
1
(1 + ¢ + ½):
3

(4.11)

Total output of the enhanced good will be
1
(2 (1 + ¢) ¡ ½)
3
The sum of the two ¯rms' pro¯t is
1
1
(1 + ¢ + ½) (2(1 + ¢) ¡ ½) = (2(1 + ¢)2 + ½ (1 + ¢) ¡ ½2)
9
9
Since the ¯rms can divide the joint pro¯t with ¯xed fees, they want to maximize
joint pro¯t. The joint pro¯t is greatest at ½ = ¢: Therefore the price of the enhanced
good is the same with and without licensing, namely (1=3)(1 + 2¢): This accounts
for our claim that consumers are as well o® with licensing as without. However, the
¯rms' joint pro¯t with licensing is
1
(2(1 + ¢)2 + ¢)
9

(4.12)

which is larger than their pro¯t in competition with each other, in the absence of a
license.
We now compare this result to the collusive outcome in which ¯rm 1 renounces
its right to supply the inferior product.

The monopoly price and quantity of the

enhanced good satisfy (4.2) and (4.1) with c = 0, and the maximum pro¯t is
1
((1 + ¢)2)
4

(4.13)
26

The collusive pro¯t (4.13) is larger than the pro¯t (4.12) available with one-way licensing, and the price of the enhanced good is also higher, 12 (1 + ¢) > (1=3)(1 + 2¢);
in the case (¢ < 1) where the possibility of supplying the inferior good is actually a
constraint in the market:
We conclude that the one-way license allows the proprietor to pro¯t from the
social value of the enhancement without pro¯ting from cartelizing the market. This
is the only type of license that should be allowed under our principles. In contrast, a
cross-license of the type discussed in the next section would allow the two ¯rms to earn
monopoly pro¯ts as if the proprietor of the enhancement created the whole market.
Blocking Patents on Enhancements: Cross Licensing. We continue using the
same model, but now assume that the enhanced product infringes the patent on the
original product, so the patent holders have blocking patents. This was the situation in
Line Material (1948). Since the enhanced product infringes the patent on the inferior
product, the knowledge created by the ¯rst innovator was presumptively required to
develop it. In this sense, the net value of the enhanced product is presumptively part
of the social value created by the ¯rst innovator, even though the second innovator
bore the incremental costs (Scotchmer 1991). By the derived-reward principle, the
¯rst innovator is entitled to pro¯t from it.
There are not many possibilities for how to resolve the blocking patents so that
the enhanced product can come to market. They include:
(a) Consolidate ownership of the patents (one patent holder sells to the other).
(b) Allow the patent holders to cross license the enhanced product, each paying
royalties to the other.
(c) Allow the patent holders to cross license with royalties, ¯xing the price of the
enhanced good, and stipulating that the inferior good will not compete in the
market.
(d) Force the patent holders to cross license without royalties.
27

We assume that (d) is not what Congress had in mind, as it leads to the same
market outcome as if the patents were not blocking, discussed in section 4.2.9 It is easy
to see that (c) is equivalent to (a). We now show that (b) is also equivalent to (a),
provided that the cost of manufacturing the enhanced good is the same regardless of
how the manufacturing is divided between the ¯rms. However, echoing our discussion
of section 3, (b) is not equivalent to (a) or (c) if the manufacturing must be divided
in a particular way to achieve cost e±ciencies.
Since the enhancement adds ¢ to every user's willingness to pay, the inverse
demand curve can again be written as p(q) = 1 + ¢ ¡ q, where q is the quantity
supplied of the enhanced good, and the inferior good is not supplied.

The most

pro¯table arrangement is for only the better product to be produced.10 We will ¯rst
assume that the marginal cost of producing both goods is the same, and for simplicity,
equal to zero. Then any manufacturing arrangement is equally cost-e±cient.
Clearly the maximum pro¯t can be achieved if both patented goods are owned
or controlled by a single ¯rm (solutions (a) and (c)). What we will now show is that
it can also be achieved by cross licensing with royalties (solution (b)), but only if the
previous patent holder, whom we again call ¯rm 1, can either renounce his right to
supply the inferior product, or pays a low enough royalty that he has no incentive to
supply it.
Assume that the cross license on the enhanced good provides for royalties in
amounts (½1 ; ½2); with ¯rm 1 charging a royalty ½2 to ¯rm 2 and ¯rm 2 charging a
royalty ½1 to ¯rm 1. We will show that in order to sustain the pro¯t maximizing price,
9

Although this seems self-evident to us, Line Material (1948) seems to assume that the economic
consequences of blocking and nonblocking patents are the same: \Where two or more patentees with
competitive, noninfringing patents combine them and ¯x prices on all devices produced under any
of the patents, competition is impeded to a greater degree than where a single patentee ¯xes prices
for his licensees. The struggle for pro¯t is less acute. Even when, as here, the devices are not
commercially competitive because the subservient patent cannot be practiced without consent of the
dominant, the statement holds good. The stimulus to seek competitive inventions is reduced by
the mutually advantageous price-¯xing arrangement." We argue here that the two situations are
economically distinct. See chapter 5 of Scotchmer 2005 for a more extensive discussion of how the
incentive e®ects depend on whether the successive patents are noninfringing.
10
If users value the enhancement di®erently, both products might survive in the market, allowing
a sort of price discrimination. See Gabscewicz and Thisse (1980).

28

these royalties must satisfy
1
½1 + ½2 = (1 + ¢)
2

(4.14)

½1 · ¢

(4.15)

The constraint (4.15) on ½1 is needed to dissuade ¯rm 1 from undercutting the market
by supplying the inferior product as well: However the constraint imposes no harm
provided the cost of aggregate supply does not depend on how the supply is divided
between the ¯rms.

That is, it imposes no harm if there is no issue of productive

e±ciency.
With the royalties in place, and assuming that ¯rm 1 does not supply the
inferior good, the ¯rms will choose their most pro¯table supplies, (q1 ; q2); realizing
that the price in the market will satisfy
p(q1 + q2 ) = 1 + ¢ ¡ q1 ¡ q2 :
Taking as given the royalties (½1 ; ½2) and the supply q2 of ¯rm 2, ¯rm 1's pro¯t function
is
(p(q1 + q2 ) ¡ ½1) q1 = (1 + ¢ ¡ q1 ¡ q2 ¡ ½1 ) q1

(4.16)

and the pro¯t-maximizing quantity satis¯es
q1 =

1
(1 + ¢ ¡ q2 ¡ ½1 )
2

(4.17)

Similarly, ¯rm 2's pro¯t-maximizing quantity satis¯es
q2 =

1
(1 + ¢ ¡ q1 ¡ ½2 )
2

(4.18)

Adding (4.17) and (4.18), it follows that the aggregate equilibrium supply q1 + q2
satis¯es
2
1
q1 + q2 = (1 + ¢) ¡ (½1 + ½2 )
3
3
29

But since the objective is to choose the royalties such that the equilibrium quantities
satisfy
1
q1 + q2 = q¤ (¢) = (1 + ¢);
2
condition (4.14) must hold.

(4.19)

The royalty ½1 paid by ¯rm 1 cannot be higher than

¢ without leading to the result that ¯rm 1 supplies the inferior good instead of the
enhanced good. Each ½1 2 [0; ¢] (and ½2 chosen to satisfy (4.14)) implies a di®erent
division of pro¯t, not accounting for ¯xed fees. Thus, if the two ¯rms have the same
constant marginal cost of supply, there is a cross licensing arrangement that sustains
the maximum pro¯t. In this arrangement,
² each ¯rm pays a royalty to the other on the enhanced units it sells;
² the royalty paid by the previous patent holder is positive, but may be smaller
than the royalty paid by the improver;
² the previous patent holder has no incentive to undermine the monopoly on the
enhanced product by selling the inferior product;
² the pro¯ts can be divided arbitrarily by using ¯xed fees as well as royalties.
We thus conclude that when manufacturing costs are the same regardless of
which ¯rm supplies the market, a cross-licensing agreement is pro¯t neutral with respect to the benchmark solution (a) where the patent holders are allowed to consolidate
their patent rights. By the minimalist principle, there is no need to allow price ¯xing.
The decision against price-¯xing in Line Material may therefore be consistent with
our principles, even though the reasoning in the case is, in our view, misguided (see
footnote 10).
The conclusion changes, however, if each ¯rm's marginal cost of production is
increasing, or if the ¯rms have di®erent marginal costs of production. In that case
there is an issue of productive e±ciency as in section 3, so royalties and ¯xed fees are
no longer pro¯t neutral. Pro¯ts may be higher under solution (a) than (b).
30

When productive e±ciency is at issue, cross licensing with only royalties and
¯xed fees may result in one of the following problems.
1. Manufacturing costs are unnecessarily high due to unequal production in the
¯rms, so that the ¯rms earn less than maximum pro¯t.
2. Manufacturing is e±cient, but the ¯rms earn less than the maximum pro¯t
because royalties are too low.
3. The ¯rms earn less than the maximum pro¯t because the inferior product is also
supplied to the market.
To see this more formally, modify the above model so that the marginal costs
of manufacturing are given by a function °(¢), as in section 3 above, and for simplicity,
assume that these are the costs in each ¯rm. Then the maximum pro¯t is
p(q¤ (¢)) q ¤(¢) ¡ 2

Z

q ¤ (¢)=2

°(z)dz

0

where the optimal quantity and price satisfy
1
q¤ (¢)
q (¢) =
(1 + ¢ ¡ °(
))
2
2
p(q¤ (¢)) = 1 + ¢ ¡ q¤ (¢)
¤

(4.20)

The optimum clearly requires equal production in the two ¯rms. To support equal
production, the royalties must be equal, ½1 = ½2 : In the appendix (section 8.3), we
show that the royalties required to support the pro¯t maximizing price are
1 q¤ (¢)
1
½1 = ½2 = (1 + ¢) ¡ °(
)
4
4
2

(4.21)

However, if ½2 = ½1 > ¢; these will not sustain the pro¯t maximum, since ¯rm
1 will supply the inferior product instead of the enhanced product, thus depriving ¯rm
2 of royalties. The condition (4.21) may be inconsistent with ½2 = ½1 · ¢ if ¢ > 1=3
and costs ° are relatively low: There are several ways to solve these problems, but
31

they may require terms of license beyond cross licensing the enhanced product. Two
possibilities are
1. Write into the terms of license that ¯rm 1 will not supply the inferior product,
and write royalty rates that satisfy (4.21). Distribute the pro¯t with ¯xed fees.
2. (Price Fixing) Set the price at p(q ¤ (¢)) and divide the market so that the proprietor of the inferior product gets at least as much pro¯t as it would make by
keeping the superior product out of the market.
The neutrality principle suggests that the ¯rst solution should be legal { the
licensee should be allowed to renounce his right to supply the inferior product { especially if the second solution, price ¯xing, remains illegal under Line Material.

5. Possible Per Se Rules
This section suggests three possible per se rules that follow from the three principles,
and discusses some of their advantages and disadvantages. Where the presumption
in favor of these rules can be rebutted, we think the rules that replace them should
use the three principles as a guide.
1. Patent licenses based on a combination of (positive) ¯xed fees and per-unit
royalties should be presumptively lawful.
2.

In cases where the rightholder competes with the licensee, licenses that

(a) ¯x product prices for the licensee and licensor, (b) require the licensee or licensor
to observe quantity limits, or (c) reduce the licensee's per unit royalties as licensor
output increases should be presumed lawful.
The second rule applies both in the case of licensing product patents and in
cross-licensing blocking patents.
These proposed rules require additional comment:

32

First, the rules reduce but do not eliminate uncertainty for licensors. They
establish presumptions, as do most per se rules created by courts (Areeda & Hovenkamp, 2003) and commentators (Baxter 1966; Adelman & Juenger 1975; Kaplow
1984), but presumptions can be challenged. The main danger is that judges may be
too wary of sham agreements. Courts had good reason to be suspicious in the days
when commentators argued that licensing is a second-best way to exploit a patent,
and would ordinarily be avoided by a sensible patent holder (Baxter 1966; Adelman &
Juenger 1975). A more modern view, which undercuts the case for suspicion, is that
licenses are e±cient and appropriate, even (sometimes) when they ¯x prices. Thus,
courts should normally uphold the presumption that licenses are pro-competitive absent evidence that royalties exceed the value of the defendant's invention or other
circumstances that clearly point to collusion.11
Second, our conclusions follow from a standard, but nevertheless speci¯c, economic model about how licensors and licensees behave { namely, that they engage
in quantity competition.

However, the intuition is more robust than our particu-

lar model. The productive ine±ciency arises because the licensor perceives a lower
marginal cost of production than the licensee, and will produce too much relative
to the licensee. It is hard to see how any form of competition between the licensor
and licensee would change this conclusion as long as marginal cost is increasing. In
any case, all per se rules can be rebutted with new and convincing arguments. For
a successful rebuttal, a plainti® would have to produce (a) a model where the e®ect
vanishes, and (b) evidence that the model is more appropriate to the facts than the
very standard model discussed in this paper.
Third, more complicated models might render our results ambiguous. For
example, some commentators have argued that rightholders cannot use licenses e®ectively because of limited information about licensees' cost functions, current market
demand, and/or future demand (Landes & Posner 2003; Adelman & Juenger 1975).12
11

Such circumstances might include that the property right is likely invalid or that it can easily be
avoided by \inventing around" (Adelman and Juenger, 1975).
12
To the contrary, Landes & Posner (2003) invoke these factors as a possible justi¯cation for
General Electric-style price restrictions. In our view, these disagreements show the need for economic

33

On the other hand, courts' \inability to ¯nd all the relevant facts" is a traditional
justi¯cation for having per se rules in the ¯rst place (Areeda & Hovenkamp, 2003).
Plainti®s who advance these alternative arguments should produce the evidence or
models to justify them, and say how they implement the three principles.
Fourth, our focus on productive e±ciency does not exhaust the licensing landscape. Some commentators argue that licensing undermines the incentive to challenge
a bad patent, since it creates collusion between otherwise competitors (Landes & Posner 2003; Adelman & Juenger 1975; Shapiro 2003; Hovenkamp, Janis, and Lemley,
2004). This argument is not actually about the patent/antitrust boundary, since it
goes to the proper functioning of the patent system itself. Scholars also argue that
cross licensing should be permitted in cases where it is needed to save transactions
costs or suppress wasteful patent races (Landes & Posner 2003).
Fifth, although the minimalism principle would allow courts to strike down unnecessary restrictions in licenses, it says nothing about whether some other, completely
di®erent, bundle of restrictions would impose even fewer burdens on the economy. It
may be di±cult for judges to compare licenses against practices not before the court
(Kaplow 1984).13
Sixth, many commentators think the main defect of per se rules as compared
to rule of reason is that per se rules eliminate a court's ability to ¯ne-tune patent
rewards based on cost of development. However such ¯ne-tuning might be too di±cult
in practice (Kaplow 1984). More importantly, Congress has created a one-size-¯ts-all
patent system, and it is the job of Congress, not the job of courts, to improve on it.

6. Rule of Reason
In general, rule of reason and per se rules like the one stated in General Electric lead
to di®erent outcomes. Rule of reason permits the court to treat a given license term
modeling.
13
Similarly, a court might have no occasion to rule that a restriction is super°uous unless the
restriction has an anticompetitive e®ect. This limits the opportunities to strike down such terms.

34

di®erently in di®erent circumstances.

Rule of reason seems tautologically better,

since a court can always choose to follow the per se rule except where improvement
seems possible.

However, this overlooks the di±culty of ¯nding and implementing

principles to de¯ne such improvements. Here, we discuss what rule of reason might
mean in the patent-antitrust context.
In practice, rule of reason is seldom based on a complete, well-articulated
principle.14 The most ambitious attempt to enunciate principles is due to Kaplow
(1984).

He argues that Congress implicitly encoded its judgment about the opti-

mal balance of ex ante and ex post e±ciency when it designed the patent statute.
A licensing restriction should be acceptable to the court if it generates a pro¯t-todeadweight-loss ratio larger than that which Congress implicitly accepted in de¯ning,
for example, breadth or patent life. This procedure saves the court from having to
decide how much reward an innovator should receive, at least directly. The optimal
reward is implicitly established in the pro¯t-to-deadweight-loss ratio.15
Kaplow concedes that any practical application of the ratio test is \quite complex." Given that the required information \will not generally be available," court
decisions \must inevitably be speculative."16 He concludes that \any careful attempt
to resolve patent-antitrust issues will be far more complex than has previously been
realized" and that fact reveals the \insu±ciency of prior formulations by courts and
commentators."

Scholars in the past twenty years have done little to change this

assessment.
14

For example, the U.S. Department of Justice and Federal Trade Commission say that the bene¯ts
of allowing the licensor \to exploit its [intellectual] property as e±ciently and e®ectively as possible,"
must outweigh the harm to competition (1995 Antitrust Guidelines). The problem with this approach
is that it fails to specify how courts should balance ex post deadweight loss against ex ante incentives
to innovate.
15
The most useful approach relies on breadth rather than duration. If markets are stable over time,
the pro¯t-to-deadweight-loss ratio is the same for all patent durations. However, the ratio test has
been revived by authors studying patent breadth; see chapter 4 of Scotchmer (2005) for a summary.
16
Kaplow admits that in practice it is probably impossible to estimate Congress's subjective
cost/bene¯t judgment by analyzing the patent statutes. He therefore proposes a less ambitious
use of his ratio called cost-e®ectiveness. This procedure asks judges to reshu²e the law by making
currently permitted licenses with low ratios illegal in exchange for legalizing currently prohibited
practices with high ratios. Kaplow concedes, however, that even this more modest project may not
be possible given current uncertainty about the \economic e®ects of various restrictive practices."

35

Any rule-of-reason approach directed at maximizing an aggregate measure of
consumer welfare will face the same practical and theoretical di±culties identi¯ed
by Kaplow.

Given Kaplow's pessimistic forecast as to whether the ratio test can

be implemented, the more likely approach seems that implied by the 1995 Antitrust
Guidelines, requiring judges to weigh de novo the value of rewards (ex ante e±ciency)
against the value of competition (ex post e±ciency) in each case. But this opens
up a host of inquiries. Should the court naively determine the necessary reward
based on the actual costs of the patent holder? Should the factual inquiry about
costs instead consider that some other inventor could have achieved the patent more
cheaply, and that too much reward only encourages waste? Should the inquiry consider
that research is risky, and that a discoverer would only have invested if he expected a
super-reward for success? Given that the research endeavor was eventually successful,
what evidence could be adduced to show that it might not have been, and with what
probability?
The ways that such an inquiry can go astray are almost endless, as noted by
other commentators.

First, the factual inquiry is so complex as to be unavoidably

speculative, and may defer to ideological prejudice. Baxter (1966) argues that the
weighing of proper rewards is \peculiarly appropriate" to the political branches of
government.17 Of course, one can argue that judges' opinions do not matter provided
that Congress can easily correct them. In practice, most judicial attempts to weigh
ex ante and ex post e±ciency will never be reviewed, much less corrected.
Second, any such inquiry requires specialized knowledge, and is likely to be
lengthy and complex.

Landes and Posner (2003) argue that the ex ante/ex post

tradeo® \may well be beyond the capacity of the courts." Kaplow (1984) is more
optimistic, observing that the required analysis \is probably more developed at both
the theoretical and empirical levels than is the analysis of a vast array of other issues
that the courts regularly confront."
17

Balancing innovation against ex post deadweight loss also requires normative judgments about
intergenerational transfers. Judges have no objective standards for deciding \whether, in any given
case, it would be desirable to sacri¯ce more or less consumer satisfaction of other wants by devoting
more or fewer resources to the promotion of innovation." (Bork 1965)

36

Third, the inquiry will almost always depend on parties and evidence not before
the court. Except when the government is a party or citizens ¯le amicus briefs, the
interests of third parties will almost always be underrepresented. However, there is
reason to suspect that many patent agreements derive their value \precisely because
[they] are injurious to third persons." (Baxter 1966) The temptation to impose costs
on third parties { who are seldom in a position to know, let alone complain { may be
overwhelming.
Fourth, permitting judges to set the balance each time they decide a case will
inevitably make patent rewards less certain (Bork 1977; Adelman & Juenger 1975).
Inventors will demand a larger reward { with greater attendant deadweight loss { for
any given level of inventive e®ort (Gi®ord 2002).
Fifth, courts almost always examine controversies ex post whereas legislatures
and executive agencies tend to make policy ex ante. Since the particular innovation
before the court cannot be un-invented, there may be a built-in bias toward addressing
antitrust issues at the expense of innovation. More broadly, judges may conclude that
their judgment in a single case cannot possibly a®ect innovation in the broader society.
Nevertheless, the aggregate e®ect of court decisions will likely be substantial.

7. Conclusion
Subsequent case law has made the General Electric price-¯xing exception quite narrow.
Critics have therefore argued that the price-¯xing exception is a discredited \vestige."
We disagree. Based on the analysis above, a narrow price-¯xing exception is exactly
what is required by the three principles of derived-reward, pro¯t-neutrality, and minimalism. Licensing terms that are more restrictive than royalties and ¯xed fees are
only justi¯ed where a licensor and licensee compete with one another, including where
they cross license blocking patents.
Our analysis based on the three principles is more favorable to per se rules than
is currently the fashion. The alternative, rule of reason, must be applied with some

37

well-articulated objective in mind. One problem is that there is no consensus on the
right objective, and another is that the main proposals are hard to implement on the
basis of facts likely to be before a court.

Consequently, rule of reason gives scope

for unpredictability in outcomes, which creates uncertainty for patent holders and reduces Congress's control over patent incentives. Uncertainty can chill patent holders'
willingness to write creative license terms, even when justi¯ed, and consequently can
chill their ability to exploit patented knowledge. On the positive side, rule of reason
lets judges tailor rewards to individual circumstances. However, the required inquiry
is so inherently speculative that °exibility may not lead to any net improvement.
We do not suggest that our three principles will give guidance in every licensing
situation.

But where they apply, such as in the core patent/antitrust cases of the

twentieth century that we have discussed, they reduce the inquiry to a simple economic
question.

Courts may occasionally have stumbled over the economics, but their

approach to licensing, which we interpret to be based on our three principles, seems
sound.

8. Appendix:
8.1. Fixing a Licensee's Price, but not the Licensor's Price
We showed in section 3.1 that General Electric restores pro¯t neutrality by ¯xing the
licensee's price to match the licensor's price.

Here we show that it is not enough

simply to specify a price for the licensee, without committing the licensor to the same
price.
To support the monopoly pro¯t, the stipulated price will have to be p(q¤ ); and
the equilibrium supplies will have to be q1 = q2 = q ¤ =2: Supposing that q2 = q¤ =2 the
royalty must be (3.12) in order to ensure that q1 = q ¤=2.

Then, since the licensee

cannot charge a price higher than p(q¤ ); he has no incentive to cut supply in order to
raise the market price. And he has no incentive to increase supply, since he would
then pay more in royalties and costs than the price of the marginal unit. Thus, the
38

price-¯x will ensure that the licensee supplies the optimal quantity, q ¤=2.
However, this regime gives licensor an incentive to opportunistically increase
supply beyond q¤ =2, and thus pro¯t at the licensee's expense.
De¯ning the licensor's pro¯t function will now be a little trickier because of
the out-of-equilibrium rationing problem.

To test whether q1 = q2 = q ¤=2 is an

equilibrium, the licensor must hypothesize what will happen if he increases or decreases
his own supply. If he deviates in supply, there will be two prices in the market. If the
licensor cuts supply, so that aggregate supply is less than q¤ ; the licensor's supply price
will be higher than p(q ¤); while the licensee's price is ¯xed at p(q¤ ): If the licensor
increases supply, his supply will be sold at a price lower than p(q¤ ), while the licensee
sells at p(q¤ ):
Regardless of a buyer's willingness to pay, he would rather buy a cheaper unit
than a more expensive one.

Therefore the cheaper units will have to be rationed

among buyers. We assume that all of the cheaper units are sold, but that some of the
higher-priced supply might remain unsold. A customer might buy from the higherpriced ¯rm if he cannot get a lower-priced unit, but only if his willingness to pay is
above the higher price. But if most of the customers with relatively high willingness
to pay manage to buy from the lower-priced ¯rm, then the only remaining customers
for the higher-priced ¯rm are those with lower willingness to pay, who may choose
instead to stay out of the market. Thus, the number of units that the higher-priced
¯rm sells depends on the rationing rule.
It is clear that the licensor will not cut his supply below q¤ =2; because he would
not do this even if he could sell all his units at the higher price required to clear the
market, p(q1 +q2 ) = p(q1 +q¤ =2). Using (3.2), pro¯t is increasing with q1 at q1 = q ¤=2.
Thus, for reducing the supply instead of increasing it (dq1 < 0 instead of dq1 > 0);
pro¯t will decrease.

The worry, as in the previous section, is not that the licensor

will want to cut supply, but that he will want to increase it.
If the licensor increases supply, he will be the lower-priced ¯rm selling all his

39

units. However, the licensee may not sell all his units. We will describe the rationing
rule by a decreasing (or nonincreasing) di®erentiable function q^2: [q ¤=2; 1) ! [0; q ¤=2]

where q^2 (q1 ) is the number of units that the licensee can sell if he produces q¤ =2 units
and the licensor produces q1 units, q1 > q ¤=2.

We assume that q^2 (q¤ =2) = q ¤=2,

which means that demand is exactly met if both ¯rms produce q¤ =2, selling at the
market-clearing price p(q ¤ ): Since the licensee cannot sell more than he produces,
q^2 (q1 ) · q¤ =2.

In fact we shall assume that the licensees' sales, q^2 ; decrease with

q1 , to re°ect rationing.

If there are more lower-priced units, more consumers with

high willingness to pay will be looking for them.

By increasing supply and selling

lower-priced units, the licensor crowds out sales by the licensee.
Two special cases are complete crowding out, so that
crowding out, so that

d^
q2 (q1 )
dq1

d^
q2 (q1 )
dq1

= ¡1; and no

= 0:

Then the licensor's pro¯t function is the following:
1

¼^ (q1 ; q2 ) = p(q1 + q^2 (q1 ))q1 + ½^
q2 (q1) ¡

Z

q1

°(^
q)d^
q

0

= (1 ¡ q1 ¡ q^2 (q1))q1 + ½^
q2 (q1 ) ¡
= (1 ¡ q1 )q1 ¡ (q1 ¡ ½)^
q2 (q1 ) ¡

Z

Z

(8.1)

q1

°(^
q)d^
q

(8.2)

0

q1

°(^
q)d^
q

(8.3)

0

Taking the derivative with respect to q1 ;
d^
q2 (q1 )
@¼
^ 1 (q1; q2 )
= (1 ¡ 2q1 ) ¡ q^2 (q1 ) + (½ ¡ q1)
¡ °(q1)
@q1
dq1
Evaluating at q1 = q2 = q¤ =2; and using (3.12) and (3.2), the derivative is zero in the
extreme case of complete crowding out,

d^
q2 (q1 )
dq1

= ¡1; but otherwise positive. Even

with the ¯xed price, the licensor will behave opportunistically in increasing supply.
The problem cannot be solved by making the royalty ½ larger, since the licensee would
not then be willing to produce q¤ =2 units.
In the special case of complete crowding out, the ¯xed-price license can support
the pro¯t maximum. With complete crowding out, the licensor is punished for his
supply deviation by losing a lot of royalty revenue.
40

However complete crowding is

unlikely.

It essentially means that all the customers with lower willingness to pay

who could have been brought into the market by the licensor's increased supply have
found themselves at the higher-priced ¯rm, and therefore decide not to purchase. This
would not happen with random assignment of customers to ¯rms.
8.2. Licensing a Patent Improvement to Oligopolists
Suppose that a patented improvement is introduced to a market with two nonproprietary oligopolists instead of a competitive market. Suppose, in particular, that there
are only two gasoline sellers, ¯rms 1 and 2, and no further threat of entry.

The

amount of pro¯t that the licensor can collect from the oligopolists depends on how he
licenses, for example, by auctioning licenses or making take-it-or-leave it o®ers. For
a discussion of how these di®erences matter for licensing a cost-reducing innovation,
see Kamien (1992). We assume here that the licensor makes a take-it-or-leave-it o®er
which either licensee can refuse.
A license on the additive cannot have a royalty or wholesale price greater than
¢; since a re¯ner can sell the same amount of unenhanced gasoline at price p ¡ ¢ as
enhanced gasoline at price p. If the royalty is greater than ¢; it is more pro¯table
to sell unenhanced gasoline.

This is true both for both perfect competitors and

oligopolists.
If both oligopolists license at royalty ½ · ¢ and sell the enhanced gasoline,
¯rm 1 chooses the supply q1 that maximizes pro¯t, de¯ned as follows, assuming that
the supply q2 of the other ¯rm is ¯xed:
(1 + ¢ ¡ q1 ¡ q2 )q1 ¡ (c + ½)q1
The optimal q1 solves
1
q1 = (1 + ¢ ¡ q2 ¡ (c + ½))
2

41

and at the symmetric solution where q1 = q2 ; the ¯rms supply
1
q1 = q2 = (1 + ¢ ¡ c ¡ ½)
3

(8.4)

Thus, the licensor's royalty income is
2
½ (q1 + q2 ) = ½(1 + ¢ ¡ c ¡ ½)
3
Exactly as for the competitive case, the optimum is to set ½ = ¢ provided ¢ · 1 ¡ c:
(If ¢ > 1 ¡ c; the licensor will give an exclusive license to a single gasoline supplier,
who will charge the monopoly price (4.2). The other gasoline supplier will not ¯nd it
pro¯table to compete.) The oligopoly price is then
p (q1 + q2 ) = 1 + ¢ ¡ q1 ¡ q2 =
2
2
= (1 + ¢)(1 ¡ ) + (½ + c)
3
3
1
=
(1 + 2c) + ¢
3
which is ¢ more than the oligopoly price in the absence of the improvement. Thus,
with licensing, consumers are as well o® as without licensing, and the licensor collects
pro¯t in amount ¢ per user, as justi¯ed by the derived-reward principle, just as when
the gasoline market is competitive.
8.3. Cross Licensing when ¯rms have increasing marginal cost
We augment section 4, showing why royalties must satisfy (4.21) in order for the
cross license to support the monopoly price for the enhanced good, assuming that the
inferior product is not supplied.

Taking as given the royalties (½1 ; ½2 ) and ¯rm 2's

supply, q2, ¯rm 1's pro¯t, as a function of its own supply q1 ;is
µ

p(q1 + q2 ) ¡ ½1 ¡

Z

0

q1

°(z)dz

¶

q1

42

and the pro¯t-maximizing quantity satis¯es
q1 =

1
(1 + ¢ ¡ q2 ¡ ½1 ¡ °(q1))
2

(8.5)

Similarly, ¯rm 2's pro¯t-maximizing quantity satis¯es
q2 =

1
(1 + ¢ ¡ q1 ¡ ½2 ¡ °(q2))
2

(8.6)

By adding (4.17) and (4.18), setting q1 = q2 = 12 q¤ (¢); it follows that
2
1
1
q1 + q2 = (1 + ¢) ¡ (½1 + ½2 ) ¡ (°(q1) + °(q2 )) and
3
3
3
1
1 q ¤ (¢)
(½1 + ½2 ) = (1 + ¢) ¡ °(
)
2
2
2
instead of (4.14).

Since the royalty rates must be equal in order to sustain equal

output, (4.21) follows.

43

References
Adelman, M. J. 1977. \Use of Property as Clandestine Cartel." American Journal of
Comparative Law 30:271-297.
Adelman, M. J., and F. K. Juenger. 1975. \Patent-Antitrust: Patent Dynamics and
Field-of-Use Licensing." New York University Law Review. 50:273-308
Areeda, P. E., and H. Hovenkamp.

2003.

Antitrust Law: An Analysis of Antitrust

Principles and Their Application. New York: Aspen Publishers.
Arthur J. Schmitt Foundation v. Stockham Valves and Fittings, Inc., 292 F. Supp. 893
(N.D. Ala. 1966).
Baxter, W. 1966. Legal Restrictions on Exploitation of the Patent Monopoly: An Economic Analysis, Yale Law Journal 76:267-370
Bork, R. H. 1965. \The Rule of Reason and the Per Se Concept: Price Fixing and Market
Division." Yale Law Journal 74:775-847.
Bork, R.H. 1978. The Antitrust Paradox: A Policy at War With Itself. New York: Basic
Books.
Bowman, W. S. 1973. Patent and Antitrust Law: A Legal and Economic Appraisal.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Brulotte v. Thys Co., 379 U.S. 29, 85 S.Ct. 176, 13 L.Ed.2d 99 (1964).
California Dental Assn. v. FTC, 526 U.S. 756, 119 S.Ct. 1604, 143 L.Ed.2d 935 (1999).
Chisum, D. S. 2003. Chisum on Patents: A Treatise on the Law of Patentability, Validity
and Infringement. Newark & San Francisco: Matthew Bender & Co.
Ethyl Gasoline Corp. v. U.S., 309 U.S. 436, 60 S.Ct. 618, 84 L.Ed. 852 (1940).
Gabscewicz, J., and J.-F. Thisse. 1980. \Entry (and Exit) in a Di®erentiated Industry."
Journal of Economic Theory 22:327-338.

44

General Talking Pictures Corp. v. Western Electric Co., 305 U.S. 124, 59 S.Ct. 116, 83
L.Ed 81 (1938).
Gi®ord, D. J. 2002. \The Antitrust/Intellectual Property Interface: An Emerging Solution to an Intractable Problem." Hofstra Law Review 31:398-418.
Hensley Equip. Co., Inc. v. Esco Corp., 383 F.2d 252 (5th Cir. 1967).
Hovenkamp, H., M. D. Janis, and M. A. Lemley 2004, IP and Antitrust:
sis of Antitrust Principles Applied to Intellectual Property Law.

An Analy-

New York: Aspen

Publishers.
Interstate Circuit v. U.S., 306 U.S. 208, 59 S.Ct. 467, 83 L.Ed. 610 (1939).
Kamien, M. I. 1992. \Patent Licensing." In R. Aumann, and S. Hart, eds., Handbook
of Game Theory, 331-354. Amsterdam: North-Holland/Elsevier Science.
Kaplow, L. 1984.

\The Patent-Antitrust Intersection: A Reappraisal." Harvard Law

Review 97:1813-1912.
Landes, W. M. and R.A. Posner. 2003. The Economic Structure of Intellectual Property
Law. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
Neal Report (White House Task Force Report on Antitrust Policy), 1969. Antitrust &
Trade Regulation Reports 411 (Pt. 2).
American Bar Association Section of Antitrust Law 2002. The Federal Antitrust Guidelines for the Licensing of Intellectual Property: Origins and Applications (ABA Publishing 2d ed.).
Morton Salt v. G.S. Suppiger Co., 314 U.S. 488, 62 S.Ct. 402, 86 L.Ed. 363 (1942).
Patterson, M. R. 2002. \When is Property Intellectual: The Leveraging Problem." Southern California Law Review 73:1133-1160
Royal Industries v. St. Regis Paper Co., 420 F.2d 449 (9th Cir. 1969).
Schlicher, J. W. 2002. Patent Law: Legal and Economic Principles. Eagan MN: Thomson/West.
45

Scotchmer, S. 1991. \Standing on the Shoulders of Giants: Cumulative Research and the
Patent Law." Journal of Economic Perspectives 5:29-41.
Scotchmer, S. 2005. Innovation and Incentives. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Shapiro, C. 2003. \Antitrust Limits to Patent Settlements." RAND Journal of Economics 34:391-411.
Shapiro v. General Motors Corp., 472 F. Supp. 636 (D. Md. 1979).
U.S. v. Line Material Co. 333 US 287, 68 S.Ct. 550, 92 L.Ed. 701 (1948)
U.S. v. General Electric Co., 272 U.S. 476, 47 S.Ct. 192, 71 L.Ed. 362 (1926).
U.S. v. E.I. du Pont De Nemours & Co., 118 F. Supp. 41 (D. Del. 1953).
Weinschel, A.J. 2000. Antitrust-Intellectual Property Handbook (Glasser LegalWorks, Little Falls N.J.)

46

