NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE COSTS OF LOW BIRTH WEIGHT
Douglas Almond
Kenneth Y. Chay
David S. Lee
Working Paper 10552
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10552
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2004

An earlier version of this paper was circulated with the title “Does Low Birth Weight Matter? Evidence from
the U.S. Population of Twin Births” (Center for Labor Economics Working Paper No. 53, September 2002).
We thank David Card, Janet Currie, David Cutler, Bill Evans, Lorenz Goethe, Michael Grossman, Jon
Gruber, Ted Joyce, Bob Kaestner, Larry Katz, Karen Norberg, Jack Porter, Doug Staiger, Paul Torelli, and
participants of seminars at Berkeley, Illinois, Maryland, RAND, and the NBER Summer Institute in
Children’s Studies for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Douglas Almond, Kenneth Y. Chay, and David S. Lee. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Costs of Low Birth Weight
Douglas Almond, Kenneth Y. Chay, and David S. Lee
NBER Working Paper No. 10552
June 2004
JEL No. H51, I12, I18
ABSTRACT
Birth weight has emerged as the leading indicator of infant health and welfare and the central focus
of infant health policy. This is because low birth weight (LBW) infants experience severe health and
developmental difficulties that can impose enormous costs on society. But would the prevention of
LBW generate equally sizable cost savings and health improvements? Estimates of the return to
LBW-prevention from cross-sectional associations may be biased by omitted variables that cannot
be influenced by policy, such as genetic factors. To address this, we compare the hospital costs,
health at birth, and infant mortality rates between heavier and lighter infants from all twin pairs born
in the United States. We also examine the effect of maternal smoking during pregnancy n the
leading risk factor for LBW in the United States n on health among singleton births after
controlling for detailed background characteristics. Both analyses imply substantially smaller effects
of LBW than previously thought, suggesting two possibilities: 1) existing estimates overstate the
true costs and consequences of LBW by at least a factor of four and by as much as a factor of 20;
or 2) different LBW-preventing interventions have different health and cost consequences, implying
that policy efforts that presume a single return to reducing LBW will necessarily be suboptimal.
Douglas Almond
Department of Economics
Columbia University
International Affairs Building,
MC 3308
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
almond@nber.org

Kenneth Y. Chay
Department of Economics

David S. Lee
Department of Economics

University of California, Berkeley University of California, Berkeley

549 Evans Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
kenchay@econ.berkeley.edu

549 Evans Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
dslee@econ.berkeley.edu

I. Introduction
Infants born at low birth weight (LBW) – conventionally defined as a birth weight less than 2,500
grams – experience severe health and developmental difficulties that can impose substantial costs on
society. For example, the expected costs of delivery and initial care of a baby weighing 1000 grams at
birth can exceed $100,000 (in year 2000 dollars), and the risk of death within one year of birth is over
one-in-five. Even among babies weighing 2000-2100 grams, who have comparatively low mortality
rates, an additional pound (454 grams) of weight is still associated with a $10,000 difference in hospital
charges for inpatient services. The open circles in Figure 1 illustrate these striking facts, plotting the
associations between hospital costs at discharge and birth weight (Panels A and B) and between infant
mortality and birth weight (Panel C) for singleton births in the United States.1 Studies have also
established a correlation between LBW and high blood pressure, cerebral palsy, deafness, blindness,
asthma and lung disease among children, as well as with reduced IQ, test scores, and cognitive
development.2
Not surprisingly, birth weight is the primary measure of a baby’s health in most analyses of infant
health and welfare in economic research. In some contexts, birth weight is viewed as the “output” in the
study of infant health production functions and the maternal behaviors that impact infant well-being
(Rosenzweig and Schultz 1983; Corman, et al. 1987; Grossman and Joyce 1990; Geronimus and
Korenman 1992; Rosenzweig and Wolpin 1991; Rosenzweig and Wolpin 1995; Currie and Moretti
2003). In other contexts, birth weight is an “input” – i.e., a proxy for the initial endowment of an infant’s
“health human capital”. Consistent with this view, research has found that LBW infants tend to have
lower educational attainment, poorer self-reported health status, and reduced employment and earnings as
adults, relative to their normal weight counterparts (Behrman, Rosenzweig, and Taubman 1994; Currie
and Hyson 1999; Behrman and Rosenzweig 2001). Finally, birth weight has been used to evaluate the
effectiveness of social policy. Research on the benefits of large-scale social programs – including welfare

1

We discuss the samples and estimation methods underlying Figure 1 below.
For example, see Kaelber and Pugh (1969), McCormick, et al. (1992), Paneth (1995), Nelson and Grether (1997),
Lucas, Morley, and Cole (1998), Brooks, et al. (2001), Matte, et al. (2001), and Richards, et al. (2001).

2

and health insurance for the poor – typically use birth weight as the primary indicator of infant welfare
(Currie and Cole 1993; Currie and Gruber 1996; Hanratty 1996).
Perhaps because of its central role in research on infant health and welfare, LBW is also the direct
target of health policy, both in the United States and abroad. In the U.S., reducing the incidence of LBW
has been a stated goal of several social programs targeting infant health, including Medicaid, and
publicly-funded nutrition programs such as the Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) program.3 The
National Institutes of Health has encouraged research to focus on the prevention of LBW births.4 The
World Bank’s $100 million “Second Tamil Nadu Integrated Nutrition Project” in India had “cut[ting] in
half the incidence of low birth weight newborns” as a goal.
The logic behind focusing on LBW as a central target of policy is illustrated by an important
health intervention effort in the United States – the prevention of cigarette smoking during pregnancy.
Babies born to mothers who smoke during pregnancy are on average 9-10 ounces lighter than those born
to non-smoking mothers. Indeed, maternal smoking has been identified as the most significant,
modifiable risk factor for LBW incidence in developed countries (Kramer 1987): in the United States,
smoking mothers are over two times more likely to have a LBW baby than non-smoking mothers. The
strong cross-sectional association between LBW and infant mortality has led to the reasoning that the
prevention of all maternal smoking is an “optimal public health outcome”, since “maternal smoking is a
significant risk factor for LBW infants, which, in turn, influences infant mortality” (Vogler and
Kozlowski 2002). Similarly, the correlation between LBW and the hospital costs of birth (e.g. open
circles in Panels A and B of Figure 1) has been used to calculate the sizeable cost savings of interventions
that encourage smoking cessation (Lightwood, et al. 1999).

3

In the United States, a motivation for the Medicaid expansion to pregnant women during the 1980s was the
reduction of the incidence of low birth weight through expanded access to prenatal care (Currie and Gruber, 1996).
See Institute of Medicine (1996) for the LBW motivation for WIC and Kowalseki-Jones and Duncan (2002) for an
evaluation of the birth weight benefits of the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program of WIC.
4
For example, the chief goal of a program announcement for NIH-sponsored research (PA-99-045) is the
“development of innovative strategies to prevent LBW in minority populations.” In addition, the director of the
NICHD, has stated “[T]he increased black mortality from low birth weight is not due to weaker infants or poorer
care. It is simply because there are so many more low birth weight and particularly very low birth weight AfricanAmerican births. So the key is to try to prevent these low birth weight births.”

2

There is, however, an important caveat to these kinds of policy conclusions.5 The strong
correlation between birth weight and costs (or between birth weight and mortality) may partially reflect
the influence of unobserved variables. For example, some mothers could be genetically predisposed to
giving birth to unhealthy babies who – because of this inherent disadvantage – fail to attain normal birth
weights. For these babies, it may be possible to prevent LBW, but doing so will have no impact on
mortality risk, if such risk were genetically determined. More generally, for cost-benefit assessments of
policy, estimates of the returns to reducing LBW should control for factors that cannot be influenced by
policy, such as genetics and race.
This study provides new evidence on the early health and economic costs of LBW, attempting to
control for these confounding factors.6 Our first approach uses the population of twins born in the United
States between 1983 and 2000 to examine the correlation between twin differences in birth weight and
twin differences in hospital costs, other measures of health at birth, and infant mortality rates. This
strategy controls for all observed and unobserved characteristics of the mother. In the case of identical
twins, it guarantees that the birth weight differences are entirely driven by environmental factors (e.g.,
nutritional intake within the uterus) rather than by any genetic factors.
In a complementary analysis, we consider a specific external influence of LBW that is 1)
arguably less directly attributable to genetics, 2) most certainly not a consequence of the inherent health
of the fetus, and 3) cited as the leading modifiable cause of LBW in the United States: maternal smoking
during pregnancy. We estimate the effects of maternal smoking on a variety of infant health outcomes for
the population of singleton births, controlling for the detailed background variables available in birth
certificate data. The estimates are predicted to be large if, indeed, smoking causes LBW, and if LBW has
a causal link to adverse infant health outcomes. Here, by attributing the entire impact of maternal
smoking on infant health to its impact through LBW, we generate estimates of the effects of LBW that are
5

Cross-sectional correlations between birth weight and various childhood outcomes are often used to calculate the
costs of LBW. For example, using this approach Lewit et al. (1995) calculate that in 1988 the health care,
education, and child care costs associated with the 3.5-4 million children aged 0 to 15 born at low birth weight was
$5.5-6 billion more than if the children had been born at normal weight, and that LBW accounted for 10 percent of
all health care costs for children.
6
More specifically, as we discuss below, we are assessing the costs and consequences of intrauterine growth
retardation.

3

arguably overstated. We recognize that, in contrast to the twin analysis, this approach cannot fully
control for unobserved heterogeneity across mothers. Nevertheless, the analysis allows us to gauge the
plausibility of the magnitudes derived from the analysis of twins, within an important and policy-relevant
context.
Both approaches yield implied impacts of LBW that are many times smaller than those typically
used in cost-benefit calculations. First, we document the significant differences in birth weights between
twins – an average difference that is larger than the estimated impact of maternal smoking on birth
weight. There is also substantial variation in hospital costs and health outcomes within twin pairs. We
find, however, that the birth weight difference is a relatively poor predictor of differences in costs or other
health outcomes. Table 1 reports the coefficients from linear regressions of several different outcomes on
birth weight for different samples of twin pairs. The cross-sectional OLS estimates in the first column
indicate that a one standard deviation increase in birth weight (one pound and seven ounces) is associated
with a 0.51 standard deviation decrease in hospital costs of about $19,500 (in $2000). When mother fixed
effects are included, the costs estimate falls by a factor of 6, implying a $3,200 decrease in hospital costs.
In addition, there is evidence to suggest that even these latter estimates – which account for
mother-specific heterogeneity – are overstated, due to a potential association between detrimental genes
and lower birth weights.7 For example, the coefficients fall further when we drop the small number of
twin pairs in which one of the twins is born with a congenital anomaly or dies as a result of a congenital
anomaly, as shown in the third column. 8 The estimated effects of birth weight on the incidence of
assisted ventilation, an initial health measure (the five-minute APGAR score), and infant mortality, fall by
additional factors of 2 to 3. Overall, the conventional OLS estimates imply that a one standard deviation
increase in birth weight reduces infant mortality, increases APGAR scores, and reduces ventilator use by
0.41, 0.51, and 0.25 standard deviations, respectively, while the corresponding magnitudes from the fixed
effects specification (final column) vary between 0 and 0.03 standard deviations. Due to the large sample
7

As we discuss below, our data cannot differentiate between identical and fraternal twins. This leads to within-twin
pair variation in genes, which may be correlated with birth weight.
8
Among the known causes of congenital abnormalities, only about 10 percent is believed to be due to environment
only. The data do not allow us to perform this exercise with the hospital discharge data.

4

sizes, the fixed effects estimates are precise; indeed, several of the estimates are statistically different
from zero, even though their magnitudes are 13 to 20 times smaller than in the cross-section. As we
discuss below, this enormous reduction in magnitudes can lead to very different cost-benefit calculations
and policy conclusions.
Furthermore, we document two other facts relevant for policy purposes. First, we show that the
twins population is not so different from the singleton population with respect to the association between
birth weight and infant health outcomes and costs. For example, even though twins are generally born at
much lower birth weights, the cross-sectional relation between birth weight and health outcomes/costs for
the two populations is very similar, as illustrated in Figure 1. Second, there are important nonlinearities
in the relation between birth weight and infant outcomes, implying that interventions that raise birth
weights will have very different impacts, depending on whether they raise weights for moderately or
extremely low weight babies. For example, the fixed effects estimates in Figure 1C show that a one
pound birth weight increase from 540 grams to 1000 grams reduces the probability of infant death by 0.15
(compared to the difference of 0.60 when mother effects are excluded). But the fixed effects (as well as
the conventional OLS) estimates imply very little mortality impact of a one pound weight increase at birth
weights above 1,500 grams. And even though there is a negligible influence of birth weight on mortality
in the 4.5 to 5.5 pound range (2,000 to 2,500 grams), the fixed effects estimates in Figure 1B imply that
such a one pound increase in weight results in a cost savings of $2,000 (compared to the $11,000 implied
by the conventional OLS estimates).
We subject our findings to a battery of robustness checks and demonstrate that they are
insensitive to the years of birth examined, functional form assumptions, and the scheme used to match
twins. In addition, we test the assumption of twin exchangeability that underlies the fixed effects models.
Finally, we document that the five-minute APGAR score, another continuous proxy for health of the
infant at birth, is a significantly better predictor of within-twin pair differences in both infant mortality
and assisted ventilation than birth weight.
The findings from analyzing the impact of maternal smoking on infant health among singletons
are remarkably consistent with those from the twins analysis. We estimate a substantial impact of
5

smoking on birth weight (and on LBW incidence) after controlling for detailed background characteristics
using both regression and propensity score methods. However, the corresponding estimates of the effects
of smoking on the five-minute APGAR score, assisted ventilation use after birth, and infant mortality are
essentially zero. In addition, using our estimates of the association between maternal smoking and birth
weight and the association between birth weight and costs, we calculate a cost savings of $53 per infant
for every mother discouraged from smoking during pregnancy. By contrast, the cross-sectional estimates
typically used in the literature imply a cost savings of over $1,000 per infant.
In two different settings – corresponding to policies that impact fetal nutrient intake and maternal
smoking – we find small effects of birth weight on other outcomes of interest. There are two plausible
interpretations of these results. The first is that the analysis identifies the structural impact of birth weight
and that the true health benefits and cost savings of preventing LBW are greatly exaggerated by crosssectional correlations. A more cautious interpretation is that the cross-sectional correlations, withinmother twins analysis, and the covariate-adjusted smoking analysis each isolate different determinants of
birth weight, and therefore that the benefits to reducing LBW are highly dependent on the type of
intervention that influences birth weight. At a minimum, this would imply that LBW status is not a
consistently dependable target of policy, if the ultimate objective is to minimize infant mortality, health
problems, and consequent health care costs. That is, the most cost-effective ways of preventing LBW
may have little correspondence with the most cost-effective ways of minimizing infant health problems
and consequent health care costs.
The next section defines the parameter of interest and describes our estimation strategies. Section
III describes the data and provides descriptive statistics. Section IV presents our main findings, while
Section V implements our robustness checks. We discuss the policy implications of our results in Section
VI and conclude with directions for future research in Section VII.

II. Conceptual Framework and the Etiology of LBW
This section discusses our framework for quantifying the costs and consequences of LBW. In
particular, we define the parameter of interest and describe our identification strategies; discuss the
6

etiology of LBW; justify the outcome variables used in the study; and discuss functional form issues for
estimating the impact of birth weight on these outcomes.

A. Parameter of Interest
Let
(1)

hij = α + bwij β + X i' γ + a i + ε ij

where hij is the underlying health of newborn j for mother i, bwij is birth weight, Xi is a vector of motherspecific observable determinants of health (e.g., race, age, education), ai reflects mother-specific
unobservable determinants of health (e.g., genetic factors), and ε ij represents other newborn-specific
idiosyncratic factors, assumed to be independent of all observable and unobservable factors.
The central parameter of interest is β , and its magnitude is important for policy purposes. If it is
large and positive, it suggests substantial benefits to interventions that raise birth weights. Estimation of

β by OLS, however, is confounded by the existence of factors such as race, age, and education (elements
of Xi) or genetic determinants (ai) that simultaneously influence birth weight and infant health. The
omitted variables formula implies that the OLS coefficient from a regression of the health measure on
birth weight is
(2)

β OLS = β +

(

cov bwij , X i' γ
var( bwij )

) + cov(bw

ij

, ai

)

var( bwij )

Thus, even if there is a strong cross-sectional correlation between health measures and birth weight – and

β OLS is highly significant – the strength of the relation could be driven by the correlation between birth
weight and other factors such as race, age, education, and unobservable genetic factors.
The distinction between β and the latter two terms in (2) is important. Existing LBW-reducing
intervention efforts in the U.S. (nutritional programs, smoking cessation) do not seek to alter the age or
education levels of mothers, and no policy can ever affect immutable factors such as race or genetics.
Thus, if β OLS is primarily driven by the latter two terms in (2), then it would be an exaggerated and
perhaps misleading estimate of the benefits ( β ) of a policy that raises birth weights.

7

B. Identification Strategies
We use two different strategies to estimate β . First, we examine the population of twin births in
the U.S., and include mother fixed effects in the regression. Twins share the same mother, so the
inclusion of fixed effects effectively controls for race, age, education, family background, behaviors (e.g.,
smoking), as well as genetic factors and other unobservable mother-specific factors. Including mother
fixed effects is equivalent to estimating the first-differenced equation:
(3)

hi 1 − hi 2 = α 1 − α 2 + (bwi 1 − bwi 2 )β + ε i 1 − ε i 2

where ‘1’ and ‘2’ denote the first- and second-born infants of a twin-pair. Under the assumption that

ε ij is uncorrelated with bwij, the fixed effects estimator, β FE , is unbiased for β . In the case of fraternal
twins, genetic differences could imply that (εi1 – εi2) is correlated with (bwi1 – bwi2) leading to a β FE that
is biased. Below, we find evidence that birth weight is negatively correlated with congenital defects
among twins, suggesting that β FE overstates the impact of birth weight per se.9 Further, below we use
the birth order of twins to derive tests of the assumption of the “perfect exchangeability” of twins that
underlies the twins fixed effects estimator.
Second, to complement this “within-mother” approach, we conduct a “between-mother” analysis.
Specifically, we attempt to isolate variation in birth weight that is a direct result of the behavior that has
been identified as the leading cause of LBW in the United States: maternal smoking (Kramer 1987). It
has been argued that since smoking induces LBW, and LBW causes infant mortality, then maternal
smoking must have an influence on infant mortality (Vogler and Kozlowski, 2002). To test this
reasoning, we estimate the direct effect of maternal smoking on infant mortality and on other outcomes
and attribute this effect entirely to the impact of smoking on birth weight.
More formally, let
(4)

bwij = λ + SMOKEi δ + X i'ψ + u ij

9

Almond, Chay and Lee (2002) show the set of conditions under which the “twins estimate” should be strong and
potentially larger than the cross-sectional “between-family” relation if birth weight is a valid policy marker.

8

where SMOKEi is an indicator for whether the mother smoked during pregnancy, uij reflects unobservable
determinants of birth weight, and is by definition orthogonal to SMOKEi and Xi. The reduced-form then
becomes
(5)

hij = α * + SMOKEi δβ + X i' γ * + a*i + u ij β + ε ij

where a*i is the residual from regressing ai on Xi.10 Unbiased estimation of δβ with OLS requires

SMOKEi to be uncorrelated with a*i .
There is no a priori justification for a*i being uncorrelated with SMOKEi, and the analysis cannot
control for unobservable differences across families. Equations (4) and (5) implicitly assume that
smoking behavior during pregnancy is “randomized” conditional on the observable characteristics Xi.
While experimental studies have demonstrated an effect of smoking cessation during pregnancy on birth
weight and LBW, they have found no effects on gestation length and APGAR scores. 11 Further, the small
numbers of women in the treatment and control groups did not allow for an analysis of the impact of
smoking cessation on rare outcomes such as infant mortality. Thus, all of the evidence on the infant
mortality effects of maternal smoking stems from purely observational studies.
In view of this, our approach is to estimate the direct effects of maternal smoking using a large
sample of singleton births while controlling for more detailed maternal and background characteristics
than previous studies. We also allow these characteristics to enter flexibly in both a regression and
propensity score analysis. Although this may still result in biased inference, two factors mitigate potential
concerns. First, the estimated birth weight effects are both robust and similar in magnitude to those
documented in the experimental literature. Second, we attribute the entire infant health effect of maternal
smoking to its impact on birth weight. Thus, the OLS estimate of δβ will overstate the importance of the
birth weight channel if maternal smoking has a negative effect on infant health that is independent of its
effect on LBW. This will also be true if the omitted variables, such as genetics, are correlated both with
smoking and poorer birth outcomes.
10

γ * is ( γ + ψβ + φ ) where φ are the linear projection coefficients from regressing ai on Xi. α * is ( α + λβ ).

11

The quasi-experimental studies involve randomly assigned interventions in which the treatment group was
encouraged to cease smoking through personal visits, information dissemination, telephone calls, etc. Some
examples are Sexton and Hebel (1984), Ershoff et al. (1989), and Windsor et al. (1993).

9

C. Etiology and Sources of Birth Weight Variation
It is generally recognized that LBW is governed by two factors: a short duration of gestation (i.e.,
prematurity), and a reduced fetal growth rate at a fixed gestation length, also known as intrauterine
growth retardation (IUGR). Research on the etiology of birth weight suggests that both environmental
and genetic factors play a role in the rate of fetal growth in utero. In a widely-cited survey of research on
the determinants of low birth weight, Kramer (1987) notes that most research focuses on the factors
causing IUGR, as opposed to those causing prematurity.12 In addition, interventions targeted at
preventing premature birth, including enhanced prenatal care and nutritional interventions, have been
found to be ineffective (Goldenberg and Rouse 1998). By contrast, the causes of IUGR are both wellknown and well-established. This study focuses on the consequences of LBW resulting from IUGR.
The twins analysis described above seems ideal for isolating birth weight variation driven by
IUGR. Gestational ages for twins are essentially identical, so differences in birth weight must necessarily
be due to differential intrauterine growth rates. While twins must share the same supply of nutrition from
the mother, this sharing can be unequal. For example, for identical twins sharing the same placenta, the
differing insertion points of the twins’ umbilical cords into the placenta are believed to affect nutritional
intake of each fetus, and hence contribute to intra-pair differences in fetal growth (Bryan 1992).13 This
type of variation corresponds to an intervention that affects intrauterine nutrient consumption of the fetus.
Further, the similarity of the twins and singletons cross-sectional “response functions” plotted in Figures
1 and 2 suggest that twins may not be an unusual subpopulation with respect to their responses to birth
weight changes. Indeed, if anything the pooled response function of twins has a slightly sharper gradient

12

In developing countries, it is difficult to analyze prematurity since the gestational age is often unrecorded or
unreliably measured (Kramer 1987).
13
The most commonly cited factors for twin birth weight differences are discrepancies in the microintrauterine
environment due to different placentation and blood perfusion (Zhang, et al., 2001), different nutritional sources at
different parts of the uterus, and different genetic growth potentials among dizygotic twins. Although very rare,
fetal transfusion syndrome among identical twins, which involves the transfer of blood from one fetus directly to the
other, can cause substantial birth weight differences (also known as discordance). In this case, both the lighter and
heavier twins are at greater risk of death. Some of this follows from a conversation with Dr. Louis Keith in the
Obstetrics and Gynecology Department of Northwestern University. He has edited a text on multiple pregnancies.

10

than that of singletons for all outcomes examined in this study.14
According to the Kramer (1987) survey, nutrition plays an important role in intrauterine growth.
In both developed and developing countries, low caloric intake is found to be one of the most important
modifiable contributors to IUGR. The other important modifiable contributor to IUGR, particularly in
developed countries, is maternal cigarette smoking. This motivates our second identification strategy to
quantify the costs of LBW. Based on analyses that use the correlation between LBW and infant health
and costs, interventions that target maternal smoking cessation have been identified as having large
benefits-to-costs ratios. Further, the experimental intervention studies have found substantive effects of
smoking cessation on birth weight but no effects on gestation length. Consequently, maternal smoking
presents another compelling context for examining the effects of IUGR.15

D. Measures of Health and Costs
We use four different outcome variables (hij) to characterize the consequences and costs of low
birth weight. First, we consider infant death at periods up to 1 year after birth. The advantage of this
measure is that it is a somewhat objective measure of severe health problems, and is in fact an outcome of
direct interest. Smoking cessation campaigns, for example, are motivated not by how smoking impacts
birth weight, per se, but instead by how smoking-induced LBW can affect infant mortality. As another
example, the U.S. National Institutes of Health has adopted the view that the difference in LBW between
blacks and whites is the leading cause of the substantial black-white gap in infant mortality. It is for this
reason that it has proposed that infant birth weight be targeted for intervention.
Second, we examine the so-called APGAR score of initial infant health status. The National
Center for Health Statistics describes this measure as a “predictor of the infant’s chances of surviving the
first year of life” and a “summary measure of the infant’s condition” (NCHS Vital Statistics Technical
14

Conley, Strully, and Bennett (2003) argue that among identical twins sharing a placenta, the smaller twin may be
even more deprived of nutrition than a comparable fraternal twin or singleton birth. They conclude that a fixed
effects estimate based on identical twins will overstate the importance of size at birth.
15
Other identified contributors in Kramer (1987) were more generalized: pre-pregnancy weight, very young
maternal age, maternal education, and weight gain during pregnancy. Other studies have found IUGR effects of
alcohol and drug abuse, maternal nutrition, and prenatal care, but little evidence of effects on prematurity
(Goldenberg and Rouse 1998).

11

Appendix, 1990). The APGAR score ranges from 0 to 10 and is calculated from five separate tests of
newborn health made both one and five minutes after birth. At the time of birth, the doctor assesses each
of the five factors, and for each factor a score from 0 to 2 is given. The five health factors are heart rate,
respiratory effort, muscle tone, reflex irritability, and color. The five scores are summed to calculate the
APGAR score. Since infant death can be extremely rare at birth weights above 1,500 grams, this measure
is helpful when mortality indicators are too crude to measure underlying health.
Third, we consider the total charges incurred by the hospital for the delivery and initial care of the
infants. This can be an important component of the societal costs of LBW. That is, even if it is possible
to treat LBW infants so that they have similar health outcomes as normal weight babies, the price to pay
for this parity may be the use of costly medical procedures. Hospital costs at discharge provide a
comprehensive index of these procedures.
Fourth, we examine one of these costly procedures: the newborn’s utilization of a ventilator for
assisted-breathing shortly after delivery. In addition to being a specific component of the costs, it is also
an alternative measure of any initial health problems that may be incompletely captured by the APGAR
score.
In the analysis of twins, we examine the effects of birth weight on all four outcomes. Below, we
find substantial intra-pair variation in these outcomes as well as in birth weight. This, along with the fact
that the APGAR score is a substantive predictor of the variation in infant death and ventilator use,
suggests that the relatively small birth weight effects that we document are not the result of either
measurement error in the outcomes or behavioral responses of parents and hospitals – e.g., attempting to
keep twins together until discharge.
Unfortunately, the hospital discharge data used in this study do not contain information on the
smoking behavior of the mother during pregnancy. As a result, we cannot examine the direct association
between maternal smoking and hospital costs, and, to date, we have not found any study that has been
able to do this. However, the effect of maternal smoking on the use of assisted ventilation provides
evidence on at least one very costly procedure.

12

E. Functional Form Issues
There are a number of important functional form issues involved in estimating Equations (3), (4),
and (5). First, as suggested by the plots for singletons in Figure 1, the relationship between birth weight
and various health and cost outcomes is nonlinear. In certain ranges – 300-1000 grams for mortality, and
800-2500 grams for costs – the relationship with birth weight is steep, but quickly flattens at higher
weights. Therefore, we also estimate fixed effects models that include a set of dummy variables for
discrete birth weight categories, given by
hij = α +
Dijk β k + X i' γ + ai + ε ij
(6)

∑
k

where

Dijk

is an indicator variable that is equal to one if the jth infant of the ith mother is in the kth (out of

200) quantile of the overall birth weight distribution.16 We plot the entire set of estimated coefficients of

β k to give a complete picture of the effects at different parts of the birth weight distribution. In Figures
1A, B, and C, the solid squares plot these coefficients.
To quantify the slopes of the relationship throughout the birth weight distribution, we simply
Dijk β k in (6) with a piecewise linear spline specification with break points at 600, 800, 1000,
replace

∑
k

1500, 2000, 2500, and 3000 grams, and report the slope coefficients for each segment. For all health and
cost outcomes, we use least squares to estimate these equations with and without fixed effects. For the
binary outcome variables, mortality and ventilator use, we also estimate the above specifications by logit
and fixed-effects conditional logit to examine sensitivity to the specification of the probability model.
Finally, for the maternal smoking analysis, we implement a propensity score procedure. The
most flexible way to incorporate covariates is to simply compute smoking-nonsmoking differences for
each distinct value of the observed covariates X, and average those differences. Due to the high
dimension of X, we instead use a propensity score approach (Rosenbaum and Rubin, 1983). More
specifically, we estimate a logit model that predicts the probability of maternal smoking during pregnancy
based on all of the “pre-treatment” covariates that have been determined prior to pregnancy. These
include mother’s and father’s age, education, and race, marital status, number of previous live births and
16

For the pooled singletons’ plots, we used 655 quantiles of the conditional distribution of birth weights below
3,000 grams.

13

terminations, prenatal care usage, months since last birth, immigrant status, county of birth, indicators for
previous births over 4000 grams or LBW, indicators for alcohol use, and indicators for medical risk
factors (see Torelli 2003).17 We then group the predicted probabilities of smoking for each observation –
i.e., the propensity score – into 200 equal-sized bins from the overall distribution of propensity scores. To
graphically illustrate the estimated “treatment” effects, we present the average outcomes for both smokers
and nonsmokers in each of the 200 cells in which the propensity score is held constant.

III. Data and Summary of Differences between Twins
Here we describe the data sets used and document the degree of within-twin pair variation in twin
birth weights and outcomes. We utilize two different data sources on twin births. The first is the annual,
linked birth and infant death micro data produced by the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS).
These files provide detailed information on the population of U.S. twin births and death information for
those who die within their first year of life. The second is the Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project
(HCUP) State Inpatient Database, produced by the Department of Health and Human Services. The
HCUP database contains detailed information collected from hospital discharge abstracts in participating
states. We are the first to match twin pairs in either data set using a unique algorithm.

A. Linked Birth-Infant Death Data: 1983-1985 1989-1991, 1995-1997
These micro data files provide detailed information on the universe of births occurring each year
in the United States, as reported on birth certificates, linked to death certificate information for the infants
who die in their first year of life. The natality portion of the linked data provides socioeconomic and
demographic information on each mother giving birth, including maternal age, race, educational
attainment, marital status, childbearing history, prenatal care, and geographic residence. Beginning in
1989, the files also contain information on mother’s tobacco use during pregnancy. Information on the

17

Medical risk factors include anemia, cardiac disease, lung disease, diabetes, genital herpes,
hyrdamnios/oligohydramnios, hemoglobinopathy, chronic hypertension, eclampsia, incompetent cervix, renal
disease, Rh sensitization, and uterine bleeding.

14

father includes age, race, education, and Hispanic origin. The natality portion also includes detailed
information on the newborn infant, including baby’s sex, race, gestational age, birth weight, APGAR
scores, use of assisted ventilation, and plurality – i.e., whether the infant was part of a multiple birth.
For the infants who die by the age of one, NCHS matches detailed information drawn from death
certificates to the corresponding birth record. This information includes the infant’s age at death in days,
where the death occurred, and the precise cause of death. Annual linked birth/infant death files are
available from 1983 through to the present, with the exception of the years 1992, 1993, and 1994, when
only “unlinked” natality and mortality detail files are available. In the 1989 birth cohort, for example,
approximately 97.4 percent of the 38,605 infant death records are matched to one of the 4,045,881
natality records.
Our analysis of twins only uses information for matched twin pairs. Multiple birth records are
identified with the plurality variable (DPLURAL). In 1989, 2.2 percent of all births (90,022) were twin
births (DPLURAL=2). While the corresponding twin pairs for each mother are not explicitly identified in
the linked data, beginning with the 1989 file, records for twin pairs are generally located next to each
other in the “denominator-plus” file produced by NCHS. The adjacency of twin records can be inferred
from the detailed information on parental and pregnancy characteristics, which generally are repeated the
same number of times as the plurality variable would indicate. The precise procedure used to confirm
twin matches is described in the Data Appendix.18 Further, the birth order of the matched twins can be
determined by the information provided on the number of children born to the mother at the time of birth.
For the 1989 birth cohort, 58,132 matched twin pairs born to non-Hispanic, black and white native-born
mothers are used in the analysis.
While births occurring between 1989 and 1991 are the primary focus of the analysis, twin pairs
were also matched for the 1983 to 1985 and 1995 to 1997 birth cohorts. Before 1989, twin records are
not located next to each other in NCHS’s “denominator-plus” file. Therefore, the plurality indicator is
18

It should be noted that any “mismatching” of twin pairs will cause an upward bias in the twins fixed effects
estimates of the effect of birth weight. Pollack, et al. (2000) use a different algorithm to match twins with their
siblings in linked birth-infant death data. However, the matched twin pairs are only used to adjust their estimated
standard errors for twin-pair correlation in the residuals.

15

used along with a string of eleven variables reflecting parental and pregnancy characteristics to match
twin records with identical values. Checks of this alternative matching algorithm using variables not
included in the matching string indicate that the matching is nearly as good as the record location-based
approach. Moreover, the basic 1989-1991 results do not change when the covariate matching approach is
used instead. For 1983 and 1984, NCHS did not include a unique identifier to enable one-to-one
matching of birth and death records. Therefore, a string of 35 covariates is used to match the live birth
records (where a death is known to occur) with additional information on the death provided by the
“numerator file” record. Approximately 150 twin observations are lost in each year due to multiple
potential matches. The elimination of these observations has only a nominal effect on the results.
For births occurring between 1995 and 1997, in which the location-based matching algorithm is
used, father’s education was no longer collected by NCHS. Therefore, adjacent twin birth records for
these cohorts are not checked for consistency in father’s education (see Data Appendix). However,
maternal education, maternal age, race, and other factors are still checked for consistency within adjacent
twin pairs.
In the fall of 2002, NCHS released the 1995-1997 Matched Multiple Birth Data Set that matches
multiple births from the same delivery set. The algorithm NCHS uses to match twins is similar to the
covariate approach used here for births between 1983 and 1985. NCHS does use additional information –
namely mother’s date of birth and the half-week of delivery – that increases the precision of their
covariate matches and is unavailable in the publicly-released linked files. However, NCHS does not
make use of the information contained in the adjacency of multiple-birth records, as the algorithm applied
in this study does for 1989 on.19 Despite the different matching algorithms, below we find that the
empirical results based on the NCHS-matched data are nearly identical to those based on our 1995-1997
location-based matching algorithm.

19

NCHS does not maintain information on the set to which a multiple birth belongs, nor does it collect information
on the name or address of the mother, which would help in identifying twins from the same birth set. Further, the
NCHS-matched twins data suppresses information on the year (between 1995 and 1997) in which the multiple births
occurred. This is the data used in Conley, Strully, and Bennett (2003).

16

B. Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project Data: 1995-2000
The HCUP state inpatient database contains detailed information from the universe of hospital
discharge abstracts in participating states. In 1995, discharge data for thirteen states are available with
approximately 14 million records. In 2000, 18 states provided data with approximately 16.5 million
discharge records. According to HCUP, approximately 80 percent of all U.S. hospital discharges are
covered in their data.
The HCUP data include detailed information on hospital stays and patient characteristics.
Clinical information includes the diagnosis, course of treatment, information on the attending physician,
primary surgeon, the length of hospital stay, charges incurred during hospitalization, and the disposition
of the patient at discharge. Core demographic information on the patient is also provided, including the
age, race, and sex, and geographic residence of each patient. Finally, information on the timing of
admission, discharge, hospital at which treatment occurred, and the expected payment source is also
included.
For the purposes of this study, the key data elements are the birth weight of newborn infants, the
diagnosis (used to select twin births, as described in the Data Appendix), and the charges incurred in the
course of treatment. The availability of individual data elements varies by State. Only five of the
eighteen states provide information on birth weight: Arizona, Colorado, Maryland, New Jersey, and New
York. Of these five states, our analysis uses 1995-2000 discharge data from New York and New Jersey,
which compose almost one-quarter of all available discharge records in 2000. We also examined the
discharge data from Maryland, which provided nearly identical results (available from the authors).20
Twins can be matched using the same two approaches used for the linked birth-infant death data.
As most hospital admissions are for procedures other than delivery and given the relative infrequency of
twin births, the adjacency of twin records in the ASCII HCUP data is rare, and generally indicates that the
twins are part of the same set. Secondly, information on the twins that should be common within twin
20

As more than half of the Arizona discharge records were missing information on birth weight, Arizona is excluded
from the analysis, along with the Colorado, which had the smallest sample size (15 percent of New York sample).
We do not include Maryland in our analysis since the (location-based) algorithm used to match Maryland twins is
different from the algorithm (location- and covariate-based) used to match New York and New Jersey twins.

17

sets can be used to identify unique twin pairs independent of record location. As twin discharge records
cannot be linked to the maternal discharge record, information on the twin alone must be used to match
multiple birth records to the appropriate set. Both matching procedures are described in greater detail in
the Data Appendix. Since they led to similar findings, this study presents the results based on the
covariate matching scheme, which provides larger samples than record location matching.
Between 1995 and 2000, 44,500 (non-Hispanic white and black) newborn twin records are
matched in New York and New Jersey using the covariate matching approach. Average birth weight for
these twins is 2440 grams, which is close to the average birth weight in the linked vital statistics data.
The average length of hospital stay is 9 days; the initial hospitalization charges averaged $15,000 per
twin; and 1.4 percent of twins died prior to discharge.

C. Twins Compared to Singletons
Although twins represent a small subpopulation of all infants born in the U.S., they are of great
interest in the health and biomedical literatures for several reasons. First, while constituting 3 percent of
all births in the U.S. in 1997, twins accounted for 21 percent of all LBW births, 14 percent of preterm
births, and 13 percent of all infant deaths (Kogan, et al., 2000).21 Further, Kogan, et al. (2000) finds that
multiple births have accounted for an increasing share of all LBW infants over the past 20 years. Since
LBW is strongly associated with increased risk of infant mortality and subsequent developmental
difficulties, several researchers have suggested that the rising incidence of twin births is an important
public health problem. 22 Finally, several studies suggest that interventions that decrease infant mortality
among twins should be applicable to other high-risk groups (e.g., Fowler, et al., 1991).
Table 2 provides summary statistics for both singleton and twin births for one of the years of data
used in our analysis, 1989. It highlights some of the main similarities and dissimilarities between the two
21

In the 1989-1991 sample, twins account for over 2 percent of all births, 15 percent of LBW births, and 10 percent
of all infant deaths in the U.S.
22
For example, Behrman and Rosenzweig (2001) calculate that twinning results in a 12 percent reduction in lifetime
earnings when compared to singleton births due to their (28-ounce) lower birth weights. They conclude that the
growing incidence of twin births resulting from the increased use of fertility procedures among older women
imposes significant costs on children’s future development.

18

populations. Mothers of singleton and twin infants have comparable demographic characteristics, along
race, age and education. Owing to the large sample sizes, the differences are statistically significant, but
the means are similar – mothers of twins are slightly more likely to be black, older, more educated, and
married.
There are two important differences between the two populations. First, twins tend to be lighter,
with mean birth weights about 950 grams lower than singleton newborns. As Table 2 shows, the entire
distribution of twin birth weights is shifted leftward in comparison to the singleton distribution. Indeed,
the median twin would be considered a LBW baby. The prevalence of twins with low weights is helpful
for the identification of the birth weight effects. This is especially relevant since the cross-sectional
relation between birth weight and adverse outcomes among singletons is steeper at very low weights
(Figure 1). Second, along many measures, twins tend to be less healthy at birth than singletons. They are
much more likely to die within 1-day, 1-week, 1-month, and 1-year of the birth. Also, their APGAR
scores are lower, and their gestation lengths are shorter, with the average twin being born prematurely.
In view of these differences, we do two things when reporting our results. First, we compare the
fixed effects estimates to the pooled cross-section estimates for the same twins population. This ensures
that the differences between the two sets of estimates can be attributed to the presence of omitted
variables, rather than to a changing population. Second, we compare the pooled cross-section estimates
for the twins to that for the singleton population. If the birth weight-health cross-sectional relations in
these two populations are substantially different, it can suggest that the twins’ results may not be readily
generalizable to the larger population of births. If they are similar, then one cannot reject the hypothesis
that twins’ and singletons’ outcomes are characterized by the same equation (1), and subject to similar
omitted variables biases as in (2).

D. Within-Twin Pair Variation
Table 3 presents a variance decomposition of birth weight and the health and cost outcomes for
U.S. twins. Column 1 reports the total variance; column 2 the residual variance from a regression
controlling for a linear term in gestation length (in weeks); column 3 the residual variance from a
19

regression controlling for gestation length fixed effects; and column 4 the within-twin pair variance – i.e.,
the residual variance after controlling for mother fixed effects.
The first row shows the results for birth weight for the 1989-1991 birth cohorts of twins. 23 The
third column entry implies that variability in intrauterine growth rates account for (19.08/44.43=) 43
percent of the overall cross-sectional variation in birth weight, with gestation length accounting for the
remaining 57 percent. The final column reports that 40 percent of the variation in IUGR is due to withintwin pair differences in birth weight.24 This suggests that – conditional on gestation length – the factors
that cause differences in growth rates between twins of the same mother may also be important in
explaining across-family differences in twin growth rates.
The remaining rows show substantial within-twin pair variability in the outcome variables, also.
The second through fourth rows show that intra-pair differences in mortality account for 45 to 68 percent
of the variation in infant death adjusted for weeks of gestation. The within twin-pair variation in APGAR
scores and ventilator use is also significant. Since the discharge data do not contain gestation length, we
cannot compute a similar ratio for hospital costs. Nevertheless, the ratio of within-pair variation to the
overall variation (column 1) is 21 percent, which is on the same order of magnitude as the corresponding
ratios for the other variables (17, 42, 25, 32, 34, and 28 percent, respectively).
The first three columns in Table 4 show the differences in outcomes between the heavier twin and
his/her lighter co-twin for the 1989-1991 NCHS birth cohorts.25 The first row shows that the difference in
birth weights is 300 grams, on average. To put this magnitude in perspective, consider that maternal
smoking during pregnancy – believed to be the most important modifiable cause of LBW – has been
shown to have about a 200 gram impact on birth weight. The next three rows show that twin differences
in birth weight occur throughout the birth weight distribution, leading to large differences in the
likelihoods of the lighter twin weighing less than both 1500 grams and 1000 grams.

23

The scaling of the variables is described in the table notes.
It should be noted that this is probably a lower bound figure. Since gestation length in the NCHS data is measured
in weeks, the residual variation in birth weight after adjusting for the number of days of gestation would likely be
less than 19.08. Also, the within-twin pair variation is slightly greater for the 1995-1997 birth cohorts.
25
For about 5 percent of the pairs, the twins have identical birth weights.
24

20

The remaining rows show that the lighter twin also tends to experience worse health outcomes.
But the implied impact of birth weight is substantially smaller than that implied by the cross-sectional
correlations. For example, this 300 gram difference is associated with 6.8 more deaths (within the first
year of life) per 1,000 live births. The coefficient from the cross-sectional regression in Table 1 implies
(0.1168 times 300 grams =) 35 deaths for the same decrease in weight. Similarly, the heavy-light
comparison yields a 0.03 difference in the 5-minute APGAR score, whereas the corresponding crosssectional estimate from Table 1 would have predicted a 0.32 difference (300 times 0.105 divided by 100).
Further, the sixth row shows that the lighter twin is significantly more likely to have a congenital
anomaly, suggesting that in fraternal twin pairs the lighter twin may be genetically disadvantaged. 26 The
bottom rows show that the infant mortality differences fall sharply when the three percent of twin pairs in
which one twin suffers from a congenital anomaly are dropped from the sample. The one-year mortality
difference drops to about 2.6 deaths per 1000 live births. While the difference is statistically significant,
it is very small in magnitude. Given the large sample sizes, statistical significance is not a reliable
indicator of the importance of an effect.
Before proceeding, we note that we can identify the birth order of the twins in a pair.27 This
information allows us to test twin exchangeability – an implicit assumption of the fixed effects
specification. For example, we can test whether the effect of birth weight when the firstborn is heavier is
similar to the effect when the second-born is heavier. The last three columns of Table 4 show that the
firstborn twin tends to be healthier at birth than the second-born twin. Given these systematic differences,
it is important to test the implications of the exchangeability assumption.

26

A congenital anomaly is a defect that is present at birth. These include genetic defects and disorders, but also
include conditions that could plausibly be the result of damage incurred during fetal development. As a result, we
always present the estimates from both the full sample of twins and from the sample that excludes twin pairs with
congenital anomalies, and we use the former sample for all cost-benefit calculations.
27
Birth order could not be determined for about 10 percent of the twin pairs.

21

IV. Empirical Results
A. Main Twins Results
Table 5 is an expanded version of Table 1, providing more details on the results from the twins
analysis. The health outcomes data are for all twins born in the United States between 1989 and 1991,
and the hospital costs data are for twins born in New York and New Jersey between 1995 and 2000. In
the second set of rows, the cross-sectional estimate (or “Pooled OLS”) of –0.0739 shows that the majority
of the association between infant mortality and birth weight is driven by mortality risk within the first day
of life. When mother fixed effects are included, the coefficient falls by more than a factor of 10. Thus,
while the cross-section implies that a 300 gram birth weight difference is associated with 22 more deaths
within 24 hours of birth per 1,000 live births, the within-pair estimator suggests an impact of only 2
deaths per 1,000 live births.
The fourth column provides evidence that the fixed effects estimates themselves are largely
driven by the small number of twin pairs in which at least one infant is born with a congenital anomaly.
For infant mortality within a year of birth, the impact of birth weight falls further, by more than a factor of
2.7. For one-day mortality, the fixed effects estimate falls by an additional factor of 24, and the point
estimate is no longer statistically significant. The fixed effects estimates for the other outcomes also fall
to varying degrees when these twin pairs are excluded, and the fixed effects estimates for ventilator use
are statistically insignificant in both samples. By contrast, the third column shows that that the exclusion
of these anomalous pairs (less than 3 percent of the sample) has a relatively minor impact on the crosssectional estimates.28
The fixed effects estimates for the full sample are five to 20 times smaller in magnitude than the
cross-sectional estimates, and they are 14 to 40 times smaller than in the cross-section for the sample
excluding “anomalous” pairs.29 The one exception is for infant death occurring 28 days or more after
birth (postneonatal); in which the fixed effects estimates are two to three times smaller than the cross-

28
29

Indicators for congenital anomalies are not available on the HCUP discharge data.
Adding controls for infant gender and birth order to the regressions results in nearly identical findings.

22

sectional estimates. Below, we find that the majority of the postneonatal mortality effect is driven by
death due to sudden infant death syndrome and death due to accidents and homicide.
Figures 1 and 2 present our graphical analysis of the birth weight effects that allow for very
flexible relationships between birth weight and the outcomes of interest. In each figure, the solid circles
are the means of the outcome, by quantiles (200 of them) of the birth weight distribution. The solid
squares are the corresponding fixed effects estimates – that is, the estimated coefficients βk from the
specification in Equation (6).30 When data on congenital anomalies are available, the solid triangles are
the fixed effects estimates when infants with those anomalies (and their co-twins) are excluded from the
sample.
In Figure 1A, the cross-section reveals a peak in costs for hospital services of $160,000 for a twin
infant weighing nearly 800 grams at birth, and a steady and significant decline in costs with increases in
birth weight.31 The fixed effects estimates reveal a substantially smaller effect throughout the 800 to
2,000 gram range of birth weights. The contrast between the cross-sectional and fixed effects
associations is even more pronounced in the 2,000 to 2,500 gram range. As Figure 1B illustrates, for the
cross-section the decrease in costs continues to be substantial until the 2,500 gram mark. By comparison,
the fixed effects estimates are relatively flat throughout that range of birth weights.
Figure 1C shows qualitatively similar results for mortality rates within one year of birth. In the
cross-section, the relationship between birth weight and mortality is steepest in the 300 to 1,000 gram
range. This is also the range of birth weights in which the differences between the cross-sectional and
fixed effects gradients are the largest – that is, the fixed effects slopes are substantially smaller in
magnitude than the cross-sectional slopes. On the other hand, the fixed effects and cross-sectional
gradients are similar in the 1,000 to 1,500 gram range,
The results for the 5-minute APGAR score in Figure 2A show significant differences between the
cross-sectional and fixed effects “response functions” throughout the birth weight distribution. In the
30

The average of the mother-specific intercepts is used in reporting the results.
The rise in costs in the 300 to 800 gram range is likely due to a simple selection effect, as babies born in that
weight range are highly likely to die soon after birth, and therefore accumulate fewer charges for hospital services.
In the HCUP data, we find infant death rates before discharge that are very consistent with this selection effect.
31

23

cross-section, the APGAR-birth weight relation is strongly positive even at birth weights well above
1,000 grams. The fixed effects estimates reveal a somewhat positive relation in the 300-800 gram range,
but very little relation at birth weights above 800 grams.32
There are even more striking differences between the cross-sectional and fixed effects profiles for
the use of a ventilator for assisted breathing in Figure 2B. In the cross-section, ventilator use is strongly
negatively related to birth weight in the 800 to 2500 gram range.33 By comparison, the fixed effects
estimates reveal a much more modest decline in ventilator use. As shown in Figure 2C, this is
particularly true for the use of a ventilator for more than 30 minutes, which is considered a stronger
indicator of initial health problems than overall ventilator use. There, the fixed effects estimates reveal
essentially no relation between birth weight and the use of this expensive procedure.
Figures 1C, and 2A-2C, also show that excluding the small number of infants with congenital
anomalies tends to further flatten the birth weight-outcome profiles. Based on this pattern – and the
qualitative similarity between the ventilator and hospital costs profiles – it seems plausible that the fixed
effects profile for costs at discharge is also partially driven by these congenital anomaly cases.
Finally, Figures 1A-1C and 2A-2C also present the cross-sectional relations for the population of
singleton births, represented by the open circles. For every outcome that we examine, the birth weight
profiles for the singletons’ population are virtually identical to the cross-sectional profiles for the twins’
population. This is strongly consistent with the notion that the difference between the singleton crosssectional profile and the twins fixed effects profile is primarily due to omitted variables, rather than due to
inherent differences between singleton and twin births. Thus, extrapolating the twin fixed effects findings
to the singleton population may not be a completely unjustified exercise.

32

We find very similar results for the one-minute APGAR score (see Almond, Chay, and Lee 2002).
Again, the hump-shaped pattern at extremely low birth weights can be explained by a selection effect in which
these babies die before having the opportunity to use a ventilator for assisted breathing.
33

24

B. Magnitudes of the Effects
Table 6 presents estimates of the implied impact of birth weight in terms of its effect on the
outcomes per gram of birth weight. Since the effects are highly nonlinear, we estimate piecewise linear
splines with knot points at 600, 800, 1000, 1500, 2000, 2500, and 3000 grams. The table reports the slope
coefficients for each segment of the spline, for both the cross-sectional OLS and fixed effects
specifications applied to the full samples of twins.
First, we consider the results for costs incurred by the hospital before discharge. In Table 5 the
cross-sectional estimate implies that each gram increase in birth weight is associated with a $30 reduction
in hospital costs, whereas the fixed effects estimate implies only a $5 dollar cost reduction. Table 6
shows that even as the marginal effect of birth weight on costs varies significantly across the birth weight
distribution, the fixed effects estimates are considerably smaller in magnitude than the corresponding
“pooled” estimates. For the birth weight range of 800 to 2,500 grams, the fixed effects coefficients are
3.1 to 5.7 times smaller than the pooled coefficients. In the 2,500-3,000 gram range, the pooled
coefficient implies a highly significant five dollar reduction in costs for every added gram in weight, but
the corresponding fixed effects estimate implies absolutely no cost savings.
The next sets of columns in Table 6 show very similar results for any ventilator use and ventilator
use for more than 30 minutes. In fact, the fixed effects slope coefficients are statistically insignificant
throughout the birth weight distribution. For the APGAR score, the fixed effects coefficients are 3 to 20
times smaller than the cross-section coefficients.
For infant mortality in the final two columns, the differences between the cross-section and fixed
effects estimates are particularly large at birth weights below 1,000 grams. For example, in the 600 to
800 gram range, the cross-section estimate is –2.11 per 1,000 live births, while the fixed effects estimate
is –0.42. On the other hand, in the 1000-1500 gram range the cross-section and fixed effects estimates are
–0.23 and –0.17, respectively.
When interpreting their magnitudes, these two sets of estimates must be placed within the context
of the highly nonlinear relationship illustrated in Figure 1C. For example, consider a 200 gram increase
in birth weight. In the 600-800 gram range, the cross-section estimate implies a decrease in the
25

probability of death of 42 percent; the corresponding fixed effects estimate implies a decrease of 8.4
percent. On the other hand, that same 200 gram increase in the 1000-1500 gram range implies decreases
in the probability of death of 4.5 and 3.4 percent for the cross-section and fixed effects estimates,
respectively. Also, it is perhaps misleading to point to the relatively small differences between the two
estimates in the 2,000-2,500 gram range as evidence of minimal omitted variables bias. After all, the
birth weight impact implied by the cross-sectional estimate is already small: a 200 gram increase in that
range leads to a decrease in the probability of death of 0.0028.
It is also misleading to rely solely on statistical significance in assessing the magnitudes of the
effects. The fixed effects estimate in the 1500-2000 gram range, for example, has a t-ratio of 3.17, but the
implied impact of a 200 gram decrease in birth weight – the effect size associated with maternal smoking
– is an increase in the probability of death of only 0.0078.
Table 7 summarizes the excess costs associated with low birth weight, as implied by both the
cross-sectional and fixed effects estimates. For every infant born under 2,500 grams in the NCHS birth
certificate files (1989-1991), we calculated how much money would be “saved” by raising their weight to
2,500 grams. That is, we imputed the hospital costs in excess of the costs associated with 2,500 grams for
every infant, using the slope coefficients in the first two columns of Table 6. Table 7 reports the average
imputed value within each birth category. In each category above 600 grams, the fixed effects estimates
imply significantly smaller excess costs associated with low birth weight.34 For example, the crosssectional estimates imply that increasing the weight of a typical baby born in the 800-1000 gram range to
the “normal” weight range would save over $127,000 in hospital charges. However, the fixed effects
estimates imply a cost savings of $37,000.
Also, the degree of omitted variables bias appears to grow larger in higher birth weight
categories. For example, the implied excess costs among infants born in the 1500-2000 gram range are
3.7 times smaller for the fixed effects estimates relative to the cross-section. For the 2000-2500 gram
range, the fixed effects estimates are 5.7 times smaller than the cross-sectional estimates.
34

The smaller excess costs among infants born below 600 grams are due to the “perverse” birth weight effects for
babies born under 800 grams that are documented in Figure 1A and Table 6.

26

These differences have striking implications for the calculation of the aggregate costs of LBW in
the United States population. The distribution of birth weights can be applied to the numbers in Table 7
to impute the aggregate excess costs for all infants born below 2,500 grams. For twins born in the U.S.
between 1989 and 1991, the cross-section estimates imply aggregate costs of LBW of $2.22 billion, while
the fixed-effects estimates imply aggregate costs of $691 million. Table 7 also shows the birth weight
distribution for the 2.7 million singletons born in 1989 to non-Hispanic, black and white, native-born
mothers. For singleton births in 1989, the (twins) cross-section estimates imply aggregate costs of LBW
of $3.40 billion, while the fixed effects estimates imply aggregate costs of $1.07 billion.

C. Maternal Smoking Results
Figure 3 graphically depicts a propensity score analysis of the empirical association between
maternal smoking during pregnancy and birth weight for the 497,139 singleton births in Pennsylvania
between 1989 and 1991.35 First, we estimated a logit model of the propensity to smoke conditional on a
multitude of “pre-treatment” maternal and family background characteristics.36 Then we grouped the
estimated propensity scores into 200 equal-sized cells and separately calculated the average birth weight
of the babies of nonsmoking and smoking mothers in each cell. Thus, the smoking-nonsmoking birth
weight difference in each cell provides the estimated birth weight effect of maternal smoking at a constant
propensity score. According to the propensity score theorem (Rosenbaum and Rubin 1983), this
effectively adjusts for all bias due to observable confounders.
Panel A presents the average birth weights of babies of non-smoking mothers (the crosses) and of
smoking mothers (the open circles), by values of the estimated propensity score. The graph reveals a
visible birth weight gap that is relatively uniform across the entire range of estimated propensity scores,
even as baseline birth weights decline at high propensity scores. Panel B plots the 200 smokingnonsmoking differences in birth weight, which appear to be tightly scattered at around –200 grams. This
35

We focus on Pennsylvania since there is complete smoking information for over 95 percent of the mothers in
1989-1991. In the singleton sample, about 21 percent of Pennsylvanian women report smoking during pregnancy.
It should be noted that we found very similar results for the other states in which smoking reporting was
comprehensive – i.e., Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Michigan, North Carolina, and Ohio.
36
For the details of the specification, see Torelli (2000).

27

difference is consistent with the regression-adjusted estimate of the birth weight effect of maternal
smoking reported in the first row of Table 8.37 In addition, it is similar in magnitude to the birth weight
effects documented in the experimental intervention literature (e.g., Sexton and Hebel 1984)
Panel C is analogous to Panel B, but the outcome is instead whether or not the birth weight is less
than 2,500 grams. The graph shows a higher incidence of LBW among smoking mothers, by about 3 to 4
percent, which is again consistent with the OLS estimates reported in the second row of Table 8. The
LBW differential appears to be slightly larger at propensity scores above 0.7. On the other hand, Panel D
shows no evidence of a systematic relation between maternal smoking and the incidence of birth weights
below 1,000 grams. Table 8 shows that while there are significant raw differences in the incidences of
birth weights below 1,500 and 1,000 grams (column 1), these differences disappear after regression
adjustment for maternal and background characteristics. In fact, after controlling for observable
confounders (column 2), maternal smoking only appears to affect birth weights for infants with weights
above 1,500 grams. In addition, the next rows of Table 8 reveal very little effect of maternal smoking on
gestation lengths and the likelihood of a premature birth.38 Thus, maternal smoking appears to influence
intrauterine growth rates, but not gestation durations.
Figures 4A and 4B are the analogue to Figures 3A and 3B, except that the dependent variable is
now infant mortality within one year of birth. The graphs reveal no systematic impact of maternal
smoking on infant mortality throughout the propensity score distribution. The bottom rows of Table 8
show that while there is a significant raw difference in the infant and neonatal mortality rates of smokers
and nonsmokers, this difference disappears after regression adjustment.
Panels C and D of Figure 4 show zero-impact of maternal smoking on the 5-minute APGAR
score. Surprisingly, Panels E and F also reveal no impact of maternal smoking on the probability that the
newborn requires the use of a ventilator for more than 30 minutes. Again, the regression-adjusted
estimates in Table 8 are quite consistent with the visual impressions left by the figures.

37

The regression analysis adjusts for the exact same variables that are used to estimate the logit propensity score
model. The same transformations and interactions of the variables are also included.
38
Live births of less than 32 weeks of gestation account for the vast majority of neonatal deaths and disorders.

28

It appears that – once mother’s characteristics are included in the analysis – birth weight stands
out as the only variable that has a strong empirical association with maternal smoking. As noted earlier, if
smoking has other deleterious effects on infant health independent from its effect through lowering birth
weight, then the implied impact of birth weight on all of these outcomes are probably upwardly biased.
That is, however small the implied birth weight effect is, it would have to be even smaller if maternal
smoking is expected to independently raise infant mortality, lower the APGAR score, or make it more
likely that the infant will need a ventilator. Also, we found no effect of maternal smoking on fetal death
rates (results available from authors). This implies that, for the case of maternal smoking, conditioning
the analysis on the population of live births is not prone to nonrandom sample selection bias.
Finally, we use the estimates in Table 6 and Table 8 to calculate the savings in initial hospital
costs achieved by encouraging women to cease smoking during pregnancy. First, we derive estimates of
the cost savings based on the conventional approach used in the literature – that is, we multiply the crosssectional estimates of the association between costs and birth weight by the raw effects of maternal
smoking on LBW incidence. Suppose that maternal smoking reduces birth weight by 200 grams, on
average, and that its effect on the incidences of low, very low, and extremely low birth weights are the
same as in column 1 of Table 8. Then the costs-birth weight gradients in Table 6 imply an estimated cost
savings of $907 for every woman who ceases smoking before pregnancy.
Next, we derive estimates of the cost savings based on the fixed effects estimates of the costsbirth weight gradients in Table 6 and the regression-adjusted effects of smoking on the incidences of low,
very low, and extremely low birth weights shown in column 2 of Table 8. Again, presume that maternal
smoking reduces birth weight by 200 grams. The estimated cost savings falls by a factor of 17 to only
$53 for each woman who is prevented from smoking during pregnancy.39 Below, we discuss the
implications of this finding for cost-benefit analyses of smoking intervention programs targeted at
pregnant women.
39

Ideally, we could estimate the direct effect of maternal smoking on hospital costs. Unfortunately, the hospital
discharge data do not contain information on the smoking behavior of mothers. However, the adjusted estimate of
the effect of smoking on ventilator use provides evidence that at least one costly procedure is not affected by
maternal smoking during pregnancy.

29

D. An Alternative Measure of Initial Health: the APGAR score
The results above suggest a much weaker association between birth weight and early health and
cost outcomes than previously recognized. Here, we examine whether an alternative measure of the
initial health of the infant performs better than birth weight in predicting other health outcomes. In
particular, we consider the 5-minute APGAR score, which has the same practical advantages as birth
weight: 1) it is relatively easy to collect; 2) it is already available in United States birth record data; and 3)
it is a continuous measure that does not depend on a rare event (such as mortality).
In Table 9 we report the coefficients from cross-sectional and fixed effects regressions of the
other health outcome measures on both birth weight and the APGAR score for the 1989-1991 birth
cohorts of twins. We use the t-ratios of the estimated coefficients (shown in square brackets) to compare
the predictive power of the two indices. The APGAR score performs notably better than birth weight in
predicting within-twin pair differences in both one-year and one-day mortality. This is particularly true
when twin pairs in which one sibling exhibits a congenital anomaly are dropped from the analysis.
The APGAR score clearly outperforms birth weight as a predictor for our proxy of costs, the use
of a ventilator for assisted breathing. While the cross-sectional coefficients for birth weight are highly
significant, the fixed effects coefficients are essentially zero and statistically insignificant for both any
ventilator use and ventilator use for more than 30 minutes. By contrast, the fixed effects and crosssectional coefficients on the APGAR score are quite similar and highly significant. Perhaps this should
not be surprising since respiratory effort of the newborn is one of factors used to calculate the APGAR
score.
It is also interesting to note that the birth weight effects in Table 8 suggest large returns to
maternal smoking cessation. On the other hand, the effect of maternal smoking on the APGAR score
implies much smaller benefits, which is consistent with the findings for the effects of smoking on the
other outcome variables (ventilator use and infant mortality).

30

V. Robustness of the Findings
This section explores the sensitivity of the results to: 1) zygosity and gender of the twins; 2) years
of birth; 3) different race and education groups; 4) functional form issues; and 5) different matching
algorithms.

A. Zygosity and Gender
The data that we examine do not allow us to distinguish between monozygotic (identical) and
dizygotic (fraternal) twins. Thus it should be noted that for some fraction of our sample, genetic
differences between dizygotic twins of the same mother may be contributing to within-pair variation in
birth weight. We provide a partial assessment of the differences in effects by zygosity, by examining the
necessarily dizygotic infants of boy-girl twin pairs. For the 1989-1991 birth cohorts, 59,308 twins are in
boy-girl pairs, and 129,728 twins are in same sex pairs. This suggests that approximately 54 percent of
the same sex pairs are identical and 46 percent are fraternal.40
Examining the results by twin gender-types is also helpful in assessing a potential measurement
issue in the infant mortality analysis. That is, if some twins are accidentally “switched” either at the
hospital or by the parents once at home, then the death record could, in principle, be matched to the
incorrect birth record. As an extreme example, if all twins were randomly switched with their sibling,
then one would expect to observe a zero fixed effects estimate of the effect of birth weight on infant
mortality.41 Naturally, this is not an issue for boy-girl twins. Thus, if random switching is a substantive
problem for same-gender twins, then the fixed effects estimates for such twin pairs would be predicted to
be significantly smaller than the fixed effects estimates for boy-girl twin pairs.

40

If the effects of birth weight on infant mortality are constant across the birth weight distribution and do not
interact with twin’s gender, then the so-called “Weinberg rule” may be used to derive the effects of birth weight
among identical twins (e.g., Conley et al. 2003). However, we find that neither necessary condition holds in our
data, and therefore do not use the weighted average of the mixed-gender and same-gender fixed effects estimates to
derive fixed effects estimates for “identical” twins.
41
That said misclassification error due to the assignment of twins to an incorrect birth or death certificate is an
unlikely source of variation in twin pair birth weight differences. Specific safeguards are in place to prevent this.
For example, often two separate teams are present at each twin delivery to examine each newborn. Babies are
labeled with tags almost immediately after birth and remain tagged until they leave the hospital. Nevertheless, we
thank Dr. Christopher Almond for providing us with this information.

31

Table 10 reports the coefficients on a linear term in birth weight from linear probability models of
three different mortality measures. It shows that there are small differences in the fixed effects estimates
of boy-boy and girl-girl twin pairs for the full sample of twins. However, these differences effectively
disappear when the sample excludes the small number of twin pairs in which one sibling has a congenital
anomaly. Moreover, the fixed effects estimates for the mixed-gender twin pairs are nearly identical to
those for the same-gender pairs. Thus, these findings are consistent with effects that do not differ
substantially by zygosity, and they also suggest that the results are not an artifact of the switching of
siblings within a twin pair.

B. Results across Years of Birth
Next we examine the stability of the infant mortality-birth weight relationship across different
cohorts of twins born between 1983 and 1997. Figure 5 plots the cross-sectional (Panel A) and fixed
effects (Panel B) estimates of the birth weight profiles of infant mortality for the 1983-1985, 1989-1991,
and 1995-1997 birth cohorts. Panel B shows fixed effects profiles that are remarkably similar over time.
By contrast, the cross-sectional profiles in Panel A change considerably over time and show a sharp
improvement in the survival rates of more recent birth cohorts at each birth weight below 1,500 grams.
For example, in the early 1980s, nearly 3-in-4 twins born at 700 grams died within a year of birth; by the
late 1990s, the mortality risk had fallen to 1-in-3. In addition, while an increase in birth weight from 800
to 1,000 grams is associated with a 0.25 decrease in the probability of death in 1983-85, it is associated
with a 0.10 probability decrease in 1995-97.
Table 11 presents the linear probability estimates of the birth weight effects on infant and
neonatal mortality for the same sets of birth cohorts. The results confirm the visual impressions left by
the figures. While the fixed effects estimates are quite similar across birth cohorts, the magnitude of the
cross-sectional estimates is over 34 percent smaller for the 1995-97 birth cohort than for the 1983-85
cohort.
The instability of the cross-sectional estimates is consistent with the notion that the mortalitybirth weight, cross-sectional relation is largely driven by omitted variables. In particular, unobserved
32

secular factors over time – including advances in medical technologies and changes in the quality of
health care – appear to have a large effect on the cross-sectional associations. By contrast, the stability of
the fixed effects estimates is consistent with the view that the twins’ analysis eliminates the bias caused
by these omitted variables. It also implies that our findings above are not unique to the 1989-1991 period.

C. Functional Form Issues
We examine the sensitivity of the results to three functional form issues, in particular for the
binary dependent variables in the study (mortality, ventilator use). First, we test the appropriateness of
the piecewise linear spline specification used in Table 6 by simply comparing the predicted values from
the spline specification to those from the more flexible dummy variable specification used to create
Figures 1 and 2. Figure 6 shows the predictions from the spline models based on the cross-section
estimates (indicated by the solid line) and based on the fixed effects estimates (indicated by the open
circles) for infant mortality (Panel A) and ventilator use (Panels B and C). In each case, these predicted
values are coincident with the profile given by the dummy variable specification (connected solid circles
and connected solid squares). 42
Second, we examine the appropriateness of the linear probability model (LPM) that we have used
for infant mortality and ventilator use, by comparing their estimates to those from a conditional (“fixedeffects”) logit specification. For the cross-section, a logit with dummy variables yields exactly the same
estimates as does the LPM dummy variable specification; thus, we focus on the fixed effects
specifications.
Figures 6B and 6C show that for any ventilator use, and ventilator use for more than 30 minutes,
the conditional logit with the linear spline yields a virtually identical profile as both the LPM linear spline
and the LPM with birth weight dummy variables. This implies that our results are not sensitive to the
choice of a linear probability or logit model.

42

For a valid comparison, all predicted values are given in terms of probabilities. For the conditional logit result,
since no “fixed effect” is identified, the intercept can be arbitrarily chosen. We chose to set the intercept such that
the predicted probability of death at 2500 grams is the same as that given by the cross-sectional estimates.

33

For infant mortality (Figure 6A), while the conditional logit and LPM profiles are very similar
throughout most of the birth weight distribution, there is a noticeable difference between the two
specifications in the 300 to 1000 gram range. The logit specification is steeper than the LPM in the 300600 gram range, but flatter in the 600-1000 gram range. This difference is not an artifact of the spline
specification, as a conditional logit with birth weight dummies (open triangles) is coinicident with the
conditional logit spline specification (small solid circles). Overall, it appears that our LPM results
actually understate our primary mortality finding – that the fixed effects make the most difference where
the cross-sectional mortality-birth weight relationship is the steepest (600-1000 grams).
Finally, utilizing the information we have on the birth order of twins, we provide a simple test of
the fixed effects specification itself. There is an implicit restriction in (3) that can be relaxed to yield:
(7)

hi1 − hi 2 = α 1 − α 2 + bwi1 β 1 − bwi 2 β 2 + ε i1 − ε i 2

where the ‘1’ and ‘2’ denote the first- and second-born twin. β1 and β2 can be separately estimated by
regressing the twin difference in the mortality indicator on each sibling’s birth weight. If the two
estimates are different, it suggests that the “twin exchangeability” assumption underlying the fixed effects
specification does not hold and that the fixed effects specification is inadequate.
In practice, we utilize a more flexible parameterization, using the full set of birth weight dummy
variables – as in equation (6) – for both twins’ birth weights. Figure 7 plots the estimates of the dummyvariable analogues of β1 and β2 (the open circles and squares) along with the cross-sectional mortalitybirth weight profiles of the first- and second-born twins. In both cases, the estimated profiles are nearly
identical. This is consistent with the hypotheses that the exchangeability assumption holds and that the
fixed effects specification is valid. 43

43

In a correlated random effects framework, this specification test can be reformulated as a test of similar mortality
effects in twin pairs in which the first-born is heavier and in twin pairs in which the second-born twin is heavier. In
Almond, Chay, and Lee (2002), we implement these tests for both the linear regression specification and the
piecewise spline specification of infant mortality and APGAR scores.

34

D. Alternative Matching Algorithm
We also examine the sensitivity of our results to the method of matching twins, for the birth
cohorts (1995 to 1997) in which two different methods are possible. In particular, we compare our
matching procedure to the procedure used by the NCHS in the 1995-1997 Matched Multiple Births Data
set, which was released in Fall 2002. Figure 8 plots both the cross-sectional and fixed effects estimates of
the (one-year) infant mortality-birth weight profiles, derived from the two matching algorithms. The
figure shows that the two sets of estimates are nearly identical, with minute differences in the 300 to 500
gram range for the fixed effects profiles. Thus, the two matching procedures lead to identical findings.

E. Results by Race and Education
Finally, we examine whether our findings vary by mother’s race and education. Table 12
presents the cross-sectional and fixed effect estimates of the effect of birth weight on infant and neonatal
mortality for babies of black and white mothers, and by mother’s educational category (for white mothers
only). In the first two sets of rows, the cross-sectional, birth weight-mortality correlation is about 50
percent larger in magnitude for infants of black women than for those of white women. However, the
fixed effects estimates for black and white infants are similar
Figure 9 plots the cross-sectional and fixed effects birth weight profiles, separately for the infants
of black and white mothers. Both sets of profiles are very similar by race. These results imply that most
of the racial difference in the cross-sectional OLS estimates of the birth weight effects is due to the racial
difference in birth weight distributions. The average birth weight of a black twin (2,191 grams in 19891991) is 280 grams less than the average weight of a white twin (2,471 grams). This and the strong
nonlinearity of the mortality-birth weight relation in the cross-section results in OLS estimates that are
markedly different by race.
The remaining rows of Table 12 show that the cross-section OLS estimates also differ by the
educational attainment of the mother; but these differences fall substantially after mother fixed effects are
included, especially for the sample that excludes twin pairs with congenital anomalies. There is still a
difference in the birth weight coefficients between high school dropouts and high school graduates.
35

However, when we construct a figure analogous to Figure 9, we find cross-sectional and fixed effects
birth weight profiles that are nearly identical by educational category. Thus, it again appears that
differences in birth weight distributions across mother’s education account for the differences in estimates
that assume linear effects. We conclude that our findings are largely the same across different
subpopulations of twins.

VI. Interpretation and Implications
Our primary finding is that in two very different settings – corresponding to policies that impact
fetal nutrient intake and maternal smoking – controlling for mother-specific heterogeneity leads to
dramatically smaller effects of birth weight on several infant outcomes of interest. In Almond, Chay, and
Lee (2002), we find that the cross-sectional estimate of the effect of birth weight on infant mortality is
largely insensitive to detailed controls for mother’s observable characteristics – including age, education,
race, marital status, medical and behavioral risk factors, and prenatal care histories. Together, these
findings imply that unobserved factors, including genetics, lead to a severe overstatement of the
importance of birth weight in cross-sectional analysis.
There are two plausible interpretations of our results. The first is that, due to mother-specific
omitted variables, the payoff to LBW-prevention – in terms of cost savings or improvements in health –
has been greatly exaggerated by the well-documented cross-sectional relationships. For example,
consider the study of Lightwood et al. (1999), which provides an estimate of the direct medical costs
associated with maternal smoking. For their costs estimate, they multiply two numbers: the excess costs
at discharge associated with LBW babies, and the excess risk of LBW due to smoking during
pregnancy.44 The analysis yields an estimated $263 million (in $1995) of total hospital costs, per year, for
the United States. Our analysis suggests that the cross-sectional estimates of excess costs due to LBW is

44

This is the approach most commonly used in the literature to calculate costs. For example, see Marks et al (1990)
and Windsor et al. (1993).

36

upwardly biased by a factor of 3.2, which implies that the $263 million estimate overstates the “true”
costs of maternal smoking by $180 million.45
The case of maternal smoking also highlights the policy relevance of the highly non-linear
relations between birth weight and infant outcomes that we document in our analysis. For example, the
second column of Table 7 suggests that maternal smoking does not affect the incidence of births below
1,500 grams. In this case, the $263 million annual cost estimate is exaggerated by a factor of over four,
and its overstatement of the true costs would total $200 million per year. This sizeable reduction in the
estimated economic benefits of smoking cessation among pregnant women has clear implications for the
cost-effectiveness of different prenatal care interventions that target maternal smoking. It also has
relevance for federal and state decisions on the optimal allocation of health care resources that improves
infant health at minimal cost – for example, how to spend the U.S. states’ $206 billion settlement with the
tobacco industry, and the cost-effectiveness of Proposition 99 in California.
Since our analysis is non-experimental, we hesitate to conclude that it identifies the true
“structural” relation between birth weight and early health outcomes and costs. However, we are
confident in a second, more cautious interpretation of the findings – that the “impact” of LBW is highly
dependent on which environmental factor is influencing birth weight. Cross-sectional birth weight
variation is likely to be directly or indirectly influenced by immutable factors (genetics and race),
socioeconomic factors (education, income levels), maternal behaviors (caloric intake, smoking behavior),
and other environmental factors (intrauterine environment of the fetus). Within-twin pair variation –
which represents 40 percent of the variability in birth weight due to variable intrauterine growth rates –
holds constant all mother-specific and pregnancy-specific factors, and is partly generated by differences
in fetal nutritional intake. Our maternal smoking analysis attempts to isolate birth weight variation due to
smoking behavior during pregnancy – the leading modifiable cause of LBW in the United States.

45

Our estimate of the excess costs due to LBW is the average of the rows in the second column of Table 7 (for the
cross-section) ($21,428) and in the third column (fixed effects) ($6722), using the first column as weights. We do
not use the (less than 600 gram) segment, since Lightwood et al. (1999) exclude these births from their analysis.

37

At a minimum, our findings indicate that there does not exist a uniform causal link between birth
weight and hospital costs (ventilator use, APGAR score, and infant mortality). Some interventions may
indeed succeed in both raising birth weights and improving health outcomes, while others may only be
effective in raising birth weights, with little or no other effects on health. In other words, the most
effective ways of preventing LBW may have little correspondence with the most effective ways of
minimizing infant health complications and consequent health care costs.
If birth weight is a questionable target of policy, is there any other measure that could take its
place? One possibility is to focus directly on medical costs, both during delivery and in the first several
years of the child’s life. Another possible target of policy – in the case that detailed cost data are
unavailable – is the APGAR score. Another possibility is gestation length, or the incidence of premature
birth. These latter two indicators are readily available on large-scale databases, such as those drawn from
U.S. birth certificates.
More generally, other methods of infant health assessment may need to be developed. For
example, Wilcox (2001) emphasizes that small preterm births with extremely low weights – less than
1000 grams – are much more informative for infant mortality than LBW births. Even though the fixed
effects estimates in Figure 1C are much smaller than the cross-sectional estimates, there is nevertheless a
substantive correlation between mortality and birth weight in this extremely low weight range. This
suggests that interventions that impact the number of infants weighing less than 1000 grams could be
effective in reducing infant mortality; however, their effects at the population level may still be small,
since only one-half of one percent of all babies in the U.S. are born with a weight below 1000 grams.

VII. Directions for Future Research
We conclude by pointing out some important limitations in the scope of our analysis, and
suggested areas of future research. First, while we have focused on two important influences of birth
weight variation (nutritional factors and maternal smoking behavior), there are undoubtedly other factors
that influence birth weight. Thus, we cannot rule out the possibility that the two sources of variation we

38

have examined are the exception and not the rule. 46 We suspect that this can only be resolved through an
accumulation of evidence from studies that can control for confounding immutable factors, such as
genetics. Mother-level unobserved heterogeneity appears to be an important confounder.
Second, our outcomes focus on the status of the infant at birth, or shortly after birth. Therefore,
we cannot make any conclusions about the relation between LBW (or birth weight more generally) and
longer run outcomes such as cognitive development, educational attainment, labor market outcomes, and
adult health. In particular, our analysis focuses on prenatal investments in infant health, and not the
interactions between birth weight, overall health, and postnatal investments in the child. The relatively
small effects that we find for early infant health status suggest that previous studies’ findings of
significant impacts of birth weight on later adult outcomes is more likely to be driven by an interaction
between postnatal investments and initial birth weight, rather than due to the effects of birth weight (or
prenatal investments) per se.47 A more direct investigation of this hypothesis seems to be a useful
direction for future research.

46

We note that if these are anomalies, they are not the only ones. For example, Chay and Greenstone (2003a, 2003b)
find a strong association between sharp reductions in particulates air pollution across counties and declines in infant
mortality, with only small effects on birth weight, or the incidence of LBW. Almond, Chay, and Greenstone (2003)
document that the dramatic reduction in black infant mortality rates (IMR) in the United States from 1965 to 1971
accounts for the greatest convergence in black-white IMRs in the entire post-World War II era. However, they find
a comparatively small change in the birth weight distribution of black infants relative to whites during this period.
47
For example, women who quit smoking during pregnancy have high relapse rates following delivery (Fingerhut et
al. 1990). The handful of studies that have used twin differences to estimate the effect of birth weight on adult
health have found mixed evidence on its significance (e.g., Poulter et al. 1999, Ijzerman et al. 2000, Zhang et al.
2001, Hübinnette et al. 2001). This is not surprising given the small numbers of twin pairs in these studies (132 to
492 twin pairs). Based on 404 monozygotic, female twin pairs, Behrman and Rosenzweig (2001) find an
association between twin differences in birth weight and differences in educational attainment and wages.
Interestingly, they find that the birth weight effects are larger at normal weights than at weights below 2,500 grams.
Finally, Stein et al. (1975) find that the birth cohort born during the 1944-1945 Winter famine in Holland had largely
similar adult outcomes to cohorts born before and after the famine.

39

References
Almond, Douglas, Kenneth Y. Chay, and Michael Greenstone, “Civil Rights, the War on Poverty, and
Black-White Convergence in Infant Mortality in Mississippi,” mimeograph, University of California,
Berkeley, 2003.
Almond, Douglas, Kenneth Y. Chay, and David S. Lee, “Does Birth Weight Matter? Evidence from the
U.S. Population of Twin Births,” Center for Labor Economics Working Paper No. 53, September
2002.
Alexander, Duane “Child Health: Birth Outcomes and Infant Mortality,” Speeches and Reports, National
Institute for Child and Human Development.
Behrman, Jere R., Mark R. Rosenzweig, and Paul Taubman, “Endowments and the Allocation of
Schooling in the Family and in the Marriage Market: The Twins Experiment,” Journal of Political
Economy, CII (1994), 1131-1174.
Behrman, Jere R., and Mark R. Rosenzweig, “The Returns to Increasing Body Weight,” PIER Working
Paper No. 01-052, 2001.
Brooks, Anne-Marie, et al., “Impact of Low Birth Weight on Early Childhood Asthma in the United
States,” Archives of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, 155 (2001), 401-406.
Bryan, Elizabeth, Twins and Higher Order Births: A Guide to their Nature and Nurture, (London, UK:
Edward Arnold, 1992)
Chay, Kenneth Y., and Michael Greenstone, “The Impact of Air Pollution on Infant Mortality: Evidence
from Geographic Variation in Pollution Shocks Induced by a Recession,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, CXVIII (2003a), 1121-1167.
_____, “Air Quality, Infant Mortality, and the Clean Air Act of 1970,” National Bureau of Economics
Research Working Paper, No. 10053 (2003b).
Conley, Dalton, Kate W. Strully, Neil G. Bennett, The Starting Gate: Birth Weight and Life Chances
(Berkeley, University of California Press, 2003).
Currie, Janet, and Nancy Cole, “Welfare and Child Health: The Link Between AFDC Participation and
Birth Weight,” American Economic Review, LXXXIII (1993), 971-985.
Currie, Janet, and Jonathan Gruber, “Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of Recent Changes in the
Medicaid Eligibility of Pregnant Women,” Journal of Political Economy, CIV (1996), 1263-1296.
Currie, Janet and Rosemary Hyson, “Is the Impact of Health Shocks Cushioned by Socioeconomic
Status? The Case of Low Birth weight,” AEA Papers and Proceedings, LXXXIX (1999), 245-250.
Currie, Janet and Enrico Moretti, “Mother’s Education and the Intergenerational Transmission of Human
Capital: Evidence from College Openings,” CXVIII (2003), 1495-1532.
Fingerhut, LA, JC Kleinman, and JS Kendrick, “Smoking Before, During, and After Pregnancy,”
American Journal of Public Health, 80 (1990), 541-544.

40

Fowler, Mary Glenn, et al., “Double Jeopardy: Twin Infant Mortality in the United States, 1983 and
1984,” American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, CLXV (1991), 15-22.
Geronimus, Arline T., and Sanders Korenman, “The Socioeconomic Consequences of Teen Childbearing
Reconsidered,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CVII (1992), 1187-1214
Goldenberg, Robert L. and Dwight J. Rouse, “Prevention of Premature Birth,” New England Journal of
Medicine, 339 (1998), 313-320.
Grossman, Michael, and Theodore J. Joyce, “Unobservables, Pregnancy Resolutions, and Birth Weight
Production Functions in New York City,” Journal of Political Economy, XCVIII (1990), 983-1007.
Hanratty, Maria J., “Canadian National Health Insurance and Infant Health,” American Economics
Review, LXXXVI (1996), 276-284.
Hübinnette, A., “Birth Weight, Early Environment, and Genetics: A Study of Twins Discordant for Acute
Myocardial Infarction,” The Lancet, 357 (2001), 1997-2001.
Ijzerman, Richard G., et al., “Evidence for Genetic Factors Explaining the Birth Weight-Blood Pressure
Relation: Analysis in Twins,” Hypertension, XXXVI (2000), 1008-1012.
Institute of Medicine, WIC Nutrition Risk Criteria: A Scientific Assessment (Washington, D.C.: National
Academy Press, 1996).
Kaelber, Charles T., and Thomas F. Pugh, “Influence of Intrauterine Relations on the Intelligence of
Twins,” New England Journal of Medicine, CCLXXX (1969), 1030-1034.
Kogan, M.D., G.R. Alexander, M. Kotelchuck, et al., “Trends in Twin Birth Outcomes and Prenatal Care
Utilization in the United States, 1981-1997,” Journal of the American Medical Association, 284
(2000), 335-341.
Kowaleski-Jones, Lori and Greg J. Duncan, “Effects of Participation in the WIC Program on Birth
weight: Evidence from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth,” American Journal of Public
Health, 92 (2002), 799-804.
Kramer, Michael S., “Intrauterine Growth and Gestational Duration Determinants,” Pediatrics, 80 (1987),
502-511.
Lewit, Eugene M., “The Direct Cost of Low Birth Weight,” The Future of Children, V (1995), 35-56.
Lightwood, James M., Ciaran S. Phibbs, and Stanton A. Glantz, “Short-term Health and Economic
Benefits of Smoking Cessation: Low Birth Weight,” Pediatrics, 104 (1999), 1312-1320.
Lucas, A., R. Morley, and T.J. Cole, “Randomised Trial of Early Diet in Preterm Babies and Later
Intelligence Quotient,” British Medical Journal, 317 (1998), 1481-1487.
Marks, JS, et al., “A Cost-Benefit/Cost Effectiveness Analysis of Smoking Cessation for Pregnant
Women, “ American Journal of Preventative Medicine, 6 (1990), 282-289.

41

Matte, T.D., M. Bresnahan, M.D. Begg, and E. Susser, “Influence of Variation in Birth Weight within
Normal Range and within Sibships on IQ at Age 7 Years: Cohort Study,” British Medical Journal,
323 (2001), 310-314
McCormick, MC, J Brooks-Gunn, et al., “The Health and Developmental Status of Very Low-Birth
weight Children at School Age,” Journal of the American Medical Association, 267 (1992), 22042208.
National Institutes of Health, “NIH Guide: Low Birth Weight in Minority Populations,” PA-99-045,
1999.
Nelson, K.B. and J.K. Grether, “Cerebral Palsy in Low-Birth weight Infants: Etiology and Strategies for
Prevention,” Mental Retardation and Developmental Disabilities Research Reviews, 3 (1997), 112117.
Paneth, Nigel S., “The Problem of Low Birth Weight,” The Future of Children, V (1995), 19-34.
Pollack, Harold, Paula M. Lantz, and John G. Frohna, “Maternal Smoking and Adverse Birth Outcomes
Among Singletons and Twins,” American Journal of Public Health, 90 (2000), 395-400.
Poulter, N.R., et al., “Association between Birth Weight and Adult Blood Pressure in Twins: Historical
Cohort Study,” British Medical Journal, 319 (1999), 1330-1333.
Richards, Marcus, et al., “Birth Weight and Cognitive Function in the British 1946 Birth Cohort:
Longitudinal Population Based Study,” British Medical Journal, CCCXXII (2001), 199-203.
Rosenbaum, Paul and Donald Rubin, “The Central Role of the Propensity Score in Observational Studies
for Causal Effects,” Biometrika, 70(1983), 41-55.
Rosenzweig, Mark R., and T. Paul Schultz, “Estimating a Household Production Function: Heterogeneity
and the Demand for Health Inputs, and Their Effects on Birth weight,” Journal of Political Economy,
XCI (1983), 723-746.
Rosenzweig, Mark. R., and Kenneth I. Wolpin, “Inequality at Birth: The Scope for Policy Intervention,”
Journal of Econometrics, L (1991), 205-228.
_____, “Sisters, Siblings, and Mothers: The Effects of Teen-age Childbearing on Birth Outcomes,”
Econometrica, LXIII (1995), 303-326.
Sexton, Mary, and J. Richard Hebel, “A Clinical Trial of Change in Maternal Smoking and Its Effect on
Birth Weight,” Journal of the American Medical Association, CCLI (1984), 911-915.
Stein, Z., M. Susser, G. Saenger, and F. Marolla, Famine and Human Development: The Dutch Hunger
Winter of 1944-45 (New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 1975).
Torelli, Paul A., “Maternal Smoking and Birth Outcomes: A Nonparametric Approach,” mimeo,
University of California, Berkeley, 2000.
Vogler, George P., and Lynn T. Kozlowski, “Differential Influence of Maternal Smoking on Infant Birth
Weight,” Journal of the American Medical Association, 287 (2002), 241-242.

42

Wilcox, Allen J., “On the Importance – and the Unimportance – of Birth Weight,” International Journal of
Epidemiology, 30 (2001), 1233-1241.
Windsor, RA, et al., “Health Education for Pregnant Smokers: Its Behavioral Impact and Cost Benefit,”
American Journal of Public Health, 83 (1993), 201-206.
Zhang, Jun, Ruth A. Brenner, and Mark A. Klebanoff, “Differences in Birth Weight and Blood Pressure
at Age 7 Years among Twins,” American Journal of Epidemiology, 153 (2001), 779-782.

43

Data Appendix
Matching twins in linked birth/infant death data
Two approaches are used to match twins in the annual linked birth/infant death data. The primary
approach uses the fact that beginning in 1989, multiple-birth records are generally located next to each
other in the “denominator-plus” microdata file provided by NCHS. Additionally, with the rich set of
covariates included on the microdata file, twin pairs can be matched when two unique strings of parental
and pregnancy covariates are identified. This second approach is necessary for births occurring before
1989, when multiple births were not located next to each other in the “denominator-plus” file.
A. Record Location Matching Approach
The record location-based matching approach begins by selecting all “higher-order” pregnancies
identified with the DPLURAL variable. For 1989, the DPLURAL variable indicates that 90,222 of the
4,045,881 births (2.2 percent) were twin births. The repetition of paternal and pregnancy characteristics
indicate that adjacent twin records are part of the same twin set. Adjacent twin records are considered
matched twins if the following covariates are each identical: mother’s age, state of birth, state of
residence, race, and education, marital status of the parents, father’s age, father’s education48, and the
month in which prenatal care began. Of the 81,757 adjacent twin records that have both information on
maternal education and birth weight, 74,472 (91%) have identical information for these nine covariates.
Additional information on these files not used in matching suggests that incorrect twin matches are
uncommon: of the 74,742 matched twin pairs for 1989, all but 37 of the pairs were born in the same
month. While a longer string of covariates could be used to increase the likelihood that adjacent twin
records are indeed part of the same twin set, incomplete or miscoding of the second twin record can cause
the incorrect rejection of true twin matches.
This risk of Type 1 error needs to be balanced against the risk generated by relying more on the adjacency
of twin records and less on the correspondence of parental and pregnancy covariates. Relying more on
adjacency increases the risk of Type 2 error for several reasons. First, there appear to be singleton birth
records that were coded as twins. (This could possibly result from the fact that the plurality field,
DPLURAL, should be coded as “2” for twins, whereas “2” is often used as a code for “no”). It is also
possible that one twin in the pair was not born alive, and therefore will appear in the fetal death data
rather than in the “denominator-plus” natality data. Finally, it could be the case that while both twin birth
records are present in the natality data, they are not adjacent in the “denominator-plus” file. All of these
possibilities increase the risk of incorrectly matching adjacent twin records when a more sparse set of
covariate checks is used.
B. Covariate Matching Approach
Before 1989, multiple birth records are not located together in the “denominator-plus” files. Therefore,
an alternative matching algorithm is needed. A long string of parental and pregnancy covariates can
instead be used to search across the entire set of twin records (i.e., where DPLURAL = 2) for a unique
match. A string of eleven covariates was created that attempts to balance the risk of incorrectly matching
twin pairs from different mothers (by including fewer covariates) against the risk of not matching correct
twin pairs where there is incomplete or incorrect information for one of the twin pairs (by including more
covariates in the matching). The eleven covariates used to match twins are: maternal education, maternal
age, maternal race, marital status, mother’s state of birth, state of birth occurrence, county of birth
48

Note for births occurring in 1995, father’s education is no longer collected and therefore this covariate is dropped
from the matching algorithm.

44

occurrence, father’s age, father’s education, month of pregnancy that prenatal care began, and the number
of prenatal care visits. Twins are considered matched when there are exactly two records with
DPLURAL = 2 and with equal values for this set of eleven covariates. For 1989, 74,886 twin pairs are
matched, which is nearly identical to the number of pairs matched with the location-based method
(74,472). Moreover, the econometric results using these two different matching techniques are nearly
identical.
Finally, the birth order of the matched twins is not explicitly noted in the linked birth/infant death data.
As pronounced health differences exist between first- and second-born twins, birth order should be
allowed for in the econometric estimation. On the “denominator-plus” file, the DTOTORD variable gives
the number of children born to the mother at the time of birth as well as the number of terminations of
pregnancy. In most cases, DTOTORD differs by 1 for matched twin pairs. In these cases, the matched
twin with the lower value for DTOTORD is considered the first-born twin.
Matching twins in HCUP state inpatient discharge data
The fist step to matching twin records in the discharge data is to identify birth records where the newborn
is part of a twin set. In contrast to the linked birth/infant death data, there is no dedicated field that
identifies multiple births. In the hospital discharge data, the fields containing the diagnosis code DX1
(principal diagnosis) and DX2 (first secondary diagnosis) are used to select liveborn infants that are twins
(ICD9-9-CM code equals V31, V32, or V33).
Like the NCHS data, the HCUP data do not provide information on the twin set to which individual twin
records belong. Nor are twin discharge records linked to the maternal discharge record, which would
permit use of information on the mother in identifying which twin records are part of a twin set.
Nevertheless, the two basic approaches used to match twins in the linked birth/infant death data can be
applied to the discharge records – i.e., using location of the discharge record in the ascii data and using a
string of covariates that sibling twins should have in common. Note, the absence of information on the
mother also means that the birth order of the twins cannot be imputed, as it was in the linked birth-infant
death data (using the information on the number of children born to the mother).
A. Record Location Matching Approach
The ascii HCUP discharge data is sorted by a unique record identifier for each discharge record (not
unique to each patient)49. The basic record location approach checks whether twin records, approximately
.3 percent of all discharge records, have a unique ID number that are in sequence. These adjacent twin
records are then considered to be part of the same set.
Multiple matches of an individual twin discharge record can occur when it is both preceded and followed
by other twin records. To determine which of the two potential matches for of this individual twin record
to its neighbors is invalid (as is necessarily the case), information that should be common within valid
twin sets is checked. This information includes the race of the twin, the zip code of residence of the
mother, and the identity of the attending physician. If any of this information differs for an individual
record with two potential neighboring matches, the match is rejected. Another reason more than two twin
records might be contiguous is that triplets or quadruplets were miscoded as twin births. When more than
two twin records are contiguous in the ascii data and also have identical information for race, zip code,
and identity of the attending physician, these records are considered to be higher-order multiple births
miscoded as twins and deleted.

49

For 1998-2000, this variable is called KEY; for 1995-1997 it is called SEQ_SID

45

The record location matching approach matches approximately 72 percent of the twin records identified
as twins using the diagnosis codes.
B. Covariate Matching Approach
The covariate approach to matching twins does not use any information on the position of records within
the file. Instead, it uses a string of five variables that will be common within twin sets in order to isolate
unique pairs. The variables used to match twins are: the zip code of the patients’ residence, the HCUP
hospital ID number from which the twin was discharged, the month the hospital admission occurred,
whether the admission was on a weekend, and the race of the infant twin. Approximately 82 percent of
discharge records with twin diagnosis codes can be uniquely matched with this approach.
If one is willing to assume that twins would also have the same attending physician in discharge records,
then the ID number of the attending physician can be included in the covariate string. Approximately 76
percent of the records with twin diagnosis codes can be matched when attending physician is included in
the variable string used for the covariate match.

46

Table 1: Summary of Basic Results for United States Twins

Outcome Variables

Coefficient on Birth Weight
Fixed Effects
w/ congenital
w/o congenital
Pooled

Hospital costs at discharge
(in 2000 dollars)

-29.95
(0.84)
[-0.506]

-4.93
(0.44)
[-0.083]

--

Mortality, 1-year
(per 1,000 births)

-0.1168
(0.0016)
[-0.412]

-0.0222
(0.0016)
[-0.078]

-0.0082
(0.0012)
[-0.031]

Mortality, 28 days
(per 1,000 births)

-0.1050
(0.0016)
[-0.415]

-0.0154
(0.0013)
[-0.061]

-0.0041
(0.0008)
[-0.018]

5-min. APGAR score
(0-10 scale, divided by 100)

0.1053
(0.0011)
[0.506]

0.0117
(0.0012)
[0.056]

0.0069
(0.0011)
[0.034]

Ventilator incidence
(per 1,000 births)

-0.0837
(0.0015)
[-0.228]

-0.0039
(0.0017)
[-0.011]

-0.0020
(0.0016)
[-0.006]

Ventilator >= 30 min.
(per 1,000 births)

-0.0724
(0.0013)
[-0.252]

0.0006
(0.0013)
[0.002]

0.0016
(0.0012)
[0.006]

Notes: The hospital cost data are from the 1995-2000 annual Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project (HCUP) State
Inpatient Database for New York and New Jersey. All other data come from the National Center of Health Statistics
1989-1991 Linked Birth-Infant Death Detail Files. The Pooled column contains the OLS estimates based on the
pooled sample of twins. The Fixed Effects columns include mother fixed effects in the regressions. The “w/
congenital” column includes twin pairs in which one or both twins either had a congenital anomaly at birth or whose
cause of death was a congenital anomaly. The “w/o congenital” column excludes these twin pairs from the analysis.
The standard errors are in parentheses and are corrected for heteroskedasticity. The Pooled results also correct the
standard errors for within-twin-pair correlation in the residuals. The brackets contain the effects as measured in
standard deviation units – i.e., the effect of a one standard deviation increase in birth weight (667 grams).

Table 2: Sample Means for Singletons and Twins in the 1989 Linked Natality-Mortality Detail File
Sample Means
Singletons
Twins
Mother’s Demographic Characteristics
Fraction Black

T-ratio for Diff
In Sample Means

0.195

0.219

14.1

Education

12.8

13.0

22.2

Fraction High School Dropout

0.184

0.157

17.3

Fraction College Graduate

0.187

0.212

15.2

Age

26.3

27.4

51.3

Fraction Teenager

0.129

0.078

45.8

Fraction 30 or Older

0.289

0.360

35.5

Fraction Married

0.736

0.746

5.1

0.982

0.982

0.4

Number of Prenatal Visits

11.2

12.4

49.7

Pregnancy Associated Hypertension

0.030

0.067

35.1

Anemia of Mother

0.018

0.035

21.0

Fraction Smoke during Pregnancy

0.212

0.201

5.4

0.512

0.504

4.1

Breech Birth

0.035

0.256

119.5

Abnormal Conditions of Newborn

0.055

0.148

62.9

Assisted Ventilation (<30 minutes)

0.011

0.024

20.4

Assisted Ventilation (>=30 minutes)

0.006

0.038

40.1

Congenital Anomaly

0.019

0.027

12.4

2,655,977

58,132

Mother’s Risk Factors
Fraction Prenatal Care

Characteristics of Birth
Fraction Male

Sample Size

Table 2 (cont’d)
Sample Means
Singletons
Twins
Infant Birth Weight (grams)
Mean

T-ratio for Diff
In Sample Means

3,369
(591)

2,417
(670)

Median
25th percentile
10th percentile
5th percentile
1st percentile

3,402
3,060
2,693
2,410
1,430

2,495
2,070
1,503
1,080
503

Fraction Low birth weight (<2500g)

0.061

0.504

39.3
(2.65)
8.02
(1.35)
8.97
(0.81)

36.0
(3.85)
7.30
(1.97)
8.52
(1.40)

201.2

8.46

38.71

37.7

Within 24 hours of birth

2.73

19.27

29.0

Within 7 days

3.99

26.92

34.1

Within 28 days (neonatal)

4.99

30.62

35.8

28 days to 1 year (postneonatal)

3.49

8.19

12.5

0.57

0.93

Within 24-hour mortality

0.89

0.98

Neonatal mortality

0.76

0.97

Postneonatal mortality

0.30

0.79

2,655,977

58,132

Gestation in weeks
1-minute APGAR score (0-10)
5-minute APGAR score (0-10)
Infant Deaths (per 1,000 live births)
Within 1-year of birth (infant mortality)

Fraction of dead with birth weight<2500 g
Infant mortality

Sample Size

339.6

79.9
70.2

Notes: Data come from the National Center of Health Statistics 1989 Linked Birth-Infant Death Detail File. The
sample is restricted to non-Hispanic, black and white mothers born in the United States. The standard deviations of
the means are in parentheses.

Table 3: Components of Variance for Birth Weight and Outcomes among Twins

Dependent Variable
1989-1991 U.S. Twins
Birth weight

(1)

Mean Squared Error in OLS Regressions
(2)
(3)
(4)

Ratio
(4)/(3)

44.434

21.307

19.080

7.535

0.40

Mortality (1-year)

0.0356

0.0287

0.0219

0.0149

0.68

Mortality (1-day)

0.0183

0.0152

0.0102

0.0046

0.45

Mortality (28-day)

0.0283

0.0224

0.0158

0.0090

0.57

5-min. APGAR

1.9254

1.4078

1.1744

0.6510

0.55

Ventilator >= 30 min.

0.0370

0.0348

0.0338

0.0102

0.30

1995-2000 NY-NJ Twins
Hospital costs

14.410

--

--

2.958

--

No
No
No

Yes
No
No

-Yes
No

--Yes

Controls for
Gestation length (linear)
Gestation length dummies
Mother fixed effects

Notes: See notes to Table 1. Columns (1) – (4) provide the means squared error from OLS regressions that include
no controls, a linear control for gestation length (in weeks), gestation length fixed effects, and mother fixed effects,
respectively. The final column provides the ratio of Column (4) to Column (3) – that is, the fraction of overall
variation in outcomes, for fixed gestation lengths, that is due to within-twin-pair differences instead of betweentwin-pair differences. The hospital costs data do not contain gestation lengths. Birth weight is measured in 100’s of
grams, and hospital costs are in 10,000’s of dollars. The sample size for birth weight, mortality, and assisted
ventilation is 187,948. The sample size for 5-minute APGAR score is 158,700, and the sample size for hospital
costs is 44,410.

Table 4: Sample Means for Twin Pairs in 1989-1991
Heavier versus Lighter Twin
Sample Means
T-ratio for
Heavy
Light
Difference
Birth weight

First versus Second Born Twin
Sample Means
T-ratio for
First
Second
Difference

2,563.3

2,263.6

98.7

2,422.5

2,388.0

10.7

Birth weight < 2500 grams

0.399

0.620

-96.2

0.499

0.526

-10.9

Birth weight < 1500 grams

0.075

0.114

-28.5

0.095

0.101

-4.14

Birth weight < 1000 grams

0.035

0.050

-15.2

0.043

0.045

-2.32

Male

0.548

0.460

37.8

0.507

0.503

1.68

Congenital anomaly

0.0237

0.0275

-5.18

0.0256

0.0256

0.02

Breech birth

0.249

0.258

-4.27

0.214

0.294

-37.4

Abnormal conditions

0.154

0.157

-2.03

0.151

0.165

-8.27

Ventilation < 30 min.

0.0249

0.0266

-2.35

0.0233

0.0290

-7.29

Ventilation >= 30 min.

0.0384

0.0377

0.76

0.0364

0.0418

-5.79

1-minute APGAR

7.39

7.29

10.14

7.54

7.09

43.5

5-minute APGAR

8.56

8.53

4.44

8.59

8.47

16.4

5-min. APGAR <= 8

0.264

0.270

-3.00

0.242

0.300

-24.4

Infant Deaths (per 1,000 births)
Including Congenital Anomalies
Within 1-year of birth
32.4

38.4

-6.84

35.7

37.9

-2.40

Within 24 hours

16.3

18.5

-3.48

18.0

18.2

-0.25

Within 28 days

25.6

29.6

-5.15

27.8

29.7

-2.41

28 days to 1 year

6.84

8.83

-4.78

7.90

8.14

-0.54

Excluding Congenital Anomalies
Within 1-year of birth
28.1

30.7

-3.19

29.8

31.4

-1.83

Within 24 hours

14.3

14.8

-0.97

15.1

15.1

0.10

Within 28 days

22.0

23.2

-1.69

22.9

24.4

-1.96

28 days to 1 year

6.13

7.52

-3.51

6.94

7.02

-0.21

90,179

90,179

85,142

85,142

Sample Size

Notes: See notes to Table 2. Data are from the 1989-1991 Linked Birth-Infant Death Detail Files. The first set of
columns present sample means separately for the heavier and lighter twin across twin pairs. The second set of
columns present sample means separately for the first- and second-born twin across twin pairs. Observations
missing data on birth order are dropped from this sample.
.

Table 5: Pooled OLS and Twins Fixed Effects Estimates of the Effect of Birth Weight
Including Congenital Anomalies
Birth weight coefficient

Excluding Congenital Anomalies

Pooled OLS

Fixed Effects

Pooled OLS

Fixed Effects

-0.1168
(0.0016)

-0.0222
(0.0016)

-0.1069
(0.0017)

-0.0082
(0.0012)

0.169
189,036

0.585
189,036

0.164
183,727

0.629
183,727

-0.0739
(0.0015)

-0.0071
(0.0010)

-0.0675
(0.0015)

-0.0003
(0.0006)

Adj. R-squared
Sample Size

0.132
189,036

0.752
189,036

0.127
183,727

0.809
183,727

Mortality, neonatal

-0.1050
(0.0016)

-0.0154
(0.0013)

-0.0962
(0.0016)

-0.0041
(0.0008)

Adj. R-squared
Sample Size

0.173
189,036

0.683
189,036

0.169
183,727

0.745
183,727

Mortality, postneonatal

-0.0117
(0.0005)

-0.0069
(0.0010)

-0.0107
(0.0005)

-0.0042
(0.0009)

Adj. R-squared
Sample Size

0.008
189,036

0.059
189,036

0.007
183,727

0.067
183,727

0.1053
(0.0011)

0.0117
(0.0012)

0.1009
(0.0011)

0.0069
(0.0011)

Adj. R-squared
Sample Size

0.255
159,070

0.663
159,070

0.248
154,449

0.673
154,449

Ventilator incidence

-0.0837
(0.0015)

-0.0039
(0.0017)

-0.0810
(0.0015)

-0.0020
(0.0016)

Adj. R-squared
Sample Size

0.052
189,036

0.706
189,036

0.050
183,727

0.716
183,727

-0.0724
(0.0013)

0.0006
(0.0013)

-0.0701
(0.0014)

0.0016
(0.0012)

0.063
189,036

0.724
189,036

0.062
183,727

0.739
183,727

-29.95
(0.84)

-4.93
(0.44)

--

--

0.256
44,410

0.796
44,410

Mortality, 1-year

Adj. R-squared
Sample Size
Mortality, 1-day

5-min. APGAR score

Ventilator >= 30 min.

Adj. R-squared
Sample Size
Hospital Costs

Adj. R-squared
Sample Size

Notes: See notes to Tables 1 and 3. The data come from the 1989-1991 Linked Birth-Infant Death Detail Files and
the 1995-2000 HCUP Inpatient Database for New York and New Jersey. The first two columns use samples that
include twin pairs in which one or both twins either had a congenital anomaly at birth or whose cause of death was a
congenital anomaly. The second two columns exclude these twin pairs from the analysis. The HCUP data does not
contain information on congenital anomalies. The standard errors are in parentheses and are corrected for
heteroskedasticity and within-twin-pair correlation in the residuals. For mortality and ventilator use the birth weight
coefficients have been scaled up by 1,000. For APGAR score, the coefficients are scaled up by 100.

Table 6: Piece-wise Linear Spline Estimates of the Effect of Birth Weight on Hospital Costs and Infant Health
Dependent Variable
Units
Birth Weight
segment

Hospital Costs
Dollars
per gram

Ventilator (any)
Usage per 1000 births
per gram

Ventilator (> 30 min.)
Usage per 1000 births
per gram

APGAR (5-minute)
Score times 1000
per gram

Mortality (1-year)
Deaths per 1000 births
per gram

Percent

Pooled

F.E.

Pooled

F.E.

Pooled

F.E.

Pooled

F.E.

Pooled

F.E.

< 600g

0.18

428.09
(39.56)

247.79
(99.35)

0.7995
(0.0640)

0.2718
(0.1012)

0.7434
(0.0578)

0.2361
(0.0969)

12.26
(0.39)

4.41
(1.02)

-0.5754
(0.0640)

-0.4400
(0.1560)

600-800 g

0.16

186.59
(62.03)

-270.30
(133.79)

0.3027
(0.1022)

-0.0052
(0.0914)

0.2369
(0.0970)

0.0261
(0.0891)

9.38
(0.58)

2.19
(1.06)

-2.1122
(0.0913)

-0.4197
(0.2139)

800-1000 g

0.19

-212.77
(47.89)

-49.75
(67.31)

-0.2164
(0.0863)

-0.0772
(0.0797)

-0.2136
(0.0815)

-0.0549
(0.0792)

3.04
(0.40)

0.16
(0.81)

-1.1302
(0.0752)

-0.4332
(0.1669)

1000-1500 g

0.55

-121.20
(7.57)

-36.88
(9.89)

-0.2216
(0.0218)

-0.0005
(0.0243)

-0.2124
(0.0201)

0.0168
(0.0232)

2.12
(0.09)

0.60
(0.22)

-0.2258
(0.0144)

-0.1693
(0.0336)

1500-2000 g

1.11

-74.27
(2.50)

-24.07
(2.95)

-0.2121
(0.0110)

-0.0063
(0.0137)

-0.1891
(0.0096)

-0.0018
(0.0118)

0.98
(0.04)

0.18
(0.09)

-0.0279
(0.0051)

-0.0391
(0.0123)

2000-2500 g

3.95

-18.19
(0.84)

-3.21
(0.89)

-0.0671
(0.0052)

-0.0091
(0.0067)

-0.0469
(0.0038)

0.0008
(0.0050)

0.51
(0.02)

0.14
(0.04)

-0.0146
(0.0022)

-0.0113
(0.0051)

2500-3000 g

15.54

-5.19
(1.45)

0.58
(0.56)

-0.0206
(0.0034)

-0.0009
(0.0050)

-0.0128
(0.0020)

0.0014
(0.0032)

0.27
(0.02)

0.05
(0.03)

-0.0076
(0.0020)

-0.0043
(0.0034)

> 3000 g

78.31

6.66
(3.31)

1.37
(0.83)

-0.0035
(0.0033)

-0.0012
(0.0053)

-0.0027
(0.0016)

-0.0033
(0.0031)

-0.02
(0.02)

-0.02
(0.03)

0.0120
(0.0038)

-0.0019
(0.0036)

44410

44410

189036

189036

189036

189036

159070

159070

189036

189036

Observations

Notes: Costs data come from 1995-2000 NY/NJ HCUP data. The remaining columns use the 1989-1991 linked Birth-Infant Death files. Entries are the slope coefficients within
each birth-weight segment from piecewise linear spline specifications. The Percent column contains the percentages of all singleton births in 1989 with birth weights in the
corresponding birth weight segment. Pooled is ordinary least squares applied to the pooled data. The F.E. columns include mother fixed effects. Standard errors are in
parentheses and are corrected for both within-twin-pair correlation and heteroskedasticity.

Table 7: Implied Excess Hospital Costs Associated with Low Birth Weight,
Pooled versus Fixed Effects Estimates
Birth Weight
Segment

Percent of
Singleton Births

Excess Hospital Costs
Pooled
Fixed Effects

< 600g

0.18

$51,803

$61,213

600-800 g

0.16

$131,589

$67,816

800-1000 g

0.19

$127,190

$36,846

1000-1500 g

0.55

$74,706

$22,309

1500-2000 g

1.11

$25,137

$6,806

2000-2500 g

3.95

$3,417

$604

Notes: The entries represent the average reduced hospital costs associated with increasing an infant’s birth weight
from the given birth weight category to above 2,500 grams. These are calculated using the estimated spline
coefficients in Table 6. The Percent of Singleton Births column provides the percentages of all singleton births in
1989 with birth weights in the corresponding birth weight segment. The costs figures are in year 2000 dollars.

Table 8: OLS Estimates of Effect of Maternal Smoking during Pregnancy,
Pennsylvania Singletons 1989-1991
Coefficient on Smoking Indicator
Unadjusted
Adjusted
Impact on Birth Weight
Birth weight
(in grams)

-284.8
(2.07)

-203.2
(2.11)

Birth weight < 2500 grams
(per 1,000 births)

64.0
(1.04)

34.7
(1.03)

Birth weight < 2000 grams
(per 1,000 births)

19.93
(0.63)

6.30
(0.62)

Birth weight < 1500 grams
(per 1,000 births)

8.58
(0.44)

0.59
(0.44)

Birth weight < 1000 grams
(per 1,000 births)

3.99
(0.31)

-0.44
(0.32)

Gestation length
(in weeks)

-0.328
(0.010)

-0.079
(0.010)

Premature Birth (< 32 weeks)
(per 1,000 births)

13.05
(0.55)

-0.27
(0.54)

5-min. APGAR score
(0-10 scale)

-0.067
(0.003)

-0.010
(0.003)

Ventilator incidence
(per 1,000 births)

6.28
(0.45)

1.20
(0.48)

Ventilator >= 30 min.
(per 1,000 births)

2.61
(0.29)

-0.11
(0.30)

Mortality, 1-year
(per 1,000 births)

4.57
(0.36)

0.10
(0.38)

Mortality, 28 days
(per 1,000 births)

1.76
(0.28)

-1.16
(0.30)

Impact on Other Outcomes

Notes: The data come from the 1989-1991 Linked National Natality-Mortality Detail Files. The sample consists of
the 497,139 singletons born in Pennsylvania between 1989 and 1991. The table entries are the coefficient estimates
on an indicator equal to one if the mother smoked during pregnancy. The Unadjusted column presents the raw
difference in sample means between smoking and nonsmoking mothers. The Adjusted column presents the
coefficient estimates from a regression that includes all of the “pre-treatment” variables included in the propensity
score model in Figures 3 and 4 (see Appendix). The standard errors are in parentheses and are corrected for
heteroskedasticity.

Table 9: Estimated Effects of Birth Weight and 5-Minute APGAR Score on Mortality and Assisted Ventilation
Mortality within 1-Year

Mortality within 1-Day

Ventilator Incidence

Ventilator >= 30 Minutes

Pooled

F.E.

F.E., nca

Pooled

F.E.

F.E., nca

Pooled

F.E.

F.E., nca

Pooled

F.E.

F.E., nca

Birth weight

-0.0511
(0.0013)
[-40.52]

-0.0188
(0.0017)
[-11.31]

-0.0072
(0.0012)
[-5.85]

-0.0161
(0.0008)
[-19.54]

-0.0048
(0.0010)
[-4.89]

-0.0004
(0.0007)
[0.68]

-0.0626
(0.0017)
[-36.28]

-0.0010
(0.0019)
[-0.55]

-0.0006
(0.0018)
[-0.36]

-0.0587
(0.0015)
[-39.33]

0.0026
(0.0014)
[1.81]

0.0026
(0.0013)
[2.02]

5-Min. APGAR

-0.0623
(0.0009)
[-72.02]

-0.0227
(0.0012)
[-19.38]

-0.0108
(0.0010)
[-10.43]

-0.0547
(0.0009)
[-58.22]

-0.0186
(0.0010)
[-18.51]

-0.0094
(0.0008)
[-11.56]

-0.0244
(0.0010)
[-25.32]

-0.0261
(0.0011)
[-23.13]

-0.0271
(0.0012)
[-23.28]

-0.0168
(0.0008)
[-20.72]

-0.0145
(0.0010)
[-14.95]

-0.0148
(0.0010)
[-15.19]

Sample Size

159,070

159,070

154,449

159,070

159,070

154,449

159,070

159,070

154,449

159,070

159,070

154,449

Notes: The data are for twins from the 1989-1991 Linked Natality-Mortality Detail Files. Observations with missing data on either birth weight or APGAR
scores are excluded from the sample. The “F.E., nca” column further excludes twins that either had a congenital anomaly at birth or whose cause of death was a
congenital anomaly. The birth weight coefficients are scaled up by 1,000 (effect of 1,000 gram increase). The standard errors are in parentheses and have been
corrected for heteroskedasticity and within-twin-pair correlation. The t-ratios of the coefficients are in brackets.

Table 10: Fixed Effects Estimates of Birth Weight Effect for Same-Sex and Boy-Girl Twin Pairs
Both Girl Twins
F.E.
F.E., nca

Pooled

Boy-Girl Twins
F.E.
F.E., nca

Pooled

Mortality, 1-year

-0.1066
(0.0029)

-0.0226
(0.0027)

-0.0085
(0.0019)

-0.1352
(0.0028)

-0.0272
(0.0031)

-0.0107
(0.0023)

-0.1079
(0.0029)

-0.0222
(0.0028)

-0.0096
(0.0018)

Mortality, 1-day

-0.0687
(0.0026)

-0.0060
(0.0015)

-0.0001
(0.0007)

-0.0842
(0.0025)

-0.0110
(0.0020)

-0.0019
(0.0013)

-0.0684
(0.0027)

-0.0058
(0.0021)

-0.0004
(0.0012)

Mortality, neonatal

-0.0962
(0.0028)

-0.0166
(0.0022)

-0.0060
(0.0013)

-0.1213
(0.0027)

-0.0198
(0.0026)

-0.0058
(0.0016)

-0.0969
(0.0029)

-0.0135
(0.0022)

-0.0032
(0.0012)

Control for Gender

--

--

--

--

--

--

Yes

Yes

Yes

64,056

64,056

62,335

65,672

65,672

63,481

59,308

59,308

57,911

Sample Size

Pooled

Both Boy Twins
F.E.
F.E., nca

Birth weight coefficient

Notes: The data are from the 1989-1991 Linked Natality-Mortality Detail Files. The “F.E., nca” column excludes twins that either had a congenital anomaly at
birth or whose cause of death was a congenital anomaly. The birth weight coefficients are scaled up by 1,000. The standard errors are in parentheses and have
been corrected for heteroskedasticity and within-twin-pair correlation.

Table 11: Twins Pooled and Fixed Effects Estimates for 1983-1985, 1989-1991, and 1995-1997
Mortality within One Year
1983-1985
Birth Weight

Dep. var. mean
Adj. R-squared
Sample Size
1989-1991
Birth Weight

Dep. var. mean
Adj. R-squared
Sample Size
1995-1997
Birth Weight

Dep. var. mean
Adj. R-squared
Sample Size

Mortality within 28 Days

Pooled

F.E.

F.E., nca

Pooled

F.E.

F.E., nca

-0.1375
(0.0019)

-0.0177
(0.0019)

-0.0089
(0.0016)

-0.1234
(0.0019)

-0.0118
(0.0016)

-0.0040
(0.0013)

47.0
0.199
140,388

47.0
0.620
140,388

43.1
0.656
139,811

37.6
0.198
140,388

37.6
0.702
140,388

34.5
0.744
139,811

-0.1168
(0.0016)

-0.0222
(0.0016)

-0.0082
(0.0012)

-0.1050
(0.0016)

-0.0154
(0.0013)

-0.0041
(0.0008)

37.3
0.169
189,036

37.3
0.585
189,036

31.3
0.629
183,727

29.3
0.173
189,036

29.3
0.683
189,036

24.4
0.745
183,727

-0.0907
(0.0015)

-0.0177
(0.0014)

-0.0057
(0.0010)

-0.0815
(0.0014)

-0.0138
(0.0011)

-0.0034
(0.0007)

27.2
0.133
214,168

27.2
0.554
214,168

22.6
0.615
209,155

21.8
0.133
214,168

21.8
0.633
214,168

18.0
0.713
209,155

Notes: The data are from the 1983-1985, 1989-1991, and 1995-1997 Linked Natality-Mortality Detail Files. The
“F.E., nca” column excludes twins that either had a congenital anomaly at birth or whose cause of death was a
congenital anomaly. The birth weight coefficients are scaled up by 1,000. The standard errors are in parentheses
and have been corrected for heteroskedasticity and within-twin-pair correlation.

Table 12: Twins Pooled and Fixed Effects Estimates by Mother’s Race and Education
Mortality within One Year
Birth weight coefficient

Mortality within 28 Days

Pooled

F.E.

F.E., nca

Pooled

F.E.

F.E., nca

White

-0.1035
(0.0019)

-0.0212
(0.0018)

-0.0066
(0.0012)

-0.0946
(0.0019)

-0.0155
(0.0014)

-0.0037
(0.0008)

Black

-0.1558
(0.0034)

-0.0263
(0.0041)

-0.0146
(0.0033)

-0.1383
(0.0034)

-0.0147
(0.0032)

-0.0056
(0.0020)

-0.1318
(0.0055)

-0.0381
(0.0066)

-0.0162
(0.0052)

-0.1173
(0.0054)

-0.0278
(0.0050)

-0.0072
(0.0032)

HS Graduate

-0.1080
(0.0031)

-0.0281
(0.0032)

-0.0083
(0.0021)

-0.0987
(0.0031)

-0.0197
(0.0026)

-0.0045
(0.0014)

Some College

-0.1002
(0.0039)

-0.0099
(0.0033)

-0.0008
(0.0022)

-0.0940
(0.0039)

-0.0078
(0.0026)

-0.0004
(0.0016)

College Graduate

-0.0853
(0.0037)

-0.0148
(0.0026)

-0.0056
(0.0016)

-0.0790
(0.0036)

-0.0118
(0.0022)

-0.0041
(0.0012)

White Education
HS Dropout

Notes: The data are from the 1989-1991 Linked Natality-Mortality Detail Files. The “F.E., nca” column excludes
twins that either had a congenital anomaly at birth or whose cause of death was a congenital anomaly. The birth
weight coefficients are scaled up by 1,000. The standard errors are in parentheses and have been corrected for
heteroskedasticity and within-twin-pair correlation.

Figure 1A: Hospital Costs and Birth Weight, under 2000 grams
180000
160000

Singletons

(Year 2000) Dollars

140000

Pooled Twins

120000

Fixed Effect

100000
80000
60000
40000
20000
0
300

800

1300

1800

Birth weight
Note: 1995-2000 NY/NJ Hospital Discharge Microdata

Figure 1B: Hospital Costs and Birth Weight, 2000-3000 grams
20000
18000
Singletons
16000
Pooled Twins

(Year 2000) Dollars

14000

Fixed Effect

12000
10000
8000
6000
4000
2000
0
2000

2500

Birth weight
Note: 1995-2000 NY/NJ Hospital Discharge Microdata

3000

Figure 1C: Infant Mortality (1-year) and Birth Weight

Probability of Death

1.00
0.90

Singletons

0.80

Pooled Twins

0.70

Fixed Effect

0.60

Fixed Effect, No
Cong. Anomalies

0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00
300

800

1300

Birth weight
Note: Linked Birth-Death certificate data, 1989

1800

2300

Figure 2A: 5-minute APGAR score and Birth Weight
10.00
9.00
8.00
7.00
Singletons
6.00
Pooled Twins

APGAR

5.00
Fixed Effect
4.00
Fixed Effect, No
Cong. Anomalies

3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
300

800

1300

1800

2300

Birth weight
Note: Birth certificate data, 1989

Figure 2B: Assisted Ventilation and Birth Weight
0.50
Singletons

0.45

Pooled Twins

0.40

Fixed Effect

0.35

Fixed Effect, No
Cong. Anomalies

Probability

0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
300

800

1300

Birth weight
Note: Birth certificate data, 1989

1800

2300

Figure 2C: Assisted Ventilation (30 minutes or more) and Birth Weight
0.50
0.45
Singletons
0.40
Pooled Twins
0.35
Fixed Effect

Probability

0.30
Fixed Effect, No
Cong. Anomalies

0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
300

800

1300

Birth Weight
Note: Birth certificate data, 1989

1800

2300

Figure 3: Estimated Birth Weight Effects of Maternal Smoking by the Propensity Score,
Pennsylvania Singletons 1989-1991
A. Average Birth Weight of Infants of Smoking and Non-Smoking Mothers by the Propensity Score
Smoker

Non-Smoker

3600
3500
3400
3300
3200
3100
3000
2900
2800
2700
2600
2500
0

.1

.2

.3

.4
.5
.6
Propensity Score

.7

.8

.9

1

B. Difference between Smokers and Non-Smokers in Average Birth Weight by the Propensity Score
150
100

Difference in Birth Weight

50
0
-50
-100
-150
-200
-250
-300
-350
-400
0

.1

.2

.3

.4
.5
.6
Propensity Score

.7

.8

.9

1

C. Difference between Smokers and Non-Smokers in Low Birth Weight (<2500 grams) Incidence
.14

Difference in Incidence<2500g

.12
.1
.08
.06
.04
.02
0
-.02
-.04
-.06
0

.1

.2

.3

.4
.5
.6
Propensity Score

.7

.8

.9

1

.9

1

D. Difference between Smokers and Non-Smokers in Incidence less than 1000 grams

Difference in Incidence<1000g

.03

.02

.01

0

-.01

-.02
0

.1

.2

.3

.4
.5
.6
Propensity Score

.7

.8

Figure 4: Estimated Effects of Maternal Smoking on Health Outcomes by the Propensity Score,
Pennsylvania Singletons 1989-1991
A. Infant Deaths within 1-Year of Birth (per 1,000 live births) for Smokers and Non-Smokers
Smoker

Non-Smoker

45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
0

.1

.2

.3

.4
.5
.6
Propensity Score

.7

.8

.9

1

.8

.9

1

B. Difference between Smokers and Non-Smokers in Infant Mortality Rates
24
20

Difference in Infant Mortality

16
12
8
4
0
-4
-8
-12
-16
0

.1

.2

.3

.4
.5
.6
Propensity Score

.7

C. 5-Minute APGAR Score for Smokers and Non-Smokers by the Propensity Score
Smoker

Non-Smoker

9.4
9.3
9.2
9.1
9
8.9
8.8
8.7
8.6
8.5
8.4
.1

0

.2

.3

.4
.5
.6
Propensity Score

.7

.8

.9

1

.9

1

D. Difference between Smokers and Non-Smokers in the 5-Minute APGAR Score
.4

Difference in 5-minute APGAR

.3
.2
.1
0
-.1
-.2
-.3
-.4
0

.1

.2

.3

.4
.5
.6
Propensity Score

.7

.8

E. Incidence of Assisted Ventilation >= 30 Minutes for Smokers and Non-Smokers
Smoker

Non-Smoker

.05

.04

.03

.02

.01

0
.1

0

.2

.3

.4
.5
.6
Propensity Score

.7

.8

.9

1

F. Difference between Smokers and Non-Smokers in Assisted Ventilation >= 30 Minutes

Difference in Ventilator>=30 min

.03

.02

.01

0

-.01

-.02
0

.1

.2

.3

.4
.5
.6
Propensity Score

.7

.8

.9

1

Figure 5A: Infant Mortality and Birth Weight, Pooled Twins, 1983-1997
1.00
0.90

Probability

0.80
0.70

1983-1985

0.60

1989-1991

0.50

1995-1997

0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00
300

800

1300

1800

2300

Birth weight
Note: Linked Birth-Death certificate data, 1983-1997

Figure 5B: Infant Mortality and Birth Weight, Fixed Effects, 1983-1997
1.00
0.90
0.80

1983-1985

0.70

1989-1991
1995-1997

Probability

0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00
300

800

1300

Birth weight
Note: Linked Birth-Death certificate data, 1983-1997

1800

2300

Figure 6A: 1-year Infant Mortality and Birth Weight
1.00
0.90
Pooled Twins

Probability of Death

0.80

Fixed Effect

0.70

Spline LPM

0.60

Spline, FE

0.50
0.40

Cond. Logit, Spline

0.30

Cond. Logit,
Dummies

0.20
0.10
0.00
300

800

1300

1800

2300

Birth weight
Note: Linked Birth-Death certificate data, 1989-1991

Figure 6B: Assisted Ventilation and Birth Weight
0.50
Pooled Twins

0.45

Fixed Effects

0.40

Spline, LPM
0.35

Spline, FE

Probability

0.30

Cond. Logit, Spline

0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
300

800

1300

Birth weight
Note: Birth certificate data, 1989-1991

1800

2300

Figure 6C: Assisted Ventilation (30 minutes or more) and Birth Weight
0.50
0.45
Pooled Twins

Probability

0.40

Fixed Effects

0.35

Spline, LPM

0.30

Spline, FE

0.25

Cond. Logit, Spline

0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
300

800

1300

Birth weight
Note: Birth certificate data, 1989-1991

1800

2300

Figure 7: Infant Mortality and Birth Weight, First- and Second-born, 1989-1991
1.00
0.90
First-born
0.80
Second-born
0.70
First, FE

Probability

0.60

Second, FE

0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00
300

800

1300

Birth weight
Note: Linked Birth-Death certificate data, 1989-1991

1800

2300

Figure 8: Infant Mortality and Birth Weight, Comparison of Matching
Algorithms, 1995-1997
1.00
0.90
0.80
Main Sample
Match
NCHS Match

0.70

Probability

0.60

Main Sample
Match, FE
NCHS Match

0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00
300

800

1300

Birth weight
Note: Linked Birth-Death certificate and NCHS Match data, 1995-1997

1800

2300

Figure 9: Infant Mortality and Birth Weight, Pooled Twins, 1989-1991, By Race
1.00
0.90
0.80
White, Pooled

0.70

Black, Pooled

Probability

0.60

White, Fixed
Effects
Black, Fixed
Effects

0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00
300

800

1300

Birth weight
Note: Linked Birth-Death certificate data, 1989-1991

1800

2300

To order any of these papers in hard copy, see instructions at the end of this list. To subscribe to all NBER
Working Papers or the papers in a single area, see instructions inside the back cover.
Author(s)

Title

10499

David G. Blanchflower
Andrew J. Oswald

Money, Sex, and Happiness: An Empirical Study

5/04

10500

Raj Chetty

Optimal Unemployment Insurance When
Income Effects are Large

5/04

10501

Chad Syverson

Market Structure and Productivity: A Concrete Example 5/04

10502

Hyuk Choe
Bong-Chan Kho
Rene M. Stulz

Do Domestic Investors Have an Edge? The Trading
Experience of Foreign Investors in Korea

5/04

10503

Xiaohong Chen
Sydney C. Ludvigson

Land of Addicts? An Empirical Investigation
of Habit-Based Asset Pricing Behavior

5/04

10504

Justin Wolfers
Eric Zitzewitz

Prediction Markets

5/04

10505

Hanno Lustig
Stijn Van Neiuwerburgh

Housing Collateral and Consumption Insurance
Across US Regions

5/04

10506

Ariel Pakes
Michael Ostrovsky
Steve Berry

Simple Estimators for the Parameters of Discrete
Dynamic Games (with Entry/Exit Examples

5/04

10507

Peter Cappelli
Monika Hamori

The Path to the Top: Changes in the Attributes and
Careers of Corporate Executives, 1980-2001

5/04

10508

John Cawley
Sheldon Danziger

Obesity as a Barrier to the Transition from
Welfare to Work

5/04

10509

Steven J. Davis
Magnus Henrekson

Tax Effects on Work Activity, Industry Mix, and
Shadow Economy Size: Evidence from
Rich-Country Comparisons

5/04

10510

Jennifer Hunt

Trust and Bribery: The Role of Quid Pro Quo and the
Link with Crime

5/04

10511

David M. Cutler
Grant Miller

The Role of Public Health Improvements in
Health Advances: The 20th Century United States

5/04

10512

Hans Fehr
Sabine Jokisch
Laurence Kotlikoff

The Role of Immigration in Dealing with the
Developed World’s Demographic Transition

5/04

10513

Lucia Breierova
Esther Duflo

The Impact of Education on Fertility and Child
5/04
Mortality: Do Fathers Really Matter Less Than Mothers?

Number

Date

To order any of these papers in hard copy, see instructions at the end of this list. To subscribe to all NBER
Working Papers or the papers in a single area, see instructions inside the back cover.
Author(s)

Title

10514

John Ameriks
Andrew Caplin
John Leahy
Tom Tyler

Measuring Self-Control

10515

David W. Galenson

A Portrait of the Artist as a Very Young or Very Old
5/04
Innovator: Creativity at the Extremes of the Life Cycle

10516

Dana Goldman
Darius Lakdawalla
Neeraj Sood

HIV Breakthroughs and Risky Sexual Behavior

5/04

10517

Ricardo J. Caballero
Arvind Krishnamurthy

Exchange Rate Volatility and the Credit Channel
in Emerging Markets: A Vertical Perspective

5/04

10518

Ricardo J. Caballero
Emmanuel Farhi
Mohamad L. Hammour

Speculative Growth: Hints from the US Economy

5/04

10519

Ricardo J. Caballero
Kevin Cowan
Jonathan Kearns

Fear of Sudden Stops: Lessons from Australia and Chile

5/04

10520

Guillermo A. Calvo
Alejandro Izquierdo
Luis F. Mejia

On the Empirics of Sudden stops: The Relevance
of Balance-Sheet Effects

5/04

10521

Mark E. Doms
Wendy E. Dunn
Stephen D. Oliner
Daniel E. Sichel

How Fast Do Personal Computers Depreciate?
Concepts and New Estimates

5/04

10522

Nicola Persico
Andrew Postlewaite
Dan Silverman

The Effect of Adolescent Experience on
Labor Market Outcomes: The Case of Height

5/04

10523

Sangeeta Pratap
Carlos Urritia

Firm Dynamics, Investment, and Debt Portfolio:
Balance Sheet Effects of the Mexican Crisis of 1994

5/04

10524

Willem H. Buiter

A Small Corner of Intertemporal Public Finance New Developments in Monetary Economics

5/04

10525

Axel Boersch-Supan
Christina B. Wilke

The German Public Pension System: How it Was,
How it Will Be

5/04

10526

Ayla Kayhan
Sheridan Titman

Firms’ Histories and Their Capital Structures

5/04

Number

Date
5/04

To order any of these papers in hard copy, see instructions at the end of this list. To subscribe to all NBER
Working Papers or the papers in a single area, see instructions inside the back cover.
Author(s)

Title

10527

Andrew Postlewaite
Larry Samuelson
Dan Silverman

Consumption Commitments and Preferences for Risk

10528

Christine Jolls

Identifying the Effects of the Americans with Disabilities 5/04
Act Using State-Law Variation: Preliminary Evidence
on Educational Participation Effects

10529

Timothy J. Hatton
Jeffrey G. Williamson

International Migration in the Long-Run: Positive
Selection, Negative Selection and Policy

5/04

10530

Brian Knight

Bargaining in Legislatures: An Empirical Investigation

5/04

10531

Steven G. Allen

The Value of Phased Retirement

5/04

10532

Ricardo J. Caballero
Arvind Krishnamurthy

Fiscal Policy and Financial Depth

5/04

10533

Daniel Cohen
Richard Portes

Dealing with Destabilizing ‘Market Discipline’

5/04

10534

Joshua Aizenman
Yeonho Lee
Yeongseop Rhee

International Reserves Management and Capital Mobility 6/04
in a Volatile World: Policy Considerations and a Case Study
of Korea

10535

Thomas Hellmann
Laura Lindsey
Manju Puri

Building Relationships Early: Banks in Venture Capital

6/04

10536

Patricia M. Danzon
Andrew Epstein
Sean Nicholson

Mergers and Acquisitions in the Pharmaceutical
and Biotech Industries

6/04

10537

Simon Gilchrist
Charles P. Himmelberg
Gur Huberman

Do Stock Price Bubbles Influence Corporate Investment? 6/04

10538

Ashish Arora
Alfonso Gambardella

The Globalization of the Software Industry: Perspectives 6/04
and Opportunities for Developed and Developing Countries

10539

Adi Brender
Allan Drazen

Political Budget Cycles in New versus Established
Democracies

6/04

10540

Fabio Ghironi
Marc J. Melitz

International Trade and Macroeconomic Dynamics
with Heterogeneous Firms

6/04

10541

Thomas Lemieux
Kevin Milligan

Incentive Effects of Social Assistance: A
Regression Discontinuity Approach

6/04

Number

Date
5/04

To order any of these papers in hard copy, see instructions at the end of this list. To subscribe to all NBER
Working Papers or the papers in a single area, see instructions inside the back cover.
Author(s)

Title

10542

Sean Nicholson

How Much Do Medical Students Know
About Physician Income?

6/04

10543

Daniel Bergstresser
Mihir A. Desai
Joshua Rauh

Earnings Manipulation and Managerial Investment
Decisions: Evidence from Sponsored Pension Plans

6/04

10544

Adriana Schor

Heterogeneous Productivity Response to Tariff
6/04
Reduction: Evidence from Brazilian Manufacturing Firms

10545

Mihir A. Desai
C. Fritz Foley
Kristin J. Forbes

Financial Constraints and Growth: Multinational
and Local Firm Responses to Currency Crises

6/04

10546

Stephen M. Maurer
Suzanne Scotchmer

Profit Neutrality in Licensing: The Boundary between
Antitrust Law and Patent Law

6/04

10547

Monika Piazzesi
Eric Swanson

Futures Prices as Risk-adjusted Forecasts
of Monetary Policy

6/04

10548

Paul Beaudry
Franck Portier

Stock Prices, News and Economic Fluctuations

6/04

10549

Marianne Bitler
Jonah Gelbach
Hilary Hoynes

Welfare Reform and Health

6/04

10550

John R. Graham
Campbell R. Harvey
Shiva Rajgopal

The Economic Implications of Corporate
Financial Reporting

6/04

10551

William M. Gentry
R. Glenn Hubbard

“Success Taxes,” Entrepreneurial Entry, and Innovation 6/04

10552

Douglas Almond
Kenneth Y. Chay
David S. Lee

The Costs of Low Birth Weight

Number

Date

6/04

Copies of the above working papers can be obtained for $10.00 per copy (plus $10.00 per order for shipping for all
locations outside the continental U.S.) to Working Papers, NBER, 1050 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 021385398. Pre-payment is required on all orders and may be made by check or credit card. Checks should be made payable
to the NBER and must be in dollars drawn on a U.S. bank. If paying by credit card, include the cardholder's name,
account number, and expiration date. For all orders, please be sure to include your return address and telephone
number. Working papers may also be ordered by telephone (868-3900), fax (617-868-2742), or email
(orders@nber.org).

