NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE ECONOMIC IMPLICATIONS OF
CORPORATE FINANCIAL REPORTING
John R. Graham
Campbell R. Harvey
Shiva Rajgopal
Working Paper 10550
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10550
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2004

We thank the following people for suggestions about survey and interview design: Sid Balachandran, Phil
Berger, Robert Bowen, Shuping Chen, Hemang Desai, Julie Edell, Gavan Fitzsimons, Michelle Hanlon, Frank
Hodge, Jim Jiambalvo, Bruce Johnson, Jane Kennedy, Lisa Koonce, SP Kothari, Mark Leary, Baruch Lev,
Bob Libby, John Lynch, John Martin, Dawn Matsumoto, Ed Maydew, Jeff Mitchell, Mort Pincus, Jim
Porteba, Brian Turner, Terry Shevlin, Doug Skinner, K.R. Subramanyam, and especially Mark Nelson. We
have also benefited from useful discussions with Michael Jensen. A special thanks to Chris Allen, Cheryl de
Mesa Graziano, Dave Ikenberry, Jim Jiambalvo and Jennifer Koski, who helped us administer the survey and
arrange some interviews. Mark Leary provided excellent research support, Andrew Frankel provided editorial
assistance, and Tara Bowens and Anne Higgs provided data entry support. We thank Gary Previts, Josh
Ronen, Shiva Shivakumar and seminar participants at Case Western University, Duke University, National
Forum on Corporate Finance and the University of Washington for comments. Finally, we thank the financial
executives who generously allowed us to interview them or who took time to fill out the survey. We
acknowledge financial support from the John W. Hartman Center at Duke University and the University of
Washington. Please address correspondence to John Graham (john.graham@duke.edu), Campbell Harvey
(cam.harvey@duke.edu), or Shiva Rajgopal (rajgopal@u.washington.edu). The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by John R. Graham, Campbell R. Harvey, and Shiva Rajgopal. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Economic Implications of Corporate Financial Reporting
John R. Graham, Campbell R. Harvey, and Shiva Rajgopal
NBER Working Paper No. 10550
June 2004
JEL No. G35, G32, G34
ABSTRACT
We survey 401 financial executives, and conduct in-depth interviews with an additional 20, to
determine the key factors that drive decisions related to reported earnings and voluntary disclosure.
The majority of firms view earnings, especially EPS, as the key metric for outsiders, even more so
than cash flows. Because of the severe market reaction to missing an earnings target, we find that
firms are willing to sacrifice economic value in order to meet a short-run earnings target. The
preference for smooth earnings is so strong that 78% of the surveyed executives would give up
economic value in exchange for smooth earnings. We find that 55% of managers would avoid
initiating a very positive NPV project if it meant falling short of the current quarter's consensus
earnings. Missing an earnings target or reporting volatile earnings is thought to reduce the
predictability of earnings, which in turn reduces stock price because investors and analysts hate
uncertainty. We also find that managers make voluntary disclosures to reduce information risk
associated with their stock but try to avoid setting a disclosure precedent that will be difficult to
maintain. In general, management's views provide support for stock price motivations for earnings
management and voluntary disclosure, but provide only modest evidence in support of other theories
of these phenomena (such as debt, political cost and bonus plan based hypotheses).
John R. Graham
Department of Economics
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
jgraham@mail.duke.edu

Campbell R. Harvey
Department of Economics
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
cam.harvey@duke.edu

Shiva Rajgopal
Department of Economics
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
rajgopal@u.washington.edu

The Economic Implications of Corporate Financial Reporting

1. Introduction
We conduct a comprehensive survey that asks CFOs to describe their choices related to reported
accounting numbers and voluntary disclosures. Our objective is to address the following questions: Do
managers care about earnings benchmarks or earnings trends and, if yes, which benchmarks are perceived
to be relatively more important? What factors motivate firms to exercise discretion, and even sacrifice
economic value, to manage reported earnings numbers? What is the relative importance of various
theories proposed by academic research to explain earnings management and voluntary disclosure?
Triangulating our results with those from archival empirical research enhances our understanding of these
issues.
We investigate these questions using a combination of field interviews and a survey instrument.
By using these methods, we are able to address issues that traditional empirical work based on large
archival data sources cannot. A combination of surveys and field interviews enables us to (i) get financial
officers to rank-order the relative importance of extant academic theories to explain financial reporting
policies; (ii) discover new patterns of behavior and new explanations for known patterns; and (iii)
highlight stylized facts on issues such as earnings benchmarks, earnings guidance, and the marginal
investor that are relatively hard to document from archival data. Overall, our evidence provides a
reference point describing where academic research and real-world financial reporting policies are
consistent and where they appear to differ.
Our results indicate that CFOs consider earnings, not cash flows, to be the key metric considered
by outsiders. The two key earnings benchmarks are quarterly earnings for the same quarter last year and
the analyst consensus estimate. Meeting or exceeding benchmarks is very important. Managers describe a
trade-off between the short-term need to “deliver earnings” and the long-term objective of making valuemaximizing investment decisions. Executives believe that hitting earnings benchmarks builds credibility
with the market and helps to maintain or increase their firm’s stock price.
The severe stock market reactions to small EPS misses can be explained as evidence that the
market believes that most firms can “find the money” to hit earnings targets. Not being able to find one or
two cents to hit the target might be interpreted as evidence of hidden problems at the firm. Additionally, if
the firm had guided analysts to the EPS target, then missing the target can indicate that a firm is managed
poorly in the sense that it can not accurately predict its own future. Both of these scenarios breed
uncertainty about a firm’s future prospects, which in turn affects its stock price. While managers are
willing to make small or moderate sacrifices in economic value to meet the earnings expectations of

1

analysts and investors (to avoid the severe market reaction for under-delivering), they are hesitant to
employ accounting adjustments to hit earnings targets, perhaps as a consequence of the stigma attached to
accounting fraud in the post-Enron environment.
An overwhelming majority of CFOs prefer smooth earnings (versus volatile earnings). Volatile
earnings are thought to be riskier than smooth earnings. Moreover, smooth earnings ease the analyst’s
task of predicting future earnings. Predictability of earnings seems to be the over-arching concern among
CFOs. Less predictable earnings -- either a missed earnings target or volatile earnings – command a risk
premium in the market. A surprising 78% of the surveyed executives would give up economic value in
exchange for smooth earnings.
Most executives feel they are making an appropriate choice when sacrificing value to smooth
earnings or to hit a target. The turmoil that can result in equity and debt markets from a negative earnings
surprise can lead to costs (at least in the short-run). Therefore, many executives feel that they are
choosing the lesser evil by sacrificing long-run value to avoid short-term turmoil (which can itself lead to
value loss). In other words, if a decision is made to sacrifice value, many executives feel that it is in some
sense forced on them by the market’s severe (over) reaction to earnings misses. Many argue that the
system (that is, financial market pressures and overreactions) encourages decisions that at times sacrifice
value to meet earnings targets.
Companies voluntarily disclose information to facilitate “clarity and understanding” to investors.
Lack of clarity, or a reputation for not consistently providing precise and accurate information, can lead to
under-pricing of the firm’s stock. In short, disclosing reliable and precise information can reduce
“information risk” about a company’s stock, which in turn reduces the required return. Concerns about
revealing sensitive information to competitors and worries about starting disclosure precedents that are
difficult to maintain (such as manager-provided earnings forecasts) appear to constrain voluntary
disclosure. Managers prefer in some cases to release bad news earlier than good news in order to build
credibility with the capital market and avoid potential lawsuits.
When benchmarked against the extant academic literature, our evidence offers four key insights.
First, accounting earnings matter more to managers than cash flows for financial reporting purposes,
which contrasts with the emphasis on cash flows pervasive in the finance literature. Second, managers are
interested in meeting or beating earnings benchmarks primarily to influence stock prices, and less so in
response to incentives related to debt covenants, credit ratings, political visibility and employee bonuses
that have traditionally been the focus of academic work (e.g., Watts and Zimmerman 1978, 1990). Third,
holding cash flows constant, managers care a lot about smooth earnings paths, although this concern has
been somewhat under-emphasized in the academic literature (see Ronen and Sadan 1981 for an earlier

2

reference on smoothing). Finally, managers are willing to sacrifice economic value to manage financial
reporting perceptions. It is difficult for archival empirical research to convincingly document such
behavior.
Our work is related to, but in important ways differs from and adds to, three papers. Nelson,
Elliot and Tarpley (2002, 2003) survey the auditors from one audit firm to learn about company attempts
to manage earnings that were detected by the auditors. Hodge (2003) seeks to assess the earnings quality
perceptions of small investors. The key difference between our work and prior research is that we find
direct evidence of managers’ willingness to give up real economic value to manage financial reporting
perceptions.1 Our research differs from prior work in four other ways. First, rather than rely on third-party
perceptions of what motivates CFOs’ financial-reporting decisions, we survey and interview the decisionmakers directly. A potential disadvantage of our approach is that executives may be unwilling to admit to
bad behavior. However, given that executives are willing to admit to sacrificing value in order to achieve
reporting objectives, admitting bad behavior does not appear to be a major problem in our study.
Moreover, directly asking the executives has the advantage that they presumably have the best
information about the circumstances surrounding their decisions.2 Second, the scope of our survey is
broader, in that we cover both earnings management decisions and voluntary disclosure practices. Third,
we sample a large cross-section of firms. Fourth, we analyze survey responses conditional on firm
characteristics. We examine the relation between the executives’ response and firm size, P/E ratio,
leverage, credit rating, managerial ownership, industry, CEO age, and the education of the CEO. By
examining such conditional responses, we attempt to shed light on the implications of various disclosure
and earnings management theories related to firm heterogeneity in size, risk, investment opportunities,
informational asymmetry, analyst coverage, level of guidance, and management incentives.
The paper is organized as follows. The second section details the methodology and design of the
survey. The importance of reported earnings and actions taken to manage earnings are discussed in the
third and the fourth sections, respectively. The fifth section deals with managers’ desire for smooth
earnings. The sixth section presents results on voluntary disclosure decisions. The seventh section
highlights observations from interviews, and the last section offers some concluding remarks.

1

Nelson et al. (2002) find that auditors identify a modest number of earnings management attempts as “structured
transactions” with real costs (e.g., transaction costs), especially among the 38 leasing transactions and the
consolidations of equity/cost method that they identify. In contrast, our results indicate that sacrificing value to
achieve earnings targets is much more pervasive than identified by auditors.
2
Further, unlike archival work where executive decisions are filtered by the subsequent decisions and perceptions of
auditors and others in the financial reporting process, we observe the decision process without such filtering.

3

2. Method
2.1 Surveys versus archival research
The typical large-sample archival analysis provides statistical power and cross-sectional
variation. However, these studies can suffer from several weaknesses related to variable specification and
the inability to ask qualitative questions. First, large sample analyses cannot always speak to the relative
importance of competing hypotheses for a phenomenon because the explanatory variable with the least
measurement error will often dominate in a regression analysis. Second, developing good empirical
proxies for voluntary disclosure, and especially earnings management, is non-trivial. Third, in some cases,
large-sample studies cannot assess which theory best fits the data because specific variables potentially
proxy for multiple theories. For example, size might explain cross-sectional variation in earnings
management or disclosure because of political costs, the information environment, or firm risk. In
contrast, surveys and interviews offer an opportunity to ask CFOs very specific and qualitative questions
about the motivation behind financial reporting choices. Moreover, the survey and interview format
enables us to adopt an integrated perspective on the trade-offs between multiple goals underlying earnings
management and disclosure (as recommended by Fields, Lys, and Vincent (2001)), rather than focus on
one narrow explanation for these phenomena. Surveys can also suggest new explanations that have not
been previously examined by academic researchers.
The survey methodology suffers from several potential limitations as well. Surveys measure
beliefs, which may not always coincide with actions. Moreover, executives can potentially parrot
explanations that they learned in business school (because they think this is what we want to hear), rather
than state their true beliefs. It is also possible that executives make (close to) optimal decisions, even if
they do not articulate their explanation in academic terms when describing the decision-making process.
Perhaps some of the survey questions are misunderstood. It is also possible that the respondents are not
representative of the underlying population. Even with these considerations, we hope to provide unique
information about how firms make financial reporting decisions. We hope that researchers will use our
results to develop new theories or potentially modify or abandon existing views. We also hope that
practitioners and students benefit from our analysis by noting how other firms operate and also where
practice diverges from academic recommendations.

2.2 Survey design and delivery
Our main survey focuses on two broad areas: voluntary disclosure choices and earnings
management. Based on a review of the existing literature, we developed a draft survey. The draft version

4

of the survey contained 10 questions, most with subsections. One question collected demographic
information about the sample firms. We solicited feedback from several academic researchers and CFOs
on the survey content and design. We also distributed drafts to marketing research experts on survey
design and execution. Our goal was to minimize biases induced by the questionnaire and maximize the
response rate. We used the penultimate version of the survey to conduct beta tests to seek feedback and to
make sure that the time required to complete the survey was reasonable. Our beta testers took 10-15
minutes to complete the survey. Based on this and other feedback, we made changes to the wording of
some questions and added two more questions. The final survey contained 12 questions, most with
subsections, and the paper version was 5 pages long. The survey is posted on the Internet at
http://faculty.fuqua.duke.edu/~jgraham/finrep/survey.htm
We use two different versions of the survey, with the ordering scrambled on the non-demographic
questions. We were concerned that the respondents might (i) abandon the survey as they filled out
questions that had many subparts; and/or (ii) be unduly influenced by the order of the questions. If the
first concern were valid, we would expect to see a higher proportion of respondents answering the
subparts that appear at the beginning of any given question. If the second concern was valid, we would
expect the answers to differ depending on the version of the survey. However, we find no evidence that
the response rate or quality of responses depends on the ordering of the questions.
We used two mechanisms to deliver the survey. First, we e-mailed the survey to 3,174 members
of an organization of financial executives that work for public companies and have the job title of CFO,
Chief Accounting Officer, Treasurer, Assistant Treasurer, Controller, Assistant Controller, or Vice
President (VP), Senior VP or Executive VP of Finance. As a secondary effort, we contacted executives
from CFO forums at the University of Illinois and the University of Washington.3 Two hundred sixty
seven members responded to the Internet survey, for a response rate of approximately 8.4 percent. In the
remainder of the paper, for simplicity, we refer to the survey respondents as CFOs. Note also that an
overwhelming majority of interviews hold the CFO title.
Second, a paper version of the survey was administered at a conference on current financial
reporting issues conducted by an organization of financial executives on November 17 and 18, 2003 in
New York City. This conference was attended by a wide variety of public companies. Before the keynote
address, the executives were asked to fill out the paper version of the survey that was placed on their
chairs. We used this approach in an attempt to obtain a large response rate, and in fact approximately onefifth of the conference attendees, or 134 participants, filled out the survey – these respondents make up
approximately one-third of our final sample.
3

We thank Dave Ikenberry and Jennifer Koski for coordinating the administration of the survey to the National
Forum on Corporate Finance (NFCF) and the University of Washington CFO Forum, respectively.

5

Averaged across the two ways in which the survey was administered, our response rate of 10.4%
falls within the ranges of response rates reported by several recent surveys of financial executives. For
example, Trahan and Gitman (1995) report a response rate of 12% in a survey mailed to 700 CFOs, while
Graham and Harvey (2001) obtain a 9% response rate for 4,400 faxed surveys. Brav, Graham, Harvey and
Michaely (2004) have a 16% response rate. Of the total 405 responses, four sets of two were responses
from the same firm, so we averaged each pair into a single observation (leaving 401 unique firm
responses). We delete seven incomplete responses, to permit full comparability across all questions.
Finally, 46 of the responses are from private firms and 36 do not indicate whether they are public or
private. Other than when we directly compare public firms to the 46 private firms, the analysis below is
based on the 312 responses that we can classify as public firms.

2.3 Interview design and delivery
In addition to the survey, we separately conducted 20 one-on-one interviews with senior
executives (typically the CFO or Treasurer). To identify interview subjects, we chose firms in different
industries and with different analyst coverage and market capitalization. These firms are not randomly
picked because we purposefully wanted some cross-sectional variation in their financial reporting
policies. Six of the 20 interviews were conducted in person and the rest were done via telephone. The
interviews were arranged with the understanding that the identity of the firms and executives will remain
anonymous.
We conduct interviews according to the best practices described in Sudman and Bradburn (1983). At
the beginning of each interview, we ask the executive to describe their policy related to voluntary
disclosures, the importance of earnings-related benchmarks, and the ways to achieve such benchmarks
within the purview of GAAP. “Riskier” questions are asked later in the interview. We attempt to conduct
the interview so as not to ask leading questions or influence the answers or the initial direction of the
interviews with a pre-set agenda. Rather, we let the executive tell us what is important at his or her firm
about voluntary disclosures and earnings targets, and then we follow up with clarifying questions. Many
of the clarifying questions are similar to those that appear on the survey. Whenever possible, we
numerically code the interviews (Flanagan 1954). This helps us link the two sources of information.
The interviews varied in length, lasting from 40 to 90 minutes. The executives were remarkably
candid in their discussions. We integrate the interviews with the survey results to reinforce or clarify the
survey responses. In general, the interviews provide insight and depth to further our understanding about
the content of the survey responses.

6

2.4 Summary statistics and data issues
Table 1, panel A presents summary information about the firms in our sample. The statistics are
based on the non-missing values for each particular characteristic. Note that the companies range from
small (15.1% of the sample firms have sales of less than $100 million) to very large (25.6% have sales of
at least $5 billion). Furthermore, 7.8% of the firms do not have any analyst coverage, while 16.7% are
covered by at least 16 analysts. We also collect information about CEOs (implicitly assuming that the
executives that we survey act as agents for the CEOs). Table 1, panel B presents Pearson correlations
among the demographic variables. One interesting relation is that the number of analysts covering a firm
is higher for firms that provide more earnings guidance (ρ = 0.437).
The notes to Table 2 describe the “breakpoints” that we use to categorize firms, based on firm
characteristics (small vs. large, high P/E vs. low P/E). For example, in subsequent analyses, we refer to
firms with revenues greater than $1 billion as “large” and firms with a P/E ratio greater than 17 (the
median for our sample) as “high P/E firms.” Overall, the substantial variation in firm and executive
characteristics permits a rich description of financial reporting practices and allows us to infer which
corporate actions are consistent with academic theories.
Table 1, panels C and D compare summary information about the firms we survey and interview to
Compustat information for the following variables: sales, debt-to-assets, dividend yield, earnings per
share, credit rating, book to market, and price-earnings ratios. For each variable, in each panel, we report
the sample average and median, and compare these values to those for the universe of Compustat firms as
of November 2003 (the month we conducted most of the survey). The table reports the percentage of
sample firms that fall into each quintile (based on separate Compustat quintile breakpoints for each
variable). The reported percentages can then be compared to the benchmark 20 percent, which allows us
to infer whether our samples are representative of Compustat firms, and if so, on which dimensions.
Relative to the typical Compustat firm, the survey firms are larger, more levered, and have higher
dividend yields. When book-to-market is considered, the survey firms are representative of the average
Compustat firm. We have fewer firms that report negative earnings compared to the typical Compustat
firm, as evidenced by very few survey observations in lower price-earnings quintiles. However, when we
delete firms that report negative earnings from the sample, the price-earnings ratios of the survey firms
are closer to the distribution as per Compustat.

7

3. The Importance of Reported Earnings
3.1 EPS focus
Table 2, row 1 of panel A reveals that earnings is the favorite financial metric of outsiders, as
perceived by CFOs. One hundred fifty nine of the respondents rank earnings as the number one metric,
relative to 36 top ranks each for revenues and cash flows from operations (Figure 1). This finding is
noteworthy because cash flows continue to be the measure of firm-value emphasized in the academic
finance literature. Revenue also appears to substantially lag earnings in terms of perceived importance by
CFOs.
The conditional analyses, reported in panel B, reveal several interesting insights about the importance
of earnings. For distressed firms, especially those reporting negative earnings, we would expect cash
flows from operations and other liquidity measures to assume more importance than earnings. Consistent
with this conjecture, unprofitable and younger firms rank earnings as relatively less important (see panel
B, row 1). However, apart from pro-forma earnings, there appears to be no distinct pattern in the
importance of other measures for unprofitable firms in the data. For firms where translation of economic
events into earnings is slow, leading indicators such as patents or product pipeline might be viewed as
being more important than earnings. However, there does not appear to be any differential importance in
earnings for technology firms, where leading indicators are likely to be more important, relative to other
industries (panel B, row 1). One interviewed CFO notes that leading indicators are important only
because they feed into future earnings.
Regarding the other metrics, the conditional analyses reveal that cash flows appear relatively more
important in younger firms and firms where less guidance is given (panel B, row 3). It is also interesting
to note that private firms place more emphasis on cash flow from operations than public firms (panel B,
row 3), suggesting, perhaps, that capital market motivations drive the focus on earnings.4 Revenues rank
higher among firms that report higher sales growth (panel B, row 2). Unprofitable firms, firms with young
CEOs, and firms where guidance and analyst coverage are high emphasize pro-forma earnings (panel B,
row 5). These patterns are consistent with firms responding to capital market pressures to use pro-forma
earnings to make their unprofitable GAAP earnings look more profitable.
The interviewed CFOs indicate that the GAAP earnings number, especially EPS, is the key metric
upon which the market focuses (“earnings are in a class by themselves”). One interviewee observes that
this “near-obsession with earnings is a phenomenon that started in the late 80s and climaxed during the
Internet boom.” Four reasons stand out as causing this focus on EPS. First, the world is complex and the

4

Recall that all numbers in all columns of the tables are for public firms, except for the column labeled private
firms.

8

number of available financial metrics is enormous. Investors need a simple metric that summarizes
corporate performance, that is easy to understand, and is relatively comparable across companies. EPS
satisfies these criteria. Second, the EPS metric gets the broadest distribution and coverage by the media.
Third, by focusing on one number, the analyst’s task of predicting future value is made somewhat easier.
The analyst assimilates all the available information and summarizes it in one number: EPS. Four,
analysts evaluate a firm’s progress based on whether a company hits the consensus EPS number.
Investment banks can also assess analysts’ performance by evaluating how closely they predict the firm’s
reported EPS.5

3.2 Earnings benchmarks
Several performance benchmarks have been proposed in the literature (e.g., Burgustahler and Dichev
1997 and Degeorge, Patel, Zeckhauser 1999), such as previous years’ or seasonally lagged quarterly
earnings, loss avoidance, or analysts’ consensus estimates. The survey evidence reported in Table 3
indicates that, while all four metrics are important, the rank ordering among them is as follows: (i) same
quarter last year (84.3% agree); (ii) analyst consensus estimate (68.8% agree); (iii) reporting a profit (65%
agree); and (iv) previous quarter EPS (54.6% agree) (see Figure 2). Degeorge et al. (1999) find a
somewhat different rank ordering in their archival data: (i) reporting a profit; (ii) earnings same quarter
last year; and (iii) analysts consensus estimates. Degeorge et al. (1999) do not investigate previous quarter
earnings.
Conditional analyses reported in panel B reveal several interesting insights. Profitable firms rank
same quarter last year EPS and analyst consensus forecast as more important than unprofitable firms
(panel B, rows 1 and 3). Firms that are large, report high sales growth, have greater analyst coverage and
provide greater earnings guidance regard analyst consensus forecasts as more important than firms with
smaller size, slower growth, less analyst coverage and less earnings guidance (panel B, row 3). It is
interesting to note that meeting seasonally lagged earnings and reporting a profit are perceived as
unconditionally important earnings benchmarks (that is, there is not much cross-sectional variation on
firm characteristics; see panel B, rows 1 and 2).
Before administering the survey, we expected the analyst consensus estimate to be the most important
earnings benchmark. However, the responses indicate that same quarter last year’s EPS seems to

5

While there is agreement on the importance of the reported earnings number, interviewed CFOs acknowledge that
the EPS number contains many discretionary components and is relatively susceptible to manipulation. Some CFOs
have tried to shift the attention of the analysts to “softer” data on value-drivers, such as new products introduced or
the extent of innovation in the firm’s business. CFOs believe that focus on value-drivers would encourage both firms
and the market to adopt a longer-term perspective, instead of thinking about beating the quarterly benchmark.

9

dominate the analyst consensus estimate. One reason for this result might be differential analyst coverage
among our sample firms: In firms that have substantial analyst coverage, or that provide substantial
guidance, the consensus earnings number is approximately as important as the four quarters lagged
number. Given that these firms are large and are frequently covered in the press, this might have affected
our prior beliefs. The survey reveals that the importance of the consensus earnings number is conditional
on the degree of analyst coverage, guidance, and size.
Interviewed CFOs point out that in press reports about a firm’s earnings, the first item is often a
comparison of current quarter’s earnings with four quarters lagged quarterly earnings. The next item
mentioned is often the analyst consensus estimate for the quarter. Interviewed CFOs also mention that
while the analyst forecast can be guided by management, last year’s quarterly earnings number is a
benchmark that is harder, if not impossible, to manage after the 10-Q SEC filing has been made. Finally,
several executives mention that comparison to seasonally lagged earnings numbers provides a measure of
earnings momentum and growth, and therefore is a useful gauge of corporate performance.

3.3 Why meet earnings benchmarks?
The academic accounting literature, summarized by Healy and Wahlen (1999), Dechow and Skinner
(2000) and Fields, Lys and Vincent (2001), provides several motivations for why managers might
exercise accounting discretion to achieve some desirable earnings goal (such as hitting an earnings
target): employee bonuses, bond covenants, stakeholder motivations, and stock price motivations. We
evaluate the evidence for each of these motivations in turn and also propose a new hypothesis based on
survey evidence (career concerns).6 The data are presented in Table 4.

3.3.1 Stock price driven motivation
Research suggests that the market cares about earnings benchmarks. Barth, Elliot and Finn (1999)
find that, all else constant, firms that report continuous growth in annual earnings are priced at a premium
relative to other firms. Skinner and Sloan (2002) show that growth firms that fail to meet earnings
benchmarks (such as analyst expectations) suffer large negative price reactions on the earnings
announcement date. Bartov, Givoly and Hayn (2002) find that firms that meet or beat analyst expectations
often report superior future accounting performance. The survey evidence is strongly consistent with the
6

We did not ask specific survey questions related to the taxes and regulation motivations for meeting benchmarks,
although literature surveys (e.g., Healy and Wahlen 1999, Fields et al. 2001 and Shevlin and Shackelford 2001)
identify these motivations as well. For one thing, incentives to meet earnings benchmarks to exploit regulatory
requirements are specific to certain industries, such as banking and insurance, and incorporating such industryspecific questions in a broad survey like ours is difficult. Furthermore, our CFO interviews reveal that taxes are a
relatively second-order incentive for meeting earnings benchmarks.

10

importance of stock price motivations to meet or beat earnings benchmarks. An overwhelming 86.3% of
the survey participants believe that meeting benchmarks builds credibility with the capital market (Table
4, row 1). More than 80% agree that meeting benchmarks helps maintain or increase the firm’s stock
price (Table 4, row 2). Consistent with these results, managers believe that meeting benchmarks conveys
future growth prospects to investors (Table 4, row 4). In sum, the dominant reason to meet or beat
earnings benchmarks relates to stock prices.

3.3.2 Stakeholder motivations
Bowen, Ducharme and Shores (1995) and Burgstahler and Dichev (1997) state that by managing
earnings firms are able to enhance their reputation with stakeholders, such as customers, suppliers and
creditors, and hence get better terms of trade with these parties. A statistically significant majority of the
respondents agree with the stakeholder story (Table 4, row 6). Conditional analyses show that the
stakeholder motivation is especially important for firms that are small, in the technology industry,
dominated by insiders, young, and not profitable (Table 4, row 6). Perhaps, suppliers and customers need
more reassurances about the firm’s future in such companies. An interviewed CFO, in an industry in
which confidence of retail customers in the product market is a key consideration, said that the
stakeholder hypothesis is likely to be a significant determinant of the accounting and disclosure decisions.

3.3.3 Employee bonuses
Several papers, beginning with Healy (1985), argue that managers exercise accounting discretion
to maximize the present value of their bonus compensation (see Fields et al. 2001 for references). For
example, Matsunaga and Park (2001) find that failure to meet analysts’ consensus estimates results in pay
cuts for the CEO. The survey evidence does not provide much support for the employee bonus
motivation: There is no statistical difference between respondents who agree and disagree with this
motivation (see row 8 of Table 4). Consistent with the survey evidence, interviewed CFOs view the
compensation motivation as a second-order factor, at best, for exercising accounting discretion. They tell
us that companies often have internal earnings targets (for the purpose of determining whether the
executive earns a bonus) that exceed the external consensus target.7 Hence, meeting the external earnings
target does not guarantee a bonus payout. Furthermore, several interviewed CFOs indicate that bonuses
are a function of an internal “stretch goal,” which exceeds the internal “budget EPS,” which in turn

7

The external targets are below the internal targets because the firms prefer that the external targets are not a stretch
to attain, so the firm can avoid disappointing the market by missing the consensus.

11

exceeds the analyst consensus estimates. Finally, many executives indicate that bonus payout is simply
not that important relative to salary and stock compensation.

3.3.4 Career concerns
The interviews reveal that the desire to hit the earnings target appears to be driven less by shortrun compensation motivations than by career concerns. Most CFOs feel that their inability to hit the
earnings target is seen by the executive labor market as a “managerial failure.” Repeatedly failing to meet
earnings benchmarks can inhibit the upward or intra-industry mobility of the CFO or CEO, as the
manager is seen either as an incompetent executive or a poor forecaster. According to one executive, “I
miss the target; I’m out of a job.” Consistent with these implications, more than three-fourths of the
survey respondents agree or strongly agree about the importance of management’s external reputation in
explaining a desire to hit the earnings benchmark (Table 4, row 3). We are not aware of a systematic
exploration of such a career concern hypothesis in the literature on earnings management.

3.3.5 Bond covenants
Some research proposes that earnings might be managed to reduce the probability of violating a
covenant, and hence the expected cost of debt (Watts and Zimmerman 1990). For example, Burgstahler
(1997) suggests that loss avoidance reduces the cost of debt. The survey evidence does not support the
bond covenant hypothesis for meeting earnings benchmarks (Table 4, row 9). This finding is consistent
with what we find in our interviews, as well as with comments in the Dechow and Skinner (2000) review
of the earnings management literature. While unconditional support for the bond covenant motivation is
low, we find that firms that are perhaps closer to violating covenants (highly leveraged, unprofitable)
consider bond covenants to be relatively more important (Table 4, row 9). Finally, private firms strongly
support the covenant hypothesis.

3.4 Consequences of failure to meet earnings benchmarks
To further understand the desire to meet earnings benchmarks, we explicitly ask about the
consequences of failing to meet such benchmarks. Table 5 summarizes the results (see Figure 4). The top
two consequences of a failure to meet earnings benchmarks are an increase in the uncertainty about future
prospects (80.7%) and a perception among outsiders that there are deeper previously unknown problems
at the firm (60%). The importance of these concerns increases with the degree of guidance.
To provide some context to these statistics, we turn to the interview evidence. Several CFOs
argue that, “you have to start with the premise that every company manages earnings.” To be clear, these

12

executives are not talking about violating GAAP or committing fraud. They are talking about “running
the business” in a manner to produce smooth, attainable earnings every year (unless, of course, they are in
a negative tailspin, in which case the firm goes into survival mode).8 This entails maneuvers with
discretionary spending, changing the timing and perhaps the scale of investment projects, and turning
some of the other dials discussed above. One CFO characterizes such decisions to meet earnings targets
as the “screw-driver” effect: “you turn the screws just a little bit so that it fits.” The common belief is that
a well-run and stable firm should be able to “produce the dollars” necessary to hit the earnings target,
even in a year that is otherwise somewhat down. Because the market expects firms to be able to hit or
slightly exceed earnings targets, and in fact firms on average do just this (Brown and Caylor 2003),
problems can arise when a firm does not deliver earnings. The market might assume that not delivering
earnings means that there are potentially serious problems at the firm (because the firm apparently is so
near the edge that it could not produce the dollars to hit earnings, and hence must have already used up its
cushion). As one CFO put it, “if you see one cockroach, you immediately assume that there are hundreds
inside the walls, even though you may have no proof that this is the case.” Corporations therefore have
great incentive to avoid the “cockroach” of missing an earnings benchmark.
If management is unable to meet an earnings benchmark, then the market concludes that the firm
probably has poorer future prospects and, hence, downgrades the firm stock price. However, CFOs point
out that the market’s reception is not as unfavorable if (i) you miss the quarterly consensus estimate but
you can explain that the miss is driven by accounting accruals, not real cash flows (where “real” means,
e.g., a drop in units sold); or (ii) you miss the quarterly consensus estimate but you can confirm guidance
for the annual EPS number. Moreover, CFOs argue that the market is likely to tolerate an EPS miss if the
non-financial leading indicators suggest good performance, thereby implying good future earnings.
However, if non-financial leading indicators perform poorly as well, then the market is likely to punish
the stock.
The other statistically significant factor motivating managers to avoid missing earnings
benchmarks relates to the time spent in explaining, especially in conference calls to analysts, why the firm
missed the target (Table 5, row 3). The interviewed CFOs say that if they meet the earnings target, they
can devote more time in the conference call to the positive aspects of the firm’s business and the firm’s
future prospects. Analysts and other stakeholders are more receptive to such discussions when the
earnings target is met. In contrast, if the company fails to beat the guided number, then the tone of the
conference call becomes substantially negative. The focus shifts completely to talking about why the
company was unable to meet the consensus estimate. Analysts then doubt the credibility of every

8

Parfet (2000), a CFO, makes a similar point in defense of earnings management.

13

assumption underlying the current earnings number and the forecast of future earnings. Such a negative
environment can cause the stock price to fall and even a debt-rating downgrade. In general, interviewed
CFOs feel that the market hates unpleasant surprises, and surprised investors or analysts become
defensive. Actions taken to meet or beat earnings benchmarks reduce the probability of such an
unpleasant surprise. We turn to these actions in the following section.

4. Actions Taken to Meet Earnings Benchmarks
4.1 Mix between accounting and real actions
The literature has long recognized that managers can take accounting actions or real economic
actions to meet earnings benchmarks. To learn more about the exact nature of the trade-offs between
these two types of actions, we ask survey respondents to rank-order a list of accounting actions and real
economic actions that managers can take to meet earnings targets. The results, reported in Table 6, are
intriguing. There is strong evidence that managers take real economic actions to keep up accounting
appearances (Figure 5). In particular, 80% of survey participants report that they would decrease
discretionary spending on R&D, advertising and maintenance (Table 6, row 1) to meet an earnings target.
More than half (55.3%) state that they would delay starting a new project to meet an earnings target, even
when such a delay entails a small sacrifice in value (Table 6, row 2). This evidence is dramatic for two
reasons. First, managers appear to be willing to burn “real” cash flows for the sake of reporting desired
accounting numbers. As one executive put it, “there is a constant tension between the short-term and
long-term” objectives of the firm. Second, getting managers to admit to such value decreasing actions in a
survey suggests, perhaps, that our evidence represents only the lower bound of such behavior.
Real actions to manage earnings have not received as much attention in the literature relative to
accounting attempts to manage earnings. A few papers (e.g., Dechow and Sloan 1991; Bartov 1993;
Bushee 1998) present evidence of asset sales or R&D cuts to meet earnings targets. Roychowdhury
(2003) argues that firms overproduce and give sales discounts to meet earnings targets. However, in
attempts to document real earnings management using archival data, researchers can never be confident
that real actions such as R&D cuts are not driven by strategic considerations (such as a decrease in the
firms’ investment opportunity set). In contrast, our survey evidence does not suffer from such omitted
variable concerns.9

9

Our finding that firms sacrifice value to increase earnings is consistent with (i) Erickson, Hanlon and Maydew
(2004), who find that firms pay extra taxes to boost reported earnings; and (ii) Bhojraj and Libby (2004), who find,
in an experiment, that just before issuing stock, managers choose projects that they believe will maximize short-term
earnings (and price) as opposed to total cash flows.

14

The survey evidence does not offer much support for other real actions, such as selling
investments or assets to recognize gains this quarter or repurchasing shares to boost EPS (Table 6, row 7
and 8). Thus, our findings differ from Bartov (1993) and Bens, Nagar, Skinner and Wong (2003), who
argue that gains from asset sales and share repurchases, respectively, are used to manage earnings.
Another provocative finding from Table 6 is the relative absence of evidence that accounting
actions are taken to meet earnings benchmarks. Survey respondents do not agree on the use of the
following accrual-related maneuvers to manage earnings targets: drawing down on reserves previously set
aside (Table 6, row 5), postponing an accounting charge (Table 6, row 6) or altering accounting
assumptions in pension calculations (Table 6, row 9). This evidence is somewhat disconcerting,
considering the large volume of literature devoted to documenting earnings management via accruals and
discretionary accruals (Teoh, Welch and Wong 1998a, b; Sloan 1996; Nelson et al. 2002; and see Healy
and Wahlen 1999, Dechow and Skinner 2000, Beneish (2001), and Fields et al. 2001 for surveys). Of
course, the aftermath of accounting scandals at Enron and WorldCom and the certification requirements
imposed by the Sarbanes-Oxley Act may have changed managers’ preferences for the mix between
accounting and real actions to manage earnings.
Our not finding evidence of accounting actions may indicate that managers are currently more likely
to indulge in real as opposed to accounting based earnings management. One interviewed CFO points out
that while auditors can second-guess the firm’s accounting policies, they cannot readily challenge real
economic actions that are taken in the ordinary course of business to meet earnings targets. Alternatively,
managers may have hesitated to acknowledge the exercise of accounting discretion, even in an
anonymous survey, in the post-Enron environment. An executive pointed out that CFOs at firms now go
out of their way to assure stakeholders that there is no accounting based earnings management in their
books. He goes on to observe that CFOs may have made the right accounting choice, out of the
alternatives available to them under GAAP, at some time in the past, but they now run the risk that
overzealous regulators will connect some dots ex post and make the case that an accounting treatment at a
particular firm was driven by a need to manage earnings.

4.2 Project adoption and earnings targets
To gauge the degree to which managers are willing to alter investment decisions to meet earnings
targets, we ask the following hypothetical question.

15

Hypothetical scenario: Your company’s cost of capital is 12%. Near the end of the quarter, a new
opportunity arises that offers a 16% internal rate of return and the same risk as the firm. The
analyst consensus EPS estimate is $1.90. What is the probability that your company will pursue
this project in each of the following scenarios?
Actual EPS if
you do not
pursue the
project

Actual EPS if
you pursue the
project

$2.00
$1.90
$1.80
$1.40

$1.90
$1.80
$1.70
$1.30

The probability that the project will be
pursued in this scenario is …
(check one box per row)
0%

20%

40%

60%

80%

100%

Three facts about the question are worth noting: (i) the project has positive NPV because the internal
rate of return exceeds the cost of capital by 4%; (ii) undertaking the project in the first earnings scenario
enables the firm to exactly meet the consensus estimate; (iii) under the second scenario, the firm misses
the consensus estimate by undertaking the positive NPV project; and (iv) under the third and fourth
scenarios, the company is not scheduled to meet the consensus estimate and adopting the project will take
the firm further below the consensus.
The survey responses reported in Table 7 are fascinating (Figure 6). Although adopting the positive
NPV project will not jeopardize the firm’s chances of meeting the consensus estimate, the average
probability of taking the project is 80%. A priori, one might expect all survey respondents to take the
project under the first scenario. One-fifth of the respondents would not take the earnings hit, perhaps
because passing on the NPV positive project means they would beat rather than merely meet consensus.
Alternatively, managers might hesitate to take the project-related earnings hit to hedge against the
possibility that some unforeseen event before the end of the quarter may consume earnings. Interestingly,
only 59% of the respondents would take the project in scenario two. Thus, 41% of the managers would
not take a positive NPV project just to be able to meet the analyst consensus estimate! In scenario four,
when EPS without taking the project at $1.40 is a full 50 cents below consensus, about 52% of the
managers would take the project and its associated 10 cent earnings hit. The fourth scenario result is
surprising to us because we expected more managers to take a “big bath” and accept the project, given
that they are not on track to hit consensus estimate anyway. Nonetheless, the above data strongly suggests
that managers are willing to alter consumption and investment decisions to report certain earnings
benchmarks.

16

Conditional analyses, presented in panel B, reveal cross-sectional variation in the firm’s probability of
project adoption along only two major dimensions. Technology firms and firms that provide earnings
guidance are more likely to avoid taking projects to meet earnings targets than non-technology firms and
firms with less guidance. In additional conditional analysis (not reported in a table), we examine which
firms say that they would deviate from weak monotonicity; that is, which firms become more likely to
choose the project as they move down the four earnings scenarios. This analysis indicates that only 19%
of the respondents say that they would violate monotonicity at all, and only 12% say would be more
willing to undertake the project in scenario 4 than in scenario 3. Large firms that give guidance and have a
large number of analysts, as well as firms with CEOs that do not have MBAs, are most likely to violate
monotonicity (i.e., have a probability of undertaking the project that increases as the expected earnings
shortfall increases).

4.3 Interview evidence
In the interviews, many CFOs acknowledge that they face a trade-off between delivering (short-run)
earnings and making long-run optimal decisions. The parameters of this trade-off are conditional on the
firm’s progress towards hitting consensus earnings. If the company is doing well, it is inclined to make
long-run decisions that might reduce EPS (because they will make the benchmark EPS in any case). If the
company has to stretch to attain their earnings target, they are more inclined to delay the start of a longrun project (or take some of the specific actions described below) because starting the project now would
cause them to miss the earning target. Along these lines, several CFOs candidly acknowledge that they
have made real economic sacrifices to hit an earnings target. One CFO indicates that several investment
banks promote products whose sole objective is to create accounting income with zero or sometimes even
negative cash flow consequences. Real actions often cited include: (i) postpone or eliminate hiring, R&D,
advertising, or even investments (to avoid depreciation charges to earnings or other start-up charges); (ii)
manage other expenses by cutting the travel budget, delaying or canceling software spending, or deferring
maintenance spending; (iii) sell bond investments that are not marked-to-market and, therefore, permit the
firm to book gains; (iv) do asset securitizations; (v) manage the funding of pension plans; (vi) convince
customers to increase their order quantity towards the end of the quarter; and (vii) announce an increase
in product prices in the first quarter of the coming year to stimulate demand in the fourth quarter, or cut
prices in the fourth quarter and hope to make that up in higher volume.
The opinion of many executives is that every company would/should take actions such of these to
deliver earnings, as long as the real sacrifices are not too large and are within GAAP. We give four
detailed examples of such decisions to highlight the sacrifice of long-term value to meet short-term

17

earnings objectives. We emphasize that these examples do not lead to the firm violating GAAP or
committing fraud.
• A CFO at a research-intensive firm indicates the role of “investment triggers” based on whether
the firm’s actual EPS would fall within or outside the range of earnings guidance. If the actual EPS
comes in below the lower end of the guided EPS range, the “disinvestment trigger” would go off
and the firm would eliminate or postpone R&D spending (on positive NPV R&D projects) until a
later time. Conversely, if the actual EPS comes in above the higher end of the guided EPS range,
the “investment trigger” would go off and the firm would invest the surplus earnings into R&D
projects (or take another action that would “bank” the earnings for the future). We asked why the
firm would not take all the positive NPV R&D projects, regardless of whether the reported EPS
falls in the guided range or not. The CFO responded that the market has certain expectations about
EPS growth from year to year and there is a trade-off between delivering EPS growth to the market
and investing in R&D projects that would payoff in the long run.
• A number of CFOs cite the example of funding pension plans. To cite one detailed instance, the
firm had chosen a discount rate of 6.5%-7.0% at the end of calendar year 2002 to value its pension
liability. The firm’s fair value of pension assets, most of which was invested in U.S. equities, had
lost value in recent years on account of the poor performance of the stock market. Hence, the fair
value of the pension assets (FVPA) fell below the projected benefit pension obligation (PBO) but
was higher than the accumulated pension benefit obligation (ABO). After interest rates fell in 2003,
adopting a discount rate of around 5% would leave the firm with a large under-funded position on
the pension plan (FVPA < ABO). This would mean that the firm would lose its pre-funded pension
asset from the 2003 balance sheet. The CFO acknowledged that loss of the pre-funded pension asset
would attract the attention of analysts and investors. One way to avoid this outcome is to contribute
cash to the pension plan.10 The CFO admits that the company had access to a number of positive
NPV R&D projects, the return on which would perhaps exceed the return on investing funds in the
pension plan. It is remarkable that the desire to report a fully-funded pension asset potentially
pressures firms into eliminating or postponing positive NPV investments.
• One CFO candidly admits that his/her company would defer or eliminate maintenance spending
to meet earnings targets, even if such deferment would accelerate the need to replace the asset in
the future. The CFO went on to illustrate how retrenching trained personnel might be economically
sub-optimal in the long-run, but that his/her company has taken such actions to meet the earnings
target. Similarly, another CFO mentioned that his/her firm would perform “band aid” maintenance
for several years to protect earnings, even if a decision to take a hit to earnings and refurbish the
plant all at once would have been NPV positive.
• Another example pertains to a company that would sell an internally developed patent to
outsiders and recognize revenue or return to meet an earnings target, rather than develop the patent
later in-house, even if the expected cash-flows associated with in-house development exceed the
sale proceeds of the patent.
Consistent with the survey evidence, the interviews suggest that executives currently emphasize
real economic actions rather than the exercise of accounting discretion to hit earnings benchmarks.11 The
10

Moreover, pension accounting standards allow firms to reduce pension expense by an amount equal to the
contribution times a management-assumed expected rate of return even if the actual rate of return earned by the
pension assets is lower than the assumed expected rate of return.
11
One CFO states that while it is preferable to manage earnings via real actions rather than accounting choices, it is
also more difficult. That is, a CFO must understand the operations up and down the organization to effectively
manage earnings via real actions. This CFO refers to earnings management via accounting actions as "laziness on

18

interviews did uncover some evidence of accounting choices made to enhance the odds of hitting an
earnings target, though the CFOs insist that these actions are well within the purview of GAAP (though
they acknowledge that this does not always appear to be the case at other firms). One CFO argued that
there is nothing wrong with exercising legal accounting discretion to project his/her company in a better
light. Often-quoted examples of such accounting discretion include (i) booking reserves by recognizing
more expenses this quarter than the next and drawing on such reserves to meet an earnings shortfall in the
future; (ii) accelerating revenue recognition to book a deal this quarter rather than the next; (iii) changing
the assumptions underlying the booking of litigation reserves; and (iv) changing the assumptions
underlying recognition of asset impairment.

4.4 Future reversals
Many of the real and accounting actions mentioned above eventually unwind and affect earnings in
future periods.12 Then, why do CFOs undertake such actions? When asked about this, most CFOs argue
that in a growing firm the hope is that future earnings growth will offset reversals from past earnings
management decisions.13 One interpretation of this action is that CFOs indulge in earnings management to
signal the firm’s future growth prospects (e.g., Ronen and Sadan 1981; 10). However, CFOs acknowledge
that if the firm's financial condition continues to deteriorate for a period of time, small earnings
management decisions can cascade and lead to big write-offs or large negative surprises in later periods.
Another CFO explains that when the overall economy is down, the firm makes choices that boost
earnings. The reversal or the catch-up to this action does not kick in until the overall economy recovers
and earnings are on the rise, so that the firm can pick up discretionary expenditures later without the
catch-up being obvious to investors, or being painful because the firm is relatively flush in cash during the
recovery.

4.5 Earnings guidance
CFOs indicate that they can manage earnings benchmarks via earnings guidance. The descriptive data
reported in panel A, Table 1 shows that 80.7% of the survey participants provide some sort of guidance to
analysts. Because archival data on earnings guidance is difficult to obtain, we provide descriptive
the part of the CFO" because much more effort is necessary to understand all aspects of the business in order to
manage earnings via real actions.
12
Several CFOs state that big baths often occur when there is a change in management teams. The new managers
can blame the need for a write-off on the old management team, while at the same time reducing the earnings
expected from the new management team.
13
This is consistent with Lev’s (2003) argument that one reason that financial executives manage earnings is that
they are die-hard optimists who want to "weather the storm," believing that things will improve in the future.

19

evidence on firm characteristics associated with guidance.14 The univariate correlations reported in Table
1, panel B show that guidance is higher in firms with greater analyst coverage (ρ = 0.437, p < 0.001),
perhaps because analysts demand assistance in predicting earnings. Growth firms [firms that report
higher sales growth (ρ = 0.231, p < 0.001) and in the technology sector (ρ = 0.12, p < 0.001)] are more
likely to guide because meeting analyst expectations is important for the stock price trajectory of such
firms (Sloan and Skinner 2002). Note that our comments on earnings guidance in the remainder of this
section are drawn from interviews and not from survey evidence. Although we collect basic demographic
data on the companies that provide earnings guidance, we did not ask detailed survey questions on
guidance because of space constraints on the survey.
Many interviewed CFOs indicate that they often guide analysts to a different consensus estimate
if there is a gap between their internal projections of where the firm might end up at the end of the quarter
and the consensus number. An important reason for giving guidance is to ease the analyst’s job in
computing forecasted EPS. Otherwise, executives feel, analysts would go off and “do their own thing”
and likely come back with more disperse earnings estimates. CFOs dislike dispersion in earnings
estimates. Most CFOs guide analysts to a number that is less than the internal target so as to maximize
chances of a positive surprise. In fact, the phrase “managing analysts’ expectations” came up numerous
times during the interviews. The rule of thumb that many firms try to follow is to “under-promise and
over-deliver.”
Many CFOs deplore the culture of giving earnings guidance and meeting or beating the guided
number. They argue that such a culture inhibits managers from thinking about long-term growth and,
instead, makes them invest excess energy in beating quarterly targets. Yet, many of these same firms
provide guidance because they view the practice as a “necessary evil.”
Several of the interviewed companies contemplate a reduction or elimination of earnings
guidance. Providing guidance can be desirable when the company is stable and the executives feel that
they will be able to meet or exceed the guided number. In this case, providing guidance reduces the
chance of missing consensus (perhaps because the unguided consensus might be based on faulty
information or, otherwise, unattainable). However, for an unstable company, missing a guided number is
a very bad outcome because it implies that management has little control over the firm. For example,
analysts might think that the firm is out of control, to the extent that management is unable to deliver an
earnings number that they had guided to in the first place. The consequences would be less severe for
missing an unguided number. CFOs dislike the prospect of coming in short on their numbers, particularly
if they are guided numbers, in part because then the firm has to deal with extensive interrogations from
14

Hutton (2003) analyses characteristics of firms that provide guidance in the pre-Regulation FD regime.

20

analysts about the reasons for the forecast error, which limits the firm’s opportunity to talk about long-run
or strategic issues. As mentioned before, such questioning casts a pall over the entire conference call.
Most of the interviewed firms that had given up guidance had reported losses for several quarters.
When the firm is unstable and reporting negative earnings, CFOs feel that they are better off talking about
assumptions underlying the earnings process and the firm’s performance relative to those assumptions, so
that analysts can make their own earnings estimates. (We note that this can be thought of as “indirect
guidance.”) While this may result in a wider range of earnings forecasts, there are fewer embarrassing last
minute surprises of the nature: “whoops, we can not hit the earnings number that we guided you to.” In
short, guidance is desirable if the firm is stable enough to deliver the guided number, but guidance is
undesirable if the firm is unsure of its ability to deliver the guided earnings.
We also ask why analysts would let companies get away with meeting or beating consensus estimates
quarter after quarter. Why do not analysts learn from past experience and change their consensus
estimates in such a way that meeting or failing to meet the consensus eventually becomes a random
unpredictable event? CFOs point out that analysts are complicit in the earnings game in two ways. First,
if a firm is a “bellwether” stock, such that the stock prices of other firms in the same industry co-vary
with the bellwether, then analysts might find it worthwhile to let the bellwether stock “look good” and
beat the earnings estimates. Otherwise, they run the risk that the stock prices of other firms in the industry
would fall if the bellwether firm did not meet the estimate, increasing the odds that the analyst might look
bad with respect to those other firms and potentially causing trading losses for the investment arm of the
analyst's firm. Second, analysts feel embarrassed that the firm does not meet or exceed their earnings
prediction. As one CFO put it, “analysts viciously turn on you when you fail to come in line with their
projections.”
As an interesting aside, when asked about whether they would prefer to meet or to beat the earnings
target, several CFOs say they would rather meet (or slightly beat) the earnings target rather than
positively surprising the market in a big way every quarter because (i) this could cause the firm to lose
credibility, and (ii) providing large earnings this quarter might lead analysts and investors to “ratchet up”
expectations for earnings in future quarters. Hence, many CFOs prefer to “bank” the excess earnings for
use in later time periods. Another reason for such behavior -- the conjecture of a few CFOs -- is that the
market hammers the stock price when the firm fails to meet the consensus estimate, but the stock price is
relatively insensitive to the degree to which the target is exceeded. Such an asymmetric reward function
creates incentives for managers to smooth earnings. The role of smoothing earnings is discussed next.

21

5. Smooth Earnings Paths
5.1 Preference for smooth earnings paths, keeping cash flows constant
We ask CFOs about whether they prefer smoother or bumpy earnings paths, keeping cash flows
constant. An overwhelmingly large 96.9% of the survey respondents indicate that prefer a smooth
earnings path. We also observe a strong proclivity for smooth earnings paths, keeping cash flows
constant, during the interviews. Such a strong enthusiasm for smooth earnings is not reflected in the
academic literature.15
One interviewed CFO remarks, “businesses are much more volatile than what their earnings numbers
would suggest.” When asked specifically why they prefer a smoother earnings path, survey respondents
feel that smoother earnings are perceived as less risky by investors (88.7%, Table 8, row 1, see Figure 7).
It is interesting that smooth earnings are perceived to result in lower cost of equity and debt: CFOs
believe that investors demand a smaller risk premium for smooth earnings paths (57.1%, Table 8, row 4),
and smoother earnings paths also apparently achieve and preserve a higher credit rating (42.2%, Table 8,
row 7). Another frequently voiced explanation for a preference for smooth earnings is that smoother
earnings make it easier for analysts and investors to predict future earnings (79.7%, Table 8, row 2), and
unpredictable earnings leads to a lower stock price (in the opinions of interviewed CFOs).
Intertwined with the risk premium idea are two other motivations to smooth earnings: (i) smoother
earnings assure customers and suppliers that the business is stable, perhaps resulting in better terms of
trade (66.2%, Table 8, row 3); and (ii) smoother earnings convey higher growth prospects to investors
(46.3%, Table 8, row 5). There is no survey evidence that executives use smoother earnings to
communicate true economic performance to outsiders (Table 8, row 8). This is in contrast to claims in the
the academic literature that executives prefer to smooth out the noisy kinks in the unmanaged earnings
process so that market participants can get a feel for the true underlying earnings process. Furthermore,
there is no evidence that smoother earnings increase bonus payments (Table 8, row 9).
Conditional analyses reveal that the following types of firms feel that smooth earnings are perceived
as less risky by investors: large firms, low P/E firms, and firms in the technology industry (Table 8, row
1).

Reporting smoother earnings to ease analyst predictions of future earnings is viewed as more

important in firms that give more guidance and have greater analyst following (Table 8, row 2). Believing

15

Buckmaster (2001, 85) reports that only 8 articles related to smoothing have been published between 1982-1998
in the following three accounting journals: Journal of Accounting Research, The Accounting Review and
Contemporary Accounting Research.

22

that smoother earnings reassure stakeholders is more popular in smaller firms, firms in the technology
sector, insider dominated firms, and firms that are private, not profitable and have less analyst coverage
(Table 8, row 3). Kamin and Ronen (1978) also find that smoothing is more prevalent in ownercontrolled firms.

5.2 Sacrificing value for smooth earnings
When we directly ask respondents about how large a sacrifice in value they would make to avoid
a bumpy earnings path, an astonishing 78% of the survey respondents state that they would sacrifice a
small, moderate or large amount of value to achieve a smoother earnings path (Table 9, see Figure 8a and
b). This finding is consistent with earlier evidence (discussed above) that CFOs would give up economic
value to meet an earnings target. Conditional analyses, reported in panel B, indicate modest crosssectional variation in the responses. Technology firms are more prone to making small sacrifices than
non-technology firms, while insider-dominated firms are willing to make moderate sacrifices. Firms that
provide much guidance are more willing to give up value to report smoother earnings paths, perhaps
because inability to conform to reported guidance would have negative consequences, as discussed above.
To flush out the survey evidence, we turn to the interviews. The interviews reveal a persistent theme
among CFOs: “the market hates uncertainty.” Without exception, every CFO we spoke with prefers a
smoother earnings path to a bumpier one, even if the underlying cash flows are the same. In general, this
preference is as obvious to them as saying, “good is better than bad.”
CFOs cite a number of stock-price related motivations for their desire to smooth earnings. First,
they believe that the stock market values earnings predictability. Many CFOs state that their P/E multiples
would drop if the earnings path were to become more volatile (even if cash flow volatility stays the
same). They argue that the market expects a lower “risk premium” if the earnings path is steady (keeping
cash flow path constant). When pressed further about why earnings volatility matters over and above cash
flow volatility, a few CFOs state that the market becomes more skeptical of underlying cash flow
volatility when earnings are volatile. Even if two firms had the same underlying cash flow volatility, the
firm with the more volatile earnings would be perceived as riskier.
This risk premium is related to the asset pricing literature. First, CFOs seem to believe that
estimation risk is important.16 That is, uncertainty about earnings could induce a perceived estimation risk
in expected returns and higher moments used in portfolio selection. This estimation risk may lead to a
higher risk premium. Second, both estimation risk and increased volatility are likely to be associated with
more disagreement between analysts about earnings prospects. Recent research demonstrates that
16

See Klein and Bawa (1976), Jorion (1985), Britten-Jones (1999) and Xia (2001).

23

disagreement commands a risk premium.17 Third, in so much as volatile earnings spill over into volatile
stock returns, the CFOs seem to indicate that idiosyncratic volatility is important.18 Fourth, Barry and
Brown (1985, 1986) and Merton (1987) argue that when there is information asymmetry between
managers and outside investors, investors demand an information risk premium. Recent papers in the
accounting literature have argued that information risk stemming from poor disclosure and earnings
quality is priced accordingly by the equity and debt markets.19
We note two additional asset-pricing explanations. First, predictability of earnings makes it easier
for investors to get a sense for how much of the earnings will be paid out versus how much will be
reinvested. Second, the firm has no obvious interest in increasing earnings volatility. CFOs feel that
speculators, short-sellers and hedge funds are the only parties that benefit from higher volatility in the
firm’s earnings numbers and, consequently, in the firm’s stock price. Related to the predictability point,
one CFO goes to the extent of saying, “analysts want you to fill in the cells of their modeling spreadsheet
for them.” Bumpy earnings streams throw their spreadsheets “out of gear,” catch them off-guard and
undermine their trust in the company and its numbers. Executives point out that the culture of
“predictability in earnings” goes deep down the organizational hierarchy. Divisional managers develop
reputations as “no surprise guys" by creating cushions in their revenue and spending budgets. These
dependable managers are rewarded in the firm for the “sleep well” factor in their delivering of earnings.
CFOs equate the idea of smooth earnings with the desire to avoid negative earnings surprises
(relative to earnings targets). In their mind, missing the consensus estimate and bumpy earnings are
commingled, and both increase uncertainty in investors’ perceptions about the firm. Several CFOs
indicate that they would work aggressively within the confines of GAAP to reduce the perception of
uncertainty about the firm’s prospects. One executive cited the example of realizing a large unexpected
gain on the sale of investments. Instead of reporting the gain in the quarter that it occurred, the firm
purchased collars to smooth the gain gradually into the income over the next 10 quarters.

5.3 Target audience
We ask CFOs about the perceived marginal price-setter for their stock, which would reveal the target
audience that executives have in mind when they set voluntary disclosure and earnings recognition
policies. The survey evidence shows that CFOs view institutional investors, followed by analysts, as the
most important marginal price setters of their stock (Table 10, rows 1 and 2, Figure 9). Individual
investors are a distant third.
17

See Diether, Malloy and Scherbina (2002) and Anderson, Ghysels and Juergens (2003). Also see Miller (1977).
See Goyal and Santa-Clara (2003) for a recent treatment.
19
See Botosan (1997), Sengupta (1998) and Francis, LaFond, Olsson and Schipper (2002).
18

24

Conditional analyses in panel B highlight several interesting facts. Firms with higher P/E ratios
(growth firms) view institutions as more important price-setters of their stock, than do firms with lower
P/E ratios. Firms that are larger, have more analyst coverage and provide more earnings guidance view
analyst reporting as important influences on their stock price. Individual investors are perceived as
relatively more important by firms that are small, listed on NASDAQ/AMEX, covered by fewer analysts,
and less active in guidance. Rating agency ratings have a bigger influence in firms that are larger, more
highly levered, listed on NYSE, unprofitable, and provide more earnings guidance. Hedge funds are
viewed as more active price setters by firms that do not provide much guidance.
During the interviews, CFOs mentioned that institutions and analysts constitute a more organized
group of users of their guidance information than individual investors. Hence, it becomes harder to ignore
the demands of institutions and analysts. Most CFOs believe that institutional investors set the stock price
on the buy-side in the long run, that analysts affect short-term prices, and that retail investors are not often
an important price setter. However, CFOs worry about the perceptions of retail investors because they are
potential customers for the firm’s products, as well as investors. That is, CFOs are concerned that missed
earnings targets or bumpy earnings paths could affect the confidence of retail investors in the firm’s
products and financial stability, especially in a business like banking, where customer confidence is a
major driver behind the firm’s continued survival.
When asked why "sophisticated" investors, such as institutions and analysts, would not look beyond
short-term earnings misses or a new bump in the earnings path, assuming that long-run prospects are
relatively unaffected, interviewed CFOs respond in three ways. First, some point out that many players in
the market today, especially youthful equity analysts, do not have a sense of history, in that they have not
been in the market through more than one business cycle (market boom or bust). Referring to young
equity analysts, one agitated CFO remarks, “I don’t see why we have to place these disclosures in the
hands of children that do not understand the information.” Such an absence of history makes analysts
more prone to overreactions when the firm misses an earnings target or when a new kink appears in the
earnings path. Second, fund managers are compensated on the basis of how their funds have done relative
to peer managers. If one fund starts selling the firm’s stock when the firm misses an earnings target, fund
managers at peer firms have incentives to sell to protect their compensation. Thus, relative performance
evaluation of fund managers is believed to promote momentum investing and less willingness to hold a
stock for the long run. Third, the number of traders who try to profit on day-to-day movements in the
stock price has increased in recent times (e.g., hedge funds). If a firm misses an earnings target, this might
trigger automatic sell programs, which will drive the price lower. One CFO points out that many investors
"sell first and ask questions later.” Finally, when we ask CFOs to explain why earnings misses and the
related negative reactions of individual firms ought to matter to a diversified investor, they respond that

25

“these investors diversify by holding less of our stock and more of someone else’s,” indicating again that
managers believe that idiosyncratic risk matters.

6. Voluntary disclosure decisions
Voluntary disclosure policies are integral to the quarterly earnings reporting process, which has been
the focus of the paper thus far. Voluntary disclosures take various forms: press releases (especially for
new product introductions and awards), investor and analyst meetings, conference calls, monthly
newsletters, field visits with existing and potential institutional investors, and the disclosure of more than
mandated information in regulatory filings, such as in the 10-Q or 10-Ks (e.g., adding an extra line in
financial statements to separate core from non-core items). Firms voluntarily disclose information not
required by the SEC and the FASB in an effort to shape the perceptions of market participants and other
stakeholders and, hence, to benefit from improved terms of exchange with these parties. Healy and Palepu
(2001), who review the academic literature related to voluntary disclosure, identify firms’ motivations to
disclose voluntarily information as an important unresolved question for future research. A substantive
portion of the survey and interviews are dedicated to voluntary disclosure. Our findings are summarized
in the following paragraphs.

6.1 Why voluntarily disclose information?
We examine five motivations that the literature has identified as driving managers’ voluntary
disclosure decisions (information asymmetry, increased analyst coverage, corporate control contests,
stock compensation, and management talent) and four constraints on voluntary disclosure (litigation risk,
proprietary costs, political costs, and agency costs) (see Healy and Palepu, 2001). We also introduce two
drivers of voluntary disclosure that have not received extensive attention in the literature: the limitations
of mandatory disclosure, and setting a disclosure precedent that may be hard to maintain.

6.1.1 Information asymmetry
Barry and Brown (1985, 1986) and Merton (1987) argue that when there is information asymmetry
between managers and outside investors, investors demand an information risk premium. Firms can
reduce their cost of capital by reducing information risk through increased voluntary disclosure. Diamond
and Verrecchia (1991) and Kim and Verrecchia (1994) suggest that voluntary disclosure reduces
information asymmetry between uninformed and informed investors, and thus increases the liquidity of a
firm’s stock. We ask the executives whether the cost of capital or reduction of information risk is a
26

motivation for voluntary disclosures. More than four-in-five respondents agree or strongly agree with the
information risk motivation (Table 11, row 2, see Figure 10). In a related question, when asked whether
voluntary disclosures increase the predictability of their companies’ future prospects, 56.2% agree (Table
11, row 4). The importance of predictability is consistent with the earlier theme that the market hates
negative earnings surprises. In fact, predictability of financial results appears to be a unifying, overarching theme between quarterly earnings reporting and voluntary disclosure decisions.
Many interviewed CFOs state that reducing uncertainty about the firms’ prospects is the most
important motivation for making voluntary disclosures. The executives distinguish between “information
risk” and “inherent risk.” As one CFO puts it, “information risk is the risk that the market does not have
all the pertinent information about an event or the uncertain cash flows of our firm, whereas inherent risk
relates to the uncertainty associated with the underlying cash flows.” This CFO believes that voluntary
disclosures reduce the information risk associated with the company, especially if they make the earnings
number more “predictable.” CFOs also mention that releasing bad news can be beneficial if it reduces
information risk more than it reduces expectations about cash flows. In essence, eliminating information
risk tightens the distribution of perceived cash flows, leaving only inherent risk to affect stock prices,
potentially reducing the risk premium investors demand to hold the company’s stock.
Another advantage of releasing bad news is that it can help a firm develop a reputation for providing
timely and accurate information to the marketplace. CFOs place a great deal of importance on acquiring
such a reputation: 92.1% of the survey respondents believe that developing a reputation for transparent
reporting is the key factor motivating voluntary disclosures (Table 11, row 1). Many interviewed
executives feel that the primary role of voluntary disclosure is to correct investors’ perceptions about
current or future performance, so that the stock is priced off company-provided information rather than
misinformation (or “rumors” as one CFO put it). One CFO mentions that such a reputation buys him/her
“flexibility to take strategic actions that the Street would trust.” Another CFO points out that voluntary
disclosures help the firm cultivate relationships with institutional investors, and such relationships may
“parlay into easier access to capital in the future or a lower cost of capital.”
Although only 39.3% agree with the cost of capital motive behind financial disclosure, the difference
between the percentage of those who agree and disagree is statistically significant (Table 11, row 9). In
the interviews, roughly the same proportion of executives confirms the direct link to the cost of capital.
(Several CFOs link reduction in the dispersion of analyst estimates and subsequent reduction in the cost
of capital.) In the interviews, more executives think of the relation as one of receiving a “P/E lift” due to
greater voluntary disclosures. (While a P/E lift should reduce the cost of capital, more interviewed CFOs
recognize the P/E lift than the cost of capital reduction.) Several CFOs believe that this P/E lift happens
because voluntary disclosures enhance the firm’s reputation for transparent reporting. The “P/E lift”
27

related motivation gets modest survey support, with 42% of the respondents believing this and 18% not
(Table 11, row 8), a statistically significant difference.
During the interviews, CFOs of companies with smaller market capitalizations suggest that liquidity
of their firm’s stock improves when they make voluntary disclosures. The survey evidence reveals
support for the liquidity motivation (44.3%, Table 11, row 7), especially among small firms.
Other conditional analyses provide the following insights. Large firms are more concerned about the
predictability of future prospects and reducing the cost of capital. Small firms care more about using
disclosure to increase the liquidity of their stock. Not surprisingly, low P/E firms care about the cost of
capital motivation of voluntary disclosures (Table 11, row 9). High growth firms are interested in using
voluntary disclosures to communicate the predictability of future growth prospects (Table 11, row 4).
Highly levered firms care about predictability of future prospects and the cost of capital motivation (Table
11, row 4 and 9). Firms with large analyst coverage view the reputation for transparent reporting,
reducing information risk, increasing predictability and a reduction in the cost of capital as relatively
important motivations for voluntary disclosures (Table 11, row 1, 4, 8 and 9).

6.1.2 Increased analyst coverage
Bhushan (1989a, b) and Lang and Lundholm (1996) argue that if management’s private information
is not fully revealed through required disclosures, voluntary disclosure lowers the cost of information
acquisition for analysts and increases the amount of information available to analysts. The survey results
reports some support for this motivation (50.8%, Table 11, row 5). Small firms and insider-dominated
firms are more interested in using disclosure to attract more analysts.

6.1.3 Corporate control
Healy and Palepu (2001) hypothesize that the risk of job loss accompanying poor stock and earnings
performance encourages managers to use corporate disclosures to reduce the likelihood of undervaluation and the need to explain away poor earnings performance. Survey evidence provides moderate
support for this hypothesis (48.4%, Table 11, row 6). Conditional analyses reveal that unprofitable firms
and young firms care more about this motivation than profitable and older firms.

6.1.4 Stock compensation
Evidence linking voluntary disclosure to compensation (e.g., Noe (1999), Aboody and Kasznik
(2000), and Miller and Piotroski (2000)) relies on one of the following theoretical arguments. First,
managers have incentive to disclose private information to meet restrictions imposed by insider trading

28

rules and to correct perceived under-valuation (relative to their own information set) and to increase
liquidity of the firm’s stock. Second, managers acting in the interest of existing shareholders have
incentive to reduce contracting costs associated with stock compensation for new employees. Otherwise,
employees will demand a risk premium to shield them from the information advantage held by managers.
The survey evidence does not support the latter of these arguments. In fact, half of the respondents
disagree or strongly disagree with the idea that voluntary disclosures are made to reduce the risk premium
demanded by employees for holding stock granted as compensation (Table 11, row 11). There is modest
conditional support for this motivation in the technology sector, where stock compensation is likely more
prevalent.

6.1.5 Management talent signaling hypothesis
Trueman (1986) argues that a talented manager has incentive to make voluntary disclosures to
signal his or her type. The survey evidence for this motivation is statistically significant, although this
motivation ranks near the end in terms of importance (41.3% for and 26.1% against, Table 11, row 10).
No interviewed CFO explicitly mentioned the role of talent signaling while discussing their motivations
to voluntarily communicate information to the market. Conditional analyses indicate that this motivation
is relatively more important for managers of smaller and high growth firms.

6.1.6 Limitations of mandatory disclosures
A surprisingly high 72.1% of the respondents feel that voluntary disclosures correct gaps in the
usefulness of mandatory financial disclosures to investors. Conditional analyses reveal that this concern is
more severe for firms that are large, high-growth, highly levered and well covered by analysts (Table 11,
panel B, row 3), perhaps because their businesses and the associated mandatory disclosures are complex.
This motivation for voluntary disclosure does not get significant attention in the academic literature. As
one interviewed CFO puts it, prescribed disclosures from the FASB “confuse rather than enlighten” the
users of financial statements. An executive of a financial institution makes the incredible remark: “some
of our own footnotes related to off-balance sheet items and securitizations are so complex, even I don’t
understand them.” CFOs point out that mandated summary financial statements are reported once a
quarter and, hence lack timeliness. Moreover, mandatory statements ignore leading non-financial
indicators of future earnings, such as the product pipeline. CFOs state that GAAP-based financial
reporting ignores intangible assets such as “people, processes and our brand position.” Lev (2001)
discusses accounting and disclosure issues related to intangibles. In the literature, Bushee, Matsumoto and

29

Miller (2003) and Tasker (1998), among others, argue that less informative financial statements create
incentives for more voluntary disclosure.

6.2 Constraints on voluntary disclosures
We investigate which factors constrain voluntary disclosures, with results summarized in Table
12 (see Figure 11).

6.2.1 Disclosure precedent
The most common reason that executives limit voluntary disclosure is related to setting a precedent.
More than two-thirds of the survey participants (69.6% in Table 12, row 1) agree or strongly agree that a
significant constraint to more disclosure is the desire to avoid setting a disclosure precedent that is
difficult to maintain in the future (Bushee, Matsumoto and Miller 2003). Conditional analyses, reported in
panel B, reveal that setting disclosure precedents is a bigger issue among insider-dominated firms.20 We
are not aware of a systematic exploration in the literature of the precedent constraint to voluntary
disclosure.
Several interviewed CFOs state that they would not make an earnings forecast or start making
voluntary disclosures of non-financial leading indicators for fear of starting a practice that they might
later want to abandon. One CFO likened this process to “getting on a treadmill” that you could not get off.
The market then expects the company to maintain the newly initiated disclosures every quarter, regardless
of whether the news is good or bad.

6.2.2 Litigation costs
The literature argues that the threat of litigation can affect voluntary disclosures in two ways.
First, the threat of litigation can induce managers to disclose information, especially bad news (Skinner
1994, 1997, Francis, Philbrick and Schipper 1994). Second, litigation can potentially reduce managers’
incentives to provide forward-looking disclosures. The survey provides moderately supportive evidence:
46.4% of the respondents agree or strongly agree with the litigation cost hypothesis (Table 12, row 3).
Conditional analyses, reported in panel B of Table 12, reveal that litigation costs are a major concern for
firms that are young, listed on NASDAQ or AMEX, or in the technology sector.

20

This could be interpreted as insiders trying to protect their ‘insider’ advantage. In addition, extra disclosure might
limit the ability to delay the release of bad news (Niehaus and Roth 1999) or earnings management in general
(Beneish, Press and Vargas 2004) after insider selling.

30

One interviewed CFO points out short-run volatility in a stock attracts class-action lawyers who have
computer programs that identify firms (for potential law suit) whose stock prices fall more than 20% in a
few days. The CFO laments that the Safe Harbor legislation passed in the late 90s has had virtually no
effect on lawsuits. It is not as much a question of whether a firm can win or lose a lawsuit, because most
of them get settled out of court. Executives believe that class-action lawyers target a settlement that is
slightly smaller than the cost of going to court. The press coverage associated with the potentially
frivolous lawsuit is another deterrent. We revisit the litigation hypothesis in Section 6.3, where we
investigate factors that encourage firms to report bad news quickly.

6.2.3 Proprietary cost hypothesis
Several researchers argue that we do not observe corner solutions to the voluntary disclosure
issue (i.e., full disclosure) due to proprietary costs, reflecting concern that some disclosures might
jeopardize the firm’s competitive position in the product market (see Verrecchia (2001) and Dye (2001)).
Nearly three-fifths of survey respondents agree or strongly agree that giving away company secrets is an
important barrier to more voluntary disclosure (Table 12, row 2). Conditional analyses, reported in panel
B, reveal that small firms and those listed on NASDAQ or AMEX and that provide little earnings
guidance are more worried about proprietary costs. There is also interview support for the proprietary cost
hypothesis. A few CFOs cite proprietary costs as a significant barrier to more disclosure. CFOs do not
want to explicitly reveal sensitive proprietary information “on a platter” to competitors, even if such
information could be partially inferred by competitors from other sources, such as trade journals or trade
conferences. The survey evidence indicates that proprietary costs are a very important factor limiting
voluntary disclosures.

6.2.4 Agency costs
Agency issues are generally not addressed in proprietary cost models, and hence all voluntary
disclosures are deemed to be credible (Healy and Palepu 2001). Agency issues may represent an
important tension that explain lack of full disclosure, as suggested by Nagar, Nanda and Wysocki (2003)
and Berger and Hann (2003). The survey evidence, however, provides no support for the agency story. An
insignificant proportion of respondents agree that their firms limit voluntary disclosures to avoid potential
follow-up questions about other unimportant items (Table 12, row 4). When we specifically ask whether
avoiding unwanted scrutiny from bondholders and stockholders is a constraint on voluntary disclosure,
the majority of the survey participants reply that unwanted scrutiny is not an important factor (Table 12,
row 6). Perhaps survey participants are unwilling to acknowledge agency costs in a survey.

31

6.2.5 Political costs
Although the positive theory literature emphasizes the role of political costs in accounting and
disclosure decisions (Watts and Zimmerman 1978, 1986), the survey evidence does not provide much
support for the political cost argument. A majority of survey participants disagree or strongly disagree
with the hypothesis that avoiding unwanted attention from regulators is a significant barrier to voluntary
disclosure (Table 12, row 5). Firms with high inside ownership are more concerned about regulatory
scrutiny, although the absolute magnitude of concern is still modest.

6.3 Bad news versus good news
The accounting literature has long recognized that managers have incentive to differentially
disclose good news versus bad news (e.g., Pastena and Ronen 1979; Skinner 1994, 1997; Francis,
Philbrick and Schipper 1994). The survey evidence is fairly asymmetric in terms of the timing of the
disclosure of good news and bad news. 52.9% of the survey respondents give no preferential treatment to
disclosing good or bad news faster (panel A of Table 13, see Figure 12). Another 20.5% (26.6%) of the
sample claims that they release good (bad) news faster. In untabulated analyses, relative to profitable
firms, unprofitable firms are less inclined to release bad news faster. For example, the sales growth rate of
firms that say they release bad news faster is 9.4%, compared to –0.9% for firms that release good news
faster.
When asked detailed questions about the reasons for the preference between good and bad news,
76.8% of the respondents say that they reveal bad news faster to reduce the possibility of a lawsuit
resulting from failure to disclose timely information (e.g. unfavorable news) to the market (Table 13,
panel B, row 2). This finding is consistent with the intuition in Skinner (1994, 1997). Conditional
analyses, reported in panel C, reveal that this concern is more pronounced among low P/E firms. One
interviewed CFO stated that he/she attempts to pre-empt bad news revelations from other sources. The
thinking is that it is better that the news comes from the firm rather than from outside sources. This would
enable the firm to position the bad news in the best possible light.
During the interviews, CFOs indicate that both good news and bad news need to be communicated in
a timely manner to “build credibility with the market,” as one CFO put it. The survey data confirms that
intuition as 76.8% of the respondents agree or strongly agree that disclosing bad news faster enhances the
firm’s reputation for transparent and accurate reporting (Table 13, panel B, row 1). At the same time, in
the interviews some CFOs admit that they do not mind “fuzziness” in bad news disclosures.

32

Several interviewed CFOs argue that they delay bad news in order to further study and interpret the
information, or in hopes that the firm’s status will improve before the next required information release,
perhaps saving the company the need to ever release the bad information (e.g., interest rates might rise
before year-end, correcting a current imbalance in pension funding). The survey provides strong support
for delaying bad news to allow analysis and interpretation: Two-thirds of executives agree or strongly
agree with this assertion (panel B, row 3). Some interviewed CFOs also point to the possibility of
packaging bad news with other disclosures. However, only 35.5% of surveyed CFOs agree or strongly
agree with this possibility (panel B, row 4).

7. Other issues
The interviews addressed several issues related to disclosure and earnings management that we
eliminated from the survey due to space constraints. We briefly summarize these observations below.

7.1 Credit agencies versus equity analysts
All the CFOs we spoke to indicate that they share much more detailed information with credit
rating agencies than with equity analysts or institutional investors (one CFO refers to this as the “openkimono” policy). The executives mention that such selective disclosure to credit agencies is not a
violation of Regulation FD. Many CFOs note that although credit agencies are not technically insiders,
they have access to more information than do stock analysts. As expected, much of the information shared
with credit agencies relates to liquidity on the balance sheet and the sources and uses of cash flow,
especially related to capital expenditure, dividends and share repurchase plans in forthcoming time
periods. However, due to their status as pseudo-insiders, rating agencies are privy to inside information,
such as the firm’s internal EPS projections. Consistent with expectations, cash-rich firms view credit
rating agencies as somewhat less important than equity analysts; the importance of credit agencies
increases as the firm approaches financial distress and/or becomes at-risk to receive a speculative rating.
Some view credit rating agencies as valuable because they enhance the firm’s reputation by assigning a
credit rating and, thereby, affecting the cost of raising debt.

7.2 Recognition versus disclosure
Managers often express a preference for disclosing an item in the footnote rather than recognizing
the item in the income-statement or the balance sheet (see Bernard and Schipper 1994). Among the
interviewed CFOs, almost all feel that the market pays more attention to earnings number reported in the
income-statement than in financial footnotes. Hence, if GAAP provides a choice, CFOs prefer placing
33

items they would like to highlight to investors in the main body of the financial statements. All CFOs felt
that retail investors do not understand the implications of footnote data very well, but that institutional
investors and analysts appreciate and more fully understand footnote information.21 However, some feel
that the footnotes are too complex even for qualified accountants to fathom.
When asked about stock option compensation, almost all CFOs consider option expenses to be
operating costs that should be expensed. Many of our interviewees have already started expensing
options, while others are waiting to see what their competitors do and the FASB’s expected expensing
rule, before deciding to expense options themselves. CFOs that have not committed to expense options
believe that they would suffer a disadvantage if they expense options and their competitors do not
(because their EPS numbers would be lower). These comments indicate a belief that the market is fixated
on the bottom-line earnings number. Many executives also believe that the number of options given out to
rank and file employees will fall if option expensing is mandated by the FASB. Indeed, a recent survey
indicates that the use of options will fall at nearly two-thirds by public corporations in 2004 (Graham and
Harvey, 2003).
A CFO from the financial services industry remarks that the distinction between recognized and
disclosed items is not crucial for his/her company, as long as the item is considered for computing
statutory capital. This suggests a rational explanation for why a majority of the firms that expense stock
options belong to the financial services industry (see Aboody, Barth and Kasznik 2003; Daniel, Kale, and
Naveen 2003). If option expensing is ignored for the purpose of calculating statutory capital, then
expensing may not have major economic implications for financial services firms.
We also explore whether the desire to present items in the footnote differs depending on whether the
item is income-increasing or income-decreasing in nature. However, we do not find much support for the
idea that managers asymmetrically prefer to recognize income-increasing items and disclose incomedecreasing items in footnotes. When pressed about the potential link between EPS-based compensation
schemes and the motivation to recognize or disclose information, CFOs indicate that compensation
concerns are a second-order driver of the recognition/disclosure decision. There would surely be a
mechanical reduction in EPS, and hence an EPS-linked bonus, if the firm moved an income-decreasing
item from the footnote to the income statement. However, in many such instances, either the bonus
requirements would be changed or a one-time supplemental bonus would be paid.

7.3 Effect of Sarbanes-Oxley legislation

21

One CFO stated that “retail investors do not read this information, and they would not understand it if they did.”

34

CFOs of many companies believe that something needed to be done to address accounting abuses
witnessed during the late 90s dot com boom, but they believe the Sarbanes-Oxley (S-Ox) legislation is
overkill that adds substantially to operating costs. An executive of a large firm states that his firm hired
six new employees merely to manage the new reporting obligations required by S-Ox and related
legislation. Many CFOs deplore the “sub-certification” process created by S-Ox. While S-Ox requires
CEOs and CFOs to certify the financial statements, at many companies that we talked to, CEOs and CFOs
require divisional managers to “sub-certify” their divisional financial statements, and that process goes
right down the line in the firm. One executive said that over 300 people had to sub-certify at his firm. As
one executive put it, “the CEO used to look at the numbers over lunch and say, ‘Let’s go with it.’ Now,
the multi-layers of certification take much more management time.” One CFO felt that the FASB focus
on rules-based as opposed to principles-based accounting standards was a key factor that contributed to
accounting shenanigans in the late 90s. As he puts it, “over-emphasis on rules drives bad decisions.”
In general, interviewed CFOs feel that the changes under S-Ox, while well intentioned, will not
change the market’s desire for smooth earnings and for avoiding misses related to earnings targets. One
CFO felt that “once this certification and other such requirements become routine, people will slip into
their old ways.” Several CFOs comment that S-Ox inhibits operational risk-taking by (i) attempting to
second-guess actions taken by management; and (ii) pushing companies to expense options (which might
force firms to cut back the number of options granted and, hence, reduce incentives for risk taking).
Reducing incentives for operational risk taking is thought to have resulted in unintended costs to S-Ox in
the form of reduced entrepreneurial activity.

7.4 Regulation FD
Every interviewed CFO indicates that disclosure today involves the simultaneous posting of news
on the company’s website to comply with Regulation FD. One CFO mentioned that FD forces his/her
company to come up with a more structured communication policy with investors. CFOs are somewhat
mixed in their assessment of FD on information disclosure and dissemination. Some feel that FD has
reduced the total amount of information disclosed, while others feel that they disclose the same
information they did before FD. Almost all feel that the dissemination of information has become broader
since FD.22 Conference calls and even lunches with select analysts are now web cast. One CFO of a
Fortune 500 company mentioned that more than 1,000 outsiders routinely listen in on the conference call.
Some CFOs indicate that, after FD, they prefer to bundle voluntary disclosures with the earnings press

22

Several CFOs point out that, as one put it, “the breadth of information coverage has increased but the quality of
information has decreased” under FD.

35

release. Thus, the information content of earnings releases might have increased since FD, if this
statement can be generalized to a larger sample. Stand-alone press releases are not preferred because there
is no opportunity for dialogue with the investing public. Combining voluntary disclosures with the
earnings press release allows CFOs to use the conference call to clarify questions or concerns that
investors and equity analysts might have about the disclosure.
Although FD ensures complete dissemination of explicitly disclosed information to all parties, the
practice of implicit guidance to analysts is alive and well. One CFO remarks “you can do things such as
not answer a question an analyst poses, or say something with a grimace or a slight smile without
explicitly violating FD.”

7.5 Conglomerates
We inquired about operating in conglomerate form for two reasons. First, a conglomerate business
provides diversification and smoother cash flows. Second, the CFOs’ opinions here could reveal
important collaborating evidence regarding the agency explanation of earnings smoothing. That is, our
survey tells us that economic value is often sacrificed for smoother earnings. One explanation is that
smoother earnings extend management’s tenure.
Most CFOs feel that conglomerates are priced at a discount (relative to the value their divisions could
attain if they were stand-alone business units). This discount occurs because the benefits and synergies
from operating as a conglomerate form are smaller than the costs. The biggest cost is management’s
inability to manage businesses in many disparate industries simultaneously. When we inquire why
conglomerate firms do not then downsize and spin-off divisions, the primary answers are (i) ego
(managers like to manage big companies), (ii) job security (downsizing will likely mean the loss of jobs
for some managers), and (iii) earnings smoothing (if the divisions are somewhat counter-cyclical, the
earnings ups and downs offset each other and produce smoother earnings at the consolidated corporate
level). Hence, the responses are consistent with our survey evidence: economic value is sacrificed to
smooth earnings. In addition, a number of CFOs believe that job security is at least as important a
motivation.

8. Summary and Conclusions
This paper reports financial executives’ opinions and motives about voluntary disclosure and earnings
management. We believe that the evidence gathered via interviews and surveys adds to our understanding
along four different dimensions. First, we report stylized facts about financial reporting issues. Second,
executives rank-order the descriptive validity of academic theories of why managers make voluntary

36

disclosures or manage reported earnings numbers. Third, the interviews and surveys suggest new
explanations for several phenomena that have not received extensive attention in the academic literature.
Fourth, we identify simple heuristics that determine the context in which executives make financial
reporting decisions.
In terms of stylized facts, we find that financial officers view earnings, not cash flows, as the most
important metric reported to outsiders. Managers care about earnings benchmarks, especially the
seasonally lagged quarterly earnings number and the analyst consensus estimate. A majority of the CFOs
view institutional investors as the primary party that sets the price of their stock. A large proportion of our
respondents provide earnings guidance to equity analysts. Although Regulation FD prevents firms from
sharing differential information with market participants, some provide implicit guidance to equity
analysts. Firms are much more willing to share information with credit agencies than equity analysts.
We find that managers want to meet or beat earnings benchmarks to (i) build credibility with the
capital market; (ii) maintain or increase stock price; (iii) improve the external reputation of the
management team; and (iv) convey future growth prospects. The traditional explanations for hitting
benchmarks, such as employee bonuses or influencing credit ratings, do not get much survey support.
Failure to hit earnings benchmarks creates uncertainty about a firm’s future prospects, and signals
potentially hidden, deeper problems at the firm. Moreover, managers are concerned about spending
considerable time after the earnings announcement explaining why they missed the benchmark, rather
than presenting their vision of the firm’s future.
Managers candidly admit that they would take real economic actions such as delaying maintenance or
advertising expenditure and would even give up positive NPV projects to meet earnings benchmarks. To
our knowledge, such unambiguous managerial intent to burn economic value to meet financial reporting
goals has not been previously documented. Surprisingly, executives are more reluctant to employ
accounting discretion, such as accrual management, to meet earnings targets, although accrual
management is likely cheaper than giving up economic value. This tendency to substitute real economic
actions in place of accounting discretion might be a consequence of the stigma attached to accounting
fraud in the post-Enron and post-Sarbanes-Oxley world.
Keeping the path of the firm’s cash flows constant, almost all financial officers prefer a smoother
earnings path to a more volatile path. Smoother earnings paths are perceived as less risky by investors,
according to the CFOs. Moreover, smoother earnings improve the predictability of future earnings, which
in turn increases stock price, and also reassure suppliers and customers that the business is stable. There is
not much support for the traditional economic argument that smoothing out kinks in the firm’s earnings
process helps managers communicate the true economic performance of the firm to outsiders. The

37

consequences of a failure to smooth earnings are perceived to be severe. In fact, three-fourths of managers
are willing to give up small or moderate economic value to achieve smooth earnings paths. In sum, there
appears to be a strong preference for smooth earnings among managers, although this issue is relatively
under-developed in extant academic literature.
Firms make voluntary disclosures for three main reasons: (i) to promote a reputation for transparent
reporting; (ii) to reduce the information risk assigned to the firm’s stock; and (iii) to address the
deficiencies of mandatory reporting. The biggest barriers to voluntary disclosure are fear of setting a
disclosure precedent that may be difficult to maintain in the future and concerns about giving up
proprietary information to competitors. Managers state that they release bad news faster than good news
to promote a reputation of transparent reporting with the capital market and to avoid potential lawsuits,
though bad news is sometimes delayed to allow in-depth analysis, interpretation and consolidation into
larger news releases.
Executives seem to employ simple decision rules or heuristics in response to a handful of widely held
beliefs about how outsiders and stakeholders will react. These “rules of the game” help determine the
playing field for many of earnings management and disclosure decisions. The rules of the game include
the following: (i) the P/E multiple falls if you fail to hit the earnings benchmark or if the earnings are not
sufficiently smooth; (ii) everybody manages earnings to hit targets, so if you do not, you will get hurt;
(iii) because everybody manages earnings, if you miss the benchmark, you have revealed previously
hidden problems at the firm, which worsens the perception of future growth prospects; (iv) managers try
to maximize smoothness in earnings – volatile earnings are bad because they convey higher risk and/or
lower growth prospects; and (v) voluntarily disclose market-moving information because doing so results
in lower information risk. We believe that future research can fruitfully explore in greater depth why and
how these rules are selected and implications of these rules for financial reporting policies.

38

References
Aboody, D., and R. Kasznik. 2000. CEO stock options awards and the timing of corporate voluntary disclosures.
Journal of Accounting and Economics 29, 73–100.
Aboody, D., M. Barth and R. Kasznik. 2003. Factors associated with firms' decisions to improve earnings quality:
The voluntary recognition of stock-based compensation expense. Working paper, UCLA and Stanford
University.
Anderson, E.W., E. Ghysels, and J. Juergens. 2003. Do heterogeneous beliefs and model uncertainty matter for asset
pricing? Working paper, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Barry, C. and S. Brown. 1985. Differential information and security market equilibrium. Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis 20, 407–422.
Barry, C. and S. Brown. 1986. Limited information as a source of risk. The Journal of Portfolio Management 12,
66–72.
Barth, M., J. Elliot and M. Finn. 1999. Market rewards associated with patterns of increasing earnings. Journal of
Accounting Research, 37: 387-413.
Bartov, E. 1993. The timing of asset sales and earnings manipulation. The Accounting Review. 68 (4): 840-855.
Bartov, E., D. Givoly and C. Hayn. 2002. The rewards to meeting or beating earnings expectations, Journal of
Accounting and Economics, 33(2): 173-204.
Beneish, M.D. 2001. Earnings management: A perspective. Managerial Finance 27, 3-17.
Beneish, M.D., E. Press and M.E. Vargas, 2004. Insider trading and incentives to manage earnings. Working paper,
Indiana University.
Berger, P. and R. Hann. 2003. Segment disclosures, proprietary costs, and the market for corporate control. Working
paper, University of Chicago and University of Southern California.
Bernard, V. and K. Schipper. 1994. Recognition and disclosure in financial reporting. Working paper, University of
Michigan and FASB.
Bens, D., V. Nagar, D. Skinner and F. Wong. 2003. Employee stock options, EPS dilution, and stock repurchases.
Journal of Accounting and Economics, Vol. 36, No. 1-3 (forthcoming)
Bhojraj, S. and R. Libby. 2004. Managerial myopia and disclosure frequency. Working paper, Cornell University.
Bhushan, R. 1989a. Collection of information about publicly traded firms: theory and evidence. Journal of
Accounting and Economics 11, 183–207.
Bhushan, R. 1989b. Firm characteristics and analyst following. Journal of Accounting and Economics 11 (2–3),
255–275.
Bushee, B. 1998. The influence of institutional investors on myopic R&D investment behavior. The Accounting
Review73 (3): 305-333.
Bushee, B., D. Matsumoto and G. Miller. 2003. Open versus closed conference calls: the determinants and effects of
broadening access to disclosure. Journal of Accounting and Economics, 34(1-3): 149-180.
Botosan, C.A., 1997. Disclosure level and the cost of equity capital. The Accounting Review 72 (3), 323–350.
Bowen, R., L. Ducharme, and D. Shores. 1995. Stakeholders implicit claims and accounting method choice. Journal
of Accounting and Economics 20, 255–295.
Brav, A., J.R. Graham, C.R. Harvey and R. Michaely. 2004. Payout policy in the 21st century. Working paper, Duke
University and Cornell University.
Britten-Jones M. 1999. The sampling error in estimates of mean-variance efficient portfolio weights. Journal of
Finance, 54, 655-671.
Brown, L. and M. Caylor. 2003. A temporal analysis of earnings management thresholds. Working paper, Georgia
State University.

39

Buckmaster, D. 2001. Development of the Income Smoothing Literature 1893-1998: A Focus on the United States.
Studies in the Development of Accounting Thought. Eds: Gary Previts and Robert J. Bricker.
Burgstahler, D. 1997. Incentives to manage earnings to avoid earnings decreases and losses: Evidence from
quarterly earnings. Working paper, University of Washington, Seattle.
Burgstahler, D., and I. Dichev. 1997. Earnings management to avoid earnings decreases and losses. Journal of
Accounting and Economics 24, 99–126.
Daniel, N., J. Kale and L. Naveen. 2003. Do option expensing announcements convey information to the stock
market? Working paper, Georgia State University.
Dechow, P. and R. Sloan. 1991. Executive incentives and the horizon problem: An empirical investigation. Journal
of Accounting and Economics 14:51-89.
Dechow, P. and D. Skinner. 2000. Earnings management: Reconciling the views of accounting academics,
practitioners, and regulators. Accounting Horizons 14(2): 235-250.
DeGeorge, F., J. Patel and R. Zeckhauser. 1999. Earnings management to exceed thresholds. Journal of Business
72(1): 1–33
Diamond, D., and R. Verrecchia. 1991. Disclosure, liquidity, and the cost of capital. The Journal of Finance 66,
1325–1355.
Diether, K.B., C. Malloy and A. Scherbina. 2002. Differences of opinion and the cross-section of stock returns.
Journal of Finance 57, 2113-2142.
Dye, R. 2001. An evaluation of "essays on disclosure" and the disclosure literature in accounting, Journal of
Accounting and Economics 32 (1-3): 181-235
Erickson, M., M. Hanlon and E.L.Maydew. 2004. How much will firms pay for earnings that do not exist? Evidence
of taxes paid on allegedly fraudulent earnings. Accounting Review (forthcoming).
Fields, T., T. Lys and L. Vincent. 2001. Empirical research on accounting choice. Journal of Accounting &
Economics. 31, 255–307.
Flanagan, John C. 1954. The critical incident technique. Psychological Bulletin 51, 327-358.
Francis, J., D. Philbrick, and K. Schipper. 1994. Shareholder litigation and corporate disclosures. Journal of
Accounting Research 32, 137–165.
Francis, J., R. LaFond, P. Olsson and K. Schipper. 2002. The market pricing of earnings quality. Working paper,
Duke University.
Goyal, A., and P. Santa-Clara. 2003. Idiosyncratic risk matters! Journal of Finance 58, 975-1007.
Graham, J. R., and C. R. Harvey. 2001. The theory and practice of corporate finance: Evidence from the field,
Journal of Financial Economics 60, 187-243.
Graham, J. R., and C. R. Harvey. 2003. The Financial Executives International/Duke University CFO Outlook
Survey: 1996-2003. http://www.duke.edu/~jgraham/fei.html
Healy, P. 1985. The impact of bonus schemes on the selection of accounting principles. Journal of Accounting and
Economics 7, 85–107.
Healy, P. and J. Wahlen. 1999. A review of the earnings management literature and its implications for standard
setting. Accounting Horizons, 13, 365-383.
Healy, P. and K. Palepu. 2001. Information asymmetry, corporate disclosure, and the capital markets: A review of
the empirical disclosure literature. Journal of Accounting and Economics 31; 405–440
Hodge, F. 2003. Investors’ perceptions of earnings quality, auditor independence, and the usefulness of audited
financial information. Accounting Horizons (forthcoming).
Hutton, A. 2003. The determinants and consequences of managerial earnings guidance prior to regulation Fair
Disclosure. Working paper, Tuck School of Business at Dartmouth.

40

Jorion P., 1985. International portfolio diversification with estimation risk, Journal of Business 58, 259-278.
Kamin, Y., and J. Ronen. 1978. The smoothing of income numbers: Some empirical evidence on systematic
differences among manager-controlled and owner-controlled firms. Accounting, Organizations and Society
3(2): 141-157.
Klein, R. and V. Bawa. 1976. The effect of estimation risk on optimal portfolio choice, Journal of Financial
Economics 3, 215-231.
Kim, O. and R. Verrechhia. 1994. Market liquidity and volume around earnings announcements. Journal of
Accounting and Economics 17, 41–68.
Lang, M and R. Lundholm. 1996. Corporate disclosure policy and analyst behavior. The Accounting Review 71,
467–493.
Lev, B. 2001. Intangibles: Management, Measurement, and Reporting. The Brookings Institution.
Lev, B. 2003. Corporate earnings: Facts and fiction, Journal of Economic Perspectives 17, 27-50.
Matsunaga, S. and C. Park. 2001. The effect of missing a quarterly earnings benchmark on the CEO's annual bonus.
The Accounting Review 76: 313-332.
Merton, R.C., 1987. A simple model of capital market equilibrium with incomplete information. Journal of Finance
42, 483-510.
Miller, E.M., 1977, Risk, uncertainty, and divergence of opinion. Journal of Finance 32, 1151-1168.
Miller, G., and J. Piotroski. 2000. The role of disclosure for high book-to-market firms. Unpublished working paper,
Harvard University.
Nanda, D.J., V. Nagar and P. Wysocki. 2003. Discretionary disclosure and stock-based incentives. Journal of
Accounting and Economics 34(1-3): 283-309.
Nelson, M., J. Elliot and R. Tarpley. 2002. Evidence from auditors about managers' and auditors' earnings
management decisions. The Accounting Review 77, 175-202.
Nelson, M., J. Elliot and R. Tarpley. 2003. How are earnings managed? Examples from auditors. Accounting
Horizons, 17 (Supplement): 17-35.
Noe, C., 1999. Voluntary disclosures and insider transactions. Journal of Accounting and Economics 27, 305–327.
Parfet, W. 2000. Accounting subjectivity and earnings management: A preparer’s perspective. Accounting Horizons
14(4): 481-488.
Pastena, V. and J. Ronen. 1979. Some hypotheses on the pattern of management’s informal disclosures. Journal of
Accounting Research 17(2):550-570.
Ronen, J., and S. Sadan. 1981. Smoothing Income Numbers: Objectives and Implications. Reading, MA: AddisonWesley.
Roychowdhury, S. 2003. Management of earnings through the manipulation of real activities that affect cash flow
from operations. Working paper, Sloan School of Management, MIT.
Sengupta, P., 1998. Corporate disclosure quality and the cost of debt. The Accounting Review 73, 459–474.
Shevlin,T. and D. Shackelford. 2001 Empirical tax research in accounting, Journal of Accounting and Economics,
31 (1-3): 321-387.
Sloan. R. 1996. Do stock prices fully reflect information in accruals and cash flows about future earnings? The
Accounting Review 71: 289-315.
Skinner, D., 1994. Why firms voluntarily disclose bad news? Journal of Accounting Research 32, 38–61.
Skinner, D., 1997. Earnings disclosures and stockholder lawsuits. Journal of Accounting and Economics 23, 249–
283.

41

Skinner, D., and R. Sloan. 2002. Earnings surprises, growth expectations, and stock returns or don't let an earnings
torpedo sink your portfolio. Review of Accounting Studies 7 (2-3): 289-312.
Stein, J. 1989. Efficient capital markets, inefficient firms: A model of myopic corporate behavior. The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 104(4): 655-669.
Sudman, Seymour and Norman Bradburn, 1983, Asking Questions: A Practical Guide to Questionnaire Design, San
Francisco: Jossey Bass.
Tasker, S. 1998. Bridging the information gap: Quarterly conference calls as a medium for voluntary disclosure.
Review of Accounting Studies 3(1): 137-167.
Teoh, S., I. Welch, and T.J. Wong. 1998a. Earnings management and the long--run market performance of initial
public offerings. Journal of Finance 53(6): 1935-1974.
Teoh, S., I. Welch, and T.J. Wong. 1998b. Earnings management and the underperformance of seasoned equity
offerings. Journal of Financial Economics 50(1): 63-99.
Trahan, E. and L. Gitman. 1995. Bridging the theory-practice gap in corporate finance. A survey of Chief Financial
Officers. Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance 35, 73-87.
Trueman, B., 1986. Why do managers voluntarily release earnings forecasts? Journal of Accounting and Economics
8, 53–72.
Verrecchia, R. 2001. Essays in disclosure. Journal of Accounting and Economics 32 (1-3): 97-180
Watts, R., and J. Zimmerman. 1978. Towards a positive theory of the determination of accounting standards. The
Accounting Review 53, 112-13.
Watts, R., and J. Zimmerman. 1986. Positive Accounting Theory. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Watts, R., and J. Zimmerman. 1990. Positive accounting theory: a ten year perspective. The Accounting Review 65,
131–156.
Xia Y. 2001, Learning about predictability: The effects of parameter uncertainty on dynamic asset allocation,
Journal of Finance 56, 205-246.

42

Table 1
Panel A: Distribution of survey participant characteristics
Percent

Public/NYSE
Public Nasdaq/Amex
Private

51.1%
36.0%
12.8%

CEO age
<=39
40-49
50-59
>=60

2.3%
25.6%
49.5%
22.7%

CEO tenure
< 4 yrs
4-9 yrs
>=10 yrs

Percent
Number of employees

Ownership

36.9%
33.0%
30.1%

<100
100-499
500-999
1,000-2,499
2,500-4,999
5,000-9,999
>10,000

5.2%
13.6%
5.5%
12.9%
13.9%
13.9%
35.0%

Industry
Retail & Wholesale
Tech [Software/Biotech]
Bank/Finance/Insurance
Manufacturing
Public Utility
Transportation/Energy
Other

8.6%
13.9%
13.2%
30.7%
3.3%
5.3%
12.2%

Insider ownership
CEO education
College degree
MBA
non-MBA masters
>masters

33.0%
36.0%
12.5%
15.2%

<5%
5-10%
11-20%
>20%

45.2%
20.3%
12.1%
22.3%

Number of analysts
Revenues
<$100 million
$100-499 million
$500-999 million
$1-4.9 billion
>$5 billion

15.1%
22.0%
12.8%
24.6%
25.6%

None
1-5
6-10
11-15
>16

7.8%
39.9%
21.6%
14.1%
16.7%

Guidance
0. None
1. a little
2.
3. moderate
4.
5. a lot
Notes: Frequencies are based on non-missing observations

19.3%
18.0%
8.5%
32.0%
13.7%
8.5%

Table 1 (continued )
Panel B: Pearson correlation coefficients
Stock
price

Firm age

Ownership

CEO age CEO tenure

CEO
education

Number of
Revenues employees

Industry

Insider

Number of
analysts

Profit

Profit

-0.028

1.000

PE ratio

-0.222***

0.008

1.000

Sales growth

0.098

0.167***

-0.080

1.000

Stock price

-0.018

0.234***

0.023

0.096

1.000

Firm age

0.100

0.199***

-0.107

-0.062

0.155***

1.000

Ownership

-0.157***

-0.239***

0.012

0.039

-0.174***

-0.379***

1.000

CEO age

0.064

0.171***

0.056

0.024

0.091

0.173***

-0.17***

1.000

CEO tenure

0.030

0.163***

-0.016

0.119**

0.076

-0.097*

0.062

0.347***

1.000

CEO education

0.036

-0.037

0.038

0.073

0.026

-0.029

-0.023

-0.030

-0.068

1.000

Revenues

0.071

0.339***

0.040

0.026

0.252***

0.366***

-0.591***

0.153***

-0.044

-0.040

1.000

Number of
employees
Industry

0.083

0.361***

0.037

0.013

0.262***

0.392***

-0.514***

0.182***

-0.006

-0.054

0.859***

1.000

0.107*

0.1*

-0.008

-0.036

0.014

0.086

-0.154***

0.024

-0.007

0.058

0.118**

0.054

1.000

Insider

-0.057

0.013

0.118*

0.030

0.007

-0.254***

0.277***

-0.059

0.211***

-0.099*

-0.318*** -0.224***

-0.006

1.000

Analysts

-0.008

0.258***

0.209***

0.113*

0.181***

0.092

-0.338***

0.075

-0.025

0.084

0.639***

0.563***

0.049

-0.243***

1.000

-0.040
0.134**
0.054
0.231***
0.070
0.074
-0.145**
-0.014
***, **, and * denote a statistically significant difference from zero at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

0.010

0.146**

0.374***

0.333***

0.12**

-0.207***

0.437***

Guidance

PE ratio

Sales
growth

Leverage

Guidance

1.000

Table 1 (continued )
The table reports summary statistics on the representativeness of both the interviewed (Panel C) and surveyed firms
(Panel D) relative to the universe of firms listed on NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ and with CRSP share codes of 10
and 11.
Comparison is based on the following variables: Sales, Debt-to-assets, Dividend yield, Earnings per share, Credit
rating, Book-to-market, Price-earnings ratio. Since companies report their firm characterstics we are able to compare
those with Compustat. The information for the universe of firms is obtained from Compustat. For each such variable,
we identify all candidate firms listed on the three major exchanges with valid data on Compustat and share codes 10
and 11 on CRSP as of November 2003, the time at which we conducted the survey and interviewed most of the 20
firms. We then sort all firms with valid data into quintiles and record the corresponding breakpoints. For each
qunitile, we then report in Panel C (Panel D) the percentage of interviewed (surveyed) firms that are allocated into
these five sorts. The reported percentages can then be compared to the benchmark 20% and thus allow us to infer
whether our samples are representative and on which dimensions.
Panel C: Representativeness of 20 interviewed firms
Sample
Sample
Variable
average
median
Universe avg.
Sales
Sample avg. 47601.16 23591.00
Sample %

1
10.58
N.A.
0.00%

Compustat breakpoint quintiles
2
3
4
47.22
153.43
547.21
N.A.
123.30
N.A.
0.00%
10.53%
0.00%

5
7596.30
53186.79
89.47%

Debt
to
assets

Universe avg.
Sample avg.
Sample %

0.22

0.23

0.00
0.00
5.26%

0.01
0.00
5.26%

0.09
0.10
26.32%

0.22
0.24
42.11%

0.49
0.45
21.05%

Dividend
yield

Universe avg.
Sample avg.
Sample %

0.02

0.02

0.00
N.A.
0.00%

0.00
N.A.
0.00%

0.00
0.00
26.32%

0.00
0.01
26.32%

0.19
0.04
47.37%

Universe avg.
Sample avg.
Sample %

1.18

1.96

-3.11
-5.00
15.79%

-0.30
-0.04
5.26%

0.31
N.A.
0.00%

1.09
1.33
21.05%

5.57
2.92
57.89%

Credit
rating

Universe avg.
Sample avg.
Sample %

8.7(A-)

7(A+)

18.1(B-)
27(D)
5.88%

Book
to
market

Universe avg.
Sample avg.
Sample %

0.50

0.26

-23.57
0.17
57.89%

0.44
0.41
26.32%

0.67
0.65
5.26%

0.97
1.14
5.26%

4.11
3.91
5.26%

Price
to
earnings

Universe avg.
Sample avg.
Sample %

7.20

17.50

-36.32
-78.15
10.53%

-0.98
-0.67
10.53%

9.54
10.10
15.79%

15.84
16.72
26.32%

58.46
25.79
36.84%

PE (>0)

Universe avg.
Sample avg.
Sample %

19.63

18.34

7.64
7.92
6.67%

12.31
11.19
13.33%

15.64
15.81
20.00%

21.43
21.88
46.67%

81.71
31.78
13.33%

EPS

14.7(BB-) 12.4(BBB-) 10.4(BBB+) 7.4(A+)
15(BB-)
14(BB)
11(BBB) 5.8(AA-)
5.88%
5.88%
11.76%
70.59%

Table 1 (continued )
Panel D: Representativeness of surveyed public firms
Sample
Sample
Variable
average
median
1
10.58
Universe avg.
Sales
2185.74
3000.00
N.A.
Sample avg.
0.00%
Sample %
Debt
to
assets

Universe avg.
Sample avg.
Sample %

Dividend
yield

Universe avg.
Sample avg.
Sample %
Universe avg.
Sample avg.
Sample %

EPS

Compustat breakpoint quintiles
2
3
4
47.22
153.43
547.21
50.00
N.A.
465.57
15.08%
0.00%
34.75%

5
7596.30
4019.61
50.16%

0.28

0.00
0.00
15.38%

0.01
0.03
4.03%

0.09
0.11
11.72%

0.22
0.25
27.84%

0.49
0.55
41.03%

0.012

0.000

0.000
N.A.
0.00%

0.000
N.A.
0.00%

0.000
0.000
55.17%

0.005
0.010
17.24%

0.193
0.037
27.59%

2.81

1.56

-3.11
N.A.
0.00%

-0.30
0.00
0.48%

0.31
0.43
12.92%

1.09
1.14
35.41%

5.57
4.60
51.20%

0.31

Credit
rating

Universe avg.
Sample avg. 9.8(BBB+) 10(BBB+)
Sample %

18.1(B-)
17.8(B-)
6.09%

Book
to
market

Universe avg.
Sample avg.
Sample %

0.60

-23.57
0.07
22.81%

0.44
0.44
23.68%

0.67
0.68
21.93%

0.97
0.96
17.54%

4.11
2.17
14.04%

Price
to
earnings

Universe avg.
Sample avg.
Sample %

18.55

17.00

-36.32
N.A.
0.00%

-0.98
0.75
0.48%

9.54
9.85
25.24%

15.84
15.81
39.52%

58.46
28.23
34.76%

Universe avg.
Sample avg.
Sample %

18.55

17.00

7.64
7.81
13.81%

12.31
12.29
18.57%

15.64
15.38
21.43%

21.43
20.94
32.38%

81.71
37.02
13.81%

PE (>0)

0.74

14.7(BB-) 12.4(BBB-) 10.4(BBB+) 7.4(A+)
15.2(BB-) 12.9(BB+) 10.5(BBB) 5.9(AA-)
5.58%
23.35%
22.34%
42.64%

1) Sales, is based on Data 12; Debt-to-asset, is based on Data 9-long term debt divided by Data6-total assets; 3)
Dividend yield, is the ratio of Data26 divided by the firm's stock price, Data24; 4) Earnings per share, denoted, EPS,
is Data58-EPS (basic) excluding extraordinary items; 5) Credit rating, is Compustat variable SPDRC: S&P long term
domestic issuer credit rating; 6) Book to market, denoted BM, is total stockholders' equity, Data216, divided by size,
where size is computed as the product of price Data24, and common shares outstanding, Data25; 7) Price-earnings
ratio is firm's stock price, Data24 divided by EPS, Data58-EPS (basic excluding extra-ordinary items.

Table 2
Survey responses to the question: Rank the three most important performance measures reported to outsiders
In panel A, points are assigned as follow: 3 points for a #1 ranking; 2 points for a #2 ranking; 1 point for a #3 ranking.
Panel B presents a comparison of the percent of respondents indicating they agree or strongly agree with each statement when the sample is split on various firm characteristics. These characteristics
are Size, where large indicates revenues exceeding $1 billion; P/E, where high indicates a Price/Earnings ratio greater than 17, the median for all public firms surveyed; Sales Growth, where high
indicates average sales growth over the last 3 years greater than 5%, the median for all public firms surveyed; D/A, where high indicates a debt-to-total assets ratio exceeding 0.25; Credit Rating,
where high indicates above investment grade; Tech Industry, an indicator for whether a firm is in a high technology industry; Exchange, in which NYSE firms are compared to AMEX/Nasdaq listed
firms; CEO age, where mature indicates at least 60 years old; Ownership, where public firms are compared to private firms; Profitable, an indicator for whether or not a firm reported a profit last
year; Firm Age, where old indicates firms more than 36 years old, the median for all public firms surveyed; Guidance, where low refers to those firms that indicated they provide no or little earnings
guidance; Number of Analysts, where few refers to those firms that indicated that 5 or fewer analysts currently follow their stock; and CEO education, where firms for which the CEO has an MBA
are compared to all others. The sample for all comparisons in Panel B is all public firms surveyed, with the exception of the Ownership column, which uses all firms surveyed. ***, **, and * denote
a statistically significant difference across groups at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
Panel A: Unconditional averages
Measure
Earnings
Revenues
Cash flows from operations
Free cash flows
Pro forma earnings
Other
EVA

#1 Rankings
159
36
36
30
38
7
2

#2 Rankings
67
97
72
41
10
13
4

#3 Rankings
31
75
93
42
24
28
5

Total points
642
377
345
214
158
75
19

Average
points
2.10
1.24
1.13
0.70
0.52
0.25
0.06

Panel B: Conditional averages
Measure

Average
points

Number of
observations

Earnings
Revenues
Cash flows from operations
Free cash flows
Pro forma earnings
Other
EVA

2.10
1.24
1.13
0.70
0.52
0.25
0.06

305
305
305
305
305
305
305

Measure

Average
points

Number of
observations

Earnings
Revenues
Cash flows from operations
Free cash flows
Pro forma earnings
Other
EVA

2.10
1.24
1.13
0.70
0.52
0.25
0.06

305
305
305
305
305
305
305

Size
Small Large
2.06
2.13
1.37
1.10 **
1.18
1.08
0.64
0.75
0.50
0.56
0.23
0.28
0.05
0.08

P/E
Low
2.38
1.09
1.08
0.71
0.40
0.26
0.06

High
2.10 *
1.37 *
1.07
0.75
0.52
0.16
0.04

CEO age
Ownership
Young Mature
Private Public
2.01
2.47 ***
1.84
2.10
1.23
1.24
1.02
1.24
1.19
0.93 *
1.71
1.13 ***
0.68
0.81
0.80
0.70
0.60
0.23 ***
0.20
0.52 **
0.24
0.23
0.22
0.25
0.05
0.10
0.16
0.06

Sales growth
Low High
2.14 2.11
1.17 1.39 *
1.14 1.09
0.76 0.63
0.49 0.56
0.24 0.20
0.07 0.04

Debt to assets
Low
2.20
1.34
1.11
0.67
0.42
0.26
0.01

High
2.01
1.11 *
1.12
0.80
0.60
0.26
0.09 **

Profitable
Firm age
No
Yes
Young
Old
1.66 2.26 ***
1.96
2.25 **
1.29 1.22
1.30
1.19
1.16 1.11
1.25
0.99 **
0.71 0.70
0.71
0.73
0.82 0.42 ***
0.49
0.55
0.32 0.22
0.25
0.22
0.05 0.07
0.05
0.05

Credit rating
Low
2.12
0.96
1.23
0.89
0.44
0.35
0.03

High
2.16
1.27 **
1.02
0.62 *
0.55
0.26
0.11

Guidance
Little Much
2.20
2.03
1.14
1.26
1.35
1.00 ***
0.80
0.67
0.23
0.70 ***
0.21
0.27
0.07
0.06

Tech industry
Other
2.14
1.21
1.14
0.69
0.49
0.27
0.06

Tech
1.88
1.46
1.05
0.73
0.73
0.07 *
0.07

Number of
analysts
Few Many
2.15
2.05
1.31
1.17
1.21
1.03
0.72
0.71
0.36
0.66 **
0.25
0.25
0.03
0.09

Insider
Low
2.17
1.12
1.08
0.66
0.59
0.29
0.08

High
2.06
1.34 *
1.17
0.74
0.44
0.22
0.04

CEO education
MBA Other
2.10
2.11
1.18
1.27
1.08
1.15
0.75
0.71
0.58
0.48
0.25
0.23
0.07
0.06

Exchange
NASDAQ/
Amex

2.05
1.43
1.21
0.62
0.45
0.26
0.02

NYSE
2.15
1.10 ***
1.07
0.76
0.57
0.24
0.09

Table 3
Survey responses to the question: How important are the following earnings benchmarks to your company when you report a quarterly earnings number?
Respondents were asked to indicate their level of agreement with each statement on a scale of -2(strongly disagree) to +2(strongly agree). Panel A reports summary statistics for the responses from all
public firms surveyed. Column (1) presents the percent of respondents indicating they agree or strongly agree with each statement; likewise, column (2) presents the percent of respondents indicating they
disagree or strongly disagree with each statement. Column (3) reports the average rating, where higher values correspond to more agreement. Column (4) reports the results of a t-test of the null
hypothesis that each average response is equal to 0 (neither agree nor disagree). ***, **, and * denote rejection at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. Panel B presents a comparison of the percent
of respondents indicating they agree or strongly agree with each statement when the sample is split on various firm characteristics. These characteristics are Size, where large indicates revenues exceeding
$1 billion; P/E, where high indicates a Price/Earnings ratio greater than 17, the median for all public firms surveyed; Sales Growth, where high indicates average sales growth over the last 3 years greater
than 5%, the median for all public firms surveyed; D/A, where high indicates a debt-to-total assets ratio exceeding 0.25; Credit Rating, where high indicates above investment grade; Tech Industry, an
indicator for whether a firm is in a high technology industry; Exchange, in which NYSE firms are compared to AMEX/Nasdaq listed firms; CEO age, where mature indicates at least 60 years old;
Ownership, where public firms are compared to private firms; Profitable, an indicator for whether or not a firm reported a profit last year; Firm Age, where old indicates firms more than 36 years old, the
median for all public firms surveyed; Guidance, where low refers to those firms that indicated they provide no or little earnings guidance; Number of Analysts, where few refers to those firms that indicated
that 5 or fewer analysts currently follow their stock; and CEO education, where firms for which the CEO has an MBA are compared to all others. The sample for all comparisons in Panel B is all public
firms surveyed, with the exception of the Ownership column, which uses all firms surveyed. ***, **, and * denote a statistically significant difference across groups at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels,
respectively.
Panel A: Unconditional averages
Question
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

% agree or strongly
agree
84.3%
68.8%
65.0%
54.6%

Same quarter last year EPS
Analyst consensus forecast of EPS for current quarter
Reporting a profit (i.e. EPS >0)
Previous quarter EPS

% disagree or
strongly disagree
6.9%
13.2%
12.1%
20.2%

Average rating
1.25
0.82
0.83
0.47

H 0: Average
rating = 0
***
***
***
***

Credit rating

Tech industry

Insider

Panel B: Conditional averages
Question

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

% agree or
strongly
agree
84.3
68.8
65.0
54.6

% agree or
strongly
agree
Question
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

84.3
68.8
65.0
54.6

Obs.

306
304
306
302

Obs.
306
304
306
302

Size
Small Large
79.9
88.7 **
58.1
79.2 ***
67.8
62.0
58.9
50.3

CEO age
Young Mature
83.7
87.1
67.1
72.9
61.8
75.7 **
56.3
50.0

P/E
Low
91.2
65.5
65.5
42.0

High
92.8
75.3
60.8
61.1 ***

Ownership
Private Public
60.5
84.3 ***
14.3
68.8 ***
72.1
65.0
37.2
54.6 **

Sales growth
Low High
86.5 82.8
63.9 73.4 *
64.9 68.0
53.1 53.5

Debt to assets
Low
83.2
59.5
67.9
56.9

High
86.5
76.6 ***
60.3
49.6

Profitable
Firm age
No
Yes
Young
Old
69.7 89.9 ***
78.1
90.7 ***
59.5 72.4 **
65.3
70.7
69.7 63.6
66.4
64.0
66.7 51.1 **
58.6
49.0 *

Low
84.9
67.7
61.3
48.9

High
87.6
73.4
66.7
56.7

Guidance
Little Much
85.8
83.4
53.1
78.9 ***
63.7
65.8
48.2
57.0

Other Tech
85.2 78.0
67.7 68.3
64.5 68.3
50.4 78.0 ***

Low High
81.6 86.5
72.6 64.8
64.7 66.3
52.2 56.5

Number of
analysts
CEO education
Few Many
MBA Other
83.2 85.4
84.9 84.8
54.2 82.1 *** 63.2 72.0
63.6 66.9
54.7 71.7 ***
47.5 60.0 **
57.3 54.7

Exchange
NASDAQ/
Amex

78.0
55.6
66.9
60.8

NYSE
88.8 **
78.1 ***
63.7
50.3 *

Table 4
Survey responses to the question: Do these statements describe why your company tries to meet earnings benchmarks?
See Table 3 header for table and variable descriptions.
Panel A: Unconditional averages
Question
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)

% agree or strongly
agree
86.3%
82.2%
77.4%
74.1%
66.6%
58.5%
40.1%
39.5%
26.5%

Meeting earnings benchmarks helps…
us build credibility with the capital market
us maintain or increase our stock price
the external reputation of our management team
us convey our future growth prospects to investors
us maintain or reduce stock price volatility
us assure customers and suppliers that our business is stable
our employees achieve bonuses
us achieve or preserve a desired credit rating
us avoid violating debt-covenants

% disagree or
strongly disagree
3.9%
3.6%
3.6%
5.9%
6.2%
16.3%
30.3%
28.8%
41.5%

Average rating
1.17
1.06
0.95
0.90
0.74
0.50
0.06
0.07
-0.28

Credit rating

Tech industry

H 0: Average
rating = 0
***
***
***
***
***
***

***

Panel B: Conditional averages
Question

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)

% agree or
strongly
agree
86.3
82.2
77.4
74.1
66.6
58.5
40.1
39.5
26.5

Obs.

306
304
305
305
305
306
307
306
306

% agree or
strongly
agree
Question

Obs.

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)

306
304
305
305
305
306
307
306
306

86.3
82.2
77.4
74.1
66.6
58.5
40.1
39.5
26.5

Size
Small Large
84.5
88.7
78.8
85.4
77.0
78.0
71.6
76.0
61.5
70.7 *
63.8
52.7 *
40.3
39.7
27.0
51.7 ***
29.1
23.8

CEO age
Young Mature
87.2
82.4
80.8
88.1
76.9
79.4
75.6
67.6
66.2
67.6
57.0
63.2
41.1
38.2
38.7
42.6
25.5
27.9

P/E
Low
86.2
80.9
75.5
68.2
61.8
52.7
40.0
34.5
25.5

Sales growth

High
82.5
80.0
75.3
85.6 ***
68.0
56.7
41.2
39.2
21.6

Ownership
Private Public
78.3
86.3
39.1
82.2
71.7
77.4
56.5
74.1
23.9
66.6
67.4
58.5
63.0
40.1
69.6
39.5
69.6
26.5

***
**
***
***
***
***

Low High
84.2 87.3
79.5 83.2
74.0 78.6
71.2 77.0
67.8 64.3
59.6 57.1
38.1 40.5
37.4 40.5
27.2 23.8

Profitable
No
Yes
92.0 84.4
84.9 80.8
80.8 75.6
64.4 77.3
68.5 65.8
71.6 54.7
36.0 41.3
41.9 38.2
36.5 22.7

Debt to assets
Low
82.2
75.0
72.3
69.2
66.2
62.3
41.5
30.0
21.5

High
88.5
85.6
79.0
77.5
64.5
52.2
40.3
43.9
30.9

**

*
**
*

Firm age
Young
Old
*
86.0
86.5
83.1
79.7
78.5
74.1
**
74.3
74.1
62.5
70.1
***
64.6
53.7 *
41.7
37.8
31.9
45.9 **
**
24.3
29.1

Low
83.7
80.4
78.3
65.2
60.9
58.7
31.5
33.7
23.9

High
86.6
84.1
74.0
78.0 **
67.7
56.7
40.6
48.4 **
22.7

Guidance
Little Much
75.9
92.0
74.1
86.6
71.7
80.7
69.0
77.5
57.5
72.2
56.6
58.8
34.5
43.1
31.9
44.1
30.1
25.0

***
***
*
***

**

Other Tech
85.2 95.0 **
82.0 82.5
75.0 87.5 **
72.7 77.5
65.6 72.5
54.3 82.9 ***
40.1 41.5
42.8 20.0 ***
26.8 22.5

Number of
analysts
Few Many
81.7 89.9
78.9 84.7
74.1 79.6
69.9 78.3
59.4 72.6
61.5 55.4
39.2 41.8
33.6 44.9
35.7 19.0

**

*
**

**
***

Insider
Low High
87.5 84.7
82.2 82.2
72.6 80.5
73.3 74.4
66.7 65.9
51.9 63.4 **
32.4 47.0 ***
40.4 38.4
21.3 30.5 *

CEO education
MBA Other
84.3 87.4
79.6 83.6
77.6 77.0
68.2 77.0
61.7 69.6
55.1 59.9
44.4 38.0
49.1 35.1 **
32.4 23.6

Exchange
NASDAQ/
Amex

81.1
76.8
78.6
69.0
61.1
63.8
43.3
25.4
23.8

NYSE
89.9
86.0
76.5
77.7
70.4
54.7
37.8
49.4
28.3

**
**
*
*

***

Table 5
Survey responses to the question: Do these statements describe why your company tries to avoid missing an earnings benchmark?
See Table 3 header for table and variable descriptions.
Panel A: Unconditional averages
% agree or strongly
agree
Question
(1)
it creates uncertainty about our future prospects
80.7%
(2)
outsiders might think there are previously unknown problems at our firm
60.0%
(3)
we have to spend a lot of time explaining why we missed rather than focus on future
58.2%
(4)
it leads to increased scrutiny of all aspects of our earnings releases
37.6%
(5)
outsiders might think that our firm lacks the flexibility to meet the benchmark
28.1%
(6)
it increases the possibility of lawsuits
25.7%

% disagree or
strongly disagree
7.5%
18.7%
18.6%
28.4%
36.3%
37.8%

Average rating
0.97
0.49
0.48
0.07
-0.14
-0.20

Credit rating

Tech industry

H 0: Average
rating = 0
***
***
***
**
***

Panel B: Conditional averages
Question

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

% agree or
strongly
agree
80.7
60.0
58.2
37.6
28.1
25.7

% agree or
strongly
agree
Question
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

80.7
60.0
58.2
37.6
28.1
25.7

Obs.

306
305
306
306
306
307

Obs.
306
305
306
306
306
307

Size
Small Large
78.4
82.8
58.5
62.3
60.4
56.7
33.8
41.1
22.3
32.5 **
30.2
21.2 *

CEO age
Young Mature
80.4
83.8
62.1
52.9
57.0
61.8
36.2
42.6
26.8
32.4
25.4
26.5

P/E
Low
73.4
55.5
60.6
39.1
29.1
20.9

High
85.6 **
53.6
51.5
35.1
32.0
27.8

Ownership
Private Public
58.7
80.7 ***
63.0
60.0
58.7
58.2
37.0
37.6
34.8
28.1
4.3
25.7 ***

Sales growth
Low High
76.7 84.9 *
56.8 61.1
55.1 59.2
38.8 36.5
22.4 34.9 **
21.8 30.2

Profitable
No
Yes
81.3 80.4
65.8 56.9
58.7 57.1
39.2 36.4
20.3 30.7 *
36.0 22.7 **

Debt to assets
Low
78.3
56.2
53.8
35.4
27.7
28.5

High
81.3
59.4
59.4
38.8
28.1
23.7

Firm age
Young
Old
81.8
78.4
63.9
53.7 *
60.8
54.7
35.4
39.2
28.5
27.0
31.3
20.9 **

Low
73.6
58.7
66.3
37.0
21.7
32.6

High
83.6
59.4
54.3
41.4
33.6
17.2

Guidance
Little Much
69.9
87.2
52.7
64.9
55.8
59.9
29.2
42.6
19.5
33.5
23.9
26.1

Other Tech
79.3 87.8
58.2 72.5 *
*
56.6 70.7 *
36.2 45.0
**
26.8 35.0
*** 21.8 48.8 ***

*

***
**
**
***

Number of
analysts
Few Many
76.9 84.1
55.6 63.9
60.8 56.7
33.6 41.8
23.8 32.3 *
27.3 24.1

Insider
Low High
76.3 83.5
54.4 64.4 *
48.5 65.6 ***
33.1 40.2
22.1 32.9 **
22.1 28.0

CEO education
MBA Other
78.7 81.7
66.7 55.0 **
54.6 60.2
31.5 41.4 *
24.1 29.8
20.4 28.1

Exchange
NASDAQ/
Amex

77.2
56.8
59.8
31.0
23.8
32.3

NYSE
83.2
62.2
57.0
42.2 **
31.1
21.1 **

Table 6
Survey responses to the question: Hypothetical scenario: Near the end of the quarter, it looks like your company might come in below the desired earnings
target. Within what is permitted by GAAP, which of the following choices might your company make?
See Table 3 header for table and variable descriptions.
Panel A: Unconditional averages
Question
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)

% agree or strongly
agree
79.9%
55.3%
40.4%
39.1%
27.9%
21.3%
20.2%
12.4%
7.9%

decrease discretionary spending (e.g. R&D advertising maintenance etc.)
delay starting a new project even if this entails a small sacrifice in value
book revenues now rather than next quarter (if justified in either quarter)
provide incentives for customers to buy more product this quarter
draw down on reserves previously set aside
postpone taking an accounting charge
sell investments or assets to recognize gains this quarter
repurchase common shares
alter accounting assumptions (e.g. allowances pensions etc.)

% disagree or
strongly disagree
11.2%
23.5%
38.1%
40.8%
50.5%
62.7%
61.3%
68.5%
78.2%

Average rating
1.00
0.33
-0.12
-0.11
-0.45
-0.72
-0.77
-1.02
-1.22

Credit rating

Tech industry

H 0: Average
rating = 0
***
***

***
***
***
***
***

Panel B: Conditional averages
Question

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)

% agree or
strongly
agree
79.9
55.3
40.4
39.1
27.9
21.3
20.2
12.4
7.9

Obs.

304
302
302
304
301
300
302
298
303

% agree or
strongly
agree
Question

Obs.

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)

304
302
302
304
301
300
302
298
303

79.9
55.3
40.4
39.1
27.9
21.3
20.2
12.4
7.9

Size
Small Large
80.4
80.5
54.8
57.0
43.5
37.8
44.6
33.6 **
28.6
27.9
21.1
21.9
20.4
20.3
11.6
13.8
8.8
7.4

CEO age
Young Mature
81.8
74.3
58.5
45.7 *
42.4
34.3
40.7
32.9
27.6
28.6
21.1
21.4
18.8
25.7
13.2
10.4
7.4
10.0

P/E
Low
75.0
44.6
34.8
27.7
27.3
23.4
16.2
16.2
10.7

High
80.2
57.3 *
34.7
38.5 *
25.0
16.0
22.9
12.0
4.2 *

Ownership
Private Public
86.4
79.9
59.1
55.3
36.4
40.4
43.2
39.1
52.3
27.9 ***
31.8
21.3
22.7
20.2
4.7
12.4 **
13.6
7.9

Sales growth
Low High
82.3 77.2
57.8 54.0
43.2 36.2
38.1 41.7
25.5 29.1
21.4 20.6
19.7 20.6
9.6 17.9 **
9.5
6.3

Profitable
No
Yes
82.9 78.8
70.7 50.7
49.3 37.8
56.6 33.2
32.0 26.8
24.0 20.6
21.3 20.0
6.7 14.5
13.3
6.2

Debt to assets
Low
82.3
55.4
37.2
40.0
25.4
15.5
19.2
15.9
6.2

High
75.0
54.0
41.4
40.0
29.7
23.9 *
20.1
9.4
10.0

Firm age
Young
Old
79.9
78.7
***
56.9
55.0
*
40.6
39.3
***
45.8
31.3 ***
27.8
27.7
21.7
20.3
20.3
19.3
**
14.0
11.0
*
6.3
9.3

Low
73.6
65.9
37.4
38.5
26.7
25.6
13.2
11.0
11.0

High
Other Tech
78.3
78.8 90.0 **
44.5 *** 52.8 71.8 **
39.1
39.0 53.8 *
30.2
36.1 62.5 ***
27.3
28.9 28.2
19.7
22.6 17.9
23.4 **
19.7 28.2
12.9
13.5
7.7
7.0
7.5 12.8

Guidance
Little Much
75.9
82.8
50.0
58.9
35.7
43.2
34.8
41.9
26.8
28.3
20.5
21.9
17.9
21.6
10.0
14.2
6.3
9.1

Insider
Low High
78.5 80.2
51.5 58.0
37.3 41.4
32.6 43.2 *
24.1 30.2
21.1 20.5
20.9 18.5
7.6 16.1 **
5.9
8.6

Number of
analysts
CEO education
Few Many
MBA Other
77.5 82.1
82.9 77.9
55.3 55.8
56.2 55.9
45.1 35.5 *
39.4 41.3
40.8 37.2
36.2 40.0
28.2 27.3
23.8 29.9
22.7 20.1
15.5 25.0 **
14.8 25.2 **
24.0 18.0
9.9 14.5
12.5 12.4
9.9
5.8
4.8
9.5

Exchange
NASDAQ/
Amex

81.1
54.0
39.7
45.7
24.6
19.8
18.3
12.0
9.5

NYSE
79.1
56.3
40.9
34.5 **
30.3
22.4
21.6
12.7
6.8

Table 7
Survey responses to the question: Hypothetical scenario: Your company’s cost of capital is 12%. Near the end of the quarter, a new opportunity arises that offers a 16%
internal rate of return and the same risk as the firm. The analyst consensus EPS estimate is $1.90. What is the probability that your company will pursue this project in each
of the following scenarios?
See Table 3 header for table and variable descriptions.
Panel A: Unconditional averages
EPS if you
do not
EPS if you
pursue
pursue
0%
$2.00
$1.90
4%
$1.90
$1.80
10%
$1.80
$1.70
14%
$1.40
$1.30
20%

Panel B: Conditional averages
EPS if you
do not
EPS if you
pursue
pursue Avg prob.

$2.00
$1.90
$1.80
$1.40

$1.90
$1.80
$1.70
$1.30

80%
59%
55%
52%

EPS if you
do not
EPS if you
pursue
pursue Avg prob.
$2.00
$1.90
$1.80
$1.40

$1.90
$1.80
$1.70
$1.30

80%
59%
55%
52%

Probability that the project will be
pursued: (Percent of respondents
indicating)
20%
40%
60%
80%
4%
5%
10%
32%
14%
10%
20%
28%
12%
13%
21%
22%
13%
12%
15%
20%

Obs.

284
284
284
284

Obs.
284
284
284
284

Size
Small
78.4
59.2
55.1
50.4

Large
81.8
60.1
56.2
53.7

CEO age
Young Mature
79.5
79.5
58.4
61.3
54.3
57.8
51.0
52.7

P/E
Low
79.5
63.1
56.7
51.8

High
79.1
55.9
52.8
50.2

Ownership
Private Public
79.6
79.1
62.8
59.2
52.6
55.3
46.0
51.7

Average
probability of
pursuing
100%
45%
18%
17%
19%

Sales growth
Low
80.0
60.6
55.6
52.1

High
78.2
56.4
53.4
50.7

Profitable
No
Yes
79.0
79.7
56.9
59.8
56.0
54.9
53.7
50.8

80%
59%
55%
52%

Debt to assets
Low
78.4
57.4
54.0
52.5

High
81.0
61.4
57.5
51.7

Firm age
Young
Old
79.3
79.4
57.7
60.0
53.1
56.6
50.4
52.9

Credit rating
Low High
81.4 78.0
58.1 61.3
58.1 56.1
56.9 51.3

Guidance
Little Much
81.1 78.7
64.3 56.0 **
60.9 52.0 **
54.5 50.5

Tech industry
Other Tech
80.8 74.2
61.2 50.6 *
57.9 45.0 **
53.8 45.6

Number of
analysts
Few Many
80.1 78.9
60.2 58.3
56.4 54.4
52.8 51.1

Insider
Low High
80.4 79.0
61.6 57.8
58.0 53.6
54.2 50.4

CEO education
MBA Other
78.9 79.8
58.5 59.0
52.9 55.8
47.9 52.9

Exchange
NASDAQ/
Amex

77.5
55.7
52.9
51.7

NYSE
80.9
61.5
56.9
51.8

Table 8
Survey responses to the question: Do the following factors contribute to your company preferring a smooth earnings path?
See Table 3 header for table and variable descriptions.
Panel A: Unconditional averages
Question
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)

% agree or strongly
agree
88.7%
79.7%
66.2%
57.1%
46.5%
46.3%
42.2%
24.3%
15.6%

A smooth earnings path is preferred because it…
is perceived as less risky by investors
makes it easier for analysts/investors to predict future earnings
assures customers/suppliers that business is stable
reduces the return that investors demand (i.e. smaller risk premium)
promotes a reputation for transparent and accurate reporting
conveys higher future growth prospects
achieves or preserves a desired credit rating
clarifies true economic performance
increases bonus payments

% disagree or
strongly disagree
2.3%
2.7%
13.2%
11.3%
18.6%
12.4%
18.9%
26.0%
42.5%

Average rating
1.18
0.99
0.61
0.55
0.32
0.42
0.21
-0.05
-0.43

Credit rating

Tech industry

H 0: Average
rating = 0
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***

Panel B: Conditional averages
Question

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)

% agree or
strongly
agree
88.7
79.7
66.2
57.1
46.5
46.3
42.2
24.3
15.6

Obs.

302
301
302
301
301
298
301
300
301

% agree or
strongly
agree
Question

Obs.

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)

302
301
302
301
301
298
301
300
301

88.7
79.7
66.2
57.1
46.5
46.3
42.2
24.3
15.6

Size
Small Large
85.6
91.9 *
76.6
81.9
73.3
59.1 ***
53.1
61.1
44.8
48.3
45.1
46.9
35.2
49.0 **
23.6
24.8
19.3
12.1 *

CEO age
Young Mature
89.6
85.3
80.9
75.0
64.9
70.6
56.1
60.3
44.3
52.9
46.9
42.6
40.9
47.1
25.3
20.6
16.1
14.7

P/E
Low
92.9
76.8
62.5
60.7
43.8
45.0
42.3
20.7
14.4

High
81.1 **
82.1
64.2
48.4 *
45.3
43.6
40.0
25.3
12.6

Ownership
Private Public
79.1
88.7
62.8
79.7 **
83.7
66.2 ***
48.8
57.1
41.9
46.5
53.5
46.3
74.4
42.2 ***
27.9
24.3
20.9
15.6

Sales growth
Low High
88.1 87.1
81.1 78.2
67.8 65.3
58.7 54.8
43.4 45.2
42.6 48.0
42.7 40.7
19.6 24.4
14.0 13.8

Profitable
No
Yes
87.1 88.9
78.3 80.0
74.3 63.1 *
59.4 56.0
43.5 45.8
42.6 47.1
44.3 40.2
17.4 25.4
15.7 14.7

Debt to assets
Low
84.4
76.6
64.8
53.1
47.7
44.1
35.2
19.5
18.0

High
91.1 *
83.0
65.9
60.0
41.5
44.4
45.5 *
26.1
11.2

Firm age
Young
Old
87.2
89.0
78.0
80.8
70.2
63.7
56.0
56.8
48.9
40.4
46.4
44.4
35.0
48.6 **
25.7
19.9
16.4
11.6

Low
91.2
80.2
62.6
57.1
41.8
36.3
40.0
17.8
5.6

High
Other Tech
88.1
87.7 95.1 *
80.2
79.8 80.0
62.7
63.9 82.9 ***
56.3
56.0 70.0 *
47.6
45.2 47.5
45.2
46.6 42.5
50.0
44.2 29.3 *
27.0
25.1 22.5
18.3 *** 15.5 17.1

Guidance
Little Much
87.2
90.4
75.2
83.4
68.8
64.7
50.5
61.0
35.8
51.9
40.7
49.7
38.0
44.4
17.6
28.3
14.8
15.0

*
*
***

**

Insider
Low High
87.1 89.6
81.8 78.0
60.6 71.3 *
59.1 56.1
43.2 48.2
39.2 52.1 **
40.9 42.9
25.0 23.3
11.4 17.8

Number of
analysts
CEO education
Few Many
MBA Other
90.0 87.8
92.4 86.8
75.0 85.3 **
80.0 80.3
73.6 60.9 **
62.9 68.8
57.1 57.7
55.2 59.0
43.6 48.1
46.7 46.3
44.6 48.7
43.8 47.3
39.6 44.2
41.0 44.1
18.7 28.2 *
21.0 26.2
15.8 14.7
12.4 17.6

Exchange
NASDAQ/
Amex

85.5
76.4
70.2
56.1
48.0
51.6
31.5
21.1
21.8

NYSE
91.0
82.0
63.5
57.9
45.5
42.6
49.7 ***
26.6
11.3 **

Table 9
Survey responses to the question: How large a sacrifice in value would your firm make to avoid a bumpy earnings path?
Panel A presents the percent of all respondents from public firms indicating each choice. See Table 3 header for table and variable descriptions for Panel B.
Panel A: Unconditional averages
% of
respondents
none
22.0%
small sacrifice
52.0%
moderate sacrifice
24.0%
large sacrifice
2.0%

Panel B: Conditional averages
% of
respondents Obs.
Response

none
small sacrifice
moderate sacrifice
large sacrifice

Response
none
small sacrifice
moderate sacrifice
large sacrifice

22.0%
52.0%
24.0%
2.0%

302
302
302
302

% of
respondents Obs.
22.0%
52.0%
24.0%
2.0%

302
302
302
302

Size
Small Large
23.3
21.8
51.4
51.7
24.0
23.8
1.4
2.7

CEO age
Young Mature
21.7
20.9
51.7
53.7
24.8
22.4
1.7
3.0

P/E
Low
28.6
51.8
18.8
0.9

Sales growth

High
20.2
52.1
23.4
4.3

Low High
20.6 23.0
57.4 49.2
20.6 24.6
1.4
3.2

Ownership
Private Public
14.3
22.0
57.1
52.0
23.8
24.0
4.8
2.0

Profitable
No
Yes
18.6 23.3
57.1 50.7
21.4 24.2
2.9
1.8

Debt to assets
Low
23.4
53.9
20.3
2.3

High
21.5
52.6
23.7
2.2

Firm age
Young
Old
23.2
20.7
54.2
50.3
21.1
26.2
1.4
2.8

Credit rating
Low
26.4
49.5
24.2
.

High
21.8
51.6
25.0
1.6

Guidance
Little Much
28.4
18.3 **
48.6
53.2
21.1
26.3
1.8
2.2

Tech industry
Other Tech
23.8
7.7 ***
49.2 71.8 ***
24.6 20.5
2.4
.

Number of
analysts
Few Many
24.1 19.4
50.4 54.2
23.4 24.5
2.1
1.9

Insider
Low High
22.7 22.0
56.1 49.4
18.2 27.4 *
3.0
1.2

CEO education
MBA Other
21.7 21.4
50.9 52.4
24.5 24.6
2.8
1.6

Exchange
NASDAQ/
Amex

18.9
58.2
22.1
0.8

NYSE
24.2
47.8 *
25.3
2.8

Table 10
Survey responses to the question: Rank the two most important groups in terms of setting the stock price for your company.
Points are assigned as follow: 2 points for a #1 ranking; 1 point for a #2 ranking. See Table 3 header for additional table and variable descriptions
Panel A: Unconditional averages

Group
institutional investors
analysts
individual investors
rating agencies
hedge funds

#2
Ranki
#1 Rankings ngs
163
103
108
111
20
39
5
21
5
16

Total points
429
327
79
31
26

Average
points
1.4
1.0
0.3
0.1
0.1

Panel B: Conditional averages
Group
institutional investors
analysts
individual investors
rating agencies
hedge funds

Group

Average
points

Obs.

1.4
1.0
0.3
0.1
0.1

312
312
312
312
312

Average
points

Obs.

Small
1.41
0.87
0.39
0.05
0.09

CEO age
NASDAQ/
Amex

institutional investors
analysts
individual investors
rating agencies
hedge funds

1.38
1.05
0.25
0.10
0.08

312
312
312
312
312

Size
Large
1.33
1.21 ***
0.12 ***
0.15 **
0.07

1.39
0.96
0.35
0.05
0.09

NYSE
1.37
1.11
0.19 **
0.14 **
0.08

Low
1.36
1.05
0.34
0.07
0.09

P/E
High
1.56 **
1.03
0.22
0.08
0.07

Ownership
Young Mature
1.34
1.50
1.06
1.03
0.25
0.29
0.11
0.06
0.08
0.07

Sales Growth
Low High
1.38 1.41
1.06 1.09
0.32 0.22
0.10 0.11
0.09 0.09

Profitable
No
1.39
1.00
0.21
0.17
0.11

Yes
1.41
1.09
0.28
0.08 **
0.08

Low
1.51
1.02
0.34
0.05
0.09

D/A
High
1.32 **
1.08
0.21 *
0.16 ***
0.09

Firm age
Young
1.40
1.05
0.25
0.09
0.12

Old
1.40
1.08
0.29
0.12
0.05

Credit Rating
Low High
1.42
1.49
1.02
1.16
0.31
0.16 **
0.14
0.09
0.09
0.09

Guidance
Little Much
1.39
1.36
0.82
1.18 ***
0.49
0.11 ***
0.05
0.13 *
0.14
0.05 **

Tech Industry
Other Tech
1.37
1.45
1.04
1.07
0.26
0.21
0.12
0.00 **
0.08
0.14

Number of
analysts
Few Many
1.34
1.41
0.87
1.21 ***
0.40
0.12 ***
0.12
0.08
0.09
0.08

Insider
Low High
1.46
1.34
1.08
0.99
0.21
0.29
0.09
0.09
0.09
0.08

CEO education
MBA Other
1.37
1.40
1.02
1.08
0.33
0.22 *
0.13
0.09
0.04
0.10 *

Table 11
Survey responses to the question: Do these statements describe your company's motives for voluntarily communicating financial information?
See Table 3 header for table and variable descriptions.
Panel A: Unconditional averages
Question
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)

Voluntarily communicating information…
promotes a reputation for transparent/accurate reporting
reduces the “information risk” that investors assign to our stock
provides important information to investors that is not included in mandatory financial disclosures
increases the predictability of our company’s future prospects
attracts more financial analysts to follow our stock
corrects an under-valued stock price
increases the overall liquidity of our stock
increases our P/E ratio
reveals to outsiders the skill level of our managers
reduces our cost of capital
reduces the risk premium employees demand for holding stock granted as compensation

% agree or strongly
agree
92.1%
81.9%
72.1%
56.2%
50.8%
48.4%
44.3%
42.0%
41.3%
39.3%
9.2%

% disagree or
strongly disagree
2.0%
4.3%
8.9%
14.4%
17.0%
16.4%
17.4%
18.0%
26.2%
22.0%
49.2%

Average rating
1.39
1.03
0.86
0.53
0.43
0.37
0.31
0.27
0.16
0.17
-0.57

Credit rating

Tech industry

Insider

H 0: Average
rating = 0
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
**
***
***

Panel B: Conditional averages
Question

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)

Question
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)

% agree or
strongly
agree

Obs.

92.1
81.9
72.1
56.2
50.8
48.4
44.3
42.0
41.3
39.3
9.2

305
304
305
306
305
304
305
305
305
305
303

% agree or
strongly
agree

Obs.

92.1
81.9
72.1
56.2
50.8
48.4
44.3
42.0
41.3
39.3
9.2

305
304
305
306
305
304
305
305
305
305
303

Size
Small Large
90.6
94.0
78.2
85.3
66.9
77.3 **
47.7
64.7 ***
57.0
45.6 **
51.0
46.7
51.4
37.3 **
43.2
41.3
45.9
36.0 *
32.4
45.3 **
8.2
10.0

CEO age
Young Mature
92.2
92.9
81.4
84.3
70.3
78.6
55.8
55.7
52.6
44.3
48.5
47.1
45.3
40.0
42.2
41.4
40.5
45.7
39.2
40.0
10.4
5.8

P/E
Low
92.9
78.8
73.5
56.6
53.1
48.7
44.2
43.4
44.2
46.0
6.2

Sales growth

High
90.7
85.6
68.0
58.8
44.8
48.5
38.1
50.5
43.3
32.0 **
8.3

Ownership
Private Public
84.1
92.1
55.6
81.9
55.6
72.1
51.1
56.2
15.9
50.8
15.6
48.4
17.8
44.3
22.2
42.0
46.7
41.3
45.7
39.3
17.8
9.2

***
**
***
***
***
***

Low High
89.1 93.8
77.0 84.4
66.2 76.6 *
49.3 60.9 *
49.0 52.3
46.3 50.8
43.9 41.4
33.8 50.8 ***
37.8 47.7 *
35.8 45.3
8.1
9.4

Debt to assets
Low
88.5
77.9
66.4
49.6
52.7
46.9
39.7
42.0
38.2
32.1
7.7

High
93.6
81.6
75.9
61.7
50.7
51.1
49.6
44.0
44.0
47.5
9.9

*
**

*

***

Profitable
Firm age
No
Yes
Young
Old
88.0 93.4
93.1
90.7
78.4 82.9
77.9
86.0 *
70.7 72.8
73.3
72.0
57.9 55.7
50.0
60.7 *
56.6 48.9
55.5
47.7
62.2 43.9 ***
55.2
42.7 **
48.0 43.0
44.5
43.3
37.3 43.4
44.5
40.0
40.0 42.1
43.8
40.7
42.7 38.2
38.4
40.7
10.8
7.9
9.7
8.7

Low
91.3
79.6
71.0
51.6
54.8
55.4
45.2
44.1
40.9
44.1
8.6

High
94.6
83.7
72.1
62.0
46.1
45.7
37.2
43.4
41.1
43.4
7.0

Guidance
Little Much
88.5
94.6 *
76.1
85.5 **
69.0
74.3
50.4
58.8
46.0
52.7
44.6
51.3
42.5
44.4
36.3
45.5
41.6
41.2
33.6
42.2
5.4
11.3 *

Other Tech
91.4 97.6 **
81.2 85.0
73.4 70.0
57.0 53.7
49.8 58.5
46.7 60.0
43.8 47.5
41.4 45.0
40.6 47.5
39.8 37.5
7.9 20.0 *

Number of
analysts
Few Many
88.8 94.9
76.1 87.3
67.8 76.4
49.7 61.1
53.8 47.4
45.8 51.6
48.3 41.4
33.6 51.0
41.3 42.0
33.6 45.2
7.7 10.9

*
**
*
**

***
**

Low High
91.2 92.6
80.9 82.7
72.8 71.2
54.4 56.4
44.4 55.2 *
46.7 49.7
46.3 42.9
38.2 46.6
42.6 41.1
43.4 36.2
9.6
8.1

CEO education
MBA Other
94.3 91.1
84.0 81.0
70.8 74.2
61.3 52.4
49.1 51.6
47.2 48.1
43.4 44.7
39.6 43.2
40.6 42.6
41.5 38.4
13.3
6.3 *

Exchange
NASDAQ/
Amex

91.3
73.6
67.5
49.6
56.7
50.0
50.8
45.2
43.7
37.3
11.3

NYSE
92.7
87.7
75.4
60.9
46.6
47.2
39.7
39.7
39.7
40.8
7.8

***
**
*
*

Table 12
Survey responses to the question: Limiting voluntary communication of financial information helps…
See Table 3 header for table and variable descriptions.
Panel A: Unconditional averages
% agree or strongly
agree
Question
(1)
avoid setting a disclosure precedent that may be difficult to continue
69.6%
(2)
avoid giving away “company secrets” or otherwise harming our competitive position
58.8%
(3)
avoid possible lawsuits if future results don’t match forward-looking disclosures
46.4%
(4)
avoid potential follow-up questions about unimportant items
36.7%
(5)
avoid attracting unwanted scrutiny by regulators
20.3%
(6)
avoid attracting unwanted scrutiny by stockholders and bondholders
16.8%

% disagree or
strongly disagree
14.7%
24.8%
25.5%
30.5%
56.7%
54.8%

Average rating
0.74
0.49
0.26
0.04
-0.52
-0.56

Credit rating

Tech industry

H 0: Average
rating = 0
***
***
***
***
***

Panel B: Conditional averages
Question

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

% agree or
strongly
agree
69.6
58.8
46.4
36.7
20.3
16.8

Obs.

306
306
306
305
305
303

% agree or
strongly
agree
Question

Obs.

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

306
306
306
305
305
303

69.6
58.8
46.4
36.7
20.3
16.8

Size
Small
73.8
64.4
48.3
35.8
20.9
15.8

Large
66.7
52.7 **
46.0
38.0
20.7
18.7

CEO age
Young Mature
70.4
68.6
58.8
61.4
47.2
44.3
38.4
31.4
19.8
22.9
17.0
17.1

P/E
Low
66.4
54.0
46.0
34.5
15.9
17.7

High
69.1
63.9
43.3
36.1
22.7
17.7

Ownership
Private Public
66.7
69.6
66.7
58.8
40.0
46.4
51.1
36.7 *
31.1
20.3
26.7
16.8

Sales growth
Low High
72.3 64.8
62.2 58.6
46.6 44.5
34.5 39.1
21.6 20.3
18.9 17.5

Profitable
No
Yes
75.0 68.0
60.5 57.9
51.3 44.7
38.7 36.0
22.7 19.7
16.2 17.2

Debt to assets
Low
71.8
67.2
49.6
38.2
20.6
14.6

High
66.7
52.5 **
39.7 *
33.3
17.0
18.6

Firm age
Young
Old
69.9
68.0
61.0
56.7
52.7
40.0 **
36.3
36.7
23.3
17.3
18.1
16.7

Low
65.6
59.1
44.1
33.3
17.2
18.5

High
69.0
61.2
42.6
43.4
23.3
19.4

Guidance
Little Much
70.8
68.4
66.4
55.1 **
47.8
44.4
32.7
39.6
23.0
19.3
19.8
15.5

Other Tech
69.1 78.0
57.8 68.3
44.1 61.0 **
38.3 32.5
19.9 27.5
18.5 10.0

Number of
analysts
Few Many
72.0 66.9
62.2 56.7
48.3 44.6
32.2 41.4 *
17.5 22.3
17.0 16.6

Insider
Low High
61.8 74.8 **
55.9 61.3
41.9 48.5
32.4 41.1
15.4 23.3 *
13.4 19.0

CEO education
MBA Other
67.0 70.2
57.5 60.2
44.3 47.1
37.7 35.8
23.6 18.9
13.2 19.7

Exchange
NASDAQ/
Amex

70.1
64.6
52.8
34.1
22.2
15.3

NYSE
69.3
54.7 *
41.9 *
38.5
19.0
17.9

Table 13
Questions related to timing of disclosures
Panel A: Survey responses to the question: Based on your company's experience, is good news or bad news released to the public faster?

Bad news faster
26.6%

% of respondents

No difference
52.9%

Good news faster
20.5%

Average rating
-0.12

Panel B: Survey responses to the question: Do the following statements describe your company's motives related to the timing of voluntary disclosures?
See Table 3 header for table and variable descriptions. Responses used in rows (1) and (2) include only those respondents who indicated a preference for disclosing bad news faster. Likewise, responses used in
rows (3) and (4) include only those respondents who indicated a preference for disclosing good news faster.
Panel A: Unconditional averages
Question
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

Disclosing bad news faster enhances our reputation for transparent and accurate reporting
Disclosing bad news faster reduces our risk of potential lawsuits
Good news is released faster because bad news takes longer to analyze and interpret
Good news is released faster because we try to package bad news with other disclosures which can result in a
coordination delay

% agree or strongly
% disagree or
agree
strongly disagree
76.8%
3.7%
76.8%
8.5%
66.7%
12.7%

Average rating
0.93
0.91
0.76

35.5%

37.1%

-0.05

Credit rating

Tech industry

Insider

H 0: Average
rating = 0
***
***
***

Panel B: Conditional averages
Question

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

% agree or
strongly
agree
76.8
76.8
66.7
35.5

% agree or
strongly
agree
Question
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

76.8
76.8
66.7
35.5

Obs.

82
82
63
62

Obs.
82
82
63
62

Size
Small Large
72.2
80.4
75.0
78.3
68.8
66.7
41.9
30.0

CEO age
Young Mature
77.8
72.2
74.6
83.3
65.3
71.4
39.6
21.4

P/E
Low
80.0
88.6
68.2
22.7

High
78.6
60.7 ***
72.7
36.4

Ownership
Private Public
71.4
76.8
42.9
76.8 *
55.6
66.7
38.9
35.5

Sales growth
Low High
78.6 75.8
78.6 72.7
61.8 68.4
47.1 15.8 ***

Profitable
No
Yes
70.6 78.5
82.4 75.4
54.5 71.1
42.9 28.9

Debt to assets
Low
73.0
73.0
66.7
38.1

High
82.5
77.5
62.1
34.5

Firm age
Young
Old
75.0
79.1
77.8
76.7
69.0
58.6
41.4
27.6

Low
79.3
82.8
60.0
13.3

High
75.8
72.7
61.5
42.3 **

Guidance
Little Much
75.0
78.3
72.2
80.4
60.9
69.4
39.1
33.3

Other Tech
76.1 77.8
77.5 66.7
66.0 75.0
36.0 36.4

Number of
analysts
Few Many
70.6 80.9
82.4 72.3
63.3 69.0
33.3 37.9

Low High
78.0 75.6
78.0 75.6
68.0 61.8
40.0 29.4

CEO education
MBA Other
84.0 74.1
56.0 85.2 ***
76.2 61.9
23.8 41.5

Exchange
NASDAQ/
Amex

77.4
83.9
57.1
37.0

NYSE
76.5
72.5
74.3
34.3

1%
2%

Earnings

12%
Revenues
Cash flows from
operations

10%

Free cash flows
51%
Pro forma earnings
12%
Other
12%

EVA

Fig. 1. Responses to the question: “Rank the three most important measures
report to outsiders” based on a survey of 401 financial executives.

0%

20%

40%

60%

80%

100%

Same quarter last year EPS
Analyst consensus EPS forecast
Reporting a profit (i.e. EPS >0)
Previous quarter EPS
Percent of respondents

Fig. 2. Responses to the question: “How important are following earnings benchmarks?”
based on a survey of 401 financial executives.

build credibility with capital market
maintain or increase our stock price
external reputation of management
convey future growth prospects to investors
reduce stock price volatility
assures stakeholders business is stable
employees achieve bonuses
achieve desired credit rating
avoid violating debt-covenants
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100
%

Percent agree or strongly agree

Fig. 3. Responses to the statement: “Meeting earnings benchmarks helps …”
based on a survey of 401 financial executives.

creates uncertainty about our future prospects
outsiders think there are previously unknown problems
have to spend time explaining why we missed
increases scrutiny of all aspects of earnings releases
outsiders might think firm lacks flexibility
increases the possibility of lawsuits
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90%
Percent agree or strongly agree

Fig. 4. Responses to the statement: “Failing to meet benchmarks…” based on
a survey of 401 financial executives.

0%

20%

40%

60%

80%

100%

Decrease discretionary spending (e.g. R&D,
advertising, maintenance, etc.)
Delay starting a new project even if this entails a
small sacrifice in value
Book revenues now rather than next quarter (if
justified in either quarter)
Provide incentives for customers to buy more
product this quarter
Draw down on reserves previously set aside
Postpone taking an accounting charge
Sell investments or assets to recognize gains this
quarter
Repurchase common shares
Alter accounting assumptions (e.g. allowances,
pensions etc.)

Percent agree or strongly agree

Fig. 5. Responses to the question: “Near the end of the quarter, it looks like your
company might come in below the desired earnings target. Within what is
permitted by GAAP, which of the following choices might your company make?”
based on a survey of 401 financial executives.

0%

20%

40%

60%

80%

100%

If you take project, you
will exactly hit consensus
earnings
If you take project, you
will miss consensus
earnings by $0.10
If you take project, you
will miss consensus
earnings by $0.20
If you take project, you
will miss consensus
earnings by $0.50

Probability of accepting valuable project

Fig. 6. Responses to the statement and question: “Your company’s cost of capital is 12%.
Near the end of the quarter, a new opportunity arises that offers a 16% internal rate of
return and the same risk as the firm. What is the probability that your company will
pursue this project in each of the following scenarios?” based on a survey of 401 financial
executives.

0%

20%

40%

60%

80%

100%

Is perceived as less risky by investors
Makes it easier for analysts/investors to predict
future earnings
Assures customers/suppliers that business is stable
Reduces the return that investors demand (i.e.
smaller risk premium)
Promotes a reputation for transparent and accurate
reporting
Conveys higher future growth prospects
Achieves or preserves a desired credit rating
Clarifies true economic performance
Increases bonus payments

Percent agree or strongly agree

Fig. 7. Responses to the question: “Do the following factors contribute to your company
preferring a smooth earnings path?” based on a survey of 401 financial executives.

0%

20%

40%

60%

80%

100%

None

Small sacrifice

Moderate sacrifice

Large sacrifice

Percent of respondents

Fig. 8. Responses to the question: “How large a sacrifice in value would your firm make
to avoid a bumpy earnings path?” based on a survey of 401 financial executives.

2%
2%
7%

36%

53%

Institutions
Analysts
Individuals
Rating Agencies
Hedge Funds

Fig. 9. Responses to the statement: “Rank the two most important groups in terms
of setting the stock price for your company” based on a survey of 401 financial
executives.

0%

20%

40%

60%

80%

reputation for transparent reporting
reduces “information risk”
not in mandatory financial disclosures
increases predictability of future
attracts more financial analysts
corrects an under-valued stock price
increases the overall liquidity
increases P/E ratio
reveals skill level of our managers
reduces our cost of capital
reduces risk premium employees want
Percent of respondents

Fig. 10. Responses to the question: “Why make voluntary disclosures?” based on a
survey of 401 financial executives.

100%

avoid setting disclosure precedent
avoid giving away “company secrets”
avoid possible lawsuits
avoid follow-up questions
avoid unwanted regulatory scrutiny
avoid unwanted shareholder scrutiny
0%

20%

40%

60%

Percent of respondents

Fig. 11. Responses to the question: “Limiting voluntary communication of financial
information helps to …” based on a survey of 401 financial executives.

80%

21%

27%
Bad news faster
No difference
Good news faster

52%

Fig. 12. Responses to the question: “Is good news released faster than
bad news?” based on a survey of 401 financial executives.

