                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                   THE GREEN SOLOW MODEL

                                           William A. Brock
                                           M. Scott Taylor

                                         Working Paper 10557
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10557


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2004




We thank Henning Bohn, Brian Copeland, Steven Durlauf, John List, and conference participants at the
UNCTEE 2004 conference at UC-Santa Barbara for helpful comments on an earlier draft. Excellent research
assistance was provided by Pablo Pincheira. Research funding was generously provided by the Vilas Trust,
University of Wisconsin. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by William A. Brock and M. Scott Taylor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
The Green Solow Model
William A. Brock and M. Scott Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 10557
June 2004
JEL No. E1, O0, Q5
                                          ABSTRACT

We demonstrate that a key empirical finding in environmental economics - The Environmental

Kuznets Curve - and the core model of modern macroeconomics - the Solow model - are intimately

related. Once we amend the Solow model to incorporate technological progress in abatement, the

EKC is a necessary by product of convergence to a sustainable growth path. Our amended model,

which we dub the "Green Solow", generates an EKC relationship between both the flow of pollution

emissions and income per capita, and the stock of environmental quality and income per capita. The

resulting EKC may be humped shaped or strictly declining. We explain why current methods for

estimating an EKC are likely to fail whenever they fail to account for cross-country heterogeneity

in either initial conditions or deep parameters. We then develop an alternative empirical method

closely related to tests of income convergence employed in the macro literature. Preliminary tests

of the model's predictions are investigated using data from OECD countries.

William A. Brock
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin
Social Science Building
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53705
wbrock@ssc.wisc.edu

M. Scott Taylor
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin
Social Science Building
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53705
and NBER
staylor@ssc.wisc.edu
