                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      “SUCCESS TAXES,” ENTREPRENEURIAL ENTRY,
                                  AND INNOVATION

                                          William M. Gentry
                                          R. Glenn Hubbard

                                         Working Paper 10551
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10551


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2004




This paper was prepared for presentation at the NBER Conference on Innovation Policy, Washington, DC,
April 13, 2004. We thank Josh Lerner and Scott Stern for their comments, and Anne Dorn for research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by William M. Gentry and R. Glenn Hubbard. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
“Success Taxes,” Entrepreneurial Entry, and Innovation
William M. Gentry and R. Glenn Hubbard
NBER Working Paper No. 10551
June 2004
JEL No. H0, O0
                                         ABSTRACT

Interest in the role of entrepreneurial entry in innovation raises the question of the extent to which

tax policy encourages or discourages entry. We find that, while the level of the marginal tax rate has

a negative effect in entrepreneurial entry, the progressivity of the tax also discourages

entrepreneurship, and significantly so for some groups of households. These effects are principally

traceable to the "upside" or "success" convexity of the household tax schedule. Prospective entrants

from a priori innovative industries and occupations are no less affected by the considerations we

examine than other prospective entrants. In terms of destination-based industry and occupation

measures of innovative entrepreneurs, we find mixed evidence on whether innovative entrepreneurs

differ from the general population; the results for entrepreneurs moving to innovative industries

suggest that they may be unaffected by tax convexity but the possible endogeneity of this measure

of innovative entrepreneurs confounds interpreting this specification. Using education as a measure

of potential for innovation, we find that tax convexity discourages entry into self-employment for

people of all educational backgrounds. Overall, we find little evidence that the tax effects are

focused simply on the employment changes of less skilled or less promising potential entrants.

William M. Gentry                                     R. Glenn Hubbard
Department of Economics                               Graduate School of Business
Williams College                                      Columbia University
Fernald House                                         609 Uris Hall
Williamstown, MA 01267                                New York, NY 10027
wgentry@williams.edu                                  and NBER
                                                      rgh1@columbia.edu
I. Introduction


        Public policy interest in entrepreneurs reflects a number of considerations, from

the role of entrepreneurs in innovative activity to the significance of entrepreneurship in

wealth accumulation (Gentry and Hubbard, 2002) to the relationship between

entrepreneurship and income and wealth mobility (Quadrini, 1999). Entrepreneurship

can take many forms, ranging from small mom-and-pop operations to larger firms backed

by venture capital. Naturally, some entrepreneurial enterprises are more innovative than

others; for example, some entrepreneurs open restaurants that closely follow existing

business models while other entrepreneurs develop new computer software. Despite the

wide range of entrepreneurial activities and their varied contributions to innovation,

entrepreneurship is typically a risky business.1

        The risk entailed in entrepreneurship amplifies public policy concerns about

whether the government can (or should) foster innovation and entrepreneurship. In

addition to specific policies towards entrepreneurship, the tax system can potentially have

positive and negative effects on entrepreneurship. Some tax policies, such as accelerated

capital recovery for small businesses, target entrepreneurs but other tax effects may arise

from general tax policy choices, such as the choice of the shape of the tax rate schedule.

Given the riskiness of entrepreneurship, the shape of the tax schedule may play an

especially important role in affecting entrepreneurial decisions since with a progressive

income successful ventures may face a higher tax rate than unsuccessful ventures face.

        In our previous work (Gentry and Hubbard, 2003), we focus on the effect of the

1
 For evidence that entrepreneurial outcomes are riskier than earnings in employment, see Borjas
(1999), Hamilton (2002), and Gentry and Hubbard (2003).




                                                                                                  1
progressivity of the income tax schedule on the entry decisions of risk averse potential

entrepreneurs. On the one hand, when greater tax progressivity can offer insurance

through the tax system against uninsured idiosyncratic risk, entry may be enhanced (see,

e.g., Kanbur, 1981). On the other hand, the "success tax" feature of a progressive tax

combined with imperfect loss offsets can reduce the likelihood of entry. As we discuss

more fully below, our focus on the progressivity of the tax system departs from earlier

research on taxation and entrepreneurship that mainly focuses on how the level of

taxation affects entrepreneurial activity.

        In our previous (2003) study, using data from the Panel Study of Income

Dynamics (PSID), we estimated the effects of tax progressivity (while controlling for the

level of taxation) in empirical estimations of the probability of entry into self-

employment.2 We found robust results that progressive marginal tax rates discourage

entry into self-employment and business ownership. Those effects are large: The

Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993, which raised the top marginal individual

income tax rate, was estimated to have reduced the probability of entry into self-

employment for upper middle income households by as much as 20 percent. Moreover,

those estimated effects were robust to controlling for differences in family structure,

spousal income, and measures of transitory income.

        An open question in this research is the whether the estimated negative effects of

tax progressivity on entrepreneurship translate into negative effects on innovation. That

is, we do not know whether the tax system discourages entry by potential entrepreneurs

2
 We choose this setup as opposed to examining cross-sectional evidence about who is an entrepreneur
because we use workers’ wage income in constructing our proxy for expected entrepreneurial outcomes.
Obviously, self-employment is only one possible definition of entrepreneurship. While other definitions
may more naturally capture the notion of innovation, data constraints prevent us from using alternative
measures.


                                                                                                          2
who are especially innovative by more or less than it discourages entry by potential

entrepreneurs who want to pursue projects that are not terribly innovative or risky. It is

possible that risk and innovation are positively correlated so that entrepreneurs with more

innovative projects are more concerned with the success tax from progressive tax rates

compared to entrepreneurs who undertake safer, less innovative projects. However, it is

also possible that tax factors play less of a role of innovative entrepreneurs due to the

relative importance of other factors dominating the entry decision.

       Unfortunately, we do not have a direct measure on how innovative particular

entrants into entrepreneurship are. As an indirect test of whether the tax system

discourages particularly innovative types of entrepreneurship, we examine whether our

estimated effects vary by characteristics of the potential entrepreneur that might plausibly

be correlated with how innovative his or her project may be. As characteristics that

might be correlated with how innovative the potential entrepreneur is, we focus on the

potential entrepreneur’s education, industry, and occupation. Our underlying assumption

is that better educated entrepreneurs are more likely to be innovative than less educated

potential entrepreneurs. In terms of industry and occupation, we assume that more

technical industries and occupations (as opposed to, say, service industries and

occupations) are more innovative forms of entrepreneurship. We use industry and

occupation in two ways to proxy for how innovative the entrepreneur is. First, we use the

potential entrepreneur’s industry and occupation at the time of the decision as measures

of his or her predetermined characteristics; we call this the “origin” basis for defining

innovation as a characteristic. Second, we identify innovative entrepreneurs based on

their “destination” industry and occupation. That is, we test whether entry into self-




                                                                                             3
employment in innovative industries or occupations is differentially sensitive to tax

incentives.

       To preview our results, we find some evidence that our estimated effects of tax

progressivity discouraging entry into entrepreneurship vary with our proxies for how

innovative the potential entrepreneur is. In most cases, the sensitivity to the tax

parameters does not vary systematically with our industry and occupation measures of

how innovative the entrepreneur is. There is one notable exception: While the

benchmark estimated effect of tax convexity is negative, entrepreneurs who enter into

innovative industries are essentially unaffected by convexity of the tax system. We also

find that the estimated effects suggest that the negative effect of tax progressivity is larger

(in absolute value) for people with more than a college degree but these estimated effects

are not statistically different from the estimated effects for other education groups.

Overall, however, the results suggest that potential entrepreneurs in innovative industries

and occupations are less likely to enter self-employment than potential entrepreneurs in

other industries and occupations, though these differences are only marginally

statistically significant. One explanation for these negative effects is that the activities

that we define as “innovative” tend to be undertaken in relatively large scale

organizations.

       One overall lesson from our results is that the shape of the tax schedule can have

substantial effects on whether individuals undertake risky investments. The interactions

with measures of innovative occupations and industries do not reveal that these large

effects are either more or less likely in such activities. This possible distortion from

nonlinear tax schedules is not commonly included in discussions of designing tax




                                                                                               4
schedules; the sized of our estimated effects and the importance of entrepreneurship in

the economy suggests that this omission may be important. Furthermore, if the estimated

responsiveness to nonlinearities in tax schedules by individuals carries over to corporate

investment, then loss offset rules and other features of the corporate tax system that

create nonlinearities may generate larger distortions in investment than previous

estimates suggest.

       This paper is organized as follows. Section II briefly surveys previous empirical

work on the effects of taxation on entrepreneurship. Section III describes our basic

empirical specification of the link between progressivity and entry and describes the data.

We present empirical results in section IV. Section V concludes.



II. Taxation and Entrepreneurship

       Tax policy can affect entrepreneurship and innovation through a variety of

channels. Broadly speaking, these channels can be categorized as the effects of general

tax policies, such as a change in marginal tax rates, and targeted tax policies, such as a

tax credit for research. In assessing how general tax policies affect entrepreneurship, the

critical question is why the tax policy would have a differential effect on

entrepreneurship relative to other economic activity (e.g., other occupation or investment

choices). For targeted tax policies, the policy design question is whether the policy can

encourage the desirable behavior without just providing subsidies to projects that would

have taken place without the targeted policy.

       One common hypothesis regarding the differential effects of tax rates on self

employment (one measure of entrepreneurship) and working for someone else is that




                                                                                             5
higher tax rates encourage self employment because self employment provides tax-

sheltering opportunities.3 These tax-sheltering opportunities include both tax evasion

(i.e., it is relatively easy to underreport self-employment income) and tax avoidance (e.g.,

legal opportunities to deduct business-related consumption from one’s taxable income).4

The value of these tax-sheltering opportunities increases with the tax rate which leads to

the hypothesis that higher tax rates increase the level of self employment in the economy.

Previous empirical tests of this hypothesis have yielded mixed results but the bulk of the

evidence suggests a positive relationship between tax rates and self-employment.5

         The tax-sheltering hypothesis provides one channel for general tax policies to

affect the decision to be an entrepreneur. In a series of papers, Carroll, Holtz-Eakin,

Rider and Rosen (2000a, 2000b, and 2001) examine a separate line of inquiry regarding

the role of tax rates and entrepreneurship has been to assess whether taxes affect the

ongoing decisions of entrepreneurs. They examine the effects of the tax reforms of the

1980s on investment and hiring decisions of small businesses and on small business

income growth. These reforms, which reduced marginal tax rates, could differentially

affect small business investment and hiring for several reasons. First, the tax rate

reductions for noncorporate businesses were larger than the tax rate reductions for

3
  Cullen and Gordon (2002) embed this hypothesis in a broad model of the effects of taxes on
entrepreneurship. The general idea, however, has been common through research on taxes and self
employment.
4
  This tax-shelter hypothesis commonly assumes that self-employment provides a tax advantage since the
taxpayer reports a smaller tax base due to underreporting income or taking business deductions for
expenses that have a personal consumption aspect. However, tax rate differentials between being an
employee and being self-employed can also affect the self-employment decision if there are legislated
differences in the tax base between the two employment choices. For example, before 1987, the self-
employed could not deduct the cost of “employer-provided” health insurance.
5
  Bruce (2000) summarizes this literature and estimates how entry decisions into self-employment depend
on both the marginal and average tax rates. The time-series studies of taxes and self-employment include
Long (1982a) and Blau (1987). Several studies using household-level data (e.g., Long, 1982b; Moore,
1983; and Schuetze, 2000) report that higher marginal tax rates are associated with higher probabilities of
self-employment. In our empirical methodology, we control for the level of the marginal tax rate, which
should capture some of these tax-sheltering effects of self employment.


                                                                                                              6
corporate businesses. Second, if the production functions for small businesses include

complementarities between the owner’s effort and the use of other factors (i.e., capital or

hired workers), then any tax effects on the labor supply of existing entrepreneurs can

affect their purchase of other factors. Carroll, Holtz-Eakin, Rider, and Rosen find that

higher tax rates reduce investment, hiring, and small business income growth.

         A third channel for general tax policies to affect entrepreneurship arises because

entrepreneurship is riskier than other occupational choices and innovative investments are

riskier than other possible investments. Thus tax policies that affect the returns to taking

risks can have consequences for entrepreneurship. Given that the returns to

entrepreneurship are relatively risky, the level of the marginal tax rate is unlikely to

capture the complete effect of tax policy on entrepreneurship (see Cullen and Gordon,

2002; and Gentry and Hubbard, 2003).6 To see this, consider the example of a

proportional tax on entry by a risk-neutral individual. Because a prospective entrant

would pay the same rate of tax on earnings from work for a firm and earnings from self-

employment, selection into entrepreneurship would be independent of tax

considerations.7 When investment is risky, the tax effects may depend on the overall

shape of the tax schedule which is not captured by a local measure of the marginal tax

rate. Thus, nonlinearities in the tax system can affect decisions. Our previous research

emphasizes this point, as do the results we present below.



6
   In addition to the effects of tax rates, Cullen and Gordon’s (2002) model includes the option to
incorporate, which is valuable if double taxation of corporate income reduces the tax burden on investment
relative to remaining an unincorporated business. The option value of incorporating depends on being able
to decide on organizational form after learning about the prospects of the business. This creates another
form of nonlinearity in the tax system.
7
  With a constant marginal tax rate, the income tax cannot change the sign of the entry decision for a risk-
neutral potential entrant. This flat tax case is the commonly analyzed analogue to the Domar and Musgrave
(1944) analysis of a proportional tax on a risky investment for risk-averse potential investors.


                                                                                                          7
         Imperfect loss offset provisions provide another example of how relatively risky

projects face a higher tax burden than relatively safe projects face. Rather than focusing

on the riskiness of occupational choices, the analysis of loss offset provisions usually

focuses on corporate investment.8 For corporations, reporting negative taxable income

does not necessarily generate a tax refund. Instead, corporations benefit from losses in

one year by applying a set of tax loss carryback and carryforward rules; these rules

specify a limited time period over which corporations can essentially average their

income. These rules create another form of “success tax” in the tax code, whereby

successful firms face a higher tax rate than unsuccessful firms face. In the extreme, if a

corporation has negative taxable income in a year but does not have sufficient positive

income during the carryback or carryforward period, then it faces a tax rate of zero on the

losses; however, had the corporation been successful it might face the top corporate tax

rate of 35 percent. Altshuler and Auerbach (1990) and Graham (1996) discuss how these

loss offset rules can affect corporate investment and financing decisions.9

         Capital gains taxation provides a final channel through which general tax policy

can affect entrepreneurship. If entrepreneurial activity inherently generates more of its

income as capital gains relative to other employment or investment choices, then lower

capital gains tax rates may increase entrepreneurial activity.10 These capital gains tax

effects are often discussed in the context of the taxation of venture capital. Poterba

(1989) has stressed that the ability of entrepreneurs to shift some of their labor returns

8
  Noncorporate firms face similar issues due to progressive tax rates.
9
  Our empirical methodology does not account for the effects of these loss offset rules because we focus on
the self-employment decision, which often does not entail forming a C-corporation that would face the
corporate tax.
10
   Theoretical predictions about the effects of tax rates on risk taking are complicated due to the tax system
reducing both the mean and the variance of returns. Theoretically, it is possible that a higher tax rate on
risky outcomes will increase the amount of risk taking. Domar and Musgrave (1944) is the seminal paper
on the effects of taxes on risk taking.


                                                                                                             8
from ordinary income to less heavily taxed capital gains income encourages

entrepreneurial ventures; in addition, the capital gains tax can affect the supply of venture

capital to start-up firms.11

         By definition, these effects of general tax policies on entrepreneurship are not the

main objectives of the tax policy process. Presumably, general tax policies are set based

on broad policy goals and the effects on entrepreneurship are only a part of the overall

effects of tax policy. Nonetheless, given the importance of entrepreneurship to the

overall economy, the effects on entrepreneurship could be an important part of the overall

effects of tax policy, especially if the effects on entrepreneurship are large.

         In contrast to the effects of general tax policies on entrepreneurship, specific tax

policies can be targeted at small businesses and innovation. Such targeted tax policies

include: (1) tax credits for research and development;12 (2) favorable depreciation rules

for the capital expenditures of small businesses; (3) reduced capital gains taxes after the

initial public offerings of qualified small business stock;13 and (4) preferential

exemptions for business assets under the estate tax. The goals of these policies are aimed

at promoting specific aspects of entrepreneurship or solving problems associated with

taxing small businesses. For small businesses, Slemrod (2003) argues that these tax


11
   Our empirical methodology does not incorporate the effects of capital gains taxes since we are focusing
on the self-employment decision. It is unlikely than many of the types of self-employed people in our
sample engage in activities financed by venture capital. Also, one can view our methodology as capturing
the tax on the returns that are taken as personal income (and personal consumption) before the business is
sold.
12
   Hall and Van Reenen (2000) survey the design of fiscal incentives for research and development and the
evidence on whether these policies have been effective. They conclude that the evidence suggests that a
dollar in tax credit stimulates an additional dollar of R&D.
13
   Guenther and Willenborg (1999) examine the effects of the reduced tax rate on capital gains on initial
public offerings of qualified small business stock. In 1993, Congress reduced by half the capital gains tax
on small business (defined as having assets of less than $50 million) stock purchased from the corporation
by individuals. Guenther and Willenborg find that this policy increased the price that small businesses
were able to charge for their stock, which is consistent with the tax break lowering the cost of capital for
such businesses.


                                                                                                           9
preferences may offset the high tax compliance costs relative to business size that small

businesses face.



III. Description of Tests and Data

         In a perfect world, tests of effects of tax policy on entrepreneurship would use

household-level panel data, with information on employment, entrepreneurial status and

capital, and measures of the shape of the tax schedule over both households and time.

The hurdle for measuring the relevant shape of the income tax schedule is high, as the

measure of progressivity depends both on provisions of the tax and the ex ante

distribution of outcomes in entrepreneurship. While the former is common across

households, households have access to quite different entrepreneurial opportunities.

Moreover, to link the potential tax policy effects to innovation, we need a measure of

how innovative the different entrepreneurial opportunities are.

         We use data from the PSID, relying on self-employment of the head of the

household as an indicator of entrepreneurship.14 Self-employment is one of many

potential measures of “entrepreneurship.” Our choice of looking at self-employment –

rather than some measure of business ownership or investment – is that our empirical

methodology is based on household characteristics and we need panel data on a large

sample of households. 15 A possible criticism of studying self employment is that self


14
   In the data, “self employment” is defined by the respondent so a self-employed person could work in a
business that is organized for legal and tax purposes in either the corporate or noncorporate form.
15
   For three years (1984, 1989, and 1994), the PSID includes data on asset holdings, including a category
covering business assets. For this smaller sample of years, we can calculate entry into entrepreneurship
based on business ownership rather than self-employment. The estimated effects of tax convexity on entry
into business ownership are similar to the effects on entry into self-employment (Gentry and Hubbard,
2003). However, because the sample size in considerably smaller, the data do not lend themselves to
testing whether the effects are similar across subsets of the population; hence, we define entrepreneurship
as self-employment for testing whether the effects are similar across subsets of the population.


                                                                                                         10
employment does not necessarily capture innovative activity which might be

concentrated in a small number of entrepreneurial firms. While our methodology cannot

be easily adapted to concentrate on small corporations, at a general level, our framework

tests whether decision makers respond to nonlinearities in the tax system and an open

question is whether the responsiveness that we estimate for individuals entering into self

employment can be generalized to comment on how executives in somewhat larger firms

respond to nonlinearities in the tax schedule.

       Our data cover the period 1979-1993. We start in 1979 because our source for

variation in state tax rates begins in the late 1970s; our data end in 1993 because it is the

last year of final release data from the PSID. We include in the sample heads of

households between the ages of 18 and 60 who are in the workforce in consecutive years.

We pool in the sample single men and women and married heads of households; to avoid

issues of the endogeneity of labor force participation, we excluded married women. As

entry is the object of our attention, our sample conditions on working for someone else

(without any self-employment) in the first of the consecutive years for each observation.

"Entry," then, is represented by the household reporting self-employment income in year

t+1. On average each year for our sample, 3.1 percent of households enter self-

employment each year, with the remainder continuing to work for someone else.

       To model entry into entrepreneurship we estimate a probit model for the choice of

each household head i at time t + 1:

       ENTRYi,t+1=f(ei, xt, zt, γt, TAXit),

where e represents educational attainment; x is an individual's earnings potential as an

employee; z captures demographic differences across households; TAX includes an




                                                                                            11
individual's marginal tax rate and a measure of the convexity of the tax schedule faced by

the individual as an entrepreneurial entrant (described below); and γ reflects time-specific

macroeconomic factors.

         More specifically, we represent educational status with indicator variables for

"less than high school education," "some college," "college," and "some post-college

education." 16 As basic controls for the opportunity cost of entry, we include the level and

square labor earnings of the head of the household in year t.17 We also include as a proxy

for wealth (reflecting effects of access to capital on entry) interest and dividend income.18

Finally, we control the level and square of the spouse’s labor earnings in year t (assigning

values of zero for single households).

         Variables in z include the number of children in the household, as well as dummy

variables for five-year age ranges for the head, whether the head is nonwhite, female,

single, a homeowner, living outside a Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area, and

whether the head experienced a marital transition during the year (as a result of marriage,

divorce, or death of a spouse). For x, we include Census-region-specific year dummy

variables to capture trends in entry decisions or effects of aggregate conditions.

Summary statistics for these non-tax-related control variables are provided in Table I.

         Tax variables present several challenges. To construct marginal tax rates, we use

the TAXSIM model of the National Bureau of Economic Research (see Feenberg and




16
   The omitted category is “high school education.”
17
   In Gentry and Hubbard (2003), we conduct substantial sensitivity analysis on this choice of functional
form, with little change in the estimated coefficients of interest.
18
   Again, wealth data are not available on an annual basis in the PSID.


                                                                                                            12
Coutts, 1993). For the household’s predicted future marginal tax rate, we use household

characteristics in year t. and project the tax rate using year t + 1 tax code.19

        The other tax variable central to analysis is the measure of the convexity of the

tax schedule confronting prospective entrepreneurs. Following Gentry and Hubbard

(2003), we use the observed distribution of three-year real wage growth for entrants into

self-employment to capture the range of “successful” and “unsuccessful” outcomes for

entrants. Based on these outcomes, we calculate marginal tax rates that an entrepreneur

would face at various levels of success. Using the observed distribution, we form

weighted averages of these marginal tax rates for "successful" and "unsuccessful"

entrepreneurial outcomes. This measure of convexity has a value of zero if the marginal

tax rate is constant over the range of potential outcomes. Nonzero values occur when

entrepreneurial success or failure changes the household’s marginal tax rate. In taking

this approach, we are relating the distribution of potential entrepreneurial success to

opportunity cost measured by current income. We assume that the variability of the

distribution of rewards to entrepreneurial activity is constant in percentage terms across

households.20

        Specifically, guided by the three-year real wage growth experience of entrants, we

consider four possible "successful" outcomes by entrants, in which labor income

increases by 25 percent (with probability 0.4), 50 percent (with probability 0. 4), 100

percent (with probability 0.15), or 200 percent (with probability 0.05). Similarly, we

consider four possible "unsuccessful" outcomes for entrants, in which labor income falls


19
   To capture the effects of wage growth, we allow earnings to grow by five percent in constructing our
benchmark tax rate.
20
   In Gentry and Hubbard (2003), we relax this assumption. Our estimated effects of tax convexity on the
probability of entry are not driven importantly by differences by sex, marital status, or income group.


                                                                                                       13
by 10 percent (with probability 0.5), 25 percent (with probability 0.3), 50 percent (with

probability 0.15), and 75 percent (with probability 0.05).21 Our basic convexity measure

is the difference between the weighted average of the marginal tax rates if the entrant

succeeds and the weighted average of the marginal tax rates if the entrant is unsuccessful.

         In principle, convexity need not be positively correlated with the level of the

marginal tax rate or with income. Indeed, convexity depends on tax provisions that vary

across households within a state, across similar households in different states and over

time. As we discuss in our (2003) paper, the most important source of variation in tax

convexity is the household’s location on the tax schedule which is determined by sources

of income other than the head of household’s labor income (e.g., spousal income).22

         Our (2003) paper showed that the relationship between entry and household

income is u-shaped, with higher entry probabilities for the lowest and highest income

groups than for middle-income households. This pattern implies that one must control

carefully for household income so that non-tax-related variation in entry probabilities

across income groups is not assigned to tax considerations alone.

         To link these tax effects to innovation, we interact the tax variables with measures

of whether a potential entrepreneur is “innovative.” As proxies for “innovative”

entrepreneurs, we use information on what industry or occupation the potential

entrepreneur is working in when deciding whether to become self-employed. Our

choices of “innovative” industries and occupations are somewhat arbitrary, of course, but

we lacked data on our R&D intensity or other proxies that could be matched to industry


21
   Our (2003) paper presents an analysis of the wage growth distribution and of alternative proxies for the
convexity of the tax schedule faced by a prospective entrant.
22
   We base this conclusion on the fact that a household’s state of residence, its income decile, and the year
under consideration do not explain much of the variation in the tax convexity measure.


                                                                                                           14
or occupational categories in PSID. Our definition of innovative industries includes the

following: machinery (including electrical), transportation equipment, scientific

instruments, chemicals and allied products, petroleum and coal, rubber and plastics,

commercial research, development and testing labs, and computer programming services.

These industries account for 13.8 percent of the observations in our sample. Overall,

workers in these industries are less likely to enter self-employment. The entry rate

among workers in these industries is 2.02 percent compared with an entry rate of 3.47

percent for workers in other industries.

       Our definition of innovative occupations includes computer specialists, engineers,

life and physical scientists, operations and systems researchers, science teachers at the

college and university level, and engineering and science technicians. The occupations

account for 7.8 percent of our sample. As with our innovative industries, the entry rate is

lower for these occupations than for other occupations (2.16 percent compared to 3.38

percent).

       These definitions of innovative potential assume that a worker’s industry or

occupation in year t reflects the chance that he or she will undertake an innovative

activity conditional on entering self-employment. The entry decision could, however,

involve a change in either industry or occupation and this change could be into something

more or less innovative than the entrant’s previous industry and occupation. As an

alternative measure of innovative industry or occupation, we use the individual’s industry

or occupation in year t + 1. For entrants into self-employment, this measure will capture

the industry or occupation in which they are self-employed. For innovative industries,

we use the same definitions as above. However, for innovative occupations, we exclude




                                                                                            15
college and university science teachers as innovative ‘destinations’ for the self-

employed.23 We refer to these proxies for innovative industries and occupations as

“destination” – based since they reflect the industry or occupation into which an entrant

moves; in contrast, we refer to the proxies based on year t variables as “origin” – based

since they capture the field in which the potential entrant starts.

         The destination-based proxies for innovative industries and occupations have an

important statistical disadvantage relative to the origin-based measures, because they are

endogenous. For example, if the tax system discourages entry into particular industries

or occupations, then the data will have fewer such observations and we will not capture

the people who were discouraged from entering. Given this endogeneity, the results

using the destination-based measures should be interpreted with caution.

         As we discuss below, we also allow the estimated effects of the tax system to vary

with the individual’s level of education. In these specifications, we interpret the level of

education as a proxy for the probability that the new entrepreneur will undertake an

innovative activity.



IV. Empirical Results

         We report our basic results in Table 2. The first column of Table 2 presents

estimates of a probit model for entrepreneurial entry in which the non-tax and tax

variables described in section II are included as explanatory variables but interactions

with the measures of being innovative are not included. We report estimated marginal

effects, accompanied by robust standard errors which allow for intertemporal correlation


23
  Of course, given the organization of colleges and universities, workers in these occupations are unlikely
to be self-employed.


                                                                                                         16
for observations from the same household. These base case results are consistent with

those of Gentry and Hubbard (2003). For the tax variables, the estimated effect at the

level of the marginal tax rate on the probability of entry is negative (-0.000314) and

statistically different from zero at the 95 percent confidence level.24 Note that the sign of

the estimated coefficient is not consistent with the argument that high tax rates stimulate

entry to take advantage of tax-avoidance possibilities. The estimated coefficient on the

marginal tax spread, however, is negative (-0.00173) and statistically significantly

different from zero at the 99 percent level. Consistent with the "success tax" prediction

and inconsistent with the "insurance" prediction, convexity of the tax schedule decreases

the likelihood of entrepreneurial entry, all else equal.25

         As a way of interpreting this estimated coefficient, consider a five-percentage-

point reduction in convexity (which is roughly a one standard-deviation reduction in the

convexity measure). This reduction would increase the entry probability by 0.86

percentage points; given a baseline entry probability of 3.2 percent, this reduction in

convexity would increase the entry rate by about 25 percent. Hence the estimated effect

of tax convexity is economically significant.

         In the second through fifth columns of Table 2, we investigate how the estimated

tax effects vary across “non-innovative” and “innovative” potential entrants. The second

and third columns of Table 2 report results for potential entrants from innovative

24
   While this estimated coefficient is statistically different from zero, sensitivity analysis in Gentry and
Hubbard (2003) suggests this result is fragile. For example, alternative functional forms for controlling for
income or alternative definitions of the sample yield estimated coefficients that change in sign and are
typically not statistically different than zero. In contrast, the estimated effects of tax convexity are robust to
a wide variety of sensitivity tests.
25
   In terms of the (unreported) non-tax variables, higher levels of educational attainment are associated with
higher entry probabilities. Once we control for education, current labor earnings have a negative effect on
the likelihood of entry except for very high income households. As a proxy for potential entrants’ wealth,
capital income positively affects the entry probability. Finally, all else equal, minority and female heads
and household are substantially less likely to entry self-employment than white male heads of households.


                                                                                                              17
occupations or moving to innovative occupations, respectively. The fourth and fifth

columns of Table 2 report results with innovative defined based on industry on a origin

and destination basis, respectively. Across all of the specifications, the baseline

coefficient estimates for the level and convexity of the tax system are very similar to

those reported in the first column. Furthermore, the interaction terms are not statistically

significant in three of the four columns; these results suggest that innovative potential

entrants are not affected by the tax incentives differentially than other potential entrants.

        The one exception to this pattern is when we define innovative based on the

occupation for year t + 1, which is the occupation into which the entrant moves. In this

case, the estimated effects of the interactions on the level of the tax rate and the convexity

of the tax system are positive. The overall effect of the tax incentives for these groups is

the sum of the estimated coefficients with and without the interaction. For example, tax

convexity appears to have very little overall effect on entry into the innovative

occupations based on adding together the estimated coefficient on tax convexity

(−0.00169) and the estimated coefficient on the interaction term (0.00175). As

mentioned above, the destination-based results should be interpreted with caution since

the observed year t + 1 occupation is endogenous to the entry decision.26

        Following our (2003) paper, we break our convexity into two parts. The first part

is the difference between the average marginal tax rate on “successful” entrepreneurial

outcomes and the benchmark tax rate; we refer to this part as “upside” convexity. The

second part is the difference between the benchmark tax rate and the average marginal

26
  To see how the endogeneity problem could affect the estimated coefficients, consider the following
extreme example. Suppose that tax convexity reduced the number of entrants into innovative occupations
to zero. It would appear in the destination-based entry data that the variation in tax convexity would be
unrelated to the entry decision when in fact tax convexity has a large negative effect on entry into these
occupations.


                                                                                                        18
tax rate on “unsuccessful” outcomes; we refer to this part as “downside” convexity.

Intuitively, the notion of a convex tax system creating a success tax is more related to

upside convexity than to downside convexity. To examine whether potential

entrepreneurs respond differently to the shape of the tax schedule above versus below

their benchmark tax rate, we allow the estimated effects of tax convexity to vary between

upside and downside convexity. Furthermore, we explore whether the effects of upside

and downside convexity differ with our proxies for innovative potential entrepreneurs.

       Table 3 reports the results from decomposing the tax convexity effect into upside

and downside convexity. The format of Table 3 follows that of Table 2, with the

columns containing different definitions of innovative potential entrepreneurs. As in

Gentry and Hubbard (2003), the negative estimated effect of upside tax convexity is

roughly twice the size as the negative estimated effect of downside convexity, although

both estimated effects are statistically different from zero at the 99 percent confidence

level. Turning to the interactions with innovative occupations, the estimated coefficients

on the interaction terms are small and imprecisely estimated suggesting that the effects of

tax convexity do not differ across our categories of occupations. The same result holds

when we define “innovative” using the potential entrepreneur’s industry of origin. When

we define “innovative” using the destination industry, the estimated coefficients on the

interactions roughly offset the estimated effect of the main tax variable; however, this

offset appears to be stronger for downside convexity than it is for upside convexity,

suggesting that upside convexity may still have a negative effect on entry decisions.




                                                                                            19
        As another a priori measure of how innovative a potential entrepreneur may be,

we consider how the estimated tax effects vary by education groups.27 Education might

be correlated with the responsiveness to tax convexity, especially if the motives for

entrepreneurial entry vary by education groups. For example, entrants with low skill or

educational levels may be "pushed" into self-employment by a spell of unemployment,

while high-skill entrants may enter with the explicit goal of creating wealth. Moreover, if

workers with few skills (as measured by low educational attainment) drive our main

results, then one might be tempted to infer that the estimated tax effects are unrelated to

innovative entrepreneurship.

        To explore this possibility, we interact the tax effects with five educational

attainment groups: (1) less than high school; (2) high school; (3) some college; (4)

college; and (5) post-graduate work. Table 4 reports the results of these interactions. In

the first row of Table 4, the estimated coefficients on the level of the marginal tax rate

across education groups provide an example of the fragility of the estimates of this

parameter; the estimated coefficient varies across education groups and is only

statistically different from zero for people with a high school education.

        In contrast, the estimated effect of tax convexity is consistently negative, of

roughly similar magnitude across education groups, and statistically different from zero

at the 99 percent confidence level for all five groups. In comparing the estimated effect

of tax convexity among the education groups, the largest (in absolute value) estimated

effect is for highly educated people, though we cannot reject the hypothesis that the


27
  Separating households by income levels provides another possible categorization that might be related to
how innovative a potential entrepreneur is. Gentry and Hubbard (2003) reports results for a specification
that allows the tax effects to vary by income quintile (defined on an annual basis). These results do not
suggest any strong relationship between income and the responsiveness to tax convexity.


                                                                                                       20
estimated effects are equal across education groups. Overall, it does not appear that the

negative estimated effect of tax convexity is concentrated among lower education groups

(which one might expect to be less innovative).28



V. Conclusion

        Interest in the role of entrepreneurial entry in innovation raises the question of the

extent to which tax policy encourages or discourages entry. We find that, while the level

of the marginal tax rate has a negative effect in entrepreneurial entry, the progressivity of

the tax also discourages entrepreneurship, and significantly so for some groups of

households. These effects are principally traceable to the "upside" or "success" convexity

and household tax schedule.

        Prospective entrants from a priori innovative industries and occupations are no

less affected by the considerations we examine than other prospective entrants. In terms

of destination-based industry and occupation measures of innovative entrepreneurs, we

find mixed evidence on whether innovative entrepreneurs differ from the general

population; the results for entrepreneurs moving to innovative entrepreneurs suggest that

they may be unaffected by tax convexity but the possible endogeneity of this measure of

innovative entrepreneurs confounds interpreting this specification. Using education as a

measure of potential for innovation, we find that tax convexity discourages entry into

self-employment for people of all educational backgrounds. Overall, we find little

evidence that the tax effects are focused simply on the employment changes of less

skilled or less promising potential entrants.

28
  We also estimated models in which the education groups interacted with upside and downside convexity
separately. The results from this expanded model did not reveal any strong patterns among education and
the estimated effects of upside or downside convexity.


                                                                                                     21
       Three extensions are promising. The first is to investigate more completely which

types of businesses are being discouraged by tax policy. Second, effects of tax policy on

innovation may also come through impacts on individual's willingness to pursue

education or change jobs or careers (see, e.g., Gentry and Hubbard, forthcoming). The

third is to integrate tax policy effects on entrepreneurial decisions in more general models

of savings, investment, and economic growth.




                                                                                         22
                                      References

Altshuler, Rosanne, and Alan J. Auerbach. “The Significance of Tax Law Asymmetries:
       An Empirical Investigation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 105 (February
       1990): 61-86.

Blau, David M. “A Time-Series Analysis of Self-Employment in the United States.”
       Journal of Political Economy 95(June 1987):445-467.

Borjas, George J. “The Wage Structure and Self-Selection into Self-Employment,”
        Mimeograph, Harvard University, 1999.

Bruce, Donald. “Effects of the United States Tax System on Transitions into Self-
       Employment.” Labour Economics 7(2000):545-574.

Carroll, Robert, Douglas Holtz-Eakin, Mark Rider, and Harvey S. Rosen.
        “Entrepreneurs, Income Taxes, and Investment.” in Joel Slemrod, ed., Does Atlas
        Shrug? The Economic Consequences of Taxing the Rich. Cambridge: Harvard
        University Press, 2000a.

Carroll, Robert, Douglas Holtz-Eakin, Mark Rider, and Harvey S. Rosen. “Income Taxes
        and Entrepreneurs' Use of Labor.” Journal of Labor Economics 18(2000b):324-
        351.

Carroll, Robert, Douglas Holtz-Eakin, Mark Rider, and Harvey S. Rosen. “Personal
        Income Taxes and the Growth of Small Firms.” In James M. Poterba, ed., Tax
        Policy and the Economy, Volume 15. Cambridge: MIT Press, 2001.

Cullen, Julie B., and Roger Gordon. “Taxes and Entrepreneurial Activity: Theory and
       Evidence from the U.S.” Working Paper No. 9015, National Bureau of Economic
       Research, June 2002.

Domar, Evsey, and Richard Musgrave. “Effects of Proportional Taxes on Risk-Taking.”
      Quarterly Journal of Economics 59(1944).

Feenberg, Daniel, and Elisabeth Coutts. “An Introduction to the TAXSIM Model.”
      Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 12(1993):189-194.

Feldstein, Martin. “The Effect of Marginal Tax Rates on Taxable Income: A Panel Study
       of the 1986 Tax Reform Act.” Journal of Political Economy 103(June 1995):551-
       572.

Gentry, William M., and R. Glenn Hubbard. “Entrepreneurship and Household Saving.”
       Mimeograph, Columbia University, 2002.

Gentry, William M., and R. Glenn Hubbard. “Progressive Taxation and Job Turnover.”
       Journal of Public Economics, forthcoming.


                                                                                     23
Gentry, William M., and R. Glenn Hubbard. “Tax Policy and Entry into
       Entrepreneurship.” Mimeograph, Columbia University, November 2003.

Graham, John R. “Proxies for the Corporate Marginal Tax Rate.” Journal of Financial
   Economics 42 (1996): 187-221.

Gruber, Jonathan, and Emmanuel Saez. “The Elasticity of Taxable Income: Evidence and
       Implications.” Journal of Public Economics 84(April 2002):1-32.

Guenther, David A., and Michael Willenborg. “Capital Gains Tax Rates and the Cost of
      Capital for Small Business: Evidence from the IPO Market.” Journal of
      Financial Economics 53(1999): 385-408.

Hall, Bronwyn, and John Van Reenen. “How Effective are Fiscal Incentives for R&D? A
       Review of the Evidence.” Research Policy 29(2000): 449-469.

Kanbur, S.M. “Risk Taking and Taxation: An Alternative Perspective.” Journal of
      Public Economics 15(1981):163-184

Long, James E. “Income Taxation and the Allocation of Market Labor.” Journal of Labor
       Research 3(1982a):259-276.

Long, James E. “The Income Tax and Self-Employment.” National Tax Journal,
       35(March 1982b):31-42.

Moore, Robert L. “Self-Employment and the Incidence of the Payroll Tax.” National
      Tax Journal, 36(1983):491-501.

Poterba, James M. “Venture Capital and Capital Gains Taxation.” In Lawrence H.
       Summers (ed.), Tax Policy and the Economy, vol. 3, Cambridge: MIT Press,
       1989, pp. 47-67.

Quadrini, Vincenzo. “The Importance of Entrepreneurship for Wealth Concentration and
      Mobility.” Review of Income and Wealth 45(1999):1-19.

Schuetze, Herb J. “Taxes, Economic Conditions and Recent Trends in Male Self-
       Employment: A Canada-U.S. Comparison.” Labour Economics 7(2000):507-544.

Slemrod, Joel. “Small Business and the Tax System.” Mimeograph, University of
      Michigan, February 2003.




                                                                                      24
                              Table 1: Summary Statistics
                                         Mean         Standard       Minimum        Maximim
                                                      Deviation
 Marginal tax rate (percent)          28.29          11.04         -18.85          69.45
 Marginal tax rate convexity           8.98           5.25         -15.09          49.34
 measure (percent)
 Average tax rate (percent)           16.22          7.50          -19.83          61.51
 Average tax rate convexity            7.03          2.50          -17.18          21.47
 measure (percent)
 Head’s labor earnings ($)            26,249         19,807         30             550,000
 Spouse’s labor earnings ($)           5,882         10,099          0             240,000
 Dividend and interest income ($)     768.17         2,951.49        0             145,000
 Other property income ($)            633.79         4,352.49       -111,000       250,000
 Age (years)                          36.07          10.24          18             60
 Minority (non-white = 1)              0.15           0.35           0              1
 Female head                           0.23           0.42           0              1
 Married (single = 1)                  0.40           0.49           0              9
 Number of children                    0.92           1.15           0              1
 Homeowner (yes = 1)                   0.60           0.49           0              1
 Rural (yes = 1)                       0.39           0.49           0              1
 Less than high school                 0.15           0.36           0              1
 High school                           0.38           0.48           0              1
 Some college                          0.21           0.41           0              1
 College                               0.18           0.39           0              1
 Some post-college education           0.080          0.27           0              1

Source: Authors' calculations based on data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics
(PSID).
Notes: Our sample pools data from 1978 to 1993. The number of observations is 53,151.
The sample includes households for which the head works for someone else in year t and
is not out of the labor force in t + 1. We include only those households whose age is
between 18 and 60 and whose labor income is positive in t. We drop all observations
with average or marginal tax rates larger than 75 percent or smaller than -20 percent. We
also drop observations with average or marginal tax rates for the successful or the
unsuccessful case larger than 75 percent or smaller than –20 percent. The sample is
weighted to reflect oversampling of low-income households.




                                                                                       25
                               Table 2: Effects of Tax Rates and Tax Convexity on Entry Decisions
                                                 -------------------------- Definition of “innovative” based on: --------------------------
                                                               Occupation                                        Industry
                            Base Case                Origin                  Destination               Origin                Destination
Tax rate                    -0.000314*             -0.000320*                -0.000333*              -0.000309*               -0.000346*
                            (0.000147)             (0.000146)                (0.000145)              (0.000146)               (0.000134)
Tax convexity               -0.00173**             -0.00170**                -0.00168**              -0.00171**               -0.00169**
                            (0.000240)             (0.000237)                (0.00024)               (0.000241)               (0.000230)
Tax rate *                                          0.000416                  0.000782                0.000121                 0.00134**
innovative                                         (0.000527)                (0.000530)              (0.000333)               (0.000368)
Tax convexity *                                     0.000325                  0.000160                0.000248                 0.00175**
innovative                                         (0.000933)                (0.000936)              (0.000652)               (0.000666)
Dummy variable for                                 -0.0217                   -0.0259*                -0.0158                  -0.0380**
‘innovative’                                       (0.00777)                 (0.00486)               (0.00718)                (0.00311)
Pseudo-R2                    0.0779                 0.0804                    0.0811                  0.0807                   0.0884

Notes: The sample has 53,151 observations. The reported coefficients are the marginal effects from a probit regression. A * denotes
coefficient estimates that are statistically different from zero at the 95 percent confidence level and ** denotes coefficient estimates
that are statistically different from zero at the 99 percent confidence level. The last four columns reflect different definitions of
“innovative” − by industry or occupation − using year t or year t + 1 data. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. The regressions
also include the following covariates: labor earnings and labor earnings squared for the head of household; labor earnings and labor
earnings squared for the spouse (or zero for unmarried individuals); dividend and interest income; other property income; dummy
variables for five-year age ranges; number of children; dummy variables for race, female-headed households, single, got married
during the year, got divorced during the year, spouse passed away during the year, homeownership, lived outside of an SMSA, less
than a high school education, some college education, college graduate, and post-college education; and Census-region-year effects.




                                                                                                                                              26
                   Table 3: Comparison of Upside and Downside Tax Convexity Effects on Entry Decisions
                                            -------------------------- Definition of “innovative” based on: --------------------------
                                                          Occupation                                        Industry
                           Base Case            Origin                  Destination               Origin                Destination
Tax rate                    -0.000494**       -0.000495**               -0.000514**             -0.000488**              -0.000507**
                            (0.000155)        (0.000154)                (0.000153)              (0.000154)               (0.000145)
Upside tax convexity        -0.00227**        -0.00223**                -0.00226**              -0.00229**               -0.00218**
                            (0.000294)        (0.000294)                (0.000293)              (0.000298)               (0.000284)
Downside tax                -0.00110**        -0.00109**                -0.00102**              -0.00105**               -0.00113**
convexity                   (0.000305)        (0.000303)                (0.000304)              (0.000306)               (0.000295)
Tax rate *                                     0.000351                  0.000955                0.000194                 0.00123**
innovative                                    (0.000581)                (0.000553)              (0.000356)               (0.000363)
Upside tax convexity *                         0.000044                  0.000128                0.000853                 0.00143
innovative                                    (0.00112)                 (0.00140)               (0.000870)               (0.000921)
Downside tax                                   0.000570                 -0.00104                -0.000375                 0.00207*
convexity * innovative                        (0.00122)                 (0.00130)               (0.000957)               (0.000908)
Dummy variable for                            -0.0207                   -0.0271**               -0.0171                  -0.0372**
‘innovative’                                  (0.00878)                 (0.00440)               (0.00713)                (0.00305)
          2
Pseudo-R                     0.0791            0.0816                    0.0825                  0.0820                   0.0895

Notes: The sample has 53,151 observations. The reported coefficients are the marginal effects from a probit regression. A * denotes
coefficient estimates that are statistically different from zero at the 95 percent confidence level and ** denotes coefficient estimates
that are statistically different from zero at the 99 percent confidence level. The last four columns reflect different definitions of
“innovative” − by industry or occupation − using year t or year t + 1 data. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. The regressions
also include the following covariates: labor earnings and labor earnings squared for the head of household; labor earnings and labor
earnings squared for the spouse (or zero for unmarried individuals); dividend and interest income; other property income; dummy
variables for five-year age ranges; number of children; dummy variables for race, female-headed households, single, got married
during the year, got divorced during the year, spouse passed away during the year, homeownership, lived outside of an SMSA, less
than a high school education, some college education, college graduate, and post-college education; and Census-region-year effects.




                                                                                                                                         27
                Table 4: Effects of Tax Rates and Tax Convexity on Entry Decisions, By Educational Attainment
                        ---------------------------------------------- Level of Educational Attainment ----------------------------------------------
                          Less than High
                               School                  High School              Some College             College              Post-College Work
Tax rate                     -0.000091                   -0.000495*               -0.000192             -0.000332                   -0.000342
                             (0.000259)                  (0.000199)               (0.000231)            (0.000257)                  (0.000429)
Tax convexity                -0.00160**                  -0.00175**               -0.00162**            -0.00177**                  -0.00261**
                             (0.000424)                  (0.000341)               (0.000428)            (0.000475)                  (0.000878)
Dummy variable for           -0.00719                         N/A                  0.000131              0.00856                     0.0143
education                    (0.00630)                                            (0.00803)             (0.0117)                    (0.0219)

Notes: The sample has 53,151 observations. The Pseudo-R2 is 0.0785. For the education dummy variables, high school education is
the omitted category. The reported coefficients are the marginal effects from a probit regression. A * denotes coefficient estimates
that are statistically different from zero at the 95 percent confidence level and ** denotes coefficient estimates that are statistically
different from zero at the 99 percent confidence level. The last four columns reflect different definitions of “innovative” − by industry
or occupation − using year t or year t + 1 data. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. The regressions also include the following
covariates: labor earnings and labor earnings squared for the head of household; labor earnings and labor earnings squared for the
spouse (or zero for unmarried individuals); dividend and interest income; other property income; dummy variables for five-year age
ranges; number of children; dummy variables for race, female-headed households, single, got married during the year, got divorced
during the year, spouse passed away during the year, homeownership, and lived outside of a SMSA; and Census-region-year effects.




                                                                                                                                                  28
