                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                CONSCRIPTION AS REGULATION

                                             Casey Mulligan
                                             Andrei Shleifer

                                          Working Paper 10558
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10558


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2004




Pak Shun Ng helped us gather information from The Military Balance and other sources, and gave us good
advice on several other aspects of the project. We have also benefitted from seminars at the University of
Chicago, and discussions over the years with Gary Becker and John Warner. Mulligan gratefully
acknowledges the financial support of the University of Chicago’s Stigler Center for the study of the
Economy and the State. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Casey Mulligan and Andrei Shleifer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Conscription as Regulation
Casey Mulligan and Andrei Shleifer
NBER Working Paper No. 10558
June 2004
JEL No. D72, D73, H56, K2
                                           ABSTRACT

We examine the practice of military conscription around the world from the perspective of two

standard theories, and a new one, which emphasizes the fixed cost of introducing and administering

the draft as a deterrent to its use. We find that, holding the relative size of the military constant,

higher population countries are more likely to use the draft. We also find that French legal origin

countries, which we see as facing lower fixed and variable administrative costs, are more likely to

draft than are common law countries. Conscription does not seem to be influenced by democracy,

and is influenced by the deadweight costs of taxation only in countries with very large militaries.

The results suggest that fixed costs of introducing and administering new regulations may be an

important determinant of their use.

Casey Mulligan
University of Chicago
Department of Economics
1126 East 59th Street, #506
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
c-mulligan@uchicago.edu

Andrei Shleifer
Harvard University
Department of Economics
M9 Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ashleifer@harvard.edu
I. Introduction
       Every military in the world employs at least some professional volunteer soldiers. Somewhat
fewer than half of all countries rely entirely on such volunteers, while the rest draft some of their
military personnel. According to the International Institute for Strategic Studies, in 1995 the
militaries of the countries that used conscription ranged from 25% draftees in South Korea and
Denmark to 89% draftees in Switzerland and Senegal. Why is there so much variation across
countries in the importance of conscription in meeting military manpower needs?
       Traditional public economics answers this question by postulating a tradeoff between
selection (the draft inducts the wrong people into the military) and deadweight costs of taxation (as
a tax in kind, the draft saves on the cash costs of a military that must be otherwise financed through
distortionary taxes). This approach to the draft has been pursued, among others, by Friedman
(1967), Lee and McKenize (1992), Ross (1994), and Warner and Asch (1995), and may explain why
conscription is more likely when the demand for troops is high. But as both Ross (1994) and our
work below show, this approach has been otherwise unsuccessful in explaining the variation of
conscription patterns across countries.
       In this paper, we analyze conscription from the perspective of startup and enforcement costs.
Specifically, we argue that the organization of conscription relative to the already available
volunteer army requires substantial incremental fixed costs. Some of these costs are political:
interest groups favoring conscription must organize and translate their agenda into law. Other fixed
costs of running the draft are administrative. A conscription law must be drafted and passed. A
census of potential draftees must be prepared. If the draft is universal, offices must be set up
throughout the country and staffed with draft officials, medical doctors (who deal with medical
exemptions), and enforcers who pursue draft dodgers. If the draft allows for various exemptions or
replacements, further staff must be recruited to administer these procedures. Relative to an all
volunteer army, where potential recruits show up and willingly cooperate with all procedures,
conscription demands a substantial fixed cost on top of what is already being spent recruiting
volunteers.
       The emphasis on the fixed costs of organizing the draft follows from our earlier work on
regulation, which modeled the fixed cost of drafting and enforcing new laws (Mulligan and Shleifer
2003). This theory yields two fundamental implications. First, it predicts that countries with larger
                                                                       Conscription as Regulation – 2


populations, which can spread these fixed costs over more people, are more likely to have
conscription, holding constant their military manpower needs. Second, it predicts that countries for
which the incremental administrative fixed costs are lower are more likely to have conscription.
        The first prediction can be tested using data on population. But how would one compare
administrative costs of enforcing additional regulations, such as conscription, across countries? Our
proxy for the level of incremental administrative costs is the historical origin of a country’s laws.
In a series of papers, La Porta et al. (1997, 1998, 1999) argue that legal systems of most countries
have relatively few “origins.” These origins include the laws of England (common law), and civil
laws of France, Germany, Scandinavia, and U.S.S.R..            From the mother countries, the legal
traditions have been transplanted through conquest (mostly by Napoleon and the Soviets) and
colonization. As a consequence, legal developments of most countries in the world have been
shaped by their involuntarily acquired legal systems. In particular, in their legal structures, common
law countries tend to rely to a greater extent on contracts and decentralized dispute resolution in
courts, and civil law countries to a greater extent on regulation and even state ownership.
        But transplantation did not just affect the codes available at the time; it influenced the
patterns of social control of business used in countries from different legal origins for reasons of
“regulatory complementarity.” Once a country used a particular way of meeting a social goal, the
human capital of its administrators and the structure of its existing institutions made it cheaper to
use a similar approach in a new area of government intervention. As a consequence, compared to
the common law countries, civil law countries tended to use heavier government regulation of a
whole range of activities from entry by new firms (Djankov et al. 2002) to labor markets (Botero
et al. 2003). By relying on the administrative apparatus of the state to solve some social problems,
the French and other civil law countries tended to rely on it to address others as well.
        This logic is directly relevant to conscription. Following Woloch (1994), we argue below
that the French administrative state – because it was already so pervasive – lowered the incremental
cost of organizing the draft (in France, in the countries that Napoleon brought his laws to, and in
their colonies). As a consequence, these countries should be more likely to use conscription than
the common law countries. To the extent that legal origin predicts the reliance on the draft, then,
it is a direct test of the enforcement theory of conscription, that puts the fixed costs at center stage.
Below, we examine this prediction empirically.
        In the next section, we summarize the available theories of the draft, and spell out our
                                                                       Conscription as Regulation – 3


approach. We also provide some historical background on the early modern use of conscription
under Napoleon. Section III presents our findings. Section IV concludes.


II. Theories of Conscription
        Prior to Napoleon, armies were typically staffed by voluntary enlistments or by impressment
– the forced recruitment of individuals with little or no compensation or regulation of service terms
or length. In contrast to impressment, we define conscription or “the draft” to be the legal and
regulated form of forced labor for the state, usually in the military, but sometimes in other activities,
such as jury duty.1 In recent years, only very few countries have used impressment, and most
militaries are staffed by some combination of volunteers – present in every military – and conscripts.
Among the 68 countries in our sample having conscription (and reporting data on the number of
draftees), the typical military force is about half volunteer and half drafted. Hence, the relevant
policy question is not a volunteer versus a draft system, but whether to have a draft system to
supplement the volunteer system. With this in mind, for brevity’s sake we refer to the all-volunteer
systems as “volunteer” and mixed systems as “conscription.”
        How should and do polities decide whether or not to add conscription? One theory
emphasizes the trade-off between the selection and the deadweight costs of taxation (e.g., Friedman,
1967; Lee and McKenzie, 1992; Ross, 1994; Warner and Asch, 1995). Obviously, any soldier has
an opportunity cost regardless of how he is recruited, but the volunteer system compensates him at
least for his opportunity cost,2 and the compensation is financed with taxes. For the usual
“deadweight cost” reasons, taxes cost taxpayers more than they deliver to the Treasury, so that on




        1
         The Old Testament mentions impressment “There was hard fighting against the
Philistines all the days of Saul; and when Saul saw any strong man, or any valiant man, he
attached him to himself.” (1 Samuel 14:52), but also mentions regulatory ingredients for
conscription, such as a census of able men aged 20+ (Numbers 1:1-3), and exemptions from
military service (Deuteronomy, chapter 20). In Sweden, Prussia, and the United States, some of
the manpower policies prior to Napoleon may also be described as conscription (Mjoset and Van
Holde, 2002, pp. 17f; Kestnbaum, 2000, but see Carleton, 1968, for another interpretation).
        2
        If the military cannot price discriminate, all personnel in the volunteer system are paid
the opportunity cost of the soldier with the highest opportunity cost.
                                                                      Conscription as Regulation – 4


this account a volunteer system may be more expensive.3 The volunteer system is also selective,
because it enlists only the qualified persons with lowest opportunity cost. If conscription selects less
well (as defined by efficiency or some other criteria), then there is a tradeoff between deadweight
costs and selection. Proxies for tax deadweight costs such as the amount of nonmilitary government
spending, the age of the population, and economic openness (which may be associated with higher
deadweight costs) or economic development (which may be associated with lower deadweight costs)
should help predict which countries use the draft.
        The theory presumes that conscription selects sufficiently different recruits than does a
volunteer system, or else there is no real tradeoff. In theory, the two systems could select the same
recruits if draftees were allowed to pay a commutation fee, or supply a substitute, as an alternative
to serving their time with the military, because persons with high opportunity costs would pay the
fee or purchase a substitute and the military would be left with the low opportunity cost persons.
Even without these fees, a military draft does not have to be random or universal, but could try by
regulation (namely a list of rules for exemptions and deferments) to mimic market selection (Warner
and Asch, 2001, p. 173). Indeed, many conscription systems exempt women, college students,
fathers, disabled, sons from rich families, older people, and others who might be expected to have
a comparative advantage in civilian activities. But the theories assume without explanation that in
practice conscription does not select enough, and hence model it as random or universal selection.
        A second theory holds that economic development and democratization are associated with
an increased disdain for arbitrary and capricious use of force by the state, which moves policy away
from impressment, although the substitute could be either conscription or a volunteer system. But
if citizens are more collective-minded in a democracy, they would be more willing to serve as
conscripts, raising the likelihood of the draft (Levi 1997). People may also desire the military to
be a cross-section of the polity, a goal which may be more easily achieved with universal or random
selection than with market selection. Hence, democracy might help predict both the use of




        3
        Conscription also has deadweight costs, as members of the draft-eligible population
emigrate or change their behavior in order to qualify for educational, occupational, and other
exemptions (President’s Commission, 1970, p. 33). These costs could be large for random
selection systems, because they violate the principle of tax smoothing. Sjaastad and Hansen
(1970) estimate large deadweight costs of the draft for the U.S. in the 1960's.
                                                                      Conscription as Regulation – 5


conscription and its “fairness.”4 Along different lines, but with the same prediction, the President’s
Commission (1970, p.25) suggests that democracies may be more likely to draft because the costs
of a draft are concentrated on a minority of voters. These predictions are testable by asking whether
democracy predicts the incidence of conscription.
       The third theory of conscription, which is new to this paper, emphasizes the startup and
enforcement costs of alternative public responses to social problems. Different public policies for
addressing social needs, including raising a military, are associated with very different marginal and
fixed social costs. For example, on the margin of how many military personnel to recruit, the
volunteer system has rising marginal costs both in terms of opportunity and deadweight costs.5 The
marginal costs of conscription-with-buyout is definitely lower, because it has the same opportunity
cost and no deadweight cost of taxes. The marginal costs of other conscriptions systems may also
be lower.
       But conscription also has significant fixed adoption, administration, and enforcement costs.
The adoption costs include reaching a political consensus on not only how many people should serve
in the armed forces, but the fraction of the force to be drafted, the length of service, the population
subject to the draft, occupation-specific terms of service, exemptions, deferrals, and possibilities for
commutation fees, substitutes, and conscientious objection. The political costs may be especially
significant for conscription policy because some of the issues involved are so controversial.
Administrative and enforcement costs include deriving algorithms for enumerating the population
subject to the draft, setting up and staffing offices throughout the country to administer the draft,
verifying qualifications for exemptions, including medical ones, establishing institutions specializing
in catching draft dodgers, and policing the system itself to assure fairness and avoid corruption.
       Conscription transforms some of the marginal costs of the volunteer army into fixed costs,



       4
         Levi (1997, pp. 103, 106) admits that the time series data are less than fully supportive
of this hypothesis, because the movement from replacement and commutation systems to
universal or random selection may have preceded democratization. Mulligan, Gil, and Sala-i-
Martin (2004) explain why democracies choose the same policies as non-democracies.
       5
         If the volunteer system has setup and enforcement costs that are “fixed” in the sense of
being independent of the number of recruits, they are irrelevant for our analysis because all
militaries have a least some volunteers. We also believe that the fixed costs of volunteer labor
are small, because volunteer labor is hired by very small businesses and households.
                                                                      Conscription as Regulation – 6


especially for the less selective conscription systems. For example, a small volunteer army might
maintain just a few recruiting stations (e.g., perhaps just one located near the military headquarters),
and plan for the training of a particular type of enthusiastic and able recruits. As the volunteer force
grows, it would open additional recruiting stations, learn to train and integrate a more heterogeneous
group of recruits, and incur the political costs associated with such changes in the force composition.
These additional recruiting costs are marginal. But a universal or random conscription system pays
these costs regardless of the number of troops to be recruited, because the system recruits a cross-
section of the population.
       The fixed costs of conscription vary systematically with the type of conscription system, and
are not limited to budgeted governmental costs. We mentioned the political mobilization costs, but
there are also private sector costs, especially under the more complex conscription systems with
commutation fees, replacement, and various exemptions.6 A replacement system creates a demand
for an infrastructure helping to match draftees with potential replacements, and private sector
intermediaries were common in the U.S. and several European countries using replacement systems
(Moore, 1924, pp. 30f; Levi, 1997, p. 102). Commutation fee systems create a demand for financing
the fee. Insurance markets even paid awards, in the amount of the commutation fee or market
replacement price, to insured persons who were chosen by the draft lottery (Levi 1997, p. 89, 91)!
These private behaviors then create additional regulatory costs for the government.7 For example,
under the replacement system, persons have been known to contract themselves as a substitute (in
exchange for the substitute fee), go AWOL, and then contract to substitute for another conscript
(Moore, 1924, pp. 32f).
       Consider a simple mathematical model of the choice of one of four military manpower
systems: all-volunteer, universal or random conscription, conscription with exemptions, and
conscription with replacement or commutation. We index these methods i = v, u, x, and r,


       6
         Levi (1997, p. 100) concludes “The costs to the government, bureaucratically and
politically, of administering the draft were high enough without the added costs created by
commutation.”
       7
        Levi (1997, pp. 89-92) explains how “[insurance schemes were] prone to fraud and
corruption, ... and the actions of agents who offered the insurance and located replacements
became even more suspect over time” and how “government was called upon to regulate a
market quite difficult to regulate.”
                                                                               Conscription as Regulation – 7


respectively (for volunteer, universal, conscription with exemptions, and conscription with
replacements). c(m) denotes the rising average opportunity cost of recruiting the fraction m of the
population with the lowest opportunity cost. Recruitment method i has total cost including fixed
adoption, administration, and enforcement costs denoted ρi, as well as opportunity, deadweight, and
other variable costs denoted mNδic(m). N denotes total population, and m military personnel per
capita, so mN denotes total military personnel. δic(m) is the net average variable cost per soldier,
which includes the opportunity cost (δi $ 1), and depends on the recruitment method. We assume:

                                    0 ' ρv < ρu < ρx < ρr
                                                                                                          (1)
                                    δv > δu > δx > δr ' 1



The ordering of the ρ’s in (1) was already explained, although our theory does not strongly favor it
over an ordering ρv < ρu < ρr < ρx because the exemption system could have the highest fixed cost
depending on the nature of the exemptions and the resources needed to regulate the market for
substitutes or commutation fees. Under some theories, the variable cost of recruiting under the
replacement system is simply the opportunity cost c(m) – hence we set δr = 1 – and the variable cost
of the volunteer system is the sum of the opportunity and deadweight-tax costs, so δv is larger than
one and reflects the deadweight costs of taxes and the market condition that the marginal soldier
must be paid his opportunity cost.8 We assume that δu and δx are in the interval (1,δv) because these
conscription systems (probably) economize on the deadweight costs of taxes but imperfectly select
soldiers according to their opportunity cost.
       We also assume that each of the conscription systems achieves the lowest cost for some m,
N. If not, we would not observe one (or more) of the systems because it would be strictly dominated
by some combination of the others. With this assumption, the recruitment system choice can be
displayed graphically, as in Figure 1.9 The optimal recruiting cost curve is the envelope of the cost
curves for each system, which means that size as measured by m or N affects the type of system in


       8
        Allow for tax deadweight costs to be convex in m does not affect the qualitative
implications of our model.

       9                                          ρu          ρx & ρu       ρr & ρx
        Algebraically, our assumption means               <             <             .
                                                δv & δu       δu & δx       δx & 1
                                                                     Conscription as Regulation – 8


a particular order. For the smallest populations and forces, the volunteer system is the least costly.
After that, universal or random conscription minimizes cost. Larger forces and populations use
systems with exemptions, and the largest systems with replacements or commutations.




                           Figure 1 The Military Recruitment System,
                     as Determined by the Size and Composition of the Force

       The previous economic theories have set all of the ρ’s equal to zero, so for them the size of
the force matters only because c(m) rises with m. Although our model has N’s effect smaller than
m’s, N’s effect is still positive. Higher population countries are more likely to have conscription,
and, conditional on having conscription, more likely to have the type with exemptions or
replacements. In our view, m and N matter even with c held fixed because of scale economies in the
adoption, administrative, and enforcement costs.
                                                                     Conscription as Regulation – 9


       There is an additional, perhaps more surprising, implication of the model. Suppose we
compare two countries, and the first has lower fixed costs of administering any incremental
government regulation, including the different kinds of conscription, perhaps because it has already
established an extensive apparatus of government control that can be utilized for conscription as
well. Then the theory predicts that the country with lower fixed costs is more likely to use
conscription, and, conditional on using conscription, more likely to use the type with exemptions
or replacements. So how can we compare fixed costs across countries?
       Motivated by the work of Woloch (1994) on Napoleonic conscription in France, we suggest
that legal origin of a country’s laws is a proxy for the level of fixed regulatory costs. Woloch
describes how, following the Revolution, France established a pervasive administrative state. The
country was divided into 80 departments, which were further subdivided down to the village level,
with each level administered through a vertical hierarchy and directly accountable to the center. The
administration was involved in budgets, police, roads, courts, primary education, hospitals, and some
social welfare. Given the level of penetration of the state administration into national life, Woloch
argues, draft administration was only an extension of the existing structures. “By Napoleon’s
choice, conscription constituted the ultimate frontier of state building, of the articulation of the
administrative state projected by the Revolution.... Conscription became the state’s obsession, the
preoccupation of officials up and down the government hierarchy...”(p. 433). Conscription,
according to Woloch, was tremendously successful in raising armies. In our, more prosaic, view,
conscription was used successfully in France because the initial administrative innovations created
sufficiently invasive governmental structures that could then run the draft without prohibitively
expensive incremental mechanisms of assuring compliance.
       We argue that the French legal origin is, in part, a shorthand for this
administrative/regulatory approach to addressing social problems (Djankov et al. 2003). Through
Napoleonic conquest and colonization, it was then transplanted to much of continental Europe, all
of Latin America, North and West Africa, and parts of Asia. Scandinavian, German, and Socialist
civil law countries have developed similar approaches to social intervention. England and its
colonies, in contrast, did not develop such an administrative state at the early stages, and therefore
we take common law to be a shorthand for the more decentralized approach to solving social
problems. If the transplantation of the administrative/regulatory approach to addressing social
problems reduces the fixed (and perhaps also the variable) costs of dealing with incremental ones,
                                                                    Conscription as Regulation – 10


then our theory predicts that common law countries should be less likely to draft than civil law
countries. Moreover, conditional on using conscription, common law countries should be less likely
to allow exemptions and replacements than do civil law countries.
       Our theory adds fixed costs (ρ’s) to the variable costs (δ’s) of the previous economic
theories. Obviously, our theory looks most like the previous ones when the variable costs are large
relative to the fixed costs, as in countries with large armed forces. Perhaps this, together with the
fact that most countries have small armed forces, explains why it has been hard to find an important
cross-country correlation between conscription and proxies for the deadweight cost of taxes (see
Ross, 1994, and our estimates below). Perhaps this, together with the fact that the deadweight cost
of taxes has fallen secularly, also helps explain why there has been a secular decline in the wartime
use of replacement and commutation conscription systems (these were common in the 19th century,
and eliminated from every European country in the first half of the 20th century). This also suggests
that deadweight costs would matter more in cross-country samples selected on the basis of large
force sizes – a prediction which we verify below.




III. Quantifying Military Manpower Systems
III.A. Data Sources
       We quantify military recruitment policy in a variety of dimensions, using a variety of
sources. Our first source is the 1985, 1990, and 1995 editions of the annual The Military Balance
from The International Institute for Strategic Studies. Its measures include whether or not people
were drafted into military service, the number of months of service required, number of people in
the Armed Forces, and number of conscripts in the Armed Forces. We cross-checked the 1995
edition with the United Nations Commission on Human Rights (1997, 1999) and War Resisters’
International (WRI, 1998), and found potential discrepancies for 33 countries. For each of those
countries, we checked the entire history from 1985 to 1995 with 1upinfo.com’s encyclopedia and
child-soldiers.org, and resolved the discrepancy as explained in a separate appendix (Ng and
Mulligan, 2004).
       For the countries with conscription, we obtain information about selection procedures from
War Resisters’ International (1998). This source indicates whether it is legal, or commonly
practiced, for conscripts to buy themselves out of military service. It also indicates whether college
                                                                     Conscription as Regulation – 11


(or, in a few cases, high school) students are exempt, have shorter terms of service, or have more
flexible terms of service. All of our sources are non-governmental organizations. Perhaps this gives
our data objectivity in some dimensions, but these organizations may also have agendas like world
peace, toppling dictators, or publicizing human rights violations.
       For the purposes of coding a country-year as having conscription or not, two judgements are
required. First, does a country-year have conscription merely because it has some of the legal
components in place (like a clause in the constitution or, as in the U.S. in 2003, a system of
registering the names of young men), or does it actually have conscripts serving? Our data indicates
the latter more easily, which fortunately may be the better judgement theoretically. We thus code
a country-year as no conscription if (1) The Military Balance (supplemented with our other sources
as indicated by the appendix) indicates no conscription in any sense of the word, (2) The Military
Balance deems the policy lax enough to report “no conscription,” which it appears to do when a
conscription law and/or partial system exists but there are few if any conscripts in the armed forces,
or (3) our other sources clearly indicate that there were zero conscripts.
       The second judgement is whether to distinguish the “modern” legally based form of
conscription from impressment or press-ganging. For the purposes of our model, legal conscription
is very different than impressment because only the former has the political and administrative costs
of drafting, adopting, and enforcing the legislation and should thereby be coded as conscription.
This distinction is less important for other models, and ideally we would have a separate coding
scheme which classified impressment systems as “having conscription” rather than not having it.
In practice, we are at the mercy of our sources, which (especially the Military Balance) might not
mention the practice of conscription in countries where it has no legal basis, and/or impressment and
other informal means are used on a small scale.10 However, even though impressment was common
historically, we suspect that in today’s world impressment is overwhelmingly dominated by
volunteer systems and legal conscription as sources of military manpower.




       10
        According to WRI (1998), impressment was used in Afghanistan under the Taliban,
Burma, Cambodia, Guatemala, and the Democratic Republic of Congo before their
independence. WRI reports that impressment as well as legal conscription are used in Angola,
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Columbia, Georgia, Lebanon, Libya, Paraguay, Peru, Sudan, Tajikistan,
and Venezuela. Rebel groups in some countries use impressment.
                                                                   Conscription as Regulation – 12


       The fraction of countries with conscription fell slightly from 63% in 1985 to 59% in 1995.11
This decline is somewhat greater if we exclude the new countries created by USSR’s breakup (many
of which have conscription). It might also be greater if we looked at the period 1985-2004 during
which many Western European countries dropped conscription.
       WRI says that 95 countries have a draft c. 1996 and, among them, most (56) have easier
terms of service for college (or sometimes high school) students. 32 of the 56 permit students to
postpone their service – a nice benefit in Western Europe where most ended up dropping
conscription within a few years. 13 countries have shorter terms for college students, and 11
countries exempt them altogether.12 Fewer countries seem to have conscripts buying their way out
of service. 13 countries, including China, Iran, Iraq, and Turkey, have legal provisions for buying
out.13 At least 17 countries are reported to have large numbers of conscripts paying bribes to obtain
fake medical records, military service certificates, or other exemptions. Military Balance says that
two countries (Iceland and Panama) had zero troops (and no conscription) 1985-95; for simplicity
we exclude them, although we have verified that their exclusion does not affect our results.
       Following Ross (1994), we use the size of the Armed Forces as a proxy for (the inverse of)
the deadweight cost of conscription – namely that a draft system is less likely to select the wrong
people when most of the people are going to serve anyway. In our analysis, there is another reason
why conscription is better for a larger force – the fixed cost of the draft system is amortized over
more draftees. Our explanatory variables also include a variety of country characteristics like
economic development, government spending, population age, etc., whose sample statistics are
shown in our appendix and whose sources are described by Mulligan and Sala-i-Martin (2004).




       11
         WRI (1998) reports 56% of countries having conscription c. 1996. The percentages
reported in the text are the year coefficients from a regression of conscription on country and
year dummies, in order to account for the addition of some countries to the same in 1990 and
1995.
       12
        Three countries actually have tougher military service for college students (Philippines,
Tanzania, and Uganda), where military training is part of the college curriculum.
       13
         For 2 or 3 of the 13 countries, it is unclear whether the buying out was legal, or
common and illegal. Nine of the 13 buyout countries are among the 56 countries having special
provisions for college students.
                                                                      Conscription as Regulation – 13


III.B. Predictors of Manpower Systems
        Table 1 displays cross-country regressions of having conscription on population, legal origin,
development, etc. The first three columns are probit regressions, measuring conscription from
Military Balance for 1985, 1990, 1995, respectively. The fourth and fifth columns use WRI. THe
last three columns are OLS regressions, with the dependent variable being the fraction of the
available three years that the country had conscription (i.e., takes on values 0, .33, .67, 1). The sixth
column adds the control for per capita income, the seventh compares just French and English legal
origin countries. In all specifications, we control for the size of the armed forces relative to the
population of males aged 15-24. We are thus looking at the decision of whether to add conscription
to a volunteer army, taking manpower needs as given.14 As we explain further below, this control
may account for international differences in war risks, differences in the belligerency of neighbors,
etc., because they affect the size of the military, but otherwise not the way in which it is recruited.
        Specifications (1)-(7) show a huge effect of legal origin on conscription, with the likelihood
of conscription 50 percentage points lower in common law countries than in other countries. This
result is broadly supportive of our prediction, and of the interpretation of legal origin as, in part, a
shorthand for fixed costs of incremental regulation.15 Population has a large effect and, as expected,
in the opposite direction of common law. This result, as well, is predicted by our theory.
        By themselves, specifications (1)-(4) may be hard to interpret because they exclude several
very small countries neglected by POLITY IV (2000), and do not control for GDP per capita. On
the first point, we note that most countries missing from POLITY are also missing from The Military
Balance. Eight of them are studied by WRI, and only one has conscription. Regression (5) includes
the five countries missing from POLITY but found in The Military Balance (and thereby having a
measure of armed forces), and the coefficient estimates are essentially the same as in specification
(4). On the second point, notice that specifications (6)-(7) exclude, among other things, the ten
countries missing from the Penn World Tables. Since all ten of these countries draft and eight are


        14
         But note that interpreting the magnitude of the coefficient on armed forces requires an
estimate of the degree to which armed forces affect conscription, rather than conscription
affecting the size of the military.
        15
        Levi (1997, p. 92) explains how “The costs to government of implementing and using
replacement decreased in some ways over time, as central government enlarged its bureaucratic
and coercive reach.”
                                                                    Conscription as Regulation – 14


communist, excluding them has a dramatic effect on the communist coefficient but provides no
convincing evidence that GDP per capita affects conscription.
       What about the other theories of conscription? Specifications (1)-(7) already suggest that
the deadweight costs of taxes do not explain much of the cross-country variation. For example,
countries with more elderly are expected to have higher deadweight costs of taxes, because their
governments spend a lot (especially on public pensions), but the partial correlation between
conscription and the elderly population share is statistically insignificant. Richer countries probably
collect taxes more efficiently, but they are not much more likely to use an all-volunteer system.
However, specification (8) shows that both of these potential proxies for the deadweight costs of
taxes are correlated with conscription – in the expected direction – for the sample of 32 countries
recruiting more than 10% of military-aged males. Perhaps this is consistent with the hypothesis that
conscription is more sensitive to deadweight costs in countries with very large armed forces.
       Tables 2 and 3 use the WRI data to explore determinants of the various kinds of conscription
systems. As discussed above, manpower systems can be ordered according to their adoption and
enforcement costs: 100% volunteer, plain conscription, conscription with college exemptions (but
no buyouts), and conscription with buyouts. The first thing to notice from Table 2's cross-tab is that
only nine (of 48) British legal origin countries had conscription in 1996. All nine of these had a
pretty plain system, namely without buyouts, exemptions for college students, or shorter service
terms for college students. Only 2 of the nine (Israel and Sudan) allowed students special provisions
for postponing their service. These results, incidentally, are inconsistent with an alternative
interpretation of British legal origin, namely that it proxies for greater pro-market sentiment, and
therefore a lower incidence of conscription. If that were so, we would expect common law countries
to allow more pro-market exceptions, such as buyouts. In fact, they allow fewer of them, consistent
with the fixed cost, but not the pro-market sentiment, interpretation.
                                                  Table 1: Conscription across Countries, 1985-96
                                            (dependent variable is fraction of years having conscription)a
independent variables                                             (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)           (8)
British legal origin                                            -0.58        -0.51        -0.52        -0.48        -0.52        -0.48        -0.48          -0.09
                                                                (0.09)       (0.10)       (0.09)       (0.09)       (0.08)       (0.08)       (0.08)         (0.18)
log(population)/10                                               0.94         1.01         1.01         0.98         1.03         0.70         0.94           0.67
                                                                (0.35)       (0.33)       (0.36)       (0.36)       (0.33)       (0.22)       (0.25)         (0.41)
armed forces per male aged 15-24, 1985-95, log                   0.16         0.16         0.13         0.15         0.16         0.15         0.16           0.41
                                                                (0.06)       (0.06)       (0.06)       (0.06)       (0.06)       (0.05)       (0.05)         (0.16)
communist dummy                                                  0.25         0.32         0.10        -0.28        -0.17         0.08
                                                                (0.11)       (0.08)       (0.17)       (0.14)       (0.14)       (0.11)
democracy index, 1975-90b                                       -0.06         0.01        -0.24        -0.46                      0.04         0.06           0.17
                                                                (0.20)       (0.19)       (0.21)       (0.21)                    (0.13)       (0.15)         (0.22)
fraction of population aged 65+, 1975-95                         0.30        -0.21         1.74         3.18        -0.38         0.76        -0.15           4.23
                                                                (2.05)       (1.99)       (2.11)       (2.06)       (1.34)       (1.32)       (1.67)         (1.90)
real GDP per capita 1975-89, log                                                                                                 -0.09        -0.11          -0.34
                                                                                                                                 (0.06)       (0.06)         (0.10)
pseudo-R2 or adjusted-R2                                          .39          .38          .31          .28          .28          .40          .38           .41
conscription source, years                                     MB ’85       MB ’90       MB ’95             WRI ’96                        MB 1985-95
samplec                                                                           POLITY                              Full        GDP         Fr-Brit      mobil’d
countries                                                         132          133          129          133          138          126          105            32
Notes: aIf just one year is included, regression is a probit with coefficient reported as marginal effects on the probability of conscription. Otherwise OLS (and
“pseudo-R2” row is adjusted R-squared);
b
  democracy is on 0-1 scale, and averaged 1975-90;
c
  Full sample is selected on the basis of available measures of conscription, population and troops, and excludes Soviet and Yugoslav republics other than Russia and
Yugoslavia. POLITY sample includes Full countries found in POLITY IV (2000). GDP sample includes POLITY countries found in the Penn World Tables.
Mobilized sample includes GDP countries with armed forces per male > 0.10. Fr-Brit sample includes POLITY countries that have either French or British legal
origin.
                                                                                 Conscription as Regulation – 16




                             Table 2: Legal Origin and Conscription Systems
                                 (number of countries in each category)
                                                                                 British legal      other
     conscription system c. 1996                                                 origin
     1. none                                                                     39                 30
     2. plain                                                                    7                  28
     2/3. just postponement option for students                                  2                  27
     3. exemption or shorter term for students, but no buyout                    0                  18
     4. legal buyout                                                             0                  13
     Source: War Resisters’ International (1998)
     Notes: numbers in the “conscription system” column indicate the category assigned for the purpose of
     estimating the Table 3's ordered probits. “Just postponement” goes in category 2 or 3, depending on the
     specification. Illegal buyouts (not shown in the table; none of these 17 countries are British and 10 of them
     are included among the 18 “exemption” countries) are counted as buyouts in some specifications but not
     others. Iceland and Panama (neither British) are excluded. 21 former Soviet and Yugoslav republics are
     included (all drafting, none British, 8 deferring service for college students, 11 exempting some or all
     service), but only Russia and Yugoslavia are included in the regression tables 1 and 3.




        Table 3's specifications (1) - (4) are ordered probits, differing according to the sample used
and whether a plain system plus an option for students to postpone (but not shorten or avoid) their
service is included in the second or third category. All eight specifications report marginal effects
on a probability.      For specifications (1), (2), and (4), the reported marginal effects are for the
probability of having some kind of conscription. Specification (3) reports marginal effects for the
probability of having some kind of selective conscription. Specification (1) uses our full sample of
countries having conscription measures and the basic control variables, and shows how small and
common law countries tend to be in the lower manpower system categories. An armed force that
is large (in per capita terms) tends to be in the higher categories. Democracy and real GDP per
capita are not correlated with manpower system. Specification (2) reports similar results when
countries with student deferral options are placed in the third category rather than the second.
Specification (3) shows similar results for having selective conscription (the categories are universal,
exemption, buyout), except that richer and younger countries may be more likely to have selective
conscription, even while not more likely to have conscription rather than all-volunteer.
                                                                       Conscription as Regulation – 17


Specification (4) shows similar results for non-British countries, which are used in specifications
(5)-(8).
           Specifications (5)-(8) are (dichotomous) probits for the non-British countries using the draft,
differing according to the type of conscription system to be predicted. They show the types of
countries that use selective rather than universal conscription. The coefficients are similar for all
of the columns, except perhaps that using college deferrals or exemptions is easier to predict than
using a buyout.
           Since few nondemocratic countries have all-volunteer armies (Congo and Saudi Arabia are
among them), why it is hard to find support for the democracy theories in Tables 1 and 3? First of
all, notice that several communist countries (all drafting) are excluded from the Penn World Tables,
and hence from some of our specifications. Table 1's specifications (1)-(5) include the broader set
of communist countries and sometimes show an economically and statistically significant effect of
communism on conscription. When it comes to the noncommunist, nondemocratic countries, notice
that they have larger armed forces and are somewhat less likely to have common law, and are
therefore expected to have conscription even if they were democratic.
           It is often claimed that democracies do more to redistribute from rich to poor (e.g., de
Tocqueville, 1835; Boix, 2003; although see Mulligan, Gil, and Sala-i-Martin, 2004, for a counter-
argument and supporting evidence). We see no evidence for this in conscription patterns. Table 3
shows that democracies are no less likely to use the volunteer army, or to use a draft system that
exempts college students, or to use a draft system that allows sons from rich families to “buy
themselves out” of their military service obligation. In fact, heuristic likelihood ratio tests show that
our model (ordered v, u, x, and r) and a closely related one (ordered v, u, r, and x) fit the data best
out of the twelve possible orderings. The worst fitting ordering is u, x, v, and r, which is arguably
ordered (low to high) in terms of “unfairness,” in terms of favoritism to the rich, or pro-market
sentiment.16




           16
         u, v, x, and r may also be ordered in terms of unfairness; this ordering ranks sixth of the
possible twelve. The log likelihood ratio for this model versus ours is 13.6.
                                       Table 3: Types of Military Manpower Systems across Countries, 1996


                            dependent variable:                         ordered systemsa,b                         college       college       buyout         legal
                                                                                                                  deferralsc     exemptd                     buyout
independent variables                                       (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)           (7)          (8)
British legal origin                                       -0.56         -0.57         -0.40
                                                           (0.11)        (0.11)        (0.24)
log(population)/10                                          1.28          1.13          1.67          1.44            3.06          0.86        1.29           0.61
                                                           (0.31)        (0.32)        (0.51)        (0.32)          (1.03)        (0.38)      (0.55)         (0.36)
armed forces per male aged 15-24,                           0.18          0.16          0.24          0.12            0.34          0.09        0.23           0.10
1985-95, log                                               (0.06)        (0.06)        (0.09)        (0.06)          (0.19)        (0.07)      (0.10)         (0.07)
democracy index, 1975-90b                                  -0.13         -0.12          0.10         -0.12           -0.32         -0.25        0.50           0.08
                                                           (0.17)        (0.17)        (0.23)        (0.17)          (0.36)        (0.19)      (0.29)         (0.19)
fraction of population aged 65+, 1975-95                   -0.44         -1.46         -5.26         -1.23           -2.94         -3.26       -8.94          -4.92
                                                           (1.64)        (1.66)        (2.20)        (1.47)          (3.96)        (1.61)      (2.56)         (1.74)
real GDP per capita 1975-89, log                            0.03          0.02          0.24          0.10            0.57          0.17       -0.03           0.02
                                                           (0.07)        (0.07)        (0.12)        (0.07)          (0.26)        (0.10)      (0.11)         (0.08)
pseudo-R-squared                                            .21           .21           .26            .15           .57            .29          .27           .21
subsample of Table 1's “GDP” sample                          all countries           drafting      non-Brit           non-British countries having a draft
countries                                                   125           125            67            83             58             58           59            59
Notes: aSpecifications (1), (3) and (4) ordered as: all-volunteer, draft w/o legal buyout or college exemption, draft w/ college exemption and w/o legal buyout, and
draft w/ legal buyout. Specification (2) moves the countries with college deferments from the second category to the third category.
b
  Ordered probit coefficients are marginal effects on the probability of have some kind of conscription, evaluated at the 125 country sample means. Specifications
(5)-(8) report marginal effects from (dichotomous) probits.
c
  includes countries with college exemptions;
d
  excludes countries with college deferrals but not exemptions
                                                                     Conscription as Regulation – 19


III.C. Alternative Interpretations and Robustness
       The large countries in our data tend to have smaller armies in per capita terms, and a small
army raises the question of how to draft a small fraction of the population. Lottery, and short terms
of service, are two ways, but we might also expect large countries to use buyouts and exemptions
because they need some way to eliminate lots of young men from the service, given that their troop
needs are so small relative to the draftable population. Might this, and not fixed costs, explain why
population increases the likelihood of using buyouts or exemptions? There are three reasons to think
not. First, our regressions hold constant troops per capita. Second, the relation between population
and troops per capita is not nearly as strong as the relation between population and the type of
military manpower system. Third, Table 3 shows that more troops per capita is associated with
more selective conscription systems, not less.
       Could our population coefficient be interpreted as evidence that small countries with the draft
are especially likely to be mis-coded as not having a draft, because they are small and it is harder
and less desirable to obtain good information about their militaries? We give this issue much more
attention in a separate data appendix, but here we mention two reasons to suspect that our coding
is mainly accurate, even for the small countries. First, we have cross-checked the Military Balance
with several other sources, including the United Nations, and War Resisters’ International. Second,
the small countries in our sample should not be considered anonymous, because Military Balance
has for years reported information on their numbers of troops and types of military hardware.
       Although not shown in Tables 1 and 3, we have tried several other explanatory variables.
Males aged 15-24 as a fraction of total population is marginally significant (with a positive sign) in
conscription regressions and ordered probits. Among the small subset of our countries with trade
information in the Penn World Tables, log((exports+imports)/GDP) helps predict conscription (with
a positive sign), although including openness does not significantly affect the British coefficient, and
increases the magnitude of the log population coefficient. Trade openness may also help predict
type of system (more open countries tend to use less complex systems). Conditional on the variables
used in Tables 1 and 3, countries with lots of Muslims, and countries that are entholinguistically
fractionalized, tend to have more complex conscription systems, but are not especially likely to have
conscription rather than all-volunteer. Otherwise, the other variables we have tried – measures of
involvement in war, other legal origins, government revenue as a fraction of GDP, average years of
schooling, agriculture’s share of the labor force, agriculture’s share of GDP, fraction of population
                                                                    Conscription as Regulation – 20


living in urban areas, union density, religion variables, oil country dummies, and a NATO dummy
– fail to predict having conscription and type of conscription system. It may seem surprising that
years at war does not matter, but notice that countries involved in war tend to have a lot more troops
per capita, and troops per capita predict conscription. War does not seem to matter holding troops
per capita constant (Ross 1994 had a similar result).
       We have also tried replacing log population with 1/population in the specifications shown
in Tables 1 and 3. Doing so has no economic or statistically significant affect on the point estimates
corresponding to the other independent variables. 1/population may predict conscription slightly
better, and selective conscription slightly worse, than does log population. Restricting the sample
to countries with at least $2000 GDP per capita (1985 $) slightly increases the magnitudes of the log
population and log armed forces coefficients, and slightly decreases the magnitude of the British
coefficient. The log GDP coefficient is larger in this case: -0.24 (s.e. = 0.09).17




V. Conclusion
       We examined patterns of conscription around the world from the perspective of three broad
theories. We did not find that democracies are more likely to use conscription. International
differences in conscription do not seem to reflect the deadweight costs of taxes, except perhaps
among the few countries with very large militaries. On the other hand, we found strong support for
the theory that the fixed costs of running a conscription system deter its use. This theory predicts
that higher population countries are more likely to use conscription, which is true. It also predicts
that countries that regulate other matters and therefore face lower fixed costs of additional
government regulation, should use conscription more. When we proxied for the lower level of
incremental fixed costs of new regulation using civil law legal origin, we found further support for
the theory. Indeed, we examined and found support for a more refined prediction of this theory,
namely that higher population countries and civil law countries should be more likely to use
elaborate forms of conscription, including special exemptions, replacements, and commutation fees.



       17
         The larger GDP coefficient is partly due to the fact that the big militaries tend to be in
richer countries and thereby get more weight in a sample excluding the poorest countries (see
also Table 1, specification (8)).
                                                                     Conscription as Regulation – 21


       These results shed light on the patterns of conscription, but they also offer a new
interpretation of the pervasive effects of legal origin on regulatory patterns. Previous research has
found that, compared to common law countries, French and other civil law countries regulate more
heavily in a variety of areas, including entry of new firms (Djankov et al. 2002) and labor markets
(Botero et al. 2003). This paper offers an interpretation of this legal origin effect, consistent with
Woloch’s (1994) account of post-revolutionary France. Specifically, France (and subsequently the
countries Napoleon occupied and their colonies) developed a strong centralized administrative state,
that intervened in a broad range of activities. Once this system was put in place, the administrative
cost of regulating additional activities on a wide-scale was reduced. As a consequence, when faced
with incremental social demands, France opted for a regulatory solution across activities, including
raising armies. England and its colonies, in contrast, did not develop such pervasive administrative
states, and therefore did not opt for regulatory solutions, such as conscription, as reliably. And when
common law countries did regulate new areas of life, the intervention was not as comprehensive.
       More generally, this evidence points to the neglected but potentially significant role of fixed
political and administrative costs in shaping regulatory policies. In our previous work (Mulligan
and Shleifer 2003), we argued that such costs determine how much regulation of various activities
different U.S. states, as well as different countries, choose to pursue. Both in that paper, and in the
present work, we have mentioned political fixed costs, but focused on administrative ones. But
political fixed costs may be equally important, and less well understood. Thus, it might take a fixed
cost for an interest group to form, but once it forms and the costs of organizing it are sunk, it can be
directed to lobby for entirely new causes at a much lower incremental cost than it takes to form a
new interest group. Thus trade unions may be formed to pursue wage demands, but then relied on
to support protectionist policies; religious coalitions might be organized to pursue social agenda, but
then directed to support particular foreign or economic policies. This emphasis on political and not
just administrative fixed costs, pursued in different contexts by Campbell (2003), Mulligan and Sala-
i-Martin (1999), and Murphy and Shleifer (2004), might also have significant implications for the
adoption of particular public policies.
                                                                                Conscription as Regulation – 22


VI. Sample Characteristics

        Appendix Table: Characteristics of 133-country sample (Table 1, specification (4))
 variable                                                    mean           std. dev.      min            max
 population (1000s)                                          35,273         117,094        302            1,073,255
 log population                                              9.10           1.55           5.71           13.9
 armed forces per male aged 15-24, 1985-95                   0.08           0.08           0.005          0.36
 log armed forces per male aged 15-24                        -3.02          1.01           -5.34          -1.01
 democracy index, 1975-90                                    0.33           0.41           0              1
 fraction of population aged 65+, 1975-95                    0.06           0.04           0.01           0.17
 real GDP per capita 1975-89 (125 countries)                 4,329          4,340          300            17,772
 real GDP per capita 1975-89, log                            7.85           1.07           5.70           9.79
                             dummy variables (fraction of countries having ...)
      Communist = 0.17. Legal origins: British= 0.32, French = 0.50, Scandinavian = 0.03
                             conscription measures (1996, according to WRI)
 countries not drafting: Afghanistan, Australia, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium, Benin, Botswana, Burma, Cambodia,
 Cameroon, Canada, Chad, Congo Brazzaville, Costa Rica, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Fiji,
 Gambia, Guyana, Haiti, India, Ireland, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Japan, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Luxembourg, Malawi,
 Malaysia, Mauritania, Mauritius, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
 Papua New Guinea, Qatar, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Togo,
 Trinidad and Tobago, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdoms, United States, Uruguay, Zambia, Zimbabwe

 “universal” draft: Angola, Burundi, Central African Republic, Democratic Republic of Congo, Cuba, Cyprus,
 Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Honduras, Indonesia, Laos, Madagascar, Mali,
 Mongolia, Mozambique, Niger, North Korea, Norway, Peru, Philippines, Senegal, Singapore, Switzerland, Tanzania,
 Uganda, Vietnam, Yemen

 just postponement option for students: Algeria, Austria, Brazil, Chile, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
 Hungary, Israel, Italy, Libya, Mexico, Portugal, Romania, South Korea, Spain, Sudan, Sweden, Taiwan, Yugoslavia

 exemption or shorter term for students, but no buyout: Bulgaria, Columbia, Kuwait, Morocco, Poland, Russia,
 Venezuela (plus several former Soviet and Yugoslav republics excluded from 133 country sample)

 legal buyout: Albania, Argentina, Bolivia, China, Ecuador, Egypt, Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Paraguay, Syria, Tunisia, Turkey
                                                                 Conscription as Regulation – 23


VII. References
Boix, Carles. Democracy and Redistribution. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003.
Botero, Juan, et al., “The Regulation of Labor,” NBER Working Paper #9756, 2003.
Campbell, Andrea Louise. How Policies Make Citizens: Senior Citizen Activism and the American
       Welfare State. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2003.
Carleton, William G. “Raising Armies Before the Civil War.” Current History. 54(322), June
       1968: 327-32.
Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, “The
       Regulation of Entry,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(1) , February: 1-38.
Djankov, Simeon, Edward Glaeser, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei
       Shleifer, “The New Comparative Economics,” Journal of Comparative Economics 31(4),
       595-619.
Fisher, Anthony C. “The Cost of the Draft and the Cost of Ending the Draft.” American Economic
       Review. 59(3), June 1969: 239-54.
Forrest, Alan. Conscripts and Deserters: The Army and French Society during the Revolution and
       Empire. New York: Oxford University Press, 1989.
Friedman, Milton. “Why Not a Volunteer Army?” New Invidualist Review. Spring 1967: 3-9.
International Institute for Strategic Studies. The Military Balance. London, various issues.
Johnson, William R. “When is a Military Draft Optimal?” manuscript, University of Virginia,
       January 1990.
Kestnbaum, Meyer. “Citizenship and Compulsory Military Service: The Revolutionary Origins of
       Conscription in the United States.” Armed Forces and Society. 27(1), Fall 2000: 7-36.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, “Legal
       Determinants of External Finance,” Journal of Finance 52(3), 1131-1150.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, “Law and
       Finance,” Journal of Political Economy 106(6), 1113-1155.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, “The Quality of
       Government,” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 15(1) : 222-279.
Lee, Dwight R., and Richard B. McKenzie. “Reexamination of the Relative Efficiency of the Draft
       and the All-Volunteer Army.” Southern Economic Journal. 58(3), January 1992: 644-54.
Martin, Donald L. “The Economics of Jury Conscription.” Journal of Political Economy. 80(4),
                                                                  Conscription as Regulation – 24


       July 1972: 680-702.
Mjoset, Lars, and Stephen Van Holde. “Killing for the State, Dying for the Nation: An Introductory
       Essay on the Life Cycle of Conscription into Europe’s Armed Forces.” in Lars Mjoset and
       Stephen Van Holde, eds. The Comparative Study of Conscription in the Armed Forces.
       Oxford: Elsevier Science, Ltd., 2002.
Moore, Albert Burton. Conscription and Conflict in the Confederacy. Columbia, SC: University
       of South Carolina Press, 1924 (reprinted 1996).
Mulligan, Casey B. and Xavier X. Sala-i-Martin. “Gerontocracy, Retirement, and Social Security.”
       NBER working paper no. 7117, May 1999.
Mulligan, Casey B., Ricard Gil, and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. “Do Democracies have Different Public
       Policies than Nondemocracies?” Journal of Economic Perspectives. 18(1), Winter 2004:
       51-74.
Mulligan, Casey B. and Andrei Shleifer. “Population and Regulation.” NBER working paper no.
       10234, January 2004.
Murphy, Kevin M. and Andrei Shleifer. “Persuasion in Politics.” American Economic Review
       Papers and Proceedings. 94(2), May 2004.
Ng, Pak Shun, and Casey B. Mulligan. “Measuring Conscription around the World.” manuscript,
       University of Chicago, May 2004.
Oi, Walter. “The Economic Cost of the Military Draft.” American Economic Review. 57(2), May
       1967: 39-62.
Polity IV Project. Political Regime Characteristics and Transition, 1800-2000. Electronic data file
       (version p4v2000). College Park, MD: CIDCM, University of Maryland, 2000.
Ross, Thomas W. “Raising an Army: A Positive Theory of Military Recruitment.” Journal of Law
       and Economics. 37(1), April 1994: 109-31.
Sjaastad, Larry A. and Ronald W. Hansen. “The Conscription Tax: An Empirical Analysis.”
       Studies Prepared for the President’s Commission on An All-Volunteer Armed Force.
       Volume II. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1970.
Summers, Robert and Alan Heston. “The Penn World Table (Mark 5): An Expanded Set of
       International Comparisons, 1950-1988.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 106(2), May
       1991: 327-68.
de Tocqueville, Alexis. “Government of the Democracy in America.” in Democracy in America.
                                                                 Conscription as Regulation – 25


       Book    1,   Chapter   13,   1835.      reprinted   by   the   University   of   Virginia,
       <http://xroads.virginia.edu/~HYPER/DETOC/).
United Nations, Commission on Human Rights. “The Question of Conscientious Objection to
       Military Service.” Report of the Sectretary-General submitted pursuant to Commission
       resolution 1995/83, January 16, 1997.
United Nations, Commission on Human Rights. “Civil and Political Rights, Including the Question
       of Conscientious Objection to Military Service.” Report of the Sectretary-General submitted
       pursuant to Commission resolution 1998/77, December 17, 1999.
United States, President’s Commission on an All-Volunteer Armed Force. The President’s
       Commission on an All-Volunteer Armed Force. London: Collier-Macmillan, Ltd., 1970.
War Resisters’ International. Refusing to Bear Arms: A Worldwide Survey of Conscription and
       Conscientious Objection to Military Service. London: War Resisters’ International, 1998.
Warner, John T. and Beth J. Asch. “The Economic Theory of a Military Draft Reconsidered.”
       Defense and Peace Economics. 7, 1996: 297-311.
Warner, John T., Beth J. Asch. “The Record and Prospects of the All-Volunteer Military in the
       United States.” Journal of Economic Perspectives. 15(2), Spring 2001: 169-92.
Woloch, Isser. The New Regime: Transformation of the French Civic Order, 1789-1820s. New
       York: Norton, 1994.
