NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHEN DO LIVING WAGES BITE?
Scott Adams
David Neumark
Working Paper 10561
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10561
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2004

We thank David Fairris, Michael Reich, anonymous referees, and participants at the Living Wage Research
Conference at the University of California at Riverside for helpful comments, and Stephanie Luce for sharing
findings from her forthcoming book manuscript. Any opinions expressed in this article are those of the
authors alone and do not necessarily reflect any position of the Public Policy Institute of California. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2004 by Scott Adams and David Neumark. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

When Do Living Wages Bite?
Scott Adams and David Neumark
NBER Working Paper No. 10561
June 2004
JEL No. J2, J3
ABSTRACT
Many features of living wage laws may influence the strength of their effects on wages and
employment of low-skill individuals. Echoing past research, business assistance living wage laws
generate stronger wage increases and employment reductions than contractor-only laws. But broader
enforcement or implementation and geographic concentration of living wage laws also appear to
strengthen their effects. Finally, geographic concentration may be more significant than the
distinction between business assistance and contractor-only living wage laws.
Scott Adams
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
Milwaukee, WI 53201
sjadams@uwm.edu
David Neumark
Public Policy Institute of California
500 Washington St, Suite 800
San Francisco, CA 94111
and NBER
neumark@ppic.org

I. Introduction
Living wage laws have become almost commonplace in cities across the United States. The total
number of living wage laws now in effect in the United States—mostly in cities but some in other
jurisdictions—is near 100.1 Studying the effects of living wage laws at the city level, our research to date
(Neumark and Adams, 2003a and 2003b) has found that the most typical living wage laws that apply only
to city contractors do not have detectable effects on wages or employment of low-skill individuals, nor on
poverty rates, which is perhaps not surprising given the relatively low estimates of coverage of city
contractors that other researchers have reported (see Table 1 in Neumark and Adams, 2003a). In contrast,
it is only for the broader living wage laws that apply also to employers receiving business assistance from
the city that we detect any statistically significant effects. These “business assistance laws” include those
laws that cover firms receiving financial assistance, tax abatements, grants, low interest loans, or other
forms of government assistance from cities, and result in higher wages, lower employment, and net poverty
reductions. Our most up-to-date evidence using data through 2002 (Adams and Neumark, forthcoming)
finds that for these broader living wage laws, for the bottom decile of the wage or skill distribution, the
wage elasticity with respect to the mandated living wage is about 0.07 and the employment elasticity is
about −0.12. The elasticity of the overall poverty rate is about −0.19.2
Although our research has found robust evidence of different effects of contractor-only and
business assistance living wage laws, it has not provided a satisfactory explanation of the differences. We
have conjectured that the economic effects of business assistance living wage laws may differ from those of
contractor-only laws. In particular, contractor-only laws typically require that employers pay the mandated
wage only for work done as part of the contract, allowing employers to mitigate the costs of complying
with living wage laws by reallocating their higher wage labor to the contract work and their lower wage
labor to noncontract work, and even reducing wages on noncontract work. But there may be fewer avenues
for mitigating the costs (and therefore the effects) of living wage laws for employers covered under
business assistance provisions. An establishment created with the help of business assistance from a city
would appear to have no choice but to pay all employees no less than the mandated living wage for all of

1

their work. And while contractors can reduce the share of their business with the city in response to a
living wage (and, similarly, cities can shift business to higher-wage employers), business assistance
recipients may have less leeway as they may have accepted long-term benefits, such as bond financing or
tax relief, in return for locating in the jurisdiction. In some cases at least, relocation costs seem likely to far
outweigh costs from shifting business away from city contracts. Yet these explanations are just
conjectures.
Moreover, our evidence that business assistance living wage laws have significant effects (and
much stronger effects than contractor-only living wage laws) has been viewed skeptically by both
researchers (e.g., Brenner, et al., 2002) and more importantly those directly involved with living wage
campaigns and living wage implementation, who believe that business assistance living wages laws are in
fact a very weak tool, barely increasing the share of workers covered by the contractor provisions of living
wage laws, and weakly enforced.
In our view, the strongest and most substantive alternative explanation of our findings that has been
offered is that business assistance living wage laws are not fundamentally different or stronger in terms of
the underlying economics or the share of workers affected. Rather, the broader business assistance living
wage laws may have arisen in cities where a constellation of forces—often related to the dynamics of living
wage campaigns—have resulted in stronger living wage laws generally, and perhaps more importantly
stronger implementation and enforcement because of both how the cities oversee the laws and how much
community and other groups remain engaged.
These concerns have led us, in this paper, to explore the effects of living wage laws in a framework
that attempts to account for the wide variety of living wage laws. Aside from contactor-only versus
business assistance provisions, living wage laws also differ in terms of factors like the extent of coverage
specified, the employers or workers exempted, enforcement and implementation, provisions for community
hiring or labor peace agreements, and whether living wage laws exist in nearby jurisdictions that might
amplify their effects. Our analysis addresses both a narrow and a broad question. The narrow question is
whether the contractor-only versus business assistance distinction is the core distinction, or whether instead

2

variation in this distinction is associated with other features of living wage laws that are the ones that really
matter. The broad question is how the many different features of living wage laws influence the effects
these laws have on urban labor markets. In particular, in this paper we try to identify those characteristics
of living wage laws that are most strongly associated with wage and employment effects.
Three qualifications or limitations should be noted at the outset. First, there are not a great many
observations on cities with different types of living wage laws from which to draw strong statistical
inferences. Living wage laws have only been around since the mid-1990s, and although they have grown
to cover a large number of cities, much of this growth occurred in the last few years, and we can only draw
reliable inferences for those cities large enough to provide a reasonable number of observations in national
labor market surveys. So especially when we try to take account of a variety of dimensions of living wage
laws, statistical power becomes somewhat tenuous and much of our evidence can be viewed as suggestive
only. Second, our analysis takes place at the city level, focusing on the net effects of living wage laws on
low-wage or low-skill workers. The city-level analysis estimates the effects of alternative policies, treating
those policies to some extent as black boxes—although the consideration of varieties of living wage laws
and their provisions is intended to help illuminate what goes on inside the black box. Future work needs to
augment such city-level analyses with research on the effects of living wages at the firm or establishment
level that try to test alternative hypotheses about the effects of different types of living wage laws. And
third, there may be features of living wage campaigns that are not reflected in either the laws that result or
the observable features of enforcement, but which influence labor market outcomes in their aftermath; an
example is changed norms of behavior affecting wage setting. To some extent, these unmeasured
influences may be common to all cities with living wage laws, and hence be captured in the estimated
effects. But to the extent that they differ across cities, they remain an omitted source of variation in our
empirical analysis.
II. Features of Living Wage Laws
Table 1 presents a summary of information on living wage laws that is used in the empirical
analysis.3 The table is divided into cities with contractor-only laws, those with contractor as well as

3

business assistance provisions, and the few cities with business assistance provisions but without contractor
coverage. There are a few important features or provisions of living wage laws that are not directly
displayed in the table. First, the range of living wages is quite large, with living wages quite high in some
cities. Current levels of living wages for these cities range from a low of $6.50 in Duluth to a high of
$10.86 in New Haven.4 Second, living wages are a recent phenomenon; the earliest living wage (in
Baltimore) was implemented in 1995, and many of the living wage laws covered were implemented in the
last few years. And finally, living wage laws are geographically quite dispersed, over-represented in
higher-wage and higher-cost parts of the country, but also present in the Midwest, parts of the South, and in
some medium-sized cities.
Column (2) of Table 1 summarizes coverage of contractors under each city’s living wage law. This
coverage varies in terms of the minimum contract covered, the types of contractors covered, and other
features, and is classified as narrow or broad relative to most cities. For example, Portland’s living wage
law applies only to custodial, security, and parking attendants, and is therefore classified as “narrow,” while
the laws in Los Angeles and Oakland cover some leaseholders (and in the case of Oakland the port), and
are therefore classified as “broad.”5
The next two columns of the table provide descriptions of the business assistance recipients
covered. Three of the cities with business assistance living wage laws are coded as having narrow
assistance coverage. As an example, San Jose is coded this way because its law only applies to recipients
of direct financial assistance, and excludes forms of assistance that in other cities trigger coverage. One
important feature of business assistance living wage laws that was suggested to us by a prominent living
wage organizer is whether tenants or leaseholders are covered.6 For example, if a shopping mall is built
with financial assistance that makes the developer and builder covered, then a leaseholder provision implies
that the employees of the establishments that eventually occupy the mall will also be covered, which should
substantially increase the impact of the living wage law. Additional provisions of living wage laws are
covered in columns (5)-(7). These include community hiring provisions, labor peace or no strike
agreements, and whether the living wage is superseded by collective bargaining agreements.7

4

As noted in the introduction, one of the central hypotheses we consider is that the key
distinguishing feature of living wage laws is their enforcement and implementation. We examined details
regarding living wage enforcement, including reporting requirements, penalties for violations, etc. These
do not differ greatly across cities, and in addition, of course, what enforcement mechanisms are specified
and what is actually done may differ. In column (8), therefore, we instead report information from research
by Luce (forthcoming) that categorizes enforcement/implementation efforts by city based on a survey of
living wage laws and city staff, as well as auxiliary information. Briefly, Luce classifies a city as having
“broad” enforcement/implementation when there is at least “one full-time person assigned to oversee
ordinance administration, who can answer questions about the law and who can be held accountable for
problems” and the “staff actively monitors the ordinance by reviewing payroll records and inspecting
worksites” (p. 96). In these cases, according to Luce, staff are engaged in trying to improve the ordinance,
creating benchmarks, and making information public. In contrast, she classifies cities without full-time
staff, in which it is difficult to find someone to answer questions, and where cities do the minimum to fulfill
technical requirements, as having “narrow” enforcement/implementation. She also classifies some
intermediate cases as “medium.” Based on Luce’s discussion of how and why implementation and
enforcement differ across cities, we believe that her classification helps to capture differences that arise
from the dynamics of living wage campaigns and the efforts of community and other groups to remain
engaged. This classification of living wage enforcement/implementation as “narrow,” “medium,” or
“broad” in column (8) of Table 1 is taken directly from Luce’s Table 5.2.8
Finally, columns (9) and (10) of Table 1 record whether the city living wage law is also in a county
with a living wage law, as well as whether there are one or more nearby cities with living wage laws. In
both cases the year in which a nearby living wage was first implemented is noted; this variation in timing is
also used in the empirical analysis.9 Both of these characteristics of living wage laws are meant to capture
whether a city’s living wage law is likely to have its effect amplified by the presence of nearby living wage
laws. Part of the importance of this distinction arises from the nature of the data. In particular, we use
Current Population Survey data that classify people by where they live, not where they work. Thus, any

5

effect of living wage laws is likely to be amplified when there are nearby living wage laws, simply because
more workers in the particular city are in fact covered by a living wage law. But nearby living wage laws
may also amplify the effects of any city’s living wage law because of the underlying economics, and we
suspect this is the more important phenomenon. For example, consider an employer who has business with
multiple cities; given the nature of businesses that typically do business with a city, this is likely. If a small
share of the business is covered by a living wage law, because only one of the cities with which the
employer has contracts is covered, then there will be more scope for mitigating the effects of a living wage
law. But if nearby cities have living wage laws, more of the employer’s work is likely to be covered by
such laws and therefore the employer would have less scope for reducing wages on other work done by its
employees, less scope for shifting high-wage workers to the covered contract, and also less scope for
shifting business away from the city that imposes the living wage law. Finally, the fact that nearby cities
have a living wage ordinance may be a sign that a broader living wage movement took place in the area,
perhaps resulting in greater attention paid to the laws by both businesses and government.
The parsimonious descriptions of living wage laws provided in Table 1 are useful in giving an
impression of how contractor-only and business assistance living wage laws differ along other dimensions,
which is useful in highlighting the other characteristics of living wage laws that might explain the
differences between these two broad categories of laws. Table 1 suggests that on some dimensions,
contractor-only and business assistance laws do not look very different. For example, roughly equal shares
are in counties with their own living wage laws, and the shares with provisions for supersession by
collective bargaining are similar. However, business assistance laws are considerably more likely to be in
cities for which nearby cities also have living wage laws, and in cities with community hiring provisions.
With regard to enforcement/implementation, the differences do not appear sharp, although more of the
contractor-only living wage laws are classified as having weak enforcement/implementation.
The empirical analysis described in the next two sections explores how the wage and employment
effects of living wage laws vary with these different features or provisions of living wage laws, and asks
whether this variation helps to explain evidence that business assistance living wage laws appear to have

6

much stronger effects. Note that a few of the features of living wage laws listed in Table 1 apply only to
business assistance living wage laws (assistance coverage, leaseholder coverage, and labor peace
agreements). While these differences therefore cannot explain differences relative to contractor-only living
wage laws, they can help us examine which features of business assistance living wage laws mute or
amplify their effects, and given prior expectations of the directions of these effects, such results can provide
additional evidence on whether the estimated effects of business assistance living wage laws are real or
spurious.
III. Empirical Approach
Data
The data on wages, employment, and other worker-related characteristics come from the Current
Population Survey (CPS) monthly Outgoing Rotation Group files (ORGs) extending from January 1996
through December 2002. The ORG files are preferable to the March Annual Demographic files for the
analysis of wages and employment because they have information on current wages and provide a sample
three times as large. Because cities cannot be identified in the ORG files for a period in 1995, coupled with
the fact that most living wage laws came into effect in 1996 or after, we restricted the sample to begin in
1996.10
In these files, residents of all MSAs, encompassing all large- and medium-sized cities in the United
States, can be identified. We extracted data on these residents for our empirical analysis. In some respects,
we would like to know where people work rather than where they live, but such information is not
available, and employees of firms covered by living wage laws need not work in the MSA. The
correspondence between cities and MSAs is imperfect, but because many suburban residents work in the
city, this is not necessarily inappropriate; for ease of exposition we often refer to cities instead of MSAs.11
The CPS has some disadvantages and some advantages for studying the effects of living wages.
Given that the CPS is a household-based survey with virtually no information on employers, it is not
possible to identify covered and uncovered workers. Instead, all we can identify (and therefore the only
information we exploit in the empirical analysis) is the city in which a worker lives and the type of law

7

prevailing there. Obviously, then, CPS data are not useful in exploring the microeconomic effects of living
wages at the firm or establishment level (i.e., questions such as whether firms engage in substitution away
from low-wage labor, how much wages are increased for their lowest-wage workers, how employment
responds, whether turnover falls, etc.). Such questions are best addressed using direct survey data on
covered employers and ideally a control group of uncovered or unaffected employers, as has begun to occur
in some recent research on living wages (e.g., Brenner, this issue; Fairris, this issue), although not with
respect to studying the effects of different types of living wage laws. On the other hand, the CPS data are
the best data available for addressing the overall effects of living wage policies on low-wage workers,
because they permit us to estimate the net effects, including indirect or perhaps “general equilibrium”
effects, of such laws in the cities where they are passed, relative to other cities. Ultimately, though, the two
types of data and research are complementary and can inform each other, with firm-level data allowing
researchers to test propositions about the individual-level behavioral responses of employers and workers to
the imposition of living wages and city-level data allowing researchers to assess the overall policy
consequences.12
Estimating Wage and Employment Effects
For wages, our basic strategy is to estimate a wage equation for the low-wage workers on whom
living wages are most likely to have an impact; we focus in particular on workers who fall below the 10th
centile in any given city-month cell.13 Considering initially, for simplicity, the case where there is a single
living wage, we pool data across cities and months and estimate the following regression for this particular
centile range
ln(wpijst) = α + Xijstω + β·ln(wminjst) + γ·max[ln(wlivjst),ln(wminjst)]

(1)

+ δYYt + δMMs + δCCj + θ·T + θLW·T·LWjs + εijst.
In this specification wp is the hourly wage for individuals in the specified range (p) of the wage
distribution, in this case below the 10th centile. The subscripts ‘i’, ‘j’, ‘s’, and ‘t’ denote individual, city,
month, and year. ε is a random error term. X is a vector of individual characteristics (age, sex, race,

8

education, and marital status),14 wmin is the higher of the federal or state minimum wage,15 and wliv is the
higher of the living wage or the minimum wage. Y, M, and C are vectors of year, month, and city (MSA)
dummy variables.16 T is a linear time trend. LWjs is an indicator for cities that adopt a living wage law at
any time during the sample period and has only a ‘js’ subscript to indicate that it is zero or one for the
entire sample period.
The living wage variable that multiplies γ is specified as the maximum of the (logs of the) living
wage and the minimum wage. We control for minimum wages separately because many cities with living
wages are in states with high minimum wages, and we want to estimate the independent effects of living
wages. This specification of the living wage effect, coupled with the inclusion of the minimum wage,
imposes the minimum as the wage floor in the absence of a living wage. However, because living wages
may have effects different from minimum wages, the coefficient is allowed to differ from that of the
standard minimum wage floor.17 If living wages boost the wages of low-wage workers, we would expect to
find positive estimates of γ when we are looking at workers at the bottom of the wage distribution. In the
specifications we estimate, we lag ln(wmin) and ln(wliv) by 12 months to allow for slower, adaptive
responses to changes in minimum wages and living wages. In our earlier work we never found much
evidence of contemporaneous effects of living wages or effects at shorter lags, presumably in part because
the effects of the laws accumulate as contracts are renewed each year.18
It is important to clarify the interpretation of equation (1). As the preceding discussion makes
clear, we are estimating the equation for those with wages below a given threshold. The selection on those
below a given threshold is not problematic as long as we interpret the regression as estimating effects on a
conditional mean. Note also that even if living wages tend to be above the 10th centile of the wage
distribution, if the laws raise wages of some workers initially below the 10th centile to above the 10th
centile, then the average wage of workers below the 10th centile will clearly increase.19 And, similarly, if
some workers drop below the 10th centile, then the average wage below the 10th centile has to have fallen,
because those workers’ wages must be below the wages of some workers previously at or below the 10th
centile.20

9

We use the same basic empirical framework to study employment, with only two differences.
First, we estimate linear probability models for individual employment status. Second, we cannot classify
non-working individuals based on their position in the wage distribution. Instead, we impute wages for
everyone and group individuals based on their position in the distribution of imputed wages, or “skills.”21
The year and month dummy variables control for common changes across cities in the sample that
could otherwise be confounded with living wage effects, because living wages were typically enacted later
in the sample period. The city dummy variables control for the possibility that living wage laws were
passed in cities with either particularly high or low wages, which would again confound the estimation of
their effects. Thus, equation (1) identifies an effect of the living wage when the dependent variable
changes differentially in cities that pass living wage laws (or increase their living wage) relative to cities
that did not pass living wage laws—a difference-in-differences research design.
The difference-in-differences strategy is predicated on the assumption that absent the living wage
and aside from differences captured in the other control variables, the treatment and control groups are
comparable. Note, though, that explicit controls for local labor market conditions are not included.
Although local labor market conditions can surely matter, they are also potentially endogenous if, for
example, living wages cause some job loss. Fixed differences in economic conditions between the
treatment and control groups are captured in the city dummy variables, and the year and month dummy
variables capture changes in economic conditions common to all cities. However, a potential problem
arises if economic conditions are changing differentially by location. For this reason, to capture some
dimensions of differing changes in economic conditions across cities, equation (1) also includes differential
linear time trends for cities that did and did not pass living wage laws over the sample period. The
difference in the trend for cities passing living wage laws is captured in the term θLW·T·LWjs. Although
these trends do not capture every possible variation in local economic conditions, they will capture
systematic differences between the different groups of cities in the rates of change of wages (and
employment).
For cities that had very few observations for a given month, determining whether a worker fell in a

10

particular range of the distribution is unreliable. We therefore restrict our sample for each analysis to
workers in city-month cells with at least 25 observations (although most have far more observations). All
observations on MSA-month pairs identified in the CPS and meeting the sample size restrictions are
included in the analysis.
Estimating the Effects of Different Features of Living Wage Laws
The key issue that this paper explores is how the effects of living wage laws differ depending on
the features or provisions of living wage laws. This analysis proceeds in four steps. First, we consider
dichotomous distinctions between living wage laws: e.g., contractor-only versus business assistance laws,22
living wage laws that are coupled with those in nearby cities versus those that are not, etc. We estimate the
separate effects using specifications of the form
ln(wpijst) = α + Xijstω + β·ln(wminjst)
+ γ1·max[ln(wlivjst)·L1,ln(wminjst)] + γ2·max[ln(wlivjst)·L2,ln(wminjst)]

(2)

+ δYYt + δMMs + δCCj + θ·T + θ1,LW·T·LWjs·L1 + θ2,LW·T·LWjs·L2 + εijst.
What is different in this specification is the interactions with L1 and L2, which are dummy variables
for the two different types of living wage laws under consideration.23 First, we add a second variable with
the max of the logs of the living and minimum wages, in each case interacting the living wage variables
with these two dummy variables; the interaction occurs inside the max operator so that in the absence of a
living wage the floor is the minimum wage, for reasons discussed earlier. The parameters γ1 and γ2 then
capture the differences in the effects of wage floors generated by living wages, allowing these to differ
depending on the type of living wage law. Second, we add a separate interaction between the time trend
and the indicator for passage of a living wage law; each of these is interacted with L1 and L2, which allows
the cities with different types of living wage laws to have different underlying trends, for the reasons
outlined above.24
The second step in the analysis addresses more directly the question of whether the differences we
have found in past research between the effects of business assistance and contractor-only laws might in

11

fact be explained by other features of living wage laws that are either more or less frequently associated
with business assistance living wage laws. To do this, we use a version of equation (2), but we augment it
to consider three types of living wage laws. Paralleling L1 and L2 in equation (2), we include indicators—
LB and LC—and the associated interactions for contractor-only living wage laws and business assistance
living wage laws; as in equation (2), these classifications of living wage laws are mutually exclusive. In
addition, though, we include an indicator and the corresponding interactions for another provision of living
wage laws, such as whether there is a county law. Calling the indicator of such provisions LP, what is
different is that LP can be equal to one when either LB or LC is equal to one. Then equation (2) is
augmented as
ln(wpijst) = α + Xijstω + β·ln(wminjst)
+ γB·max[ln(wlivjst)·LB,ln(wminjst)] + γC·max[ln(wlivjst)·LC,ln(wminjst)]
+ γP·max[ln(wlivjst)·LP,ln(wminjst)]+ δYYt + δMMs + δCCj + θ·T

(3)

+ θC,LW·T·LWjs·LC + θB,LW·T·LWjs·LB + θP,LW·T·LWjs·LP + εijst.

This specification lets us ask—continuing with the county living wage law example—whether the
effects of business assistance living wage laws continue to look different from the effects of contractor-only
living wage laws even after we allow for different effects of living wage laws based on whether or not there
is a county living wage law. Note also that, as in equation (2), a separate trend has been added for cities
whose living wage laws include the particular provision under consideration.
The preceding analysis tells us whether allowing living wage laws with some particular feature
(such as an accompanying county living wage) results in a finding that contractor-only and business
assistance living wage laws no longer look so different, and instead that the important difference is between
those living wage laws accompanied and not accompanied by county living wages. Such a finding would
suggest that the earlier evidence on differences between contractor-only and business assistance living
wage laws actually reflected the fact that these two types of laws were differentially accompanied by
county living wages. Note that while the implication of this finding would be that the key difference

12

between living wage laws is whether or not there is also a county living wage, it is possible that business
assistance living wage laws still have detectable effects.
Moreover, the effects of business assistance living wage laws may for some reasons be
considerably stronger when coupled with a county living wage. Our third analysis explores this question
by expanding the specification to allow the differential in the effects of business assistance versus
contractor-only living wage laws to vary with the presence or absence of the provision under consideration,
as in
ln(wpijst) = α + Xijstω + β·ln(wminjst)
+ γB·max[ln(wlivjst)·LB,ln(wminjst)] + γC·max[ln(wlivjst)·LC,ln(wminjst)]
+ γP·max[ln(wlivjst)·LP,ln(wminjst)] + γBxP·max[ln(wlivjst)·LB·LP,ln(wminjst)]

(4)

+ δYYt + δMMs + δCCj + θ·T + θB,LW·T·LWjs·LB + θC,LW·T·LWjs·LC
+ θP,LW·T·LWjs·LP + θBxP,LW’·T·LWjs·LB·LP + εijst.
Note that, paralleling the earlier specifications, equation (4) allows for different underlying trends for each
group of cities categorized by type of living wage law and provision.25
The description of equation (4) pertains to provisions that can apply to either contractor-only or
business assistance living wage laws—for example, whether nearby cities have a living wage. But some
features of living wage laws arise only in the context of business assistance laws. As shown in Table 1,
these include labor peace provisions, narrow business assistance coverage, and coverage of leaseholders.
Although not central to the question of understanding the source of differences between estimated effects of
contractor-only and business assistance living wage laws, these provisions that are unique to business
assistance laws are of interest in exploring under what conditions business assistance laws have more or
less impact. Thus, in our fourth analysis, to estimate the effects of such provisions we estimate versions of
equation (4) that include interactions between these provisions and LB, but drop LP as it would be perfectly
collinear with LB.

13

IV. Results
Basic Wage and Employment Effects
The basic evidence on the effects of living wages on wages and employment is reported in Table 2;
this replicates some of the findings in Adams and Neumark (forthcoming). The upper panel reports
estimates for the subsamples on which we focus—those in the bottom decile of the wage (or predicted
wage) distribution. The odd-numbered columns report estimates for a single living wage variable,
corresponding to equation (1), whereas the even-numbered columns break out separate effects for the
generally broader living wage laws that extend to employers receiving business assistance and the narrower
contractor-only living wage laws, corresponding to equation (2). In the lowest range of the wage
distribution—at or below the 10th centile in the MSA-month cell—we find a positive effect; specifically,
the estimated coefficient on the 12-month lag, 4.01 in column (1), implies an elasticity of about 0.04 but is
not statistically significant at the 10% level. However, when we estimate separate effects for business
assistance and contractor-only living wage laws we find a significant impact of business assistance laws.
As shown in column (2), the estimated elasticity is 0.07, significant at the 10% level.26
The employment results are reported in columns (3) and (4). For living wages generally, in column
(3), we find an estimated negative net employment effect that is significant at the 5% level. The estimated
coefficient of −5.25 implies an elasticity of about −0.12.27,28 When we estimate separate effects of business
assistance and contractor-only living wage laws, in column (4), both estimates are negative, but we find a
significant negative net employment effect only for business assistance living wage laws, and the difference
in the estimated coefficients is quite pronounced (−7.63 vs. −2.74); the estimate of −7.63 implies an
elasticity of −0.18.29 Thus, the basic results reflect the finding that business assistance living wage laws
boost wages but reduce employment among the lowest skilled.30
Because many living wages are above the 10th centile of the wage distribution but below the 25th,
the lower panel of Table 2 reports results for the same wage and employment specifications using those in
the bottom quartile of the wage or skill distribution, rather than the bottom decile. The directions of the
effects are similar to those in the upper panel, but are smaller and not statistically significant; this is what

14

we would expect given that living wages are most likely less binding on this larger set of individuals,
although in principle the effects could be stronger if those whose wages are affected by living wage laws
are not the lowest-wage workers. For more detail on the effects of living wages at different parts of the
wage or skill distribution, see Neumark and Adams (2003a).
Effects of Living Wage Laws Based on Other Distinctions
We next report on alternative specifications of equation (2) where we draw dichotomous
distinctions between living wage laws based on the presence or absence of other provisions. It would be
ideal, and the evidence perhaps more decisive, if we could estimate the effects of all features of living wage
laws simultaneously. However, the data—in particular, the relatively small number of cities with specific
features of living wages laws—preclude this. Attempts at this simultaneous estimation yielded
uninformative and very imprecise estimates.
In this analysis we do not focus on the contractor-only versus business assistance distinction, but
instead on other “pair-wise” comparisons of features of living wage laws. Combined with the information
in Table 1, however, the estimates are useful in thinking about which provisions of living wage laws might
account for the differences in the estimated effects of contractor-only and business assistance living wage
laws, which is taken up subsequently. The results are reported in Table 3.
Differences between cities whose living wage laws are or are not accompanied by county living
wage laws are covered in column (1). The results are ambiguous. The findings suggest a large and
significant wage effect in living wage cities with a county law, but not in living wage cities without an
accompanying county law. The employment effect, on the other hand, is larger (and statistically
significant) in the cities without a county living wage law. Given the ambiguity, it is unlikely the case that
whether or not a city living wage law is accompanied by a county law is decisive, although we view it as
notable that the wage effects are larger in places where workers are more likely to be covered because they
may be subject to either a city or a county ordinance.
Next, living wage laws are divided up by whether or not there are living wages in nearby cities.
The results, reported in column (2), suggest that this distinction is important. Living wage laws coupled

15

with those in nearby cities boost wages, with a positive and statistically significant effect (at the 5% level).
Similarly, the negative net employment effects appear only for living wage laws that are coupled with those
in nearby cities, with an employment elasticity of −0.23 and an estimated effect that is significant at the 5%
level. Note also that this table marks with an asterisk cases where the effects of the two types of living
wage laws considered are significantly different from each other at the 5% level; in this case, for both the
wage and employment effects we find significant differences in living wage effects with regard to whether
or not a nearby city has a living wage law.
Columns (3) and (4) turn to whether living wage laws have community hiring provisions or
provisions that they can be superseded by collective bargaining. It is not clear, a priori, what effects these
differences should have. Community hiring provisions in some form or another encourage hiring in the
city passing the living wage law, and are intended to encourage contractors (for example) to hire city
residents. Conceivably, if living wage laws reduce employment, then in cases where there are community
hiring provisions the employment impact on the city’s workforce could be mitigated if employment
reductions are more concentrated among non-residents; of course, since we study MSAs rather than cities,
any differences might be muted. Supersession by collective bargaining is sometimes interpreted as simply
encouraging employers to be more amenable to unionization, although living wage laws per se should
accomplish this because they make the threat point in union negotiations less attractive to employers. At
any rate, the evidence in Table 3 suggests that in both cases, living wage laws with these types of
provisions tend to have greater positive effects on wages, although the differences are not large relative to
the standard errors of the estimates.31 And correspondingly, living wage laws with these provisions have
stronger negative net employment effects; in this case the differences are marked.
Column (5) looks at living wage laws distinguished by whether or not the coverage of contractors
is broad. All else the same, to the extent that the contractor provisions of living wage laws have an effect,
we would expect the effect to be greater when broader coverage is specified. The estimates reflect this in
the employment effects of living wage laws, but not the wage effects. While the former result might appear
consistent with expectations, the ambiguity between the wage and employment results suggests that the

16

evidence of greater negative net employment effects of living wage laws with broader contractor coverage
should be viewed cautiously.
Finally, column (6) turns to Luce’s classification of living wage laws in terms of
enforcement/implementation. Here, like in column (5), the estimated employment effect is large and
significant only for those living wage laws with broad enforcement, which is sensible. With regard to the
wage effects, the point estimates are larger for these broader living wage laws, although the difference is
small and not statistically significant. All in all, though, this evidence is best interpreted as suggesting that
the living wage laws Luce classifies as having broader enforcement/implementation do have sharper
effects.32
Do Other Features of Living Wage Laws Explain the Stronger Effects of Business Assistance Laws?
In this sub-section we ask whether other provisions or features of living wage laws can account for
the stronger effects of business assistance living wage laws compared with contractor-only living wage
laws. Of course this is likely to be the case only for provisions or features of these laws that differ across
business assistance and contractor-only laws, as summarized in Table 1. Moreover, it is likely to be the
case for those provisions that appear to be associated with stronger (or weaker) effects of living wage laws.
With respect to Table 1, we noted earlier that the differences that appear to stand out are that business
assistance laws are considerably more likely to be in cities for which nearby cities also have living wage
laws, and in cities with community hiring provisions or with stronger enforcement/implementation.
Interestingly, the estimates in Table 3 suggested that the wage and employment effects are sharper when
living wages are accompanied by those in nearby cities or include community hiring provisions, and to
some extent also when enforcement/implementation is more broad. But here we turn to more direct
analysis of this question, and the complete set of results for the different features of living wage laws that
we consider.
The first analysis, based on equation (3), is reported in Table 4. Here we maintain separate
interactions for contractor-only and business assistance laws, and ask whether the greater wage and
employment effects associated with business assistance laws can be explained by other provisions or

17

features of living wage laws. The estimates in column (1) indicate that where county living wage laws
exist along with city living wage laws, the estimated wage effect of business assistance laws becomes
weaker and is no longer statistically significant. But the negative net employment effect becomes stronger
and remains statistically significant at the 5% level. Given that county living wage laws do not show up
more frequently among cities with business assistance provisions, we find it unlikely that county living
wage ordinances drive the stronger results for business assistance cities.
In columns (4), (5), and (6), looking at supersession by collective bargaining agreements, broad
contractor coverage, and broad enforcement/implementation, the estimates continue to indicate strong (if
anything, stronger) wage and employment effects of business assistance living wage laws. Thus, these
differences among living wage laws do not account for the stronger wage effects and negative net
employment effects of living wage laws that cover business assistance recipients.
The estimates in columns (2) and (3), for living wage laws in nearby cities and with community
hiring provisions, present a somewhat different picture. First, community hiring provisions appear to
account for the larger employment effects of business assistance living wage laws, as business assistance
laws without these provisions have essentially no detectable employment effect. On the other hand,
though, the wage effect of business assistance laws is not explained by this feature of living wage laws.
Coupled with the absence of an obvious reason why community hiring provisions should lead to stronger
employment effects, we do not view this evidence as overturning in a decisive way the findings regarding
business assistance laws.
In contrast, whether or not nearby cities have living wage laws appears to account more
successfully for the stronger wage and employment effects of business assistance laws. For both the wage
and employment effects, the large point estimates (positive for wages, and negative for employment) exist
for living wage laws coupled with living wages in nearby cities, and not for business assistance living wage
laws in the absence of living wages in nearby cities. These findings, combined with the expectation that
living wage laws are likely to have stronger effects when they also exist in nearby labor markets, suggest

18

that geographic concentration of living wage laws may in fact be more significant than the distinction
between business assistance and contractor-only living wage laws.
On the other hand, this inference is fragile. Note from Table 1 that many of the cities that have
business assistance living wage laws and do not have a living wage in a nearby city are quite small (e.g.,
Madison and Toledo). Thus, identification of the separate effects of business assistance provisions and
living wages in nearby cities comes from a relatively small number of observations. Reflecting this, when
we eliminate the three cities with laws that have business assistance provisions but no contractor coverage
(Minneapolis, Duluth, and San Antonio), living wages in nearby cities no longer matter, and in fact the
differences associated with business assistance living wage laws (irrespective of living wages in nearby
cities) re-emerges. The combined evidence therefore suggests that we cannot decisively determine whether
or not it is the geographic concentration of living wage laws or business assistance coverage that is
decisive, but it raises the possibility that business assistance provisions are not as central as some of our
earlier work has suggested. And the fragility of the findings with respect to this question points to the need
to revisit this question as more data on living wages become available in the future.
Table 5 takes this analysis one step further, reporting estimates of equation (4), which permits the
differences associated with business assistance versus contractor-only living wages to differ depending on
whether there is a living wage in a nearby city. We only look at the question of living wages in nearby
cities, given that the results just discussed seem to suggest that this is the one feature that may account for
the stronger effects of business assistance living wage laws. The motivation for this is to see whether the
stronger effects for living wages coupled with those in nearby cities holds across both types of living wage
laws, or whether instead it is simply business assistance living wage laws coupled with laws in nearby
cities that have stronger effects, which would leave more of an independent role for the business assistance
provisions, although the results would still suggest that that, on average, business assistance provisions of
living wage laws do not account for their stronger effects. The evidence regarding wage effects is
consistent with the second scenario, as it is only the combination of business assistance living wage
coverage plus living wages in nearby cities that yields a positive wage effect.33 On the other hand, for the

19

employment effects the evidence indicates that significant employment declines are associated with living
wage laws accompanied by living wages in nearby cities, regardless of whether the living wage law covers
contractors only or also extends to business assistance. Thus, this analysis, which is more taxing on the
data, provides mixed evidence on whether it is the business assistance provisions of living wage laws or the
presence of living wages in nearby cities that strengthens the effects of living wage laws. But clearly the
geographic concentration of living wage laws is an important part of the story, and this latter distinction
among living wage laws may be more significant than the contractor-only/business assistance distinction.
Features of Business Assistance Living Wage Laws
Finally, we explore some features of living wage laws that are unique to laws with business
assistance provisions, either by coincidence or construction. In particular, we ask how the effects of
business assistance living wage laws vary depending on whether they are accompanied by labor peace
provisions (which happen to occur only in the context of business assistance living wage laws), whether the
assistance coverage is narrow, and whether leaseholders are covered (the latter two are only defined for
business assistance laws).
If the preceding results had indicated that other features of living wage laws fully explained our
earlier findings regarding the stronger effects of business assistance living wage laws, then there would be
little if any motivation for this analysis. In fact, the previous subsection indicated that part of the reason we
tend to find that business assistance living wage laws have stronger wage and employment effects is
because these laws also tend to be the ones that are enacted in cities where there are also living wages in
nearby cities. But because the evidence was mixed, this final analysis further explores the effects of
business assistance living wage laws by asking whether features of these laws that should be associated
with variation in their effects are indeed associated with such variation (in the expected directions); this
helps both in providing additional evidence on whether the effects of business assistance living wage laws
that we find are real or spurious, and also in understanding what features of business assistance living wage
laws might strengthen or weaken their effects.

20

The results are reported in Table 6. It is not clear what to expect regarding labor peace agreements.
The point estimates are not very precise, but they suggest that living wage laws coupled with these
agreements result in larger positive wage effects; the estimated effect of a business assistance law absent a
labor peace agreement is only 3.00, versus 7.21 (3.00 + 4.21) when there is a labor peace agreement. In
contrast, the estimated employment effect if negative and little changed whether or not there is a labor
peace agreement.
The results for narrow coverage and leaseholder coverage are partially in accord with expectations.
The strong positive estimated wage effect of business assistance living wage laws (8.44) is nearly
completely offset when the coverage is narrow (as the estimated coefficient on the interaction is −7.05).
The same is true for the employment effect, for which the estimated effect is −8.59 for business assistance
laws that are not narrow, falling by 5.5 when assistance coverage is narrow. Similarly, the positive wage
effect, while imprecise, is larger for business assistance living wage laws that cover leaseholders.
However, there is no evidence of a correspondingly larger employment effect. Thus, the evidence is
mixed, but the weaker effects associated with narrow coverage and the stronger effects (for wages)
associated with leaseholder coverage are consistent with expectations regarding business assistance
coverage of living wage laws. Nonetheless, the earlier evidence regarding the business assistance versus
the nearby cities distinction indicates that the geographic concentration of living wage laws may be the
more important feature determining the strength of the effects of living wage laws.
V. Conclusions
This paper considers a variety of different features of living wage laws—such as the breadth of
coverage, community hiring provisions, whether leaseholders are covered, and the existence of living
wages in nearby jurisdictions—and how they influence the strength of the effects of living wages on wages
and employment of low-wage, low-skill individuals. This question is of general interest in furthering our
understanding of living wage laws. It is also motivated by findings in our past research that living wage
laws that apply only to city contractors do not have detectable effects on wages or employment of low-skill

21

individuals, but that strong wage and employment effects arise for living wage laws that cover recipients of
business assistance from the city (almost always in conjunction with coverage of contractors).
Given the small number of living wage laws with which to try to distinguish the effects of
alternative features of these laws, the evidence is often not very decisive statistically. In particular, we are
unable to simultaneously estimate the effects of the variety of potentially important features of living wage
laws that we have identified, and recognize that if we could do this our evidence would be stronger. And in
the more limited specifications we do estimate, the estimates are sometimes imprecise. As a result, in our
opinion this research is better viewed as opening up a number of questions about the influence of different
features of living wage laws, and beginning to try to shed some light on these questions, rather than as
providing definitive answers. With that qualification in mind, though, the analysis does provide some
intriguing findings.
First, we suggested in the introduction that the strongest and most substantive alternative
explanation of our findings regarding the greater strength of business assistance living wage laws is that
these laws are not fundamentally different, but have arisen in cities where stronger living wage campaigns
have resulted in stronger living wage laws generally. We examine this hypothesis relying on Luce’s
(forthcoming) categorization of the enforcement and implementation of living wage laws in cities that have
passed them. Consistent with this alternative hypothesis, living wage laws for which
enforcement/implementation are more broad exhibit stronger negative net employment effects, and perhaps
slightly larger wage effects. On the other hand, these stronger effects associated with broader enforcement
or implementation do not explain the stronger wage and employment effects of business assistance living
wage laws. So while stronger enforcement and implementation matters—which is reassuring from the
perspective of assessing whether the living wage effects we identify are real or spurious—the greater
impact of business assistance living wage laws is not attributable simply to business assistance laws
coinciding with laws with stronger enforcement or implementation.
We also considered a number of other features of living wage laws that might help explain when
living wage laws have more “bite,” and specifically might account for the apparent stronger effects of

22

business assistance living wage laws. Simply looking at various features of living wage laws and ignoring
the issue of contractor-only versus business assistance laws, we find that living wage laws with community
hiring provisions or living wage laws that can be superseded by collective bargaining appear to have
greater positive effects on wages and more so stronger employment effects. Living wage laws with broader
contractor coverage exhibit stronger employment effects, although not stronger wage effects. Finally,
living wage laws have stronger wage and employment effects when they are enacted (or raised) in cities for
which neighboring cities also have living wages. When the county also has an ordinance, then the wage
effects (but not the employment effects) are stronger. For the most part, the differences among the effects
of different types of living wage laws that we do find are consistent with expectations, although the
expected differences are not always apparent in the data.
When we turn to the narrower question of whether some of these differences among living wage
laws can help explain the difference between the estimated impacts of contractor-only and business
assistance living wage laws, we find that a considerably higher share of business assistance living wage
laws are in cities whose neighbors also have living wage laws. And whether or not nearby cities have
living wage laws appears to help account for the stronger wage and employment effects of business
assistance laws, although the inference is fragile. Thus, living wages in nearby cities may be part of the
reason why we see stronger effects of living wage laws in cities that cover firms receiving business
assistance.
Finally, we look more closely at business assistance living wage laws, and try to assess whether
they should be viewed as real or spurious by asking whether features of these laws are correlated with the
strength of their wage or employment effects in the directions we might expect. The evidence here is
mixed, with some evidence of stronger effects when coverage is broad and when leaseholders are covered.
All told, while the evidence does not point unambiguously in one direction, and is not statistically
overwhelming, it does suggest that variation in the effects of living wage laws could have more to do with
the concentration of many living wage laws in contiguous or nearby labor markets, rather than with
coverage of business assistance recipients. Some may find this source of variation in the strength of living

23

wage effects more palatable, in part because of skepticism about the enforcement and implementation of
business assistance living wage laws, and in part because the mechanism by which “overlapping” living
wage laws enhance their effect is perhaps more obvious than the mechanism by which business assistance
provisions enhance their effect. Regardless of the precise conclusion one draws regarding this point, we
believe this research points to the potential importance of accounting for variations in living wage laws
that—aside from the level of the mandated wage floor—influence their effects on wages, employment, and
perhaps other outcomes as well.

24

References
Adams, Scott, and David Neumark. “Living Wage Effects: New and Improved Evidence.” Forthcoming in
Economic Development Quarterly.
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2002. “How Much Should We Trust
Differences-in-Differences Estimates?” Working Paper No. 8841. Cambridge, MA: National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Brenner, Mark D. “The Economic Impact of the Boston Living Wage Ordinance.” Forthcoming in
Industrial Relations.
Brenner, Mark D., Jennifer Wicks-Lim, and Robert Pollin. 2002. “Measuring the Impact of Living Wage
Laws: A Critical Appraisal of David Neumark’s ‘How Living Wage Laws Affect Low-Wage
Workers and Low-Income Families’.” Working Paper No. 43. Amherst, MA: Political Economy
Research Institute.
Fairris, David. “The Impact of Living Wages on Employers: A Control Group Analysis of the Los Angeles
Ordinance.” Forthcoming in Industrial Relations.
Hamermesh, Daniel S. 1993. Labor Demand. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Luce, Stephanie. Fighting for a Living Wage. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, forthcoming.
Neumark, David. 2002. How Living Wage Laws Affect Low-Wage Workers and Low-Income Families.
San Francisco: Public Policy Institute of California.
Neumark, David, and Scott Adams. 2003a. “Detecting Effects of Living Wage Laws.” Industrial Relations
42 (October):531-64.
Neumark, David, and Scott Adams. 2003b. “Do Living Wage Ordinances Reduce Urban Poverty?” Journal
of Human Resources 38 (Summer):490-521.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2004. BLS Handbook of Methods (on line at www.bls.gov/opub/hom).
U.S. Bureau of the Census. 1997. “CPS Technical Paper 63: Design & Methodology.” Washington, DC.

Table 1: Coding of Living Wage Lawsa

(1)

Contractor
coverage
(2)

Assistance
coverage
(3)

Assistance coverage
includes
tenants/leaseholders
(4)

Community
hiring
(5)

Labor
peace
(6)

Superseded by
collective
bargaining
(7)

Enforcement /
implementation
(8)

County
(9)

Nearby cities
(10)

Contractor only
Baltimore

Medium

Boston

Yes

Broad

Burlington

Yes

Chicago

Narrow

Denver

Narrow

Durham

Narrow

Jersey City

Narrow

Milwaukee

Narrow

New Haven
Portland
San Francisco

Yes

Yes

Narrow
Yes

Tucson

Yes

Yes
(1998)

Yes
(1999)
Yes
(1997)

Medium
Narrow

Broad

Yes (1999)

NA

Yes (earliest
1999)
Yes
(1996)

Broad

Yes (many,
earliest 1998)

Broad

Yes
(2002)

NA

Yes
(2001)

Business
assistance plus
contractor
Ann Arbor

Yes

Cleveland

Yes

Yes

Medium

Detroit

Yes

Yes

Narrow

Hartford
Los Angeles

Narrow

Yes

Broad

Madison
Oakland

Broad

Yes

Narrow
Yes

Broad

Yes

NA

Yes

Medium

Yes

Broad

Rochester
San Jose

Yes
(1999)
Yes
(1999)

Yes (many,
earliest 1998)
Yes (many,
earliest 1999)
Yes (earliest
1997)
Yes (earliest
1996)
Yes (many,
earliest 1998)

NA
Narrow

Toledo

Yes
Yes (narrow)

Yes
(1995)

Yes (many,
earliest 1998)

NA

Business
assistance only
Duluth

Yes

Minneapolis

Yes

San Antonio
a

Narrow

Yes
Yes

Yes

Narrow
Medium
Medium

Yes (1997)
Yes
(2001)

This table was compiled using information from http://www.epionline.org/livingwage/index.cfm and

http://www.livingwageresearch.org/, and from Luce (forthcoming). In columns (2) and (3), the absence of an entry indicates that the
contractors or assistance coverage was neither particularly narrow nor broad compared to other living wage laws. In columns (4)-(7),
(9), and (10) we have included only “yes” entries; blank spaces indicate the absence of the particular feature of living wage laws to
which the column refers.

Table 2: The Impact of Living Wage Laws on Wages and Employment, Bottom Decile of Wage
or Skill Distributiona
Wages
Bottom decile of wage/skill distribution:
Living wage 12 months ago (γ)
× business assistance coverage (γ1)
× contractor-only coverage (γ2)
Sample size
Mean
Bottom quartile of wage/skill distribution:
Living wage 12 months ago (γ)
× business assistance coverage (γ1)
× contractor-only coverage (γ2)

a

Sample size
Mean

(1)
4.01
(2.97)
…

(2)
…
6.68
(3.86)
-0.56
(3.69)

…
46,374
5.60
1.58
(1.99)
…

…

2.25
(2.50)
…
-0.04
(2.20)
104,475
6.88

Employment
(3)
(4)
-5.25
…
(1.95)
…
-7.63
(1.79)
…
-2.74
(3.33)
116,466
43.37
-1.92
(1.79)
…

…

-2.06
(1.53)
…
-1.71
(3.84)
282,265
52.43

Reported are the estimated effects of the living wage on the log wage (employment) of individuals in the

bottom decile or quartile of the wage (predicted wage) distribution in the MSA-month cell. Estimates of
the effects on employment are from linear probability models. The specifications correspond to equation
(1) (columns (1) and (3)) and equation (2) (columns (2) and (4)) in the text, and the corresponding
coefficient from the specifications are listed in the left-hand column. Standard errors are reported in
parentheses. All estimates are multiplied by 100. For an MSA’s data to be included in the sample for a
particular month, there must be at least 25 observations in that MSA-month cell. Observations for which
allocated information is required to construct the dependent variable in the CPS are dropped. The
estimations include controls for year, month, MSA, education, age, marital status, race, sex, and the
minimum wage at the same lag as the living wage variable. Reported standard errors are robust to nonindependence (and heteroscedasticity) within city cells, following the suggestions in Bertrand, et al. (2002).

Table 3: Wage and Employment Effects of Various Provisions, Bottom Decile of Wage or Skill Distributiona

Wage effects:
Living wage 12 months ago
With provision (γ1)
Other laws (γ2)

County
(1)

Nearby
cities
(2)

Community
hiring
(3)

11.05
(4.84)
1.41
(3.78)

9.25*
(3.97)
-2.14
(3.40)

5.73
(5.55)
3.34
(3.45)

Living wage law provision:
Superseded by
Broad contractor
collective bargaining
coverage
(4)
(5)
5.21
(4.84)
4.25
(3.53)

Employment effects:
Living wage 12 months ago
With provision (γ1)

-1.57
(3.44)
5.66
(3.41)

Broad enforcement
/ implementation
(6)
4.47
(4.34)
3.56
(3.79)

-3.02
-9.84*
-12.38*
-8.08
-9.70
-9.32
(3.57)
(2.17)
(2.67)
(2.20)
(1.20)
(3.17)
-5.80
-1.64
-1.10
-3.88
-4.31
-4.02
Other laws (γ2)
(2.00)
(2.21)
(2.12)
(2.46)
(2.36)
(2.68)
a
See notes to Table 2. Specifications correspond to equation (2) in the text. The asterisks denote that the impact of laws with the
provision/feature is significantly different from the impact of other laws at the 5% level.

Table 4: Wage and Employment Effects of Business Assistance Laws, Controlling for Other Provisions of Laws,
Bottom Decile of Wage or Skill Distributiona

Wage effects:
Living wage 12 months ago
Business assistance (γB)
Contractor-only (γC)
With provision (γP)
Employment effects:
Living wage 12 months ago
Business assistance (γB)

County
(1)

Nearby
cities
(2)

Community
hiring
(3)

4.53
(4.19)
-5.10
(4.09)
11.78
(4.55)

-1.25
(5.27)
-2.80
(4.14)
10.76
(6.46)

7.85
(4.40)
0.37
(3.89)
-1.14
(6.68)

Living wage law provision:
Superseded by
Broad contractor
collective bargaining
coverage
(4)
(5)

-7.90
-1.85
-1.75
(2.13)
(4.03)
(2.44)
-3.85
-0.79
-0.22
Contractor-only (γC)
(3.45)
(2.50)
(2.16)
2.89
-8.54
-11.75
With provision (γP)
(3.45)
(4.74)
(3.43)
a
See notes to Table 2. Specifications correspond to equation (3) in the text.

Broad enforcement
/ implementation
(6)

9.00
(5.37)
-0.18
(3.46)
-2.47
(6.66)

10.04
(4.79)
0.31
(3.41)
-9.97
(4.81)

6.73
(5.17)
-0.72
(3.72)
0.04
(5.85)

-6.66
(2.85)
-2.47
(3.36)
-2.28
(3.57)

-7.82
(2.42)
-2.57
(3.36)
-2.76
(2.99)

-8.29
(2.67)
-1.50
(2.85)
-3.07
(4.51)

Table 5: The Influence of Living Wages in Nearby Cities on the Effects of ContractorOnly and Business Assistance Living Wage Laws, Bottom Decile of Wage or Skill
Distributiona

Living wage 12 months ago
Contractor-only
Business assistance
Nearby city
Business assistance × nearby city
a

Wage effects
(1)

Employment effects
(2)

-0.51
(3.87)
-5.24
(4.40)
-1.71
(8.51)
17.66
(10.71)

0.07
(2.74)
-3.41
(4.35)
-13.73
(5.85)
7.75
(7.97)

See notes to Table 2. Specifications correspond to equation (4) in the text.

Table 6: Effects of Features Unique to Business Assistance Laws, Bottom Decile of Wage or Skill
Distributiona
Labor
peace
(1)
Living wage 12 months ago
business assistance
business assistance × provision
a

3.00
(4.91)
4.21
(5.29)

Wage effects
Narrow
Leaseholders
coverage
covered
(2)
(3)
8.44
(3.65)
-7.05
(6.26)

5.64
(4.73)
5.38
(10.52)

Labor
peace
(4)
-7.33
(1.46)
-1.60
(5.75)

Employment effects
Narrow
Leaseholders
coverage
covered
(5)
(6)
-8.59
(1.96)
5.50
(3.96)

-7.86
(2.59)
1.16
(4.25)

See notes to Table 2. The specification corresponds to equation (4) in the text, but including the LP terms only when

interacted with LB, given that features of living wage laws unique to business assistance laws are considered. The
estimated coefficients for contractor-only laws are not shown.

Endnotes
1

For current information, see www.epionline.org.

2

The same paper also addresses criticisms of our methods and earlier estimates in Brenner, et al. (2002).

3

A table with additional details on each living wage law is available from the authors upon request.

4

In some cases a higher wage is mandated if health insurance coverage is not provided. We show the lower

wage, and use it in the estimates reported in this paper; in all of our analyses the results have been insensitive to
which of the wages we use.
5

We also looked at exemptions, which exist for non-profits, trainees or youths, small business, etc. However,

these are not easily classified into a small number of groups, and hence are not considered in the analysis.
6

Private communication with Jen Kern, from ACORN’s Living Wage Resource Center (June 2003). This

conversation led us to perform the analysis that appears in the final table of the paper, where we examine
whether particular features of business assistance laws appear to drive the results for this type of law.
7

The classification of Tucson’s law with respect to community hiring is a bit ambiguous because the law

specifies a goal of 60 percent city residents only for eligible employees on eligible contracts, which may be quite
narrow. Nonetheless, we coded Tucson as having a community hiring provision, but we verified that the results
were not sensitive to classifying Tucson as not having such a provision.
8

This information is missing for a few of the smaller cities, in which case they are dropped from the empirical

analysis reported below.
9

Column (10) also gives an indication of whether many nearby cities have living wages.

10

Specifically, for part of 1995, Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) codes are unavailable in the ORGs due to

phasing in of a new CPS sample based on the 1990 Census.
11

The CPS is a stratified random sample based on sampling units within strata. However, the sampling units

made up of the most populous areas (including large- and medium-sized metropolitan areas) are in strata by
themselves, so that these areas are always sampled, and, by design, sampling units are self-representing. That is,
the sampling unit covering an MSA is intended to be representative of the population of that MSA, not that MSA
plus other sampling units in the strata. Finally, the households sampled within each sampling unit are chosen to
be representative of the demographic and socioeconomic characteristics of the sampling unit. As a result, we can
use the CPS to construct representative wage and skill distributions for MSAs. In a small number of cases,
though, outlying counties are excluded from the CPS sampling frame for an MSA, in which case the data are

representative of the remainder of the MSA. (See U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2004; U.S. Bureau of the
Census, 1997).
12

A related issue regarding the CPS is whether we have enough observations on workers covered by living

wages to reliably estimate the effects of living wage laws. See the discussion of this point in Brenner, et al.
(2002) and Adams and Neumark (forthcoming).
13

For the estimation of wage effects, we restricted our sample to workers with an hourly wage greater than $1

and less than or equal to $100. We also limited the sample to those who were ages 16 to 70. The latter
restriction also applied to the employment analysis.
14

It is appropriate to include these controls in case the workforce in a city shifts over time in such a way as to

influence wage levels. However, any such changes are likely to be minor, and the results are robust to the
exclusion of these controls.
15

In the few cases of MSAs that straddle states with different minimum wages in some years (Davenport-Quad

Cities, Iowa; Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Portland, Oregon; and Providence, Rhode Island), we used a weighted
average of the minimum wages in the two states, weighting by the shares of the MSA population in each state
(averaged over the months of 1996).
16

Alternatively, we have estimated these specifications using dummy variables for each distinct month-year pair,

rather than month and year dummy variables separately. The results were the same.
17

The idea behind imposing the minimum wage as the floor in the absence of a living wage is that the living

wage effect is identified from whatever sectors of the workforce or population have their wage affected by a
living wage law, but in the absence of the living wage the minimum wage would still bind for these sectors. The
alternative would be to substitute the expression γ’·max[ln(wlivjst),0] for γ·max[ln(wlivjst),ln(wminjst)], where in the
absence of a living wage wlivjst would equal zero, and max[ln(wlivjst),0] would therefore equal zero. Given that
the minimum wage most likely binds on workers affected by the living wage, this seems like a misspecification.
Nonetheless, we also estimated the models using this latter specification. As we would expect, the estimate of γ’
was considerably smaller than the estimate of γ, because the scale of variation of the alternative living wage
variable is much larger, with the bottom of the range extending to zero instead of ln(wminjst). However, the
results were qualitatively similar in terms of statistical significance and the implied effect of imposing a typical
living wage.
18

For key specifications, we re-estimated the effects without lagging the minimum wage, and we found it

resulted in no appreciable change in the results.

19

Among the MSAs with a living wage effective in a particular month, the living wage was below the 10th

centile in 18% of the cases, and between the 10th and 25th centiles in 65% of the cases. We also report results for
our basic specifications conditioning on wage or predicted wages lying below the 25th centile, rather than the
10th.
20

Our work has been subjected over time to alternative analyses and specification checks. For example, when an

unconditional quantile regression is estimated, which measures the effects of living wages on those whose wages
are low in an absolute sense, effects similar to those we find using equation (1) are obtained. The same is true if
we simply estimate equation (1) for the 10th centile. In addition, to address the possibility that living wages are
passed concurrently with other policies at the state level that may impact wages positively (or employment
negatively), we have used within-state control groups (rather than all other urban workers), which resulted in
similar estimates (Neumark and Adams, 2003a). Finally, one of us has attempted to perform an event analysis,
where we examine trends before and after the passage of laws (Neumark, 2002). The results were less
informative but supported the general findings.
21

We do this in a simple manner, estimating a standard log wage regression with year and month controls and

using predicted log wages from the estimated regression to construct imputed wage distributions for the MSAmonth cell. Of course, the market wages faced by those who choose not to work are likely lower than those
faced by observationally equivalent individuals who choose to work; this is the standard sample selection
problem. We verified that reducing the imputed wages of the non-workers by 5% and 10% leads to results that
were qualitatively similar.
22

The business assistance laws may or may not include contractor provisions as well, although most do (see

Table 1).
23

L1 and L2 are a flexible way to denote that we are looking at the effects of laws with and without a given

feature. For example, L1 may be laws with business assistance provisions and L2 laws without business
assistance provisions (contractor-only laws). Alternatively, L1 might indicate a city with a law that is in a county
with a separate living wage law; L2 would then indicate a city with a law that is in a county without a separate
law. Other features, such as nearby cities, community hiring provisions, etc., are similarly examined.
24

In principle, the L1 and L2 variables in the max operators should have ‘t’ subscripts, because some

characteristics of living wage laws—in particular, whether nearby cities or the county in which a city is located
have living wages—can change over time. The analyses of living wages in the county or nearby cities are the
only ones to use variation over time in features of living wage laws.

25

Note that this specification allows for four different effects of living wage laws: business assistance laws with

the provision and without the provision, and contractor-only laws with and without the provision. The model
can be parameterized in alternative ways, but the one in equation (4) is most convenient for asking whether the
differential effect of business assistance versus contractor-only laws varies with the provision under
consideration.
26

The difference-in-differences approach can lead to spurious findings of statistically significant results in the

presence of positive serial correlation in the errors, the influence of which is exacerbated by the positive serial
correlation in the measure of the treatment that is typical of difference-in-differences analyses (Bertrand, et al.,
2002). In all of the regression tables, we report standard errors that allow for arbitrary autocorrelations across
observations for each city, which should eliminate any downward bias in the estimated standard errors. This is
one of the solutions Bertrand, et al., propose to the problem of downward bias in the estimated standard errors in
difference-in-differences analyses. In an example they consider, this approach generates accurate standard errors
and hence inferences as long as there is a large number of groups. In their example they consider 51 groups
(corresponding to a state-level analysis) to be large number for which this approach works well; we in fact have
far more groups, as we study cities rather than states.
27

This is calculated by dividing the point estimate of –5.25 by the mean employment rate among the lowest

skilled (43.37%, as reported in Table 2).
28

Note that in the context of raising a wage floor, especially for a subset of workers, the employment effect

represents a combination of demand and supply effects, which may include employment reductions among the
least-skilled from demand reductions, employment increases among the more-skilled from demand increases,
and supply shifts as, for example, wages and hours of family members change.
29

If this estimated employment effect is compared with the estimated wage effect, the evidence indicates an

employment elasticity with respect to the “realized” wage increase of −2.6 ({−7.63/.44}/−6.68), larger than the
−0.5 figure that is taken as a consensus in the labor demand literature (Hamermesh, 1993). (Note that this refers
to the overall labor demand elasticity, not the elasticity of labor demand with respect to minimum wages; the
latter is necessarily smaller because the minimum wage increases relatively few workers’ wages, and even then
typically not dollar for dollar.) This suggests that the estimated negative employment effect, insofar as it arises
solely due to the “average” wage effect of living wages, is larger than would be expected. However, living
wages may entail greater increases in projected future labor costs than the wage increase that identifies the

typical labor demand elasticity, given their frequent indexation. Also, this elasticity focuses on one narrow
category of workers, rather than labor overall, so that substitution possibilities may be considerably greater.
30

This is still true if we exclude those business assistance cities where laws apply only to business assistance

recipients and not to firms under contract.
31

One might actually expect weaker effects on wages when living wage laws can be superseded by collective

bargaining. The voice mechanism that unions allow, and the flexibility to forego the wage level mandated by the
living wage law, may result in unions using the leverage provided by living wage laws to push for other benefits
or conditions of employment rather than higher wages. Fairris (this issue) presents some other evidence for city
contractors in Los Angeles suggesting that the positive wage impact of the city’s living wage laws was smaller
for unionized contractors.
32

Although laws classified as having narrow enforcement/implementation are more prevalent among contractor-

only laws, if we instead contrasted narrow laws with broad/medium laws the results were more anomalous.
33

The effect of living wages with these characteristics is 10.71 (17.66 – 5.24 – 1.71), and this estimate has a

standard error of 4.25.

