NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GROWTH VOLATILITY AND
FINANCIAL LIBERALIZATION
Geert Bekaert
Campbell R. Harvey
Christian Lundblad
Working Paper 10560
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10560
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2004

We thank Susan Collins for inspiring this paper. We appreciate the comments of Andrew Frankel, Blake
LeBaron, Marco Del Negro, Vihang Errunza, Yasushi Hamao, Roberto Rigobon, Lubos Pastor and seminar
participants at Cass Business School, Fordham University, University of Porto, ISCTE Lisbon, HEC
Lausanne, the National Bank of Belgium Conference on E ciency and Stability in an Evolving Financial
System, the European Finance Association meetings in Berlin, and the American Economic Association
meetings in Washington, D.C. Send correspondence to: Campbell R. Harvey, Fuqua School of Business,
Duke University, Durham, NC 27708. Phone: +1 919.660.7768, E-mail: cam.harvey@duke.edu . The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2004 by Geert Bekaert, Campbell R. Harvey, and Christian Lundblad. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Growth Volatility and Financial Liberalization
Geert Bekaert, Campbell R. Harvey, and Christian Lundblad
NBER Working Paper No. 10560
June 2004
JEL No. E32, F30, F36, F43, G15, G18, G28
ABSTRACT
We examine the effects of both equity market liberalization and capital account openness on real
consumption growth variability. We show that financial liberalization is mostly associated with
lower consumption growth volatility. Our results are robust, surviving controls for business-cycle
effects, economic and financial development, the quality of institutions, and other variables.
Countries that have more open capital accounts experience a greater reduction in consumption
growth volatility after equity market openings. The results hold for both total and idiosyncratic
consumption growth volatility. We also find that financial liberalizations are associated with
declines in the ratio of consumption growth volatility to GDP growth volatility, suggesting improved
risk sharing. Our results are weaker for liberalizing emerging markets but we never observe an
increase in real volatility. Moreover, we demonstrate significant differences in the volatility response
depending on the size of the banking and government sectors and certain institutional factors.
Geert Bekaert
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway/802 Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
gb241@columbia.edu
Campbell R. Harvey
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708-0120
and NBER
cam.harvey@duke.edu
Christian Lundblad
Indiana University
clundbla@indiana.edu

1

Introduction

Is the cost to a country for opening its financial markets to foreign portfolio investment
increased economic volatility? Our research suggests the answer is no. Our research question
bridges at least two distinct literatures.
First, there is a heated debate in the growth and development economics literature on the
costs and benefits of financial liberalization. Research focusing on capital account openness
finds mixed results (see Eichengreen (2001) for a survey), but articles focusing on equity market liberalization typically find significant positive average growth effects from liberalization
(see, for example, Bekaert, Harvey and Lundblad (2001, 2004)).
Policy makers in developing countries, however, are interested in more than the average
effect. The crises in Mexico and South East Asia have focused attention on the potentially
disruptive effects of foreign speculative capital that may leave at a whim and abruptly
throw whole countries or regions into recession. There is a perception that foreign capital
not only increases volatility in the financial markets, but also in the real economy, and
that such volatility is not desired (see Stiglitz (2000) and Agenor (2003)). The perceived
disadvantages of unbridled capital flows have recently brought back proposals for a Tobin
tax on cross-border capital flows even between developed markets (see Eichengreen, Tobin,
and Wyplosz (1995)).
Second, there is an extensive literature on the benefits of international risk sharing. This
literature explicitly recognizes that open capital markets lead to international risk sharing,
which should improve welfare. Due to a multitude of reasons such as home asset preference,
imperfect market integration, and incomplete insurance markets, the benefits of international
risk sharing are not realized and, consequently, the main question the literature attempts to
answer is how large these benefits potentially would be. Most studies use consumption-based
endowment models to measure the utility benefit of moving from the current situation to a
situation of optimal risk sharing. A major component of the benefits of international risk
sharing is the reduction of the variability of consumption growth, and often level effects are
simply ignored (Obstfeld (1994) is an important exception). So far, there appears to be no
consensus about the extent of the benefits of international risk sharing (see van Wincoop
(1999) and Lewis (1999)).

1

Our study contributes to this debate by testing directly whether consumption growth
volatility changes after financial liberalization. If there are genuine benefits to international
risk sharing, we expect to observe reduced consumption growth volatility. If instead, financial
liberalization leads to increased financial fragility and crises (Furman and Stiglitz (1998)),
we expect to observe increased volatility. Of course, the presence of a positive level effect
implies that finding no significant volatility effect generally suffices to conclude that liberalizations improved welfare. Importantly, we can conduct this test with minimal parametric
assumptions.
Our research plan faces several challenges.
First, we must measure financial liberalization. Our first measure narrowly focuses on
the equity market which should be particularly relevant for risk sharing, and relies on the
measures developed by Bekaert and Harvey (2000). We also want to more broadly examine
capital account openness and we use the standard IMF measure as well as measure compiled
by Quinn (1997), which corrects for the degree of openness. We describe these measures,
some initial analysis and the empirical framework in Section 2.
Second, we face an identification and simultaneity problem. Is it liberalization that
has an effect on volatility or another characteristic of the country? Is the liberalization
strategically timed when volatility is expected to change? Or does the liberalization effect
reflect the effects of simultaneous reforms, for example regarding macro-economic policy or
the domestic financial sector? Section 3 contains the main results, showing the liberalization
effect in the presence of controls for economic development, the size of the government
sector, the presence and extent of social security benefits, time trends etc., including a large
number of robustness checks. Section 4 explicitly deals with the endogeneity and simultaneity
problems. In this section, we control for the presence of macroeconomic imbalances, financial
development, and more generally, the quality of institutions. Our findings remain robust:
in a large cross-section, equity market liberalization and capital account openness (when
measured properly) are associated with substantial lower consumption growth variability.
It is even the case that the effect of equity market liberalization is larger for countries
with a relatively more open capital account. In a sample totally focusing on the temporal
effect in mostly emerging, liberalizing countries, we never observe a significant increase in
volatility. Mostly, the volatility effect is insignificantly different from zero, but it is sometimes
2

significantly negative as well, especially when measured with indicators that take the degree
of liberalization or openness into account.
Third, it is conceivable that liberalization affects the variability of the shocks a country
faces in addition to its ability to smooth shocks over time. For example, perhaps an economy
can now afford to become more specialized or volatile capital flows may occassionally disrupt
the real economy. To investigate this further, we examine the impact of liberalization on
GDP growth volatility and on the ratio of consumption growth volatility to GDP growth
volatility. We find in section 5 that the GDP volatility effects are similar to the consumption
growth variability effects, but much weaker, leading to an almost always significantly lower
volatility ratio. This evidence points towards an improved ability to smooth shocks post
liberalization.
Fourth, the inability to find a significant effect among the liberalizing countries potentially hides important cross-sectional differences among the liberalization response for different
countries. A substantial interaction analysis hows that countries with relatively large government sectors and developed banking sectors experience significant reductions in volatility
but countries with poor investor protection experience significant increases in volatility.
Some concluding remarks are offered in the final section. An appendix describes our data
sources and our econometric framework.

2

Empirical Model and Data Description

2.1

A simple econometric model

Denote the logarithmic growth in real consumption per capita for country i between year
t and t + 1 as yi,t+1 . We define the growth rate variability, Stdevi,t+k,k , as the standard
deviation of the consumption growth rate estimated over k years, that is, with {yi,t+j },
j = 1, . . . , 5.1
In the tradition of the growth literature, our primary regressions can be specified as
1

We also constructed an alternative measure of volatility based on the high-low range of output or

consumption growth over the observed k years. This measure avoids the implicit estimation of the mean
inherent in standard deviation calculations. However, the range measure is highly correlated with the
standard deviation using the range in the regression produces qualitatively very similar results.

3

follows:
Stdevi,t+k,k = γ 0 Qi,t + αLibi,t + i,t+k,k .

(1)

Similar to standard growth regressions, the Qit variables control for different levels of consumption growth variability across countries. Our main focus is the effect, α, of equity
market liberalization or capital account openness, denoted by Libi,t , on growth variability.
Most importantly, in addition to cross-country information, this econometric method facilitates the exploration of the time-series dimension of growth variability inherent in the
liberalization process. To maximize the time-series content in our regression, we use overlapping data and deal with the resulting moving average component in the residuals by
adjusting the standard errors as a cross-sectional extension to Hansen and Hodrick (1980).2
We estimate this system with pre-determined regressors, using a GMM estimator more fully
described in the Appendix. Our main estimator corrects for country-specific heteroskedasticity and we can also accommodate SUR effects.
In the Appendix, we also describe a Monte Carlo experiment that examines the accuracy
of the volatility change estimator, and the size and power of test statistics for α̂. We estimate a cross-sectional model on one-year consumption growth rates with an average growth
effect of liberalization and with (alternative) and without (null) a volatility effect. When we
construct the five-year standard deviation measure from the simulation and run our regression on a liberalization indicator, we find the estimator to be unbiased under the null and
the t-test for significance to have considerable power. However, the t-statistic (in absolute
magnitude) needed to reach 5% significance must be larger than 3.00 instead of the standard
1.96 under a normal distribution.

2.2
2.2.1

Measuring liberalization
Equity market liberalization

We consider two measures of equity market liberalization. The “Official Liberalization”
indicator takes a value of one when the equity market is officially (by regulation) liberalized;
2

The Hansen-Hodrick (1980) estimator does not guarantee positive semi-definiteness of the weighting

matrix. If the matrix turns out to be not positive semi-definite, we increase the lag length by 1 and use the
Newey-West (1987) estimator.

4

otherwise, it takes a value of zero. Official liberalization dates are drawn from the chronology
presented in Bekaert and Harvey (2002) and expanded to all the countries considered in this
study in Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad (2004).
Our second measure of equity market liberalization, “Intensity” takes into account that
most liberalizations are not one-time events, they are gradual and may not be comprehensive
at first. Our intensity indicator follows Bekaert (1995) and Edison and Warnock (2003), who
take the ratio of the market capitalizations of the constituent members of the IFC investable
and the IFC global indices for each country. In this context, a ratio of one means that
all of the stocks are available to foreign investors. For example, during the 1990s Korea
lifted foreign ownership restrictions in a number of steps leading to an intensity indicator
that gradually moved from zero to one. For both indicators, fully segmented countries are
assumed to have an indicator value of zero, and fully liberalized countries are assumed to
have an indicator value of one.
Whereas we phrase our discussion in terms of restrictions on inflows, most liberalizations
relax inflows and outflows simultaneously, e.g. Mathieson and Rojas-Suarez (1993). This is
essential to realize risk sharing benefits.

2.2.2

Capital account openness

We consider two measures of capital account openness. Our first measure is from IMF’s
Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions (AREAER) [see also
Grilli and Milesi-Ferretti (1995)]. The IMF publication details several categories of information, mostly on current account restrictions. The capital account openness dummy variable
takes on a value of zero if the country has at least one restriction in the “restrictions on
payments for the capital account transactions” category.
Eichengreen (2001) has criticized the IMF capital account measure for being too coarse
and therefore uninformative. The second measure of capital account openness is from Quinn
(1997) and Quinn and Toyota (2003) and is also created from the annual volume published
by the IMF’s AREAER. However, in contrast to the binary IMF indicator, Quinn’s openness
measure is scored from 0 to 4, with 4 representing a fully open economy. Quinn grades capital
payments and receipts separately on a scale of 0 to 2 (0.5 increments), and then adds the two.
The scale is determined as follows: 0=approval required and rarely granted; 0.5=approval
5

required and sometimes granted; 1.0=no restrictions but official approval required (and frequently granted) plus transaction is taxed; 1.5=no official approval needed but transaction
may be taxed; and 2.0=free. The Quinn measure picks up the degree to which the capital
account is open and is analogous to our intensity indicator for equity market liberalization.
We transform the Quinn measure into a 0 to 1 scale.

2.2.3

Other data

Our macroeconomic and financial data, spanning 1980-2000, are drawn from a number of
sources detailed in the appendix. In our empirical exercises, we consider two different country
samples. Sample I represents the 95 countries where all the main macroeconomic variables
are available. Sample II includes the 40 countries that have experienced an equity market
liberalization. Most of these countries are emerging markets but the sample also includes
New Zealand and Japan. In sample I, the identification of the liberalization effect on growth
volatility comes from both cross-sectional (segmented versus liberalized countries) and temporal (pre versus post liberalization) variation.

2.2.4

Summary analysis

Table 1 reports a summary analysis of the volatility effect. For the group of 40 liberalizing
countries, 26 countries experience a decrease in consumption growth volatility and 14 countries experience an increase after liberalizations. On average, consumption growth volatility
decreases after liberalizations, from 0.052 to 0.045. However, an equally weighted average
might give undue weight to some small countries. If we weight by the level of consumption, the average volatility decreases from 0.047 to 0.033. This difference is not statistically
significant.
Importantly, this summary analysis is unconditional: in the next section, we control for
other forces that might impact growth volatility.

6

3

Consumption Growth Volatility and Financial Liberalization

3.1

Equity market liberalization and growth variability

In Table 2, we explore the role of control variables in the relation between consumption
growth volatility and equity market liberalization. In the first panel, we run a fixed effects
regression examining the 40 country sample. There is a decrease in consumption growth
volatility of 0.017 or 1.7%, however, this is only 1.5 standard errors from zero.
The next panel considers a set of control variables that represent the type of variables that
are routinely included in growth regressions: initial GDP (1980), government consumption
to GDP, secondary school enrollment, population growth, and life expectancy. While these
variables are typically used in level growth regressions, they may affect volatility as well.
We expect more developed economies to have a more diversified industrial structure and
more sophisticated macroeconomic policies that help reduce the variability of growth. Both
life expectancy and secondary school enrollment are correlated with economic development.
A large government sector could be an indication of large macroeconomic imbalances and
economies that do not let capital be allocated to investments using private market signals.
If this were the case, we would expect variability to increase the larger the government
sector. A large government sector could also reflect the existence of a large welfare state
with sophisticated policies to smooth out macroeconomic shocks. If that is true, we expect
lower variability for a larger government sector.
The coefficient on secondary school enrollment is negative for both samples but only
significant for the 40 country sample suggesting that countries with high human capital have
lower consumption growth variability. The coefficients on the life expectancy and initial
GDP variables have inconsistent signs in the two samples. The coefficient on the size of the
government sector is positive and significant in both samples. The coefficient on population
growth is significantly positive in the liberalizing sample suggesting that countries with high
population growth have higher consumption growth volatility. The primary coefficient of
interest in these regressions is the equity market liberalization coefficient. The coefficient is
highly significantly negative in the larger sample and not different from zero in the smaller
sample.
The final panel in Table 2 explores the role of time effects. We consider both a time trend
7

variable as well as 16 different year dummy variables. The first specification should control
for any trends in overall consumption growth volatility. In fact, there is a large literature in
macroeconomics (see, e.g., Stock and Watson (2002)) documenting recent decreases in the
volatility of real variables such as consumption and GDP growth in the U.S. and other OECD
countries. Because of the 0/1 pattern in our liberalization variable, we might spuriously
detect a decrease in consumption growth volatility which is simply a result of a decrease in
world consumption growth volatility through time. The time dummy specification is more
general. It will pick up potential trends and more complex patterns. For example, the time
dummy specification should control for world business-cycle effects which are potentially
important as recessions tend to be associated with increased real volatility.
The results for the two time specifications are similar. In each of the four regressions,
the coefficient on the liberalization indicator is negative. Similar to the regressions without
the time effects, the liberalization coefficient is highly significant in the larger sample and
insignificantly different from zero in the sample of liberalizers. When we introduce world
GDP growth and world real interest rates as additional controls instead of time dummies,
the liberalization coefficient is not affected.

3.2

Capital account openness and growth variability

So far, we have narrowly focused on equity markets because equity flows are particularly relevant for risk sharing. However, much of the literature describing the adverse effects of capital
mobility and financial liberalization concerns all financial markets, with primary emphasis
on the banking sector. The recent debate on the effects of capital account liberalization on
economic growth (see for example Rodrik (1998a) and Edwards (2001)) is a good example.
We repeat our regressions including either the IMF or Quinn (1997) capital account openness
measure.
Panel A of Table 3 focuses on the IMF measure of openness. While the regression includes
the standard control variables and a time trend, we only report the coefficients on the
liberalization indicators because the signs and magnitudes of the coefficients on the control
variable are generally similar to Table 2. When the equity market liberalization variable is
replaced with the IMF variable, the coefficient is still negative but one third the magnitude
of the equity market liberalization coefficient. The IMF indicator is not significant in the 40
8

country sample and significant using the asymptotic distribution but not significant using
the finite sample distribution for the 95 country sample. In the regression that combines the
IMF and equity variables, the results are similar to the individual regressions. However, the
IMF variable is never significantly different from zero.
These results suggest that countries with an open equity market and open capital account
have about 2% lower consumption growth volatility than totally closed countries. These
results are at odds with the image painted by authors such as Rodrik (1998a) and Agenor
(2003) about open capital accounts. It is conceivable that there are benefits to having an
open equity market while still maintaining some form of capital controls (for instance on
debt flows). Such countries would receive a ‘1’ for the equity market liberalization variable,
but a ‘0’ for the capital account liberalization measure. Countries in this group include
Chile, an often-cited example of a country where capital controls “work.” They also include
countries such a Botswana, Brazil, Iceland, Mexico and South Africa. There also are a
number of countries with open equity markets throughout the sample, where capital account
liberalization occurs later on. This includes several developed markets, such as the European
countries that abolished all capital controls because of their participation in the European
Union (France, Spain, and Portugal for example). To test this conjecture more directly, the
final part of panel A in Table 3 considers the interaction of the capital account and equity
market. We split up the equity liberalization variable into two parts: Equity Open/Capital
Closed and Equity Open/Capital Open. The results suggest that the maximum decreased
volatility occurs when both the equity market liberalizes and the capital account is open.
This difference in the coefficients on these two indicator variables is significant for sample I
but not for sample II.
Panel B considers the Quinn (1997) measure of capital market openness. Because the
Quinn measure does not cover our full cross-section of countries, we use 76 countries in sample I and 37 countries in sample II. Using the Quinn measure, capital account openness is
associated with significantly lower consumption growth volatility in both samples, although
the significance is marginal when we use the finite sample distribution for sample II. The
Quinn variable retains its significance when combined with the equity market liberalization
variable. In the final part of the panel, we bifurcate the Official Liberalization variable depending on whether the Quinn variable is less than or greater than 0.50. Consistent with
9

panel B, there are large negative volatility effects of equity market liberalization when the
capital account is relatively open, which disappear when the capital account has severe restrictions. The difference between the coefficients on the two indicator variables is significant
for both samples. The coefficient on the Equity Open/Capital Open variable is five standard
errors below zero for the 76 country sample and 1.7 standard errors below zero in the 37
country sample.

3.3
3.3.1

Robustness
Alternative measurement of liberalizations

In panel A of Table 4, we measure the impact on consumption growth volatility where alternatively we replace the Official Liberalization indicator with the Intensity variable. Similar
to Table 3, we do not display the coefficients associated with the control variables. The
Intensity indicator is associated with decreases in consumption growth volatility. However, in contrast to the Official Liberalization’ variable, the coefficients on these alternative
measures of liberalization are always significantly negative, at least when evaluated using
the asymptotic standard errors. For example, in the 40 country sample, the impact of the
Intensity indicator is -0.0075 compared to -0.0018 for the Official Liberalization variable.
The absolute magnitude and significance of the coefficients increase when we consider the
95 country sample.

3.3.2

Stabilizing influence of the government sector

In Table 2, we found that the size of the government sector increases consumption growth
volatility. It is conceivable that this hides two results. Less developed countries with poorly
developed welfare programs and profligate governments may have positive coefficients because a larger government sector indicates more waste and less macroeconomic stability.
Richer countries, facing fewer macroeconomic imbalances, may have negative coefficients
with a larger government sector indicating the existence of a better social security network
that provides considerable benefits in smoothing income shocks. If this is the case, our
regression may be biased as the liberalization effect may perhaps partially proxy for the
beneficial effects of a larger government sector in the richer countries. We control for this in
10

two ways.
First, we introduce an interaction term between initial GDP and government size in
the basic regression. The results in panel B of Table 4 show that the interaction is highly
significant in both samples and of similar magnitude. In relatively wealthy countries, a larger
government sector is associated with lower volatility. For example, in sample II, the estimates
imply that this is true for countries with a real GDP per capita of more than $6,836.3 The
inclusion of the interaction variable increases the magnitude of the liberalization coefficient in
the largest sample somewhat but the coefficient is still significantly negative. The coefficient
is unchanged in the smaller sample.
Second, in panel C, we introduce a cross-sectional measure for the extent and quality
of the social security system directly into the regression. The social security data are from
Botero et al. (2004) and measure: (i) old age, disability and death benefits; (ii) sickness and
health benefits; and (iii) unemployment benefits (see Appendix Table A for more details).
Because they are available for only 58 countries, we also report the original regression for this
particular sample. For this small set of countries, there is no significant liberalization effect.
The coefficient on the social security variable is highly significant being more than seven
standard errors below zero. The coefficient on the Official Liberalization indicator becomes
negative but is only one standard error below zero. We also consider the liberalization
Intensity measure. In this case, the coefficient on the social security index is almost nine
standard errors below zero. The coefficient on the liberalization Intensity variable, already
negative in the original regression, is more that four standard errors below zero. In both
cases, adding this social security variable strengthens the liberalization effect. Also note that
the coefficient on size of government increases, as expected, as the social security index is
introduced.
Whereas we do not report these results, it is the case that both for the standard IMF as for
the Quinn measure, controlling for social security makes the liberalization effect significantly
negative. This suggests that some countries with closed capital accounts (such as Chile),
derive significant volatility benefits from their social security network.
3

Calculated as the exponential of 8.83=0.8499/.0962. The base year for real GDP is 1995.

11

3.3.3

Regional and common shocks

If certain regions face similar shocks and liberalizations are clustered in regions with lower
volatility, our results may be biased. To deal with this, we introduce regional dummies for
Africa, South America, North America and Asia. Not surprisingly, the African dummy is the
largest. The magnitude of the liberalization coefficient in the largest sample again increases.
However, the coefficient is still significantly negative, albeit only marginally. The coefficient
in the smaller sample, while negative, is not significantly different from zero. These results
are available on request.
A second experiment we perform, is to re-estimate the regression using a SUR estimator that allows residual correlation across countries. The results remain qualitatively and
statistically the same and we do not report them.

3.3.4

Idiosyncratic consumption growth variability

Whereas we have so far focused on total consumption growth variability, the international
risk sharing literature mentioned in the introduction, focuses on idiosyncratic consumption
growth variability as a major component of risk sharing benefits. Most studies are mostly
counterfactual exercises in the context of full-fledged general equilibrium models focusing
on OECD countries (for example Cole and Obstfeld (1991), Obstfeld (1992), Brennan and
Solnik (1989) and van Wincoop (1994)). Van Wincoop (1999)’s survey suggests that the
benefits of perfect risk sharing are quite substantial, and it is likely that they are much
larger for emerging markets (see for example, Obstfeld (1992, 1995) and Pallage and Robe
(2003)).
It is unlikely that opening equity markets (or opening capital markets more generally) is a
sufficient step to realize the theoretical benefits of perfect risk sharing. For example, markets
are incomplete and the proportion of output represented by tradable claims is probably quite
small. In addition, only a minority of the population of most countries hold stocks (see
also Davis, Nalewaik and Willen (2000)). Our work directly tests the effect of changes in
regulations that impact the ability to share risk across countries. A related study is Lewis
(1996) who regresses consumption growth on idiosyncratic output growth for a large set of
countries. Under perfect risk sharing, the coefficient should to be zero. Lewis distinguishes

12

between restricted and non-restricted countries using a number of separate measures from
the IMF’s AREAER, including the capital account restrictions variable that we use above.
She finds that the coefficient is significantly lower for unrestricted countries.
To better relate our work to the risk sharing literature, we must eliminate the predictable
component in consumption growth and focus on idiosyncratic volatility. To do so, we build
on the framework of Athanasoulis and van Wincoop (2000, 2001) and investigate a two
equation empirical model. The mean equation is:

gi,t+k − gw,t+k = λ0k (zi,t − zw,t ) + φLibi,t + ui,t+k ,

(2)

where i is the country, w is the world, gi,t+k is the logarithmic consumption growth rate for
country i from time t + 1 to t + k, and z represents some instrumental variables. We assume
that the conditional variance of ui,t+k is a linear function of the same set of instruments, in
excess of the corresponding world instruments values that affect the conditional mean:
2
= E[u2i,t+k |It] = vk0 (zt,i − zw,t ) + δLibi,t .
σi,t+k

(3)

Hence, the coefficient φ measures a mean liberalization effect and δ measures an idiosyncratic
volatility effect. We estimated this system used the Generalized Method of Moments for
our two samples. The liberalization coefficient, φ is significantly positive in both samples,
suggesting an addition of 0.59% to 0.94% in real annual idiosyncratic consumption growth
following an equity market liberalization.4
In the variance equation, the coefficient on the equity market liberalization variable is
significantly negative in the largest sample and not significantly different from zero in the
40 country sample. Consequently, the results with idiosyncratic consumption growth are
consistent with our previous results.
Finally, most of the volatility effect is concentrated in the larger sample. This suggests
that liberalizations may substantially increase the global ability to share risk but that the
liberalizing countries themselves may not always benefit. To verify this more directly, we
created a variable Libw,t , measuring the fraction of countries that are open. As more and
more countries open up, it becomes easier for other countries to share risk internationally.
4

These results are not reported in the tables but are available on request.

13

Consequently, the increased integration over time should lead to a downward trend in idiosyncratic consumption uncertainty. Of course, only open countries will benefit. Hence, the
regressor is introduced as an interaction effect:

Libglob,t = Libi,t × Libw,t

(4)

The mean response to this global liberalization measure is significantly positive for both
samples. For volatility, we find strongly significant negative effects for sample I and insignificant effects for sample II. Hence, this variable effectively yields similar results to using
country-specific dummy variables.

3.3.5

Monte Carlo analysis

Our result is very much dependent on the identification of liberalization with a dummy
variable. Whereas we have already controlled for many possible random time patterns in
consumption growth volatility that might bias our results, it is still possible that the concentration of liberalizations around particular time periods could lead to spurious results.
To investigate this possibility, we conduct a Monte Carlo result on our 95 country sample
where we found a -1.75% decrease in consumption growth volatility. In the Monte Carlo, we
re-run the regression 1,000 times while randomizing the liberalization dummy across countries. That is, for each replication, we randomly assign each country a realization out of
the 95 possible Libi,t realizations in our sample. If there were a systematic bias, the resulting distribution of the t-statistic should be biased downward and many of the replications
should yield coefficients in the neighborhood of the one we find using the actual liberalization
dates. However, this is not the case. It turns out that a coefficient of -0.0175 is very far
out in the tails of the distribution (in our 1,000 replications, we never obtain a value this
low) and the 5% value for a two-sided test is -0.0064. The Monte Carlo does reveal that
a t-statistic of over 3.00 is necessary to obtain 5% significance in a two-sided test. This
result is entirely consistent with the Monte Carlo we ran in Appendix B and is due to the
slight under-estimation of the standard errors in the Hansen-Hodrick (1980) procedure (see
Hodrick (1992) and Ang and Bekaert (2003) for a discussion of this).

14

4

Endogeneity and Simultaneity

To sum up our results so far, we have uncovered that in a large sample of countries, having
a liberalized equity market or open capital account is associated with significantly lower
consumption growth volatility. When we restrict attention to mostly emerging liberalizing
countries, we find that the decision to liberalize the equity market does usually not lead
to a significant change in consumption growth volatility. This is also an important result
because the literature has mostly assumed that liberalization leads to significant increases
in volatility.
There are a number of well-known problems with the interpretation of these results.
First, because liberalization is a government decision, it is possible that it exactly occurs
when volatility is expected to decrease for exogenous reasons. Section 4.1 provides some
analysis that suggests this problem is not driving the results.
Second, equity market liberalization may occur simultaneously with other reforms and
it may be these other reforms that drive the volatility effect. This is also a concern for the
weak emerging market results where no volatility effect was detected: other reforms may
reduce volatility but the partial effect of opening up capital markets may actually be to
increase real volatility. More broadly put, it may be that countries only liberalize when
they have good institutions in place to help absorb income shocks, that is, when they have
highly developed financial systems, big welfare states, effective macroeconomic policies, etc.
Note that we already looked at specifications with fixed effects for the liberalizing sample
and that we controlled for the level of economic development in all of our specifications
with control variables but this is not likely to suffice. Our approach here is to include a
substantial number of controls that may capture simultaneous reforms or the presence of
effective institutions to reduce the likelihood of large economic shocks, or improve the ability
of agents to smooth these shocks. We first focus on macro-economic reforms and financial
development, then switch attention to the quality of institutions and institutional reform.

4.1

Endogeneity

This classic endogeneity problem is much more obvious when one is worried about measuring
the mean response to liberalization, because it is possible that countries relax capital inflow
15

constraints when good growth opportunities present themselves. It is very difficult to find
an instrument for this situation, because any internal variable correlated with the good
growth opportunities may alternatively anticipate the beneficial effects of the liberalization.
In Bekaert, Harvey, Lundblad and Siegel (2004) (BHLS), we create an exogenous, timevarying measure of growth opportunities for each country relying on price-earnings ratios of
the industries they specialize in, but using world market data. We find that this measure
significantly predicts growth.
Even though we focus on volatility, it is still useful to examine the determinants of the
liberalization decision. To this end, we run a probit analysis of the liberalization decision on
a number of potential determinants. Our sample has all the liberalizers and the countries
that remain segmented resulting in a sample of 68 countries. All independent variables
are five-year averages before the liberalization decision with segmented countries matched
with liberalizers according to geographic proximity. The independent variables include the
standard control variables of Table 2 and two measures of growth opportunities: the measure
created in BHLS (2004) and past real GDP growth (the average of five years of GDP growth).
Importantly, we examine the effect of volatility differences across countries on the liberalization decision. Given that volatility is a persistent process, if an anticipated decrease in the
volatility of economic shocks is driving the liberalization, we should find that a measure of
past volatility predicts the liberalization decision. To measure the past volatility of economic
shocks, we use the standard deviation of the annual GDP growth rates over the five-year
period prior to the liberalization decision.
Much of the work on the determinants of financial liberalization originates in the political
science literature where liberalization is mostly viewed as determined by political factors,
see among others, Frieden (1991), Goodman and Pauly (1993), Leblang (1997), Quinn and
Inclan (1997) and the review in Li and Smith (2002). For example, Alesina, Grilli and
Milesi-Ferretti (1994) suggest that pro-labor leaders are more likely to impose and prolong
capital controls.
To examine the importance of political factors, we focus on the political risk rating
from ICRG. This measure focuses purely on political factors like democratic accountability,
bureaucratic quality, law and order and nine other factors described in Appendix Table A.
As political risk variable aggregates many different political dimensions, we also construct
16

two variables based on the subcomponents of the political risk rating. The first focuses on
the strength of government institutions (Quality of Political Institutions) and aggregates
the Corruption, Law and Order, and Bureaucratic Quality subcomponents of the ICRG
political risk rating. The second concentrates on Conflict and is formed from the External
Conflict, Internal Conflict, Religion in Politics and Ethnic Tensions ICRG subcomponents.
It is conceivable that liberalization arises once political institutions are of sufficient quality
to consider implementing beneficial reforms. It is equally conceivable that liberalization is
correlated with the absence of important internal and external conflict.
It is also possible that governments liberalize once they feel they have sufficient institutions in place or sufficiently developed financial markets to absorb exogenous shocks that
may otherwise increase volatility. Therefore, we include a standard measure of financial development (private credit to GDP) (see, for example, King and Levine (1993)) and a measure
of the extent of the social security system in the probit regression.
Table 5 reveals that whereas past volatility has a negative effect on the probability of
liberalization, the effect is insignificant. The growth opportunity measure is inversely related
to the probability of liberalization, suggesting that governments do not time liberalizations
strategically or if they do, they do so when growth opportunities are poor. In fact, the
strongest predictor among the initial variables we include is the secondary school enrollment
variable. It is possible that this indirectly measures a development effect. Whereas financial
development significantly predicts the likelihood of liberalization, the coefficient on Social
Security index is only significant at the 10% level. The Social Security variable is also a less
useful measure because it has no time series variation and is only available for a subset of our
countries. The results in Table 5 suggest that the political risk variable is a significant factor
in the decision to liberalize. The results for the subcomponents reveal that the quality of the
political institutions drives the positive effect of the political risk rating on the probability
of liberalization.
In sum, we do not find that past volatility affects the likelihood of liberalization, but
the probit analysis nevertheless reveals that it may be important to control for the (changes
in the) quality of political institutions and financial development. The coming sub-sections
do exactly that and should therefore substantially mitigate concerns about endogeneity or
reverse causality. If governments institute volatility reducing reforms because they are wor17

ried about the increased external risks associated with openness, our control variables should
account for their effects. Note that it is essential to have control variables that exhibit time
series information for this strategy to be effective.

4.2

Macroeconomic reforms and financial development

It is possible that macroeconomic reforms implemented around the time of equity market
liberalization diminish macroeconomic imbalances and reduce consumption growth variability. Similarly, simultaneous financial reforms may be the true source of lower variability.
Given that portfolios worldwide are still very much biased towards the home market, an
efficient domestic financial sector may be more important to smooth aggregate shocks over
time than the ability to share risk internationally by investing in foreign equities. Therefore
we add three variables to the regression that should be particularly sensitive to macroeconomic reforms (trade to GDP, inflation and the black market premium) and one financial
development measure (private credit to GDP). Table 6 reports results for all of our measures
of financial liberalization.
Policies aimed at making the economy more open to international trade are typically a
cornerstone of macro-economic reform. When we add the size of the trade sector (imports
plus exports to GDP) as a control variable, we consistently find a significant positive relation
between consumption growth volatility and the external sector. This may be surprising at
first, but it is conceivable that more open economies are more specialized and hence have
larger income shocks. In the face of imperfect capital markets, this external risk may result in
higher consumption growth variability. This is exactly the argument Rodrik (1998b) makes
and our evidence is consistent with his point. Rodrik also argues that more open economies
will have larger government sectors to offset the larger external risk. Note that the positive
coefficient survives in our framework despite the presence of the size of the government
sector as an independent variable.5 Easterly, Islam and Stiglitz (2001) and Kose, Prasad
and Terrones (2003) also find that trade openness is associated with high real volatility.
Many macro-reforms are also aimed at controlling inflation so we add the log of one plus
5

In unreported results, we also estimate a model with trade interacted with the liberalization indicator.

The coefficient is negative for both samples and significantly different from zero in the largest sample. Hence,
as expected, liberalized economies cope better with external risk, brought about by trade liberalization.

18

the inflation rate for time t to our set of independent regressors. It is not surprising that
higher inflation increases the volatility of consumption growth, but it is somewhat surprising
that this result is not significant for the liberalizing sample. When we replace the level of
inflation with its standard deviation, we find a similar result.
Finally, an often-used measure of macroeconomic imbalances is the black market premium, which we measure as the log of one plus the black market premium for time t. Its
coefficient in Table 6 is always significantly positive. Countries with severe macroeconomic
imbalances face large consumption growth volatility. However, we must be careful in interpreting this result, since the black market premium is highly correlated with capital controls
and, hence, with financial liberalizations (see for example Bekaert (1995)).
Theoretical work by Aghion, Banerjee and Piketty (1999) and empirical work by Easterly,
Islam and Stiglitz (2001) suggests that financial development should be associated with lower
output volatility. However, the coefficient on private credit to GDP is never significantly
different from zero but the sign is consistently negative for the liberalizing sample.
The bottom panel of Table 6 reports results for alternative equity liberalization measures
and capital account openness. We do not repeat the coefficients for the control variables as
they are qualitatively similar to the base case. Generally, the results in Table 6 show that
the macroeconomic and financial reform proxies weaken the liberalization effect, increasing
the value of the coefficients in both samples. In the 95 country sample, the equity market
liberalization coefficient is still 3.7 standard errors below zero, with the magnitude varying
between 1.02% (Official Liberalization) and 2.33% (Intensity). For capital account openness,
a significant effect remains intact when the Quinn measure is used. Whatever the measure
of financial liberalization, the liberalization effect is insignificantly different from zero for the
40 country sample.
Because the continuous control variables we introduced may be imperfect proxies for
actual reforms, we consider one more test. It is conceivable that financial and macro reforms
occur after a banking crisis, with the equity market liberalization as one small component
of the package. However, when we introduce a dummy variable that is set to one after a
“systemic or borderline banking crisis” (see Caprio and Klingebiel (2001)), we find that the
liberalization coefficient is not affected.

19

4.3

Political and institutional factors

A stable government may be instrumental in ensuring high quality institutions that promote
growth and stability. Political factors may play an important role in determining the magnitude of the shocks an economy faces and in setting up the institutional framework to help
smooth shocks. As we argued before, it is possible that governments only liberalize when
such institutional framework is in place.
It is non-trivial to find variables that exhibit the time series variation that may be critical
in controlling for potential biases in our regressions. We turn to the subcomponents of the
ICRG political risk measure to construct two new variables, which we also used in the
probit analysis: Quality of Political Institutions and Conflict. Political unrest undoubtedly
affects the variability of output and consumption and the end of political unrest may be
correlated with reforms, including financial liberalizations. When we add these variables to
our regressions in Table 6, the Quality of Political Institutions variable is negatively related
to consumption growth volatility and the effect is economically large. That is, higher quality
government and institutions are associated with lower consumption growth volatility. The
coefficient on the conflict variable is surprisingly positive (less conflict is associated with
higher variability) but is only borderline significantly different from zero in sample II. The
inclusion of these variables increases the magnitude of the coefficient on the liberalization
variable for sample I but decreases its magnitude in sample II. This is true for all liberalization
measures. For the Intensity and Quinn measures, the liberalization effect is now significantly
negative (using asymptotic standard errors) in both samples.

5
5.1

Further Interpretation
Shocks versus smoothing

A lower consumption growth variability may be the outcome of a lower variability of income
shocks or an improved ability to smooth these shocks. We would expect that international
capital market openness should primarily reflect the latter. However, the crisis view on
financial liberalizations (see Stiglitz (2000)) would suggest that the volatility of shocks may
increase. Hence, it is even possible that our zero effect for liberalizers reflects higher shock

20

volatility coupled with a better ability to smooth these larger shocks. To disentangle these
effects, we use GDP growth volatility as our measure of the volatility of income and output
shocks and focus on its determinants. Furthermore, to directly measure the change in the
ability to share and reduce risk, we investigate the determinants of the ratio of consumption
growth volatility to GDP growth volatility.
Figure 1 presents the unconditional analysis of GDP growth volatility before and after
equity market liberalizations. There are two interesting observations. First, GDP growth
volatility decreases in 28 countries and increases in only 12 countries. Second, comparing
Figure 1 to Table 1, consumption growth volatility is generally higher than output growth
volatility. Indeed, the pre-liberalization volatility of consumption growth is higher than the
output growth volatility in 35 of 40 countries.
Table 7 explores the relation between GDP (or shock) volatility and financial liberalizations. The format is similar to Table 2 and so are the results. We consider a fixed effects
regression with the liberalizer countries and regressions with control variables and a time
trend for our two samples. In the fixed effects estimation, there is a significant decrease in
output growth volatility following equity market liberalizations. In our specification with
control variables, there is a very significant decline in output growth volatility associated
with Official liberalization in the large sample but no significant impact in the sample of
liberalizing countries. The Intensity measure shows the largest decreases in GDP growth
volatility.
Both measures of capital account openness yield significant negative coefficients for the
larger sample. In the smaller sample, the coefficient on the IMF measure is insignificantly
different from zero but the coefficient on the Quinn measure is more than three standard
errors below zero.
Whereas we do not report the coefficients on the control variables, we mention one
curious result. The GDP per capita measure has a significant positive effect on GDP growth
volatility. Yet, Kraay and Ventura (2001) have argued that more developed economies
face more moderated business cycle fluctuations. It is possible that this reflects a multicollinearity effect: we do find negative and mostly significant coefficients on secondary school
enrollment and life expectancy. Moreover, a secular trend towards lower volatility is picked
up as a trend term. The coefficient on this time trend variable is significantly negative, which
21

is consistent with Blanchard and Simon’s (2001) analysis of U.S. economic volatility.
To find out whether consumers were better able to smooth consumption after equity
market liberalizations, we examine the ratio of consumption growth volatility to output
growth volatility around a liberalization in Table 8. Panel A shows a significant decrease
in the consumption-output volatility ratio in all but a single case looking across the two
measures of equity market liberalization but neither the IMF nor Quinn (1997) measure of
capital account openness impact the volatility ratio. When the capital account openness
variables are included in the regression along with the official liberalization variable, the
capital account variable is never significantly negative – and is close to significantly positive
in the smaller samples. The equity market liberalization variable is always negative and
more than two standard errors below zero in three of four cases.
When we split up the equity market liberalization depending on the degree of capital
account openness, we always find the coefficient on the Equity Open/Capital Open to be
lower than the Equity Open/Capital Closed coefficient. The magnitude of the variable is
also quite high. For example, using the Quinn (1997) measure of openness, the Equity
Open/Capital Open coefficient is -0.23 and almost four standard errors from zero in the 76
country sample and -0.21 in the 37 country sample. The difference between the Capital
Open and Closed coefficients is always significantly different from zero except for the larger
sample using the IMF measure.
Because, surprisingly, GDP growth volatility is often larger than consumption growth
volatility, it is interesting to examine what variables significantly affect this ratio. The
relative volatility of output and consumption growth is one of the big puzzles in the real
business cycle literature (see Backus, Kehoe and Kydland (1992)). We find that the strongest
beneficial (negative) effects are economic development (GDP per capita) and secondary
school enrollment.
We also revisit the impact of macro reforms, financial development and government
stabilization programs. In both samples, we find a significantly positive association between
trade openness and the volatility ratio indicating that in countries with relatively open trade
sectors, have relatively higher consumption-output volatility ratios. There is no significant
relation between the ratio and the inflation variable. However, there is a significantly positive
relation between the black market premium and the volatility ratio in the largest sample.
22

We find a strongly negative relation between private credit to GDP and the volatility ratio
in both samples (more than five standard errors in the largest sample) indicating relatively
advanced financial development is associated with an increased ability to smooth shocks.
It is also the case that the Social Security system is associated with a better propensity to
smooth. In each of these regressions, the sign on the Official liberalization indicator remains
negative, though it is only significantly so in one of three cases. Importantly, the absolute
magnitude of the liberalization effect is somewhat diminished which suggests that our control
variables are reflecting important information that coincides with liberalization events.
Given a certain shock volatility, the results in Table 8 suggest that agents were better
able to smooth their consumption after equity market liberalizations. There is some, albeit
somewhat weak, evidence that opening up other parts of the capital account is not helpful
in doing so and may even hurt. In the 40 country sample, the coefficients on both the IMF
and Quinn indicator are positive with the IMF coefficient significantly different from zero.

5.2

Impact of 1997-2000

In none of the regressions considered so far is output or consumption growth volatility significantly larger for liberalized countries. This is a remarkable finding given that the sample
considered includes 1998, the year for which output and consumption fell dramatically in
many emerging economies in the wake of the Asian Crisis. For example, in 1998, real per
capita GDP growth was -12.1% in Thailand, -15.7% in Indonesia, and -7.8% in Korea according to the World Bank. The 1998 crises period gave rise to the argument that financial
market volatility induced by short-term foreign capital passes through to the real economy
(see, for example, Furman and Stiglitz (1998), Kaminisky and Reinhart (1999), and Gourinchas and Jeanne (2002)) . In contrast, our empirical evidence is not consistent with increased
output and consumption growth variability for emerging economies post-liberalization, and
actually is suggestive of reduced economic growth variability for those countries that are
liberalized.
We also ran regressions results for the pre-crisis period (1980-1997) (not reported). This
period allows us to consider also the effects of equity market liberalization free of the dominating effects of the 1998 crisis. While the 1998 crisis period is obviously important to this
debate, the turmoil surrounding these events was extreme and some may view it as an outli23

er. The pre-crisis evidence is strongly suggestive of reduced output and consumption growth
volatility. For every sample, the effect of equity market liberalization on the variability of
output and consumption growth is negative and significantly different from zero. For sample
II, the significance is only borderline for the Official Liberalization measure. Of course, we
cannot be sure that adding new data to our sample will effectively reduce the impact of the
crisis years as new crises may occur. For example, the 2002 Argentinian crisis will continue
to affect our sample for some time.

6

Heterogeneity

Is the volatility effect from equity market liberalizations different across countries? For example, theories of financial fragility (Furman and Stiglitz (1998)) suggest a good institutional
framework is essential to prevent crises. We have already demonstrated that the openness of
the capital account is important in determining the size of the reduction in volatility. We now
consider a menu of additional characteristics that might affect the volatility response. We
consider variables related to financial development, government provided insurance, macro
variables and the quality of political and legal institutions.
Our method for Table 9 is as follows. In the main regression with control variables,
we break up the liberalization indicator variable into three pieces. The first indictor is
for countries that are fully liberalized throughout our sample. The second indicator is for
liberalizing countries with a lower than median value of the particular characteristic that we
are considering. The third indicator is for liberalizing countries with a higher than median
value of the characteristic. We also consider the direct effect of the characteristic by adding
it to the main regression. By examining the difference between the ‘from the low level of
the variable’ and the ‘from the high level of the variable,’ we can determine whether the
growth volatility response to a liberalization differs across key characteristics. Table 9 also
reports the coefficient on fully liberalized countries. This coefficient is always negative and
significant. Note that for all characteristics ‘high’ is good (high development, low risk) and
vice versa.

24

6.1

Financial sector

We consider a number of measures of financial development: the size of the banking system,
equity market turnover, the size of the equity market, and shareholder protection.
The results in Table 9 show a significant difference between below and above median
private credit to GDP countries. Moreover, the countries with more developed banking
sectors experience significantly lower consumption growth volatility following a liberalization.
Consistent with Table 6, the direct effect of banking development on consumption growth
variability is not significantly different from zero. For the equity market turnover variable,
we only have 50 countries in the analysis. While there is a difference between the low and
high turnover countries, neither the difference nor the individual coefficients are significantly
different from zero. There is some weak evidence that the size of the equity market impacts
the size of the decrease in consumption growth volatility after a liberalization. Surprisingly,
the direct effect of a larger equity market on volatility is positive.
We consider the La Porta et al. (1997) measure of Antidirector Rights which is a scoring of shareholder rights based on six different categories (see Appendix Table A). The
liberalization impact on consumption growth volatility across countries with above and below average investor protection is marginally significant. However, for countries with poor
investor protection, liberalization increase volatility significantly.

6.2

Insurance through the government sector

Social security systems may be the most important means of smoothing income shocks in
most countries, especially for low income people. Table 9 suggests that liberalizations generate volatility increases (decreases) in countries with relatively poor (good) social security
systems, but the individual coefficients are not significant at conventional levels. As shown
before, the own effect of the Social Security variable is significantly negative.
As our sample is short, we also use the size of the government sector as a proxy for
the extent of shock insurance through the government. Here the own effect is positive,
however, there is a sharp, significant difference in the liberalization response for large and
small government countries. Countries with larger government sectors have more negative
volatility responses. Indeed, the coefficient on the large government/liberalization variable

25

is the most negative coefficient in all of Table 9 and is significant at the 1% level.

6.3

Extent of risks present in countries

We use three measures to proxy for the economic and political risk present in the country upon liberalization. For economic risks, we use the ICRG Economic Risk Ratings (see
Appendix Table A for a description) and also report results more specifically for foreign
debt/GDP, one of its components. Liberalizations may increase the leverage of highly indebted countries further and significantly increase the chances of a crisis. For political risks,
we use the Conflict measure we constructed from the ICRG data (see section 4).
Table 9 shows that countries with higher than median risk ratings experience a drop
in consumption growth volatility after liberalizations that is marginally significant whereas
lower than median countries experience an insignificant small increase in volatility. The
direct effect is large and negative as well so that the economic risk rating seems to capture
cross-sectional and time-series variation in the variability of real shocks. Whereas the direct
effect of less foreign debt on volatility is negative and significant, countries with more foreign
debt experience less volatility post-liberalization than less indebted countries. None of the
coefficients or their difference is significant, however.
We find a highly significant difference between countries with low and high Conflict. Consumption growth volatility decreases in countries with low Conflict, but there is an insignificant response in countries with a high Conflict measure. The direct effect is insignificantly
different from zero.

6.4

Quality of institutions

We begin with La Porta et al.’s (1998) Judicial Efficiency variable which is Business International Corporation’s measure of the “efficiency and integrity of the legal environment as it
affects business, in particular foreign firms.” Countries with greater judicial efficiency generally have larger decreases in consumption growth volatility following liberalizations and this
effect is significant. However, the direct effect of this variable is surprisingly significantly
positive. Note that this sample only includes 47 countries. When we use an alternative
measure of the quality and effectiveness of the legal system, based on the speed with which

26

a bounced check can be cleared and a tenant evicted (see Djankov et al. (2003)), we can
expand the sample to 69 countries. We still find that legally efficient countries generate
larger volatility responses (in absolute value) but the effect is not significant. Furthermore,
the direct effect is not significantly different from zero. Our results suggest that the quality
of the legal system has little effect on the real variability but that it helps in generating
beneficial effects to a financial liberalization.
Our final measure focuses on the components of the ICRG Political Risk Rating that are
associated with the Quality of Political Institutions (introduced in section 4.3). Acemoglu,
Johnson and Robinson (2002) stress the importance of the institutional environment in explaining cross-country differences in economic development. We find a significant difference
in the growth volatility response across high quality and low Quality of Political Institutions countries. Countries with poor political institutions experience a marginally significant
increase in volatility. There is also a very strong direct negative effect to increases in this indicator, consistent with Table 6. The political factors are more important than legal factors
in driving consumption growth volatility.
Table 9 shows that the consumption growth volatility response to liberalization may be
significantly different depending on the economic, financial, social and political conditions
within a country. We find that countries with a relatively well developed banking sector, lack
of external or internal conflict, a large government sector, above average economic outlooks,
and or an efficient legal system experience decreased consumption growth volatility after an
equity market liberalization; countries with poor investor protection, a small government
sector and or poor quality of political institutions may experience increased volatility.

7

Conclusions

In this article, we test a very simple proposition: Do equity market liberalizations increase
or decrease consumption growth volatility? Investigating a large cross-section of liberalized
and segmented markets and using information before and after liberalization, we establish
that volatility did not significantly increase. In many cases, consumption growth volatility
decreases significantly. Our investigation did not find one specification whereby consumption
growth volatility significantly increased. The maximum decrease in consumption growth

27

volatility is found for countries that liberalize their equity markets at a time when their
capital account is relatively open. In fact, capital account openness is not associated with
higher consumption growth variability and when measured using Quinn’s (1997) adjustments
for the degree of openness, it is associated with lower variability. The pure temporal effect
of equity market liberalization in a sample of mainly emerging markets is not significant
using the regulatory-based Official Liberalization measure. With an alternative measures,
that corrects for the degree of liberalization, the volatility effect is overwhelmingly negative.
The result is robust. We control for time trends, business cycle variation, and regional
effects. When we strip out the predictable part of consumption growth and focus on idiosyncratic growth variability, we also find that consumption growth volatility significantly
decreases post-liberalization in our largest sample and does not increase in the smaller one.
Our results are not likely driven by reverse causality (past volatility does not predict
liberalization) and survives the addition of numerous control variables, potentially capturing
simultaneous reforms or slow moving institutional changes that may increase a country’s ability to absorb shocks. We included variables controlling for macroeconomic reforms, financial
development, the extent of the social security system, the quality of political institutions,
political unrest proxies, among others.
We also distinguish between shock volatility and the smoothing of shocks. Similar to our
analysis of consumption growth volatility, we find no evidence of increased GDP volatility
– and considerable evidence of decreased shock volatility after equity market liberalization.
We then examine the ratio of consumption growth volatility to output growth volatility. We
find that the volatility reductions are much larger for consumption than for output implying
an increased ability to smooth output shocks after equity market liberalizations. This effect
is statistically significant for nearly all of our samples and liberalization definitions.
It is often claimed that liberalizing equity markets leads to excessive economic volatility.
Our research suggests that this statement is not supported by the data. This is, of course,
a statement about average effects. Our research suggests that if the country is economically
fragile, has low quality institutions, and a poorly developed financial sector, equity market
liberalization may not reduce real variability at all.

28

References
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson, 2002, Reversal of Fortune: Geography
and Institutions in the Making of the Modern World Income Distribution, Quarterly Journal of
Economics 117, 1231–1294.
Agenor, Pierre-Richard, 2003, Benefits and Costs of International Financial Integration: Theory and
Facts. World Economy 26, 1089–1118.
Aghion Philippe, Abhijit Banerjee and Thomas Piketty, 1999, Dualism and Macroeconomic Volatility,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, 1359-97.
Alesina, Alberto, Vittorio Grilli and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, 1994, The Political Economy of
Capital Controls, in Leonardo Leiderman and Assaf Razin, eds. Capital Mobility: The Impact on
Consumption, Investment and Growth, Cambridge: Cambridge Press.
Ang, Andrew and Geert Bekaert, 2003, Stock Return Predictability: Is it There? Unpublished working
paper, Columbia University.
Athanasoulis, Stefano G., and Eric van Wincoop, 2000, Growth Uncertainty and Risk Sharing, Journal
of Monetary Economics 45, 477–505.
Athanasoulis, Stefano G., and Eric van Wincoop, 2001, Risk Sharing within the United States: What
Do Financial Markets and Fiscal Federalism Accomplish, Review of Economics and Statistics 83,
688–698.
Backus, David K., Patrick Kehoe and Finn Kydland, 1992, International Real Business Cycles, Journal
of Political Economy 100, 4, 745–775.
Bekaert, Geert, 1995, Market Integration and Investment Barriers in Emerging Equity Markets, World
Bank Economic Review 9, 75-107.
Bekaert, Geert and Campbell R. Harvey, 2000, Foreign Speculators and Emerging Equity Markets,
Journal of Finance 55, 565-614.
Bekaert, Geert and Campbell R. Harvey, 2002, A Chronology of Important Financial, Economic and
Political Events in Emerging Markets, http://www.duke.edu/∼charvey/Country risk/couindex.htm
Bekaert, Geert, Campbell R. Harvey and Christian Lundblad, 2001, Emerging Equity Markets and
Economic Development, Journal of Development Economics 66, 465–504.
Bekaert, Geert, Campbell R. Harvey and Christian Lundblad, 2004, Does Financial Liberalization
Spur Growth?, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Bekaert, Geert, Campbell R. Harvey, Christian Lundblad and Stephan Siegel, 2004, Growth Opportunities and Market Integration, Working paper, Columbia University.
Blanchard, Olivier J., and John A. Simon, 2001, The Long and Large Decline in U.S. Output Volatility,
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 135–174.
Bollerslev, Tim and Jeffrey M. Wooldridge, 1992, Quasi-maximum Likelihood Estimation and Inference
in Dynamic Models with Time Varying Covariances, Econometric Reviews, 11, 143-172.
Botero, Juan, Simeon Djankov, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer,
2004, The Regulation of Labor, Unpublished working paper, Harvard University.
Brennan, Michael J. and Bruno Solnik, 1989, International Risk Sharing and Capital Flows, Journal
of International Money and Finance 8, 3, 359–373.
Caprio Jr., Gerard and Daniela Klingebiel, 2001, Bank Insolvencies: Cross-country Experience, Working paper 1620, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Cole, Harold L. and Maurice Obstfeld, 1991, Commodity Trade and International Risk Sharing – How
Much do Financial Markets Matter, Journal of Monetary Economics 28, 3-24.
Crucini, Mario J., 1999, On International and National Dimensions of Risk Sharing, Review of Eco-

29

nomics and Statistics 81, 73–84.
Davis, Steven J., Jeremy Nalewaik, and Paul Willen, 2000, On the Gains to International Trade in
Risky Financial Assets, National Bureau of Economic Research working paper 7796.
Easterly, William, R. Islam and J. Stiglitz, 2001, Volatility and Macroeconomic Paradigms for Rich and
Poor Countries,” in Jacques Dreze, ed., Advances in Macroeconomic Theory, New York: Palgrave.
2001.
Edison, Hali and Frank Warnock, 2003, A Simple Measure of the Intensity of Capital Controls, Journal
of Empirical Finance 10, 81-104.
Edwards, Sebastian, 2001, Capital Mobility and Economic Performance: Are Emerging Economies
Different, Unpublished working paper, UCLA.
Eichengreen, Barry, 2001, Capital Account Liberalization: What do the Cross-country Studies Tell
Us?, World Bank Economic Review 15, 3, 341–365.
Eichengreen, Barry, James Tobin, and Charles Wyplosz, 1995, Two Cases for Sands in the Wheels of
International Finance, Economic Journal, 162-172.
Frieden, Jeffrey, 1991, Invested Interests: The Politics of National Economic Policies in a World of
Global Finance, International Organization 45 425-451.
Furman, Jason and Joseph E. Stiglitz, 1998, Economic Crises: Evidence and Insights from East Asia,
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1–114.
Goodman, John B. and Louis W. Pauly. 1993. The Obsolescence of Capital Controls? Economic
Management in an Age of Global Markets, World Politics 46, 50–82.
Grilli, Vittorio and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, 1995, Economic Effects and Structural Determinants
of Capital Controls. IMF Staff Papers 42, 517–551.
Hansen, Lars P., and Robert J. Hodrick, 1980, Forward Exchange Rates as Optimal Predictors of
Future Spot Rates, Journal of Political Economy, 88, 829-853.
Hodrick, Robert J., 1992, Dividend Yields and Expected Stock Returns: Alternative Procedures for
Inference and Measurement,” Review of Financial Studies 5, 357–386.
Kaminsky, Graciella L. and Carmen Reinhart, 1999, The Twin Crises: The Causes of Banking and
Balance of Payments Problems, American Economic Review 89, 473-500.
King, Robert and Ross Levine, 1993, Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might Be Right, Quarterly
Journal of Economics 108, 717-738.
Kose, M. Ayhan, Eswar S. Prasad, and Marco E. Terrones, 2003, Financial Integration and Macroeconomic Volatility, IMF Staff Papers 50, 119–142.
Kraay, Aart and Jaume Ventura, 2001, Comparative Advantage and the Cross-section of Business
Cycles, NBER working paper 8104.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, 1997, Legal
Determinants of External Finance, Journal of Finance, 52, 1131-1150.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, 1998, Law and
Finance, Journal of Political Economy 106, 1113-1155.
Leblang, David A., 1997, Domestic and Systemic Determinants of Capital Controls in the Developed
and Developing World. International Studies Quarterly 41, 435–454.
Lewis, Karen K., 1996, What Can Explain the Apparent Lack of International Consumption Risk
Sharing?, Journal of Political Economy 104, 267-297.
Lewis, Karen K., 1999, Trying to Explain Home Bias in Equities and Consumption, Journal of Economic Literature 37, 571-608.
Li, Quan and Dale Smith, 2002, Testing Alternative Models of Capital Control Liberalization, Policy
Studies Review 19, 28–52.

30

Mathieson, Donald J. and Liliana Rojaz-Suarez, 1993, Liberalization of the Capital Account: Experiences and Issues, Staff paper 103, International Monetary Fund, Washington, D.C.
Newey, Whitney, and Kenneth West, 1987, A Simple, Positive Semi-definite, Heteroskedasticity and
Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix, Econometrica, 55, 703-708.
Obstfeld, Maurice, 1992, International Risk Sharing and Capital Mobility – Another Look, Journal of
International Money and Finance 11, 115-121.
Obstfeld, Maurice, 1994, Risk-taking, Global Diversification, and Growth, American Economic Review
84, 1310-1329.
Obstfeld, Maurice, 1995, International Capital Mobility in the 1990s, in Peter Kenen, ed., Understanding Interdependence Princeton University Press, 1995.
Pallage, Stphane and Michel Robe, 2003. On the Welfare Cost of Economic Fluctuations in Developing
Countries. International Economic Review 44 (2), 677–698.
Quinn, Dennis P., 1997, The Correlates of Changes in International Financial Regulation, American
Political Science Review 91, 531–551.
Quinn, Dennis P. and Carla Inclan, 1997, The Origins of Financial Openess: A Study of Current and
Capital Account Liberalization. American Journal of Political Science 41, 814–845.
Quinn, Dennis P. and A. M. Toyoda, 2003, Does Capital Account Liberalization Lead to Economic
Growth?: An Empirical Investigation, Unpublished working paper, Georgetown University.
Rodrik, Dani, 1998a, Who Needs Capital Account Convertibility? Presented at Princeton International Finance Section symposium.
Rodrik, Dani, 1998b, Why Do More Open Economies Have Bigger Governments? Journal of Political
Economy 997–1032.
Stiglitz, Joseph E., 2000, Capital Market Liberalization, Economic Growth and Instability, World
Development 1075–1086.
Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson, 2002, Has the Business Cycle Changed and Why?, Unpublished
working paper, Harvard University.
Van Wincoop, E., 1994, Welfare Gains From International Risk Sharing, Journal of Monetary Economics 34, 175-200.
Van Wincoop, E., 1999, How Big are Potential Welfare Gains From International Risk Sharing?,
Journal of International Economics 47, 109-235.

31

Appendix A: Estimation
Our regression is:
Stdevi,t+k,k = γ 0 Qi,t + αLibi,t + i,t+k,k ,

(5)

where the Qit variables control for different levels of consumption growth variability across countries. Our main focus is the effect, α, of equity market liberalization or capital account openness,
denoted by Libi,t , on growth variability. We identify the parameters by assuming E[ft+k ] = 0, with


ft+k

 1,t+k,k ⊗ x1,t

..
=
.





N,t+k,k ⊗ xN,t







(6)

where xi,t = [Q0i,t , Libi,t ]0 .
The estimator of θ = [γ 0 , α]0 can then be written as:
−1
0
−1
0
0
θ̂ = [(X0 Z)S−1
T (Z X)] [(X Z)ST (Z Y)]

(7)

where Yi is [Stdevi,t+k,k ], and given Xi = [x0i,t ],


 X1
 .
.
X=
 .


XN





X1




 0

, Z = 
 .

 .

 .


0

0

···

0

X2 · · ·

0

0

· · · XN







.




(8)

Furthermore, ST is the estimated variance covariance matrix of the sample orthogonality conditions,
ft+k , taking the autocovariances induced by the overlap into account.
It is straightforward to accommodate cross-sectional heteroskedasticity and SUR effects in our
specification. We define the N × N matrix Ω̂j as follows:
Ω̂j =

T
1 X
(t+k 0t+k−j ).
T t=j+1

(9)

The restricted variance-covariance matrix can then be written as follows:
ŜT =

K
T
X
X
1X 0
Zt Ω̂0 Zt +
(
(Zt−j 0 Ω̂j Zt + Zt 0 Ω̂−j Zt−j )).
T t
j=1 t=j+1

(10)

where Zt is the time t realization of the N T by P N matrix Z and P is the number of parameters
(the dimension of θ). That is, Zt is an N by P N matrix . K represents the number of lags.
Given the small time dimension in our sample, the small sample properties of the estimator in this
environment are questionable (see below). As a result, we restrict the non-diagonal terms of Ω̂j to
be identical:


σ̂11,j σ̂j · · ·
σ̂j




Ω̂j = 




σ̂j
..
.
σ̂j

σ̂22,j · · ·

σ̂j

32

σ̂j

· · · σ̂N N,j





.




(11)

This structure greatly reduces the number of parameters in the weighting matrix structure, but
retains some of the SUR flavor. Furthermore, our main estimator sets σ̂j = 0, accommodating only
groupwise heteroskedasticity in the estimator.

Appendix B: A Monte Carlo Experiment
In this appendix, we explore the small sample properties of our estimator proposed above. To
begin, we estimate a simple data generating process for one-year growth rates that will form the
basis for our simulations.
B.1 One-year growth and liberalization
Using one-year growth rates for consumption growth for each country, yi,t+1 , we estimate the
following cross-sectionally restricted specification:
yi,t+1 = α0 (1 − Libi,t ) + α1 Libi,t + [σ0 (1 − Libi,t ) + σ1 Libi,t ]ui,t+1

(12)

This methodology collects all segmented and all liberalized country years in one bin, and estimates
their relative means and volatilities. Hence, we employ both time-series and cross-sectional information to estimate four parameters, α0 , α1 , σ0 , and σ1 . Because this model mainly serves as a
data generating process, we ignore potentially predictable components consumption growth. First,
we collect the relevant innovations, ui,t , from equation (12) for each country in one vector:




ut = 



u1,t
..
.
uN,t








(13)

where N denotes the number of countries in the sample. Let Ωt denote the conditional variancecovariance matrix for ut+1 :






Ωt = 




σ1,t
0
..
.

0

···

0

σ2,t · · ·

0

0

0

· · · σN,t











(14)

SUR effects are ignored across countries. This construction is analogous to a restricted version of a
panel estimation with groupwise heteroscedasticity. The country-specific innovation variance, σi,t ,
depends only upon the liberalization indicator for that country; however, the innovation variances
within each liberalization regime, σ0 and σ1 , are assumed constant across time and countries.
The conditional likelihood function for a single time period can be expressed as follows:
lt = −

N
1
1
ln(2π) − ln |Ωt−1 | − u0t Ω−1
t−1 ut
2
2
2

(15)

where N is the number of individual countries. Thus, the log-likelihood function for the full panel
(1, . . . , T ) is given by:
L=

T
X

lt

(16)

t=1

This procedure estimates the system in equation (12) using quasi-maximum likelihood, computing
QMLE robust standard errors as in Bollerslev and Wooldridge (1992).

33

The results for one-year consumption growth rates over 1980-2000 are presented in Panel A of
Appendix Table B. We observe an increase in the average rate of growth, captured in the difference
between α0 and α1 , following equity market liberalization of 1.67% (1.31%) in sample I (II). The
mean effect is broadly consistent with evidence documented by Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad
(2001, 2004). Additionally, consumption growth volatility, captured in the difference between σ0
and σ1 , is reduced by 6.55% (1.18%) in sample I (II). Of course, these estimates do not control for
other determinants of volatility (such as economic development), or for predictable components.
We now examine the link between these one-year volatility estimates and the five-year standard
deviation based measure we use in the empirical work.
B.2 Experimental design and finite sample distribution
We employ the one-year estimates as the baseline for a Monte Carlo simulation experiment designed
to assess the small sample properties of our results based on the five-year standard deviation and
to obtain information on the significance of the volatility effects. For our largest sample size of
95 countries over a 20 year period, we conduct a Monte Carlo experiment that fully randomizes
liberalization dates consistent with their rate of occurrence in the overall sample. For each Monte
Carlo replication, we draw 95 uniform random numbers on the interval 1 to 95, and randomly
assign one of the existing liberalization dummies to each country. We simulate 20 N (0, 1) random
variables, ũi,t , for 95 countries, and given a simulated liberalization date for each country, generate
one-year growth rates according to the estimated specification for GDP growth in Table B1.
yt+1 = 0.0058 · (1 − Libi,t ) + 0.0225 · (Libi,t ) + [0.1129 · (1 − Libit ) + 0.0474 · (Libi,t )]ũi,t+1

(17)

The equation above gives the alternative hypothesis for the Monte Carlo. Additionally, the growth
rate simulation for the null model assumes σ0 = σ1 = 0.0936 – the QMLE based estimate for the
observed data under the null (the estimated mean effects are almost identical). This simulation
generates growth observations for each time period, with the parameters only depending on whether
there is a liberalization or not. In the null model, the liberalization does not change growth
volatility; in the alternative model, it decreases growth volatility.
For each replication, we construct the five-year range and standard deviation based measures
of growth volatility for each country as we do in the actual data. Then, we estimate the following
regression using the GMM based methodology presented in section 2:
Stdevi,t+k,k = δ0 + δ1 Libi,t + i,t+k,k

(18)

Under the null, this procedure provides some indication of the behavior of the t-statistics for δ1 , as
well as any potential biases in the coefficient estimates. We repeat this experiment 1,000 times.
Panel B of Appendix Table B presents some relevant percentiles of the empirical distribution for
the coefficient and for the t-statistic on the liberalization coefficient in the regression, δ1 . Under the
null model, the median coefficient is −0.0003 and the median t-statistic is −0.13, indicating that
estimation bias is not a serious issue. The 2.5th percentile of the distribution shows a coefficient of
−0.0074, and the 2.5th percentile t-statistic is −3.60. This statistic is larger (in absolute value) than
what would be implied by a standard t-distribution, a fact we take into account in our inferences
in Section 3.
We also explore the behavior of the coefficient estimates under the alternative hypothesis. In this
case, the median coefficient is −0.0554, with a corresponding t-statistic of −32.41, demonstrating
the ability of the volatility measure to capture the liberalization effect inherent in the large difference
between σ0 and σ1 in the data. In other words, tests based on our regression are likely to have large
power. Moreover, there appears to be a small upward bias in the estimate. The data generating
process builds in a drop in volatility of 6.55%. Our standard deviation measure on average yields
a 5.56% decrease.
We could employ the usual bias correction for the estimation of the standard
q
5
deviation (× 4 ), and this would lead to an estimate of 6.22% for the volatility difference, closer to

34

the 6.55% truth. We do not implement this bias correction making our volatility change estimates
conservative.

Appendix C: Randomizing liberalization dates
Because the liberalization dates have a [0,1] pattern, there is a possibility that the liberalization
effect reflects the occurence of a shock happening across liberalizing countries but not accounted
for by our control variables. This is especially so because many liberalization dates are bunched in
time. Therefore, Appendix Table C, reports the results of a Monte Carlo experiment addressing
this bunching problem. We repeat the regression for Sample I (95 countries) with the usual control
variables and the consumption growth standard deviation data, all taken from the sample, 1000
times. However, for each replication we use randomized liberalization dates. That is, we take the
95 existing liberalization dummy series and for each replication and for each country randomly
draw out of this pool with replacement. If there is a problem due to bunching, the Monte Carlo
distribution should show a significant bias. The results are given in Appendix Table C. Both the
mean and the median of the coefficients are very close to zero, suggesting unbiasedness. There
is a negligible downward bias in the t-test of 0.02. The 2.5th percentile value for the distribution
of the coefficient is a negative 64 basis points, whereas the 2.5th percentile for the t-test is 3.28.
These results are largely consistent with the results of the previous Monte Carlo. The estimator
is unbiased but the standard errors slightly under-estimate the true standard errors, a result wellknown from the asset pricing literature (see Hodrick (1992) and Ang and Bekaert (2003)). This
means that we must use somewhat higher (in absolute magnitude) critical values than dictated by
the asymptotic distribution (around 3.00 for a 5 percent test). However, assigning the liberalization
date to the right country really matters and the 0/1 pattern of the liberalization dummy does not
generate econometric problems.

35

A
Ba rgen
ng tin
Bo lade a
tsw sh
a
Br na
az
i
C C l
Co olo hile
te m
d'I bia
v
Ec oir
ua e
d
Eg o r
y
G pt
ha
G na
re
Ic ece
el
an
d
In Ind
do ia
ne
s
Is ia
r
Ja ae
m l
ai
Ja ca
p
Jo an
rd
K an
en
K ya
M ore
al a
ay
si
M Ma a
au lta
ri
M tius
e
N Mo xico
ew ro
Ze cco
al
N and
ig
Pa eri
ki a
st
Ph P an
ili er
pp u
So Po ines
ut rtu
h ga
A l
fri
c
S
Tr
Sr pa a
in
i
in
id
ad T Lan
an ha ka
d ila
To nd
b
Tu ago
n
T is
V urk ia
en e
Zi ezu y
m el
ba a
bw
e
G A
D v
P- e
w rag
ei e
gh
te
d

Figure 1

Standard
deviation
0.180

Real Output Growth Volatility and Equity Market Liberalization

0.160

0.140

0.120

0.100

0.080

0.060

0.040

0.020

0.000

5 years pre-liberalization
5 years post-liberalization
Source: WDI, World Bank

Table 1

Real Consumption Growth Volatility and Equity Market Liberalizations
5-year consumption growth volatility before and after equity market liberalization

Country
Argentina
Bangladesh
Botswana
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Cote d'Ivoire
Ecuador
Egypt
Ghana
Greece
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Israel
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kenya
Korea

PrePostliberalization liberalization
0.063
0.119
0.026
0.017
0.102
0.103
0.063
0.024
0.042
0.041
0.040
0.018
0.060
0.045
0.030
0.046
0.025
0.020
0.019
0.115
0.050
0.019
0.057
0.032
0.023
0.041
0.035
0.045
0.064
0.032
0.088
0.054
0.024
0.009
0.126
0.035
0.104
0.072
0.010
0.013

PrePostliberalization liberalization
Country
Malaysia
0.028
0.055
Malta
0.034
0.030
Mauritius
0.026
0.007
Mexico
0.034
0.016
Morocco
0.058
0.056
New Zealand
0.013
0.019
Nigeria
0.067
0.134
Pakistan
0.028
0.020
Peru
0.136
0.026
Philippines
0.028
0.031
Portugal
0.019
0.015
South Africa
0.024
0.012
Spain
0.004
0.018
Sri Lanka
0.016
0.020
Thailand
0.029
0.026
Trinidad and Tobago
0.100
0.126
Tunisia
0.048
0.010
Turkey
0.038
0.036
Venezuela
0.125
0.086
Zimbabwe
0.175
0.123

Averages
Equal-weighted
GDP-weighted

PrePostliberalization liberalization
0.052
0.045
0.047
0.033

Countries with increased volatility
Countries with decreased volatility

14
26

We explore the standard deviations of the growth rate of real per capita consumption in the 5 years before and after the official equity market liberalization (including t
liberalization year in the "after" period). For some countries, we do not have a full 5 years available given the timing of the liberalization, so we simply take the
available years in the calculation. These statistics reflect data for each country from 1980-2000. We also calculate both simple and GDP-weighted averages of these
figures in the last columns.

Table 2

Consumption Growth Volatility and Equity Market Liberalization
Volatility Countries Constant
Panel A: Fixed Effect Estimation
Cons
40
Panel B: Control Variables
Cons
95
0.2152
0.0493
Cons
40
-0.1015
0.0943
Panel C: Time Effects
Cons
95
Cons

95

Cons

40

0.1817
0.0513

-0.0742

0.0969
Cons

40

Initial
Log(GDP)

SecondarySchool
Gov/GDP Enrollment Log(Life)

Official
Population Liberalization
Indicator
Growth

Fixed
Effects

Time Effects

-0.0017
0.0011

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

No

Trend

No

Time dummies

No

Trend

No

Time dummies

-0.0039
0.0015
0.0007
0.0020

0.1948
0.0253
0.0762
0.0326

-0.0123
0.0084
-0.0515
0.0110

-0.0375
0.0131
0.0357
0.0243

0.0603
0.0946
0.4105
0.1858

-0.0192
0.0028
0.0003
0.0027

-0.0040
0.0018
-0.0060
0.0017

0.1874

-0.0157
0.0085
-0.0172
0.0085

-0.0301

0.0264
0.2227
0.0314

0.0138
-0.0172
0.0154

0.1344
0.0975
0.1580
0.0881

-0.0162
0.0030
-0.0124
0.0029

0.0012
0.0022
0.0027
0.0021

0.0326
-0.0065
0.0323

-0.0553
0.0110
-0.0484
0.0101

0.0254
-0.0215
0.0226

0.4334
0.1871
0.3191
0.1756

-0.0018
0.0033
-0.0013
0.0030

0.0766

0.0273

The dependent variable is the five-year standard deviation of the real consumption growth rate calculated over 1980-2000. Initial Log(GDP) is the
log real per capita GDP level in 1980. Govt/GDP is the ratio of government consumption to GDP; Secondary School Enrollment is the secondary
school enrollment ratio; Log(Life) is the log life expectancy of the total population;Population Growth is the growth rate of the total population;
and the Official Liberalization Indicator takes a value of one when the equity market is liberalized; otherwise, it takes on a value of zero. The last
column indicates the inclusion of a time adjustment (time trend or time dummies). All standard errors provide a correction for cross-sectional
heteroskedasticity and account for the overlapping nature of the data.

Table 3

Consumption Growth Volatility and Capital Account Openness
Standard Controls and Time Trend

Panel A: IMF Capital Account
Openness

Sample I
(95 countries)

Sample II
(40 countries)

IMF Capital Account Openness Indicator
Std. error

-0.0057
0.0028

-0.0005
0.0032

IMF Capital Account Openness Indicator
Std. error
Official Liberalization Indicator
Std. error

-0.0038
0.0028
-0.0158
0.0031

-0.0008
0.0031
-0.0018
0.0033

Sample I
(76 countries)

Sample II
(37 countries)

Quinn Capital Account Degree of Openness Indicator
Std. error

-0.0266
0.0045

-0.0185
0.0072

Quinn Capital Account Degree of Openness Indicator
Std. error
Official Liberalization Indicator
Std. error

-0.0226
0.0049
-0.0037
0.0026

-0.0190
0.0076
0.0011
0.0034

Panel B: Quinn Capital Account Openness

-0.0142
-0.0015
Equity Open/Quinn <= 0.5
0.0013
0.0036
Equity Open/IMF Capital Closed
0.0032
0.0035
0.0036
0.0040
Std. error
Std. error
-0.0223
-0.0032
Equity Open/Quinn > 0.5
-0.0165
-0.0067
Equity Open/IMF Capital Open
0.0038
0.0045
0.0033
0.0040
Std. error
Std. error
***
***
***
Significance
Significance
I and II refer to samples of 95 and 40 countries, respectively. The dependent variable is the five-year standard deviation of the real consumption growth rate calculated over 19802000. We include in the regressions, but do not report, the same control variables as presented in Table 2, with a time trend. In Panel A, the IMF Capital Account Openness
Indicator takes on a value of zero if the country has at least one reported capital account restriction.
In Panel B, the Quinn Capital Account Degree of Openness Indicator takes a value between 0 and 1 depending upon the intensity of the reported capital account restrictions; for
samples I and II, these regressions include 76 and 37 countries, respectively. We also test for the significance of the difference between two openness coefficients in the last
regression. Statistical significance is denoted by a *** for 1%. All standard errors provide a correction for cross-sectional heteroskedasticity and account for the overlapping nature
of the data.

Table 4

Robustness
Standard Controls and Time Trend

Panel A: Alternative Dating

Sample I
(95 countries)

Sample II
(40 countries)

Official Liberalization Indicator
Std. error

-0.0175
0.0031

-0.0018
0.0033

Liberalization Intensity
Std. error

-0.0296
0.0037

-0.0075
0.0040

Panel B: The Impact of the
Government Sector

Sample I
(95 countries)

Sample II
(40 countries)

Initial Log(GDP)
Std. error
Gov/GDP
Std. error
Initial Log(GDP)*Gov/GDP
Std. error
Official Liberalization Indicator
Std. error

0.0089
0.0022
1.0030
0.1097
-0.0981
0.0127
-0.0110
0.0031

0.0129
0.0033
0.8499
0.1287
-0.0962
0.0172
-0.0018
0.0032

Panel C: Social Security

Sample I
(58 countries)

Official Liberalization Indicator
Std. error
Gov/GDP
Std. error

0.0007
0.0020
0.0440
0.0108

Official Liberalization Indicator
Std. error
Gov/GDP
Std. error
Social Security
Std. error

-0.0021
0.0020
0.0645
0.0161
-0.0145
0.0019
Sample I
(58 countries)

Liberalization Intensity
Std. error
Gov/GDP
Std. error

-0.0055
0.0025
0.0467
0.0097

Liberalization Intensity
Std. error
Gov/GDP
Std. error
Social Security
Std. error

-0.0117
0.0029
0.0703
0.0159
-0.0161
0.0018

The dependent variable is the five-year standard deviation of the real consumption growth rate calculated over 1980-2000. We include in
the regressions, but do not report, the same control variables as presented in Table 2, including a time trend. In Panel A, the Official
Liberalization Indicator takes a value of one when the equity market is liberalized; otherwise, it takes on a value of zero. The Liberalization
Intensity measure is the ratio of IFC Investables to IFC Global market capitalization.
In Panel B, we consider the interaction of the initial level of GDP in 1980 with the government expenditures/GDP ratio. In Panel C, we
consider the impact of the social security index. For comparison, the first line shows the liberalization effect in the sample of 58 countries,
without including the social security variable. The second group of numbers applies to the regression with the social security index
included. All standard errors provide a correction for cross-sectional heteroskedasticity and account for the overlapping nature of the data.

Table 5

Predicting Equity Market Liberalization
68 liberalizing and segmented countries
Probit Est.
13.12
-0.80
-2.51
6.96
19.05
-3.43
-1.74
-18.39
-13.58
3.79
5.46

Std. error
12.60
0.34
3.29
2.69
29.53
3.23
8.37
7.61
9.87
1.80
2.46

Quality of Institutions

5.81

1.84

Conflict

2.25

1.91

Social Security (41 countries)

0.65

0.39

Constant
Initial Log(GDP)
Gov/GDP
Secondary-School Enrollment
Population Growth
Log(Life)
Past Growth
Growth Opportunities
Past Volatility
Private Credit
ICRG Political Index

We present probit estimates, where the dependent variable takes a
value of zero if the country never liberalizes and a one if the country
liberalizes in sample. To focus on the probability of the
liberalization decision, we ignore countries that have liberalized
before 1980. We have 68 countries that either liberalize after 1980
or do not liberalize at all. For countries that liberalize, the righthand-side predictive variables are averaged over the 5-years
preceding liberalization; for those countries that do not liberalize, the
right-hand-side predictive variables are averaged over the 5-years
preceding the liberalization date of their closest geographic neighbor
As predictive variables, we include a constant, Log(GDP),
Govt/GDP, secondary-school enrollment, population growth,
Log(Life Expectancy), past growth, a measure of industry growth
opportunities, past growth volatility, and private credit/GDP. In
addition, we consider the ICRG political risk index, two of its
subcomponents (Quality of Institutions and Conflict), or the social
security index. In the last sample, we only have 41 countries.
Estimation is by QMLE, and robust standard errors are reported in
italics.

Table 6

Consumption Growth Volatility, Liberalization, and Reform
Standard Controls and Time Trend
Sample I
Sample II
(95 countries) (40 countries)
Trade
Std. error

log(1+Inflation)
Std. error

log(1+bmp)
Std. error

Private Credit
Std. error
Inflation Volatility
Std. error
Quality of Institutions
Std. error
Conflict
Std. error

0.0153
0.0025
0.0218
0.0041
0.0183
0.0026
0.0017
0.0042

0.0161
0.0048
0.0045
0.0050
0.0076
0.0047
-0.0044
0.0035

Sample I
Sample II
(95 countries) (40 countries)
0.0149
0.0025

0.0153
0.0048

0.0180
0.0028
-0.0016
0.0042
0.0005
0.0002

0.0079
0.0047
-0.0055
0.0034
-0.0001
0.0004

Sample I
Sample II
(75 countries) (39 countries)

-0.0585
0.0108
0.0143
0.0113

-0.0205
0.0102
0.0211
0.0108

Official Liberalization
Indicator
Std. error

-0.0102
0.0027

0.0004
0.0026

-0.0116
0.0028

0.0002
0.0026

-0.0082
0.0035

-0.0026
0.0031

Liberalization Intensity
Std. error

-0.0233
0.0034

-0.0024
0.0031

-0.0263
0.0034

-0.0027
0.0031

-0.0128
0.0043

-0.0069
0.0036

IMF Capital Account
Openness Indicator
Std. error

-0.0031
0.0025

0.0011
0.0030

-0.0037
0.0026

0.0009
0.0031

-0.0035
0.0030

-0.0017
0.0032

Sample I
Sample II
(76 countries) (37 countries)
Quinn Capital Account
Degree of Openness
Indicator
Std. error

-0.0217
0.0047

-0.0118
0.0072

Sample I
Sample II
(76 countries) (37 countries)

-0.0232
0.0047

-0.0131
0.0073

Sample I
Sample II
(67 countries) (36 countries)

-0.0247
0.0047

-0.0174
0.0072

I and II refer to samples of 95 and 40 countries, respectively. The dependent variable is the five-year standard deviation of the real
consumption growth rate calculated over 1980-2000. We include in the regressions, but do not report, the same control variables as
presented in Table 2, including a time trend. The Official Liberalization Indicator takes a value of one when the equity market is
liberalized; otherwise, it takes on a value of zero. The Liberalization Intensity measure is the ratio of IFC Investables to IFC
Global market capitalization. The IMF Capital Account Openness Indicator takes on value of zero if the country has at least one
reported capital account restriction. The Quinn Capital Account Degree of Openness Indicator takes a value between 0 and 1
depending upon the intensity of the reported capital account restrictions.
Trade is the sum of exports plus imports divided by GDP, Log(1+Inflation) is the log of one plus the inflation rate, and
Log(1+bmp) is the log of one plus the black market foreign exchange premium, Private Credit is the ratio of private credit to GDP,
and inflation volatility is the high-low spread in inflation over the preceeding 5-years. Quality of Institutions and Conflict are
indices based upon ICRG political subgroups as detailed in the appendix. All standard errors provide a correction for cross-

Table 7

GDP Growth Volatility and Equity Market Liberalization

Volatility
GDP

Official
Liberalization IMF Capital
Liberalization
Intensity
Account
Indicator
Indicator
Openness
Countries
40
-0.0036
0.0010

Quinn Capital
Account
Degree of
Openness

Fixed
Effects
Yes

Time
No

GDP

95

-0.0049
0.0014

No

Trend

GDP

40

0.0000
0.0018

No

Trend

GDP

95

-0.0078
0.0019

No

Trend

GDP

40

-0.0017
0.0025

No

Trend

GDP

95

-0.0033
0.0013

No

Trend

GDP

40

-0.0029
0.0027

No

Trend

GDP

76

No

Trend

GDP

37

-0.0115
0.0026

-0.0143
No
Trend
0.0045
The dependent variable is the five-year standard deviation of the real GDP growth rate calculated over 1980-2000.
We include in the regressions, but do not report, the same control variables as presented in Table 2, including a
time trend, with the exception of the fixed effects estimate in the first line where no controls are included. The
Official Liberalization Indicator takes a value of one when the equity market is liberalized; otherwise, it takes on a
value of zero. The Liberalization Intensity measure is the ratio of IFC Investables to IFC Global market
capitalization.
The IMF Capital Account Openness Indicator takes on value of zero if the country has at least one reported capital
account restriction. The Quinn Capital Account Degree of Openness Indicator takes a value between 0 and 1
depending upon the intensity of the reported capital account restrictions; for samples I and II, these regressions
include 76 and 37 countries, respectively. All standard errors provide a correction for cross-sectional
heteroskedasticity and account for the overlapping nature of the data.

Table 8

Liberalization and Relative Consumption-Output Volatility
Standard Controls and Time Trend

Panel B: Liberalization, Reform, and Social
Sample I
(95 countries)
Security

Sample I
(95 countries)

Sample II
(40 countries)

Constant
Std. error
Initial Log(GDP)
Std. error
Gov/GDP
Std. error
Secondary-School Enrollment
Std. error
Log(Life)
Std. error
Population Growth
Std. error
Official Liberalization Indicator
Std. error

-2.6240
0.7606
-0.1819
0.0311
3.5330
0.3401
-0.3440
0.1409
0.9732
0.2066
2.4890
1.3080
-0.1827
0.0507

-1.5320
1.3830
-0.1626
0.0431
2.6830
0.5616
-0.7738
0.2149
0.7429
0.3566
2.6400
3.6130
-0.1007
0.0734

Liberalization Intensity
Std. error

-0.3394
0.0631

-0.2963
0.0828

IMF Capital Account Openness Indicator
Std. error

Sample I
(95 countries)
-0.0791
0.0443

Sample II
(40 countries)
0.1317
0.0829

IMF Capital Account Openness Indicator
Std. error
Official Liberalization Indicator
Std. error

-0.0289
0.0497
-0.1532
0.0513

0.1769
0.0887
-0.1231
0.0730

Quinn Capital Account Degree of Openness Indicator
Std. error
Official Liberalization Indicator
Std. error

-0.1702
0.0943
-0.1193
0.0547

0.2255
0.1766
-0.1572
0.0779

Equity Open/IMF Capital Closed
Std. error
Equity Open/IMF Capital Open
Std. error
Significance

-0.1364
0.0557
-0.2416
0.0693

-0.1242
0.0744
-0.1886
0.1466

Equity Open/Quinn <= 0.5
Std. error
Equity Open/Quinn > 0.5
Std. error
Significance

-0.1004
0.0676
-0.2325
0.0660

-0.1106
0.0853
-0.2122
0.1009

***

***

Panel A: Liberalization

Trade
Std. error

log(1+Inflation)
Std. error

log(1+bmp)
Std. error

Private Credit
Std. error

Official Liberalization Indicator
Std. error

Social Security
Std. error

Panel C: IMF Capital Account
Openness

**

Official Liberalization Indicator
Std. error

0.2311
0.0435
0.0433
0.0660
0.1406
0.0465
-0.4374
0.0828
-0.1044
0.0496

Sample II
(40 countries)
0.4156
0.0853
-0.0970
0.0630
0.1039
0.0950
-0.3543
0.0914
-0.0312
0.0648

Sample I
(58 countries)
-0.1941
0.0643
-0.0016
0.0530

Sample I
(76 countries)
Quinn Capital Account Degree of Openness Indicator
-0.0840
Std. error
0.0861

Panel D: Quinn Capital Account Openness

Sample II
(37 countries)
0.0100
0.1737

I and II refer to samples of 95 and 40 countries, respectively. The dependent variable is the logged value of the ratio of the five-year standard deviation of the real consumption growth
rate to the five-year standard deviation of the real GDP growth rate calculated over 1980-2000. In all cases, we include in the regressions, but do not report, the same control variables
as presented in Table 2, including a time trend. The Liberalization Intensity measure is the ratio of IFC Investables to IFC Global market capitalization. In Panel B, Trade is the sum
of exports plus imports divided by GDP, Log(1+Inflation) is the log of one plus the inflation rate, and Log(1+bmp) is the log of one plus the black market foreign exchange premium,
Private Credit is the ratio of private credit to GDP, and Social Security is the associated index value (available only for 58 countries).
In Panel C, the IMF Capital Account Openness Indicator takes on value of zero if the country has at least one reported capital account restriction. In Panel D, the Quinn Capital
Account Degree of Openness Indicator takes a value between 0 and 1 depending upon the intensity of the reported capital account restrictions; for sample I, these regressions include 76
countries. We also test for the significance of the difference between the two openness coefficients in the last regression. Statistical significance is denoted **byora*** for 5% or 1%,
respectively. All standard errors provide a correction for cross-sectional heteroskedasticity and account for the overlapping nature of the data.

Table 9

Why does the volatility effect from equity liberalizations differ across countries?
Standard Controls and Time Trend

Impact on volatility resulting
from liberalization
Financial Sector
Private Credit
Turnover
Market Capitalization/GDP
Anti-director rights

from low
level of
variable

Fully
Liberalized
-0.0429
-0.0077
-0.0089
-0.0055

Insurance through Government
Sector
Social Security
Gov/GDP

-0.0115
-0.0419

Risks Present in Countries
ICRG Economic Index
Conflict
Foreign Debt Index

-0.0323
-0.0318
-0.0267

Quality of Institutions
Judicial efficiency
Speed of process (combined)
Quality of Institutions

-0.0117
-0.0281
-0.0170

***
**
**
**

**
***

***
***
***

**
***
***

0.0060
0.0052
0.0037
0.0121

0.0048
0.0043

from high
level of
variable

**

-0.0130
-0.0010
-0.0021
-0.0021

*

-0.0020
-0.0205

*

0.0036
-0.0008
-0.0068

0.0047
-0.0033
0.0049

-0.0062
-0.0111
-0.0013

*

*

-0.0105
-0.0065
-0.0049

Wald Test:
Difference
**

***

*
***

**
***

***

*

***

**

***

**

***

*
***

Direct Effect
of Interaction
Variable
-0.0036
-0.0061
0.0041
-0.0039

-0.0417
0.2705

-0.0542
0.0027
-0.0417

0.0354
-0.0002
-0.0567

Number of Time-series
countries available

***
**
*

***
***

***

***

***

***

95
50
50
47

Yes
Yes
Yes
No

58
95

No
Yes

75
75
75

Yes
Yes
Yes

47
69
75

No
No
Yes

The dependent variable is the five-year standard deviation of the real consumption growth rate calculated over 1980-2000. We include in the regressions, but do
not report, the same control variables as presented in Table 2, with a time trend. For each regression, we separate the liberalization effect for fully liberalized and
liberalizing countries. For liberalizing countries, we estimate interaction effects with the financial sector, government sector, country risks, and quality of
institution variables; we report the associated impact on consumption growth volatility for a liberalizing country for a low level (below the median of the
associated interaction variable for liberalizing countries) and for a liberalizing country at a high level (above the median of the associated interaction variable for
liberalizing
a Wald
We a so epocountries).
t t e stat stWe
ca also
s g provide
ca cethe
o tsignificance
e te act oof coe
c etest,
ts afor
d twhich
e Wathe
d null
est ohypothesis
t e d eis ethat
ce;the
stathigh-low
st ca s geffects
ca are
ce equivalent.
s de oted by a o 0%,
for 5%, and *** for 1%. The financial sector variables we consider are the ratio of private credit to GDP, equity market turnover, equity market size, and antidirector (minority shareholders) rights. The government sector variables we consider are the social security index and the size of the government sector. The
country risk variables we consider are the ICRG economic risk index, the ICRG political subcomponent measuring conflict, and the ICRG financial risk
subcomponent measuring foreign debt exposure. Finally, the quality of institutions variables we consider are judicial efficiency, the combined speed of the
process to resolve a bounced check or tenant eviction (longer duration implies a lower speed), and the ICRG political subcomponent measuring the quality of
institutions.
For all ICRG indices, larger values denote improvements. The number of countries for which the interaction variable is available is also provided. Finally, some
of the variables are available as time-series, while others are only available in the cross-section; we denote this in the column laballed "time-series available". All
standard errors provide a correction for cross-sectional heteroskedasticity and account for the overlapping nature of the data.

Appendix Table A
Description of the Variables
All data are employed at the annual frequency.
Variable

Description
Dating equity market liberalization

Official equity market liberalization indicator

Corresponding to a date of formal regulatory change after which foreign investors officially have the
opportunity to invest in domestic equity securities. Official Liberalization dates, presented in Table 2, are
based on Bekaert and Harvey (2002) A Chronology of Important Financial, Economic and Political Events
in Emerging Markets, http://www.duke.edu/~charvey/chronology.htm. This chronology is based on over
50 different source materials. A condensed version of the chronology, along with the selection of dates for a
number of countries appears in Bekaert and Harvey (2000). We have extended their official liberalization
dates to include Japan, New Zealand, and Spain. For the liberalizing countries, the associated official
liberalization indicator takes a value of one when the equity market is officially liberalized and thereafter,
and zero otherwise. For the remaining countries, fully segmented countries are assumed to have an
indicator value of zero, and fully liberalized countries are assumed to have an indicator value of one.

Intensity equity market liberalization indicator

Following Bekaert (1995) and Edison and Warnock (2003), the intensity measure is based on the ratio of the
market capitalization of the constituent firms comprising the IFC Investable index to those that comprise the
IFC Global index for each country. The IFC Global index, subject to some exclusion restrictions, is
designed to represent the overall market portfolio for each country, whereas the IFC Investable index is
designed to represent a portfolio of domestic equities that are available to foreign investors. A ratio of one
means that all of the stocks are available to foreign investors. Fully segmented countries have an intensity
measure of zero, and fully liberalized countries have an intensity measure of one. Liberalizing countries
(denoted "frontier" by Standard and Poor's EMDB) receive an intensity measure of zero since they do not
have and "investable" index. For robustness, we consider an alternative where we code these countries 0.5
following their official liberalization date.
Other important dates

IMF Capital account liberalization indicator

We measure capital account openness by employing the the IMF's Annual Report on Exchange
Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions (AREAER). This publication reports six categories of
information. The capital account liberalization indicator takes on value of zero if the country has at least
one restriction in the "restrictions on payments for the capital account transaction" category.

Quinn Capital account liberalization indicator

Quinn’s capital account openness measure is also created from the text of the annual volume published by
the International Monetary Fund (IMF), Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions . Rather than
the indicator constructed by the IMF that takes a 1 if any restriction is in place, Quinn’s openness measure is
scored 0-4, in half integer units, with 4 representing a fully open economy. The measure hence facilitates a
more nuanced view of capital account openness, and is available for 76 countries in our study. We
transform each measure into a 0 to 1 scale.
Macroeconomic and demographic measures

Gross domestic product (GDP) growth

Growth of real per capita gross domestic product. Available for all countries from 1980 through 2000.
Source: World Bank Development Indicators CD-ROM.

Consumption growth

Growth of real per capita private consumption, the market value of all goods and services, including durable
products purchased or received as income in kind by households and nonprofit institutions. For those few
years for which consumption figures are missing, we fill in data by taking the consumption level implied by
the per capita GDP level, assuming the consumption/GDP ratio is unchanged from the previous year. We
added updated consumption data for Botswana due to apparent data error (www.worldbank.com).
Available for all countries from 1980 through 2000. Source: World Bank Development Indicators CDROM.

Appendix Table A
(Continued)
Variable

Description

Initial GDP

Logarithm of real per capita gross domestic product in 1980. Available for all countries. Source: World
Bank Development Indicators CD-ROM.

Government consumption/GDP

Government consumption divided by gross domestic product. General government final consumption
expenditure includes all government current expenditures for purchases of goods and services (including
compensation of employees). It also includes most expenditures on national defense and security, but
excludes government military expenditures that are part of government capital formation. Available for all
countries from 1980 through 2000. Source: World Bank Development Indicators CD-ROM.

Secondary school enrollment

Secondary school enrollment ratio is the ratio of total enrollment, regardless of age, to the population of the
age group that officially corresponds to the secondary level of education. Accordingly, the reported value
can exceed (or average) more than 100%. Available for all countries from 1980 through 2000. Source:
World Bank Development Indicators CD-ROM.

Population growth

Growth rate of total population which counts all residents regardless of legal status or citizenship. Available
for all countries from 1980 through 2000. Source: World Bank Development Indicators CD-ROM.

Log life expectancy

Life expectancy at birth indicates the number of years a newborn infant would live if prevailing patterns of
mortality at the time of its birth were to stay the same throughout its life. Available for all countries from
1980 through 2000. Source: World Bank Development Indicators CD-ROM.
Macroeconomic reforms

Trade/GDP

The trade dependency ratio is the sum of exports and imports of goods and services measured as a share of
gross domestic product. Available for all countries from 1980 through 2000. Source: World Bank
Development Indicators CD-ROM.

Inflation

Inflation as measured by the log annual growth rate of the gross domestic product implicit deflator. We use
the CPI if the GDP-deflator is not available. Available for all countries from 1980 through 2000. Source:
World Bank Development Indicators CD-ROM.

Black market premium

The black market premium is defined as (parallel FXrate/official FXrate-1)*100, where parallel FXrate is
the black market rate. The variable measures the premium market participants must pay, relative to the
official exchange rate, to exchange the domestic currency for dollars in the black market. Available for all
countries from 1980 through 2000. Source: Easterly (2001).

Quality of Institutions
Corruption

The sum of ICRG subcomponents: Corruption, Law and Order, and Bureaucratic Quality.
ICRG political risk sub-component (6% weight). This is a measure of corruption within the political system.
Such corruption: distorts the economic and financial environment, reduces the efficiency of government and
business by enabling people to assume positions of power through patronage rather than ability, and
introduces an inherent instability into the political process. The most common form of corruption met
directly by business is financial corruption in the form of demands for special payments and bribes
connected with import and export licenses, exchange controls, tax assessments, police protection, or loans.
Although the PRS measure takes such corruption into account, it is more concerned with actual or potential
corruption in the form of excessive patronage, nepotism, job reservations, “favor-for-favors,” secret party
funding, and suspiciously close ties between politics and business. In PRS's view these sorts of corruption
pose risk to foreign business, potentially leading to popular discontent, unrealistic and inefficient controls on
the state economy, and encourage the development of the black market.

Law and Order

ICRG political risk sub-component (6% weight). PRS assesses Law and Order separately, with each subcomponent comprising zero to three points. The Law sub-component is an assessment of the strength and
impartiality of the legal system, while the Order sub-component is an assessment of popular observance of
the law. Thus, a country can enjoy a high rating (3.0) in terms of its judicial system, but a low rating (1.0)
if the law is ignored for a political aim.

Appendix Table A
(Continued)
Variable
Bureaucratic Quality

Conflict
Internal Conflict

Description
ICRG political risk sub-component (4% weight). The institutional strength and quality of the bureaucracy
can act as a shock absorber that tends to minimize revisions of policy when governments change.
Therefore, high points are given to countries where the bureaucracy has the strength and expertise to govern
without drastic changes in policy or interruptions in government services. In these low-risk countries, the
bureaucracy tends to be somewhat autonomous from political pressure and to have an established
mechanism for recruitment and training. Countries that lack the cushioning effect of a strong bureaucracy
receive low points because a change in government tends to be traumatic in terms of policy formulation and
day-to-day administrative functions.
The sum of ICRG subcomponents: Internal Conflict, External Conflict, Religious Tensions, Ethnic
Tensions.
ICRG political risk sub-component (12% weight). This is an assessment of political violence in the country
and its actual or potential impact on governance. The highest rating is given to those countries where there
is no armed opposition to the government and the government does not indulge in arbitrary violence, direct
or indirect, against its own people. The lowest rating is given to a country embroiled in an on-going civil
war. The intermediate ratings are awarded on the basis of whether the threat posed is to government and
business or only business (e.g. kidnapping for ransom); whether acts of violence are carried out for a
political objective (i.e. terrorist operations); whether such groups are composed of a few individuals with
little support, or are well-organized movements operating with the tacit support of the people they purport to
represent; whether acts of violence are sporadic or sustained; and whether they are restricted to a particular
locality or region, or are carried out nationwide.

External Conflict

ICRG political risk sub-component (12% weight). The external conflict measure is an assessment of the risk
to both the incumbent government and inward investment. It ranges from trade restrictions and embargoes,
whether imposed by a single country, a group of countries, or the whole international community, through
geopolitical disputes, armed threats, exchanges of fire on borders, border incursions, foreign-supported
insurgency, and full-scale warfare.

Religion in Politics

ICRG political risk sub-component (6% weight). Religious tensions may stem from the domination of
society and/or governance by a single religious group that seeks to replace civil law by religious law and to
exclude other religions from the political and/or social process; the desire of a single religious group to
dominate governance; the suppression of religious freedom; the desire of a religious group to express its
own identity, separate from the country as a whole. The risk involved in these situations range from
inexperienced people imposing inappropriate policies through civil dissent to civil war.

Ethnic Tensions

ICRG political risk sub-component (6% weight). This component measures the degree of tension within a
country attributable to racial, nationality, or language divisions. Lower ratings are given to countries where
racial and nationality tensions are high because opposing groups are intolerant and unwilling to
compromise. Higher ratings are given to countries where tensions are minimal, even though such
differences may still exist.
Financial sector

Private credit/GDP

Private credit divided by gross domestic product. Credit to private sector refers to financial resources
provided to the private sector, such as through loans, purchases of non-equity securities, and trade credits
and other accounts receivable that establish a claim for repayment. Available for all countries from 1980
through 2000. Source: World Bank Development Indicators CD-ROM.

Equity market turnover

The ratio of equity market value traded to the market capitalization. The data are available for 50 countries
from 1980 through 2000. Source: Standard and Poor's/International Finance Corporation's Emerging Stock
Markets Factbook.

MCAP/GDP

The ratio of equity market capitalization to gross domestic product. The data are available for 50 countries
from 1980 through 2000. Source: Standard and Poor's/International Finance Corporation's Emerging Stock
Markets Factbook.

Appendix Table A
(Continued)
Variable
Anti-director rights

Description
An index aggregating different shareholder rights. The index is formed by adding 1 when: (1) the country
allows shareholders to mail their proxy vote to the firm; (2) shareholders are not required to deposit their
shares prior to the General Shareholders’ Meeting; (3) cumulative voting or proportional representation of
minorities in the board of directors is allowed; (4) an oppressed minorities mechanism is in place; (5) the
minimum percentage of share capital that entitles a shareholder to call for an Extraordinary Shareholders’
Meeting is less than or equal to 10 percent (the sample median); or (6) shareholders have preemptive rights
that can only be waved by a shareholders’ vote. The index ranges from 0 to 6. This variable is purely crosssectional, and available for 47 countries. Source: La Porta et al. (1998).

Legal environment
Judicial Efficiency

Assessment of the "efficiency and integrity of the legal environment as it affects business, particularly
foreign firms" produced by the country risk rating agency Business International Corp. It may be taken to
"represent investors' assessments of conditions in the country in question." Average between 1980 and
1983. Scale from 0 to 10, with lower scores, lower efficiency levels. This variable is purely cross-sectional,
and available for 47 countries. Source: La Porta et al. (1998).

Speed of Judicial Process

The total estimated speed in calendar days of the procedure (to evict a tenant for nonpayment of rent or to
collect a bounced check) under the factual and procedural assumptions provided. It equals the sum of (i)
duration until completion of service of process, (ii) duration of trial, and (iii) duration of enforcement. This
variable is purely cross-sectional, and available for 69 countries. Source: Djankov et al. (2003).

Macroeconomic and Demographic Variables
Economic risk rating

The value of the the Political Risk Service (PRS) Group’s economic risk indicator (which ranges between 0
and 50). The risk rating is a combination of 5 subcomponents: GDP levels and growth, respectively,
inflation, balanced budgets, and the current account. The minimum number of points for each component is
zero, while the maximum number of points depends on the fixed weight that component is given in the
overall economics risk assessment.

Social Security Index

From Botero, Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2002), measures social security benefits:
(i) old age, disability and death benefits; (ii) sickness and health benefits; and (iii) unemployment benefits.
The first group covers the risk of old age, disability and death: months of contributions or employment
required for normal retirement by law; percentage of the worker's monthly salary deducted by law to cover
old-age and disability benefits; and percentage of the pre-retirement salary covered by the old-age cashbenefit pension. The second group covers the risk of sickness: months of contributions or employment
required to qualify for sickness benefits by law; percentage of the worker's monthly salary deducted by law
to cover sickness and health benefits; waiting period for sickness benefits; and percentage of the salary
covered by sickness cash benefits for a two-month sickness spell.
The final group covers the risk of unemployment: months of contributions or employment required to
qualify for unemployment benefits by law; percentage of the worker's monthly salary deducted by law to
cover unemployment benefits; waiting period for unemployment benefits; and percentage of the salary
covered by unemployment benefits in case of a one-year unemployment spell. Each subgroup is
quantitavely scored, and summed to create the overall index.

Appendix Table B

Volatility and Liberalization in a One-Year Growth Model
Panel A: One-year consumption growth

α0
Std. error

α1

Full period (1980-2000)
I
II
0.0058
0.0102
0.0039

0.0034

0.0225

0.0233

Panel B: Standard deviation based regression

Null hypothesis:
σ0=σ1=0.0936
d0
T-stat
-1.4E-04
-0.080
-2.8E-04
-0.131
-0.0074
-3.603
-0.0061
-3.003
0.0058
2.756
0.0068
3.126

Mean
Std. error
0.0020
0.0036
Median
0.1129
0.0736
2.50%
σ0
Std. error
0.0110
0.0090
5.00%
0.0474
0.0618
95.00%
σ1
Std. error
0.0036
0.0038
97.50%
In Panel A, the parameters are from the model (13):
yi,t+1 = α0(1 − Libi,t) + α1Libi,t + [σ0(1 − Libi,t) + σ1Libi,t]ui,t+1

Alternative hypothesis:
σ0=0.1129 σ1=0.0474
d0
T-stat
-0.0556
-32.602
-0.0554
-32.414
-0.0615
-37.403
-0.0606
-36.939
-0.0508
-28.375
-0.0499
-27.642

using one-year consumption growth for either 95 (Sample I) or 40 (Sample II) countries. Estimation is by QMLE, and
robust standard errors are reported in italics. Panel B reports the quantiles of the empirical distribution under the null
and the alternative for both the coefficients in equation (6) and its T-statistics. The Monte Carlo experiment is fully
described in the appendix.

Appendix Table C

Monte Carlo Analysis of the Liberalization Effect
Standard Deviation Real Consumption Growth Rate (Five-Year Horizon)
1000 Replications
Randomized Lib Indicator
Coefficient
T-stat
Mean
0.0000
-0.0231
Median
-0.0002
-0.0941
2.50%
-0.0064
-3.2754
5.00%
-0.0054
-2.7531
10.00%
-0.0044
-2.2064
90.00%
0.0043
2.1628
95.00%
0.0057
2.8749
97.50%
0.0073
3.6908
This Table presents evidence from a Monte Carlo procedure (with 1000 replications) that
mimics the GMM estimation presented in Table 2, for our largest sample of 95 countries.
The dependent variable is the 5-year overlapping standard deviation of real per capita
consumption. The independent variables are the ones used in Table 2 (with a time trend), but
the liberalization variable is randomized using the procedure documented in the text. The
weighting matrix we employ in our GMM estimation provides a correction for crosssectional heteroskedasticity. We present the 2.5%, 5.0%, 10%, 50%, 90%, 95%, and 97.5%
percentile for the estimated coefficients and t-statistics on the liberalization coefficient.

