NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE REAL EFFECTS OF INVESTOR SENTIMENT
Christopher Polk
Paola Sapienza
Working Paper 10563
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10563
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2004

We thank Andy Abel, Malcolm Baker, David Brown, David Chapman, Randy Cohen, Kent Daniel, Arvind
Krishnamurthy, Owen Lamont, Vojislav Maksimovic, Bob McDonald, Mitchell Petersen, Fabio Schiantarelli,
Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy Stein, Tuomo Vuolteenaho, IvoWelch, Luigi Zingales, and seminar participants at
Harvard Business School, London Business School, McGill University, University of Virginia, the AFA 2003
meeting, the NBER Behavioral Finance Program meeting, the Texas Finance Festival, the University of
Illinois Bear Markets conference, the Yale School of Management, the WFA 2002 meeting, and the Zell
Center Conference on “Risk Perceptions and Capital Markets.” We acknowledge support from the Investment
Analysts Society of Chicago Michael J. Borrelli CFA Research Grant Award. The usual caveat applies. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2004 by Christopher Polk and Paola Sapienza. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

The Real Effects of Investor Sentiment
Christopher Polk and Paola Sapienza
NBER Working Paper No. 10563
June 2004
JEL No.E22, G31, G32
ABSTRACT
We study how stock market mispricing might influence individual firms' investment decisions. We
find a positive relation between investment and a number of proxies for mispricing, controlling for
investment opportunities and financial slack, suggesting that overpriced (underpriced) firms tend
to overinvest (underinvest). Consistent with the predictions of our model, we find that investment
is more sensitive to our mispricing proxies for firms with higher R&D intensity suggesting longer
periods of information asymmetry and thus mispricing) or share turnover (suggesting that the firms'
shareholders are short-term investors). We also find that firms with relatively high (low) investment
subsequently have relatively low (high) stock returns, after controlling for investment opportunities
and other characteristics linked to return predictability. These patterns are stronger for firms with
higher R&D intensity or higher share turnover.
Christopher Polk
Kellogg School of Management
Finance Department
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208-2001
c-polk@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Paola Sapienza
Kellogg School of Management
Finance Department
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208-2001
and NBER
paola-sapienza@northwestern.edu

The market efficiency hypothesis states that security prices always fully reflect available
information. Over the last decade that paradigm has come under attack. Shleifer (2000),
Barberis and Thaler (2001), and Hirshleifer (2001) summarize three related strands of literature.
First, theoretical work argues that arbitrage has limited effectiveness. Second, experimental
evidence shows that agents hold beliefs that are not completely correct and/or make choices
that are normatively questionable. Finally, empirical work documents phenomena where prices
almost certainly deviate from fundamental value.
This body of evidence in support of behavioral finance naturally raises the question as to
whether mispricing in the stock market has consequences for the real economy. Without such
an impact, these behavioral anomalies may just represent an interesting sideshow.
An obvious starting point for such a line of inquiry is to ask whether market inefficiencies
impact managerial decisions. Baker and Wurgler (2002) show that when a firm’s stock price
is high, the firm is more likely to issue equity rather than debt. This behavior has a large,
persistent effect on firm capital structure.
An interesting related question is whether deviation from fundamentals can influence firms’
investment policy. Stein (1996) examines firm investment in the presence of market inefficiencies. In his analysis, Stein shows that the mechanism through which market inefficiencies
affect investment decisions are different depending on whether the managers have long or short
horizons.
If managers have long horizons and discount project cash flow at the true cost of capital (i.e.
based on fundamental risks), a manager can issue overvalued stock or buy back undervalued
equity consistent with Baker and Wurgler (2002). Investment decisions may change as a result
of this capital structure decision. Stein shows that equity-dependent firms will have investment
that is more sensitive to non-fundamental variations in stock prices than firms that are not
liquidity constrained. When stock prices are above fundamentals, rational managers of equitydependent firms find it more attractive to issue equity. By contrast, when stock prices are
below fundamental values, managers of equity-dependent firms do not invest, because for them
investment requires the issuance of stock at too low of a price. In summary, stock price valuations
can affect investment through an equity-issuance channel. According to this theory irrational

1

fluctuations in a firm’s stock market price are an important determinant of investment for the
subset of firms that are equity-dependent, but are a sideshow for firms that are not. The real
effect of investors’ sentiment is to enable good (i.e. positive net present value) projects that
otherwise would not occur.
Baker and Wurgler (2002)’s evidence on the timing of equity issues is consistent with the
importance of such a mechanism but does not provide direct evidence that deviation from
fundamentals can affect a firm’s real investment decision. Baker, Stein, and Wurgler (2003) do
directly test Stein (1996) and find evidence that stock prices have a stronger influence on the
investment of firms that need external equity to finance their investments.
This literature concludes that stock market mispricing has an impact on firm’s investment
through equity-decision. In this paper we ask a complementary question, whether there is an
alternative direct channel that affects investment decisions that is not linked to equity issuance
decisions. Stein (1996) provides a positive theoretical answer to this question. In his paper
Stein also studies the case where managers have short horizons. In that circumstance, managers
discount project cash flows at the actual conditional expected return on the firm’s assets. Since
markets are inefficient, this will not necessarily be the cost of capital as predicted by a model
of fundamental risks. As Stein points out, one way of thinking about this situation is that a
short-horizons manager is interested in maximizing the current stock price and thus must cater
to any misperceptions investors may have.
In this paper we test this alternative (and complementary) catering channel through which
deviation from fundamentals may affect investment decisions directly.

If new investment

projects are evaluated at the current stock market price, for example as in the practice of
using “multiples” to evaluate new projects, and if there is enough asymmetry of information
regarding project quality, a rational manager may find it optimal to invest in projects with
negative NPV even when the project is not financed with equity issues. Firms with ample cash
or debt capacity may have an incentive to waste resources when their stock price is overpriced
and to forgo positive investment opportunities when their stock price is undervalued. Thus
mispricing may affect investment without working through an equity channel as in Baker, Stein,
and Wurgler (2003).

2

We believe that this alternative mechanism has the potential to be quite important since
retained earnings are the overwhelming source of finance (see Mayer (1988) and Rajan and
Zingales (1995), for example). Froot, Scharfstein, and Stein (1994) claim that “Indeed, on
average, less than two percent of all corporate financing comes from the external equity market.”
More recently, Mayer and Sussman (2003) analyze the source of financing of large investments for
U.S. companies. They find that most large investments are financed by new debt and retained
earnings. Because seasoned equity offerings are rarely used to finance investments, we believe it
is important to assess whether firms change their investment policies depending on the valuation
of their stock even if they are not issuing equity to finance these investments.
Furthermore, this alternative mechanism has very different implications for the types of investments chosen. Managers with long horizons make efficient investment decisions by assumption. Alternatively, if stock market valuation affects investment decision through a catering
channel, managers may take investment that have negative net present value (and avoid investment that has positive net present value) as long as this strategy increases stock price in the
short-run.
We first build on the intuition in Stein’s short-horizons model in order to develop a very simple framework in which to analyze the optimal investment decision of a manager of a mispriced
company that maximizes shareholders’ wealth. This framework allows us to generate some
testable empirical predictions. For example, we show that misallocation of investment capital
is more likely to occur when the expected duration of mispricing is long and shareholders have
short investment horizons.
The challenging task in testing the hypothesis that stock market mispricing affects investment decision is to find a good proxy for mispricing. Our analysis critically depends on identifying situations where firms are mispriced. The problem with that identification is the classic
joint hypothesis problem of Fama (1970). Predictable movements in price may just as well be
a result of compensation for risk as a consequence of bias in investors’ expectations.
We therefore rely on three different proxies for stock mispricing – discretionary accruals, net
equity issuances/repurchases, and price momentum. Several papers provide evidence that these
variables are good predictors of subsequent returns. Thus, we use these variables to measure

3

the extent to which a stock is “mispriced.” The literature’s justification of why these three
variables might be related to mispricing relies on different conjectures as to how investors form
beliefs and different hypotheses explaining deviations from market efficiency. For this reason, we
analyze the impact of each one of these measures separately and then study the overall impact
when combined together into a summary “mispricing metric” produced from a firm-level vector
autoregression.
Our first proxy, discretionary accruals, attempts to measure the extent to which the firm has
abnormal non-cash earnings. Firms with high discretionary accruals have relatively low stock
returns in the future (see Teoh, Welch, and Wong (1998a, 1998b), Sloan (1996)) suggesting that
they are overpriced. One possible explanation for this relation is that discretionary accruals may
measure the extent of earnings manipulation. For example, if investors are not sophisticated
enough, a manager facing lower than expected sales could book a high level of accounts receivable
today in order to keep stock prices high. Evidence shows that, though investors focus on
earnings, they fail to distinguish between the accrual and cash flow components (see Hand
(1990) and Maines and Hand (1996)).
Several papers present evidence on stock price drift following seasoned equity issues, repurchases, dividends initiations (see Ikenberry, Lakonishok and Vermaelen (1995), Loughran and
Ritter (1997), and Michaely et al. (1995)). This evidence is interpreted as evidence of investors’
underreaction to news or events. Recently, Daniel and Titman (2001) construct a measure of
net equity issuance that combines firm’s equity issuance and repurchase activity with dividend
initiation and omission. They show that firms with high net equity issuance in the past five
years have subsequent low stock returns in the next year suggesting that they are overpriced.
Based on this evidence, we use net equity issuance in the past five years as our second mispricing
proxy.
Our third measure exploits the firm and industry momentum documented by Jegadeesh and
Titman (1993) and Moskowitz and Grinblatt (1999). According to this research, yearly excess
returns at either the firm or industry level exhibit positive serial correlation. Also, Jegadeesh
and Titman (1993, 2001) document long-term reversal of momentum profits. A portion of this
literature has interpreted momentum as overreaction to private information, implying long-run

4

negative autocorrelation. This interpretation explains the serial correlation of excess returns as
a firm’s stock price moving away from its fundamental price (overreaction). Consistent with
this interpretation, we use lagged momentum as our third proxy for mispricing.
Our main test estimates firm-level investment on the mispricing proxies described above,
controlling for investment opportunities, measured by Tobin’s Q. Using Tobin’s Q may be
problematic in this context for several reasons. First, measured Q may itself be a function of
the bubble (see Abel and Blanchard (1986) and Gilchrist, Himmelberg and Huberman (2002)). If
managers indeed respond to stock market mispricing and Q reflects in part some of the deviations
from fundamentals, the coefficients on our mispricing proxies are biased downward. Therefore
even if we do not find a significant relation between our mispricing proxies and investment, we
cannot conclude that the market is a sideshow, because some of the effect of mispricing may be
captured by Tobin’s Q. Similarly, if we do find a positive and significant relation between our
mispricing proxies and investment, our coefficients in all likelihood understate the effect.
Second, the existence of measurement error in Tobin’s Q further complicates our our analysis
if our mispricing variable is a good indicator of unobserved investment opportunities. Therefore,
we explicitly address this problem through the use of several potential solutions suggested by
previous research.
We find a positive relation between all of these three mispricing proxies and firm investment.
Our results are robust to several alternative specifications as well as to corrections for measurement error in our measure for investment opportunities, Tobin’s Q. In agreement with the
predictions of our model, we also find that firms with higher R&D intensity and share turnover
have investment that is more sensitive to all three types of mispricing.
We summarize these results by estimating a firm-level vector autoregression (VAR) which
includes our three mispricing proxies as well as estimates of CAPM beta. The VAR’s forecasts
of future returns and risks produces a mispricing metric. We find that investment moves positively with this measure. Overall, these results provide evidence that our mispricing proxies
and firm investment are positively correlated. But they do not provide direct evidence that
overpriced firms take investment projects that have negative net present values. To address
this point, we analyze the relationship between investment and future stock returns. If firms

5

are misallocating resources due to market misvaluation, abnormal investment should predict
risk-adjusted returns. We estimate cross-sectional regressions of future monthly stock returns
on current investment, controlling for investment opportunities (Tobin’s Q) and financial slack.
We find that firms with high (low) investment have low (high) stock returns, after controlling
for investment opportunities and other characteristics linked to return predictability.
The paper is organized as follows. The next section reviews the literature. In section II we
motivate our empirical work by detailing a simple model of firm investment. We describe the
data and report the results in section III. Section IV concludes.

I

Related literature

Researchers have long known that stock prices contain information about real investment. A
broader question concerns the exact nature of this relation. Perhaps the best known description
of that relation is “Q” theory. Brainard and Tobin (1968) and Tobin (1969) propose that a firm
will invest until Q = 1 where Q is defined as the ratio between the stock-market valuation of
existing real capital assets and their current replacement cost. That theory explicitly depends
on “the values of existing capital goods, or of titles to them, to diverge from their current
reproduction cost.” Clearly, that divergence can be due to mispricing.
In most of the subsequent theoretical literature, researchers assume that financial markets are
efficient. In particular, models by Abel (1980) and Hayashi (1982) focus on marginal adjustment
costs that prevent Q from equaling 1. Thus investment should be related to the firm’s marginal
Q. If asset pricing is rational, the stock market appropriately values the average Q of this out-ofsteady-state outcome. As a consequence, a majority of empirical research explains investment
with Tobin’s Q. To the extent that the relation between Q and investment is weak, most
researchers have looked to the twin problems of asymmetric information and agency without
abandoning the efficient market hypothesis. See Stein (2001) for a survey of this literature.
However, several researchers have deserted the efficient markets assumption in this context.
Abel and Blanchard (1986) argues that stock market inefficiencies might explain the weak performance of Q-theory. If markets are inefficient, deviation from fundamental values is random
error that smears information in average Q concerning a firm’s marginal investment oppor6

tunities. This skepticism concerning the equivalence of price and fundamentals has no real
consequences. Abel and Blanchard (1986) presumes that managers ignore this noise and invest
optimally. Only the econometrician is inconvenienced.
Some researchers have considered the possibility that inefficient capital markets may actually
affect corporate investment policies. The literature on this topic has provided mixed evidence.
Merton and Fisher (1984) show that investment decisions should respond to stock price changes,
even when the stock market fluctuates irrationally. They also provide evidence that stock prices
can forecast aggregate investment expenditures. Barro (1990) shows that stock market variables
retain significant predictive power for investment, even after controlling for contemporaneous
and lagged values of after-tax corporate profits. Morck, Schleifer, and Vishny (1990) also find
that returns can predict growth rates of investment. However, when they control for lagged
growth rates of profits and sales as reasonable proxies for fundamentals, the predictive power
disappears. They conclude that “the market may not be a complete sideshow, but nor is it
very central.” Blanchard, Rhee, and Summers (1993) reach a similar conclusion using different
proxies for fundamentals and the stock market.
Chirinko and Schaller (2001) find different results using aggregate Japanese data. They
argue for a bubble in Japanese equity markets during the period 1987-89 that boosted business
fixed investment by approximately 6-9%. Their findings are consistent with the hypothesis that
the additional investment was financed with equity. As described above, Baker, Stein, and
Wurgler (2003) test the proposition in the model of Stein (1996) that the investment of equitydependent firms will respond more to the stock market than the investment of less-constrained
firms. To measure equity dependence, they use the “KZ” index in Kaplan and Zingales (1997).
Using Tobin’s q as a proxy for equity value, they confirm their hypothesis that the sensitivity
of investment to variation in stock market price is greater for equity-dependent firms.

II

Investment decisions

In this section we follow Stein (1996) and provide intuition as to why stock price deviations from
fundamental value may have a direct effect on the investment policy of the firm. The particular
aspect of his model we exploit does not require that the firm issue equity to finance investments.
7

Because the empirical evidence shows that firms generally do not finance new investments with
equity issues we think this is a sensible avenue to explore.
Consider a firm that uses capital, K at time 0 to produce output. K is continuous and
homogenous with price c. The true value of the firm at time t is V (K). The market value of
firm at time t is V mkt (K) = (1 + αt )V (K) where αt measures the extent to which the firm is
mispriced. The firm misvaluation depends on some level of mispricing α and on the probability
that the quality of the investment project is fully revealed. This discovery process follows a
Poisson process with mean arrival rate p ∈ (0, +∞). Therefore, αt = αe−t .
We assume that shareholders may have short horizons. Specifically, each shareholder j will
need liquidity at some point in time, t + u, where u is distributed according to a Poisson process
with mean arrival rate qj ∈ [0, ∞). A small qj suggests that particular shareholder is a long-term
shareholder that intends to sell his stocks many years after the initial investment. A short-term
investor has a large qj .1
Define shareholder j’s expected level of income at time t as

Yjt ≡

Z

∞

u=0

(1 + αe−pt )qe−qj t V (K)dt − (K − K0 )c

(1)

Current shareholders’ expected level of income is a weighted average of the share price before
and after the true value of the company is revealed.2 Equation (1) shows that the expected
level of income of the shareholders will depend on how likely the shareholder is to receive a
liquidity shock before the true value of the company is incorporated into stock prices. Assume
that managers maximize the wealth of the average existing shareholder. Denote q as the mean
arrival rate of the mean shareholder. The larger q is (more impatient investors on average),
the higher the weight on the informationally-inefficient share price. The larger p is (a firm
with projects of shorter maturity), the higher the weight on the share price under symmetric
information. The FOC of the manager’s problem is the following:
1

We assume that the manager is rational, maximizes shareholders’ wealth, and that the shareholders are
myopic. This assumption is equivalent to the assumption in Stein (1996) that managers are myopic. Also, Stein
(1988) and Shleifer and Vishny (1990) model myopia.
2
For simplicity, we normalize the number of shares to 1.

8

V 0 (K) =
where γ ≡ 1 +

αq
q+p .

c
γ

(2)

The optimal investment level, K ∗ when there is no mis-pricing (α = 0)

satisfies V 0 (K ∗ ) = c. When the firm is overpriced (α is high), the manager invests more than
K ∗ . Even if the marginal value from the investment is lower than the cost of investing, the
market’s tendency to overvalue the investment project may more than compensate for the loss
from the value-destroying investment. In other words, the overvaluation of the project more
than compensates for the “punishment” the market imposes on the firm at time when the firm
becomes correctly priced.
The incentive to overinvestment increases with the expected duration of the mispricing (small
p) and decreases with the horizon of the average shareholder (high q). Intuitively, if current
overvaluations are expected to last and if investors are short-term, managers increase investment
to take advantage of the mispricing.
Similarly, underinvestment occurs when firms are underpriced. If the market is pessimistic
about the value of the firm (α is negative), the manager will invest too little. The level of
investment will be lower as the expected duration of the mispricing (small p) increases and/or
the horizon of the average shareholder (high q) shortens.3

III
A

Empirical analysis
Data

Most of our data comes from the merged CRSP-COMPUSTAT database, made available to
us through Wharton Research Data Services. Our sample includes firms over the period 19632000. We ignore firms with negative accounting numbers for book assets, capital, or investment.
When explaining investment, we study only December fiscal year-end firms to eliminate the usual
problems caused by the use of overlapping observations. We drop firms with sales less than 10
million, and extreme observations (details in the appendix).
3
Our modeling of the expected duration of mispricing is quite stylized. A more in-depth analysis of the
interaction between asymmetrric information and mispricing, as modeled in a previous version of the paper, is
available upon request.

9

We intersect the initial sample with the Zacks database. That database provides analyst
consensus estimates of earnings one, two, and five years out. We use the Spectrum database to
calculate the percentage of shares outstanding owned by institutions. Table 1 reports summary
statistics for our sample of firms.

B

Methodology

Throughout the paper, we estimate linear models of firm investment. A very large previous
literature has studied the properties of that central firm decision.4

Our typical specification

regresses firm investment on a proxy for mispricing, on a proxy for Tobin’s Q, and on firm cash
flow, controlling for firm (fi ) and year (γ t ) fixed effects:
CFi,t−1
Ii,t
= fi + γ t + b1 αi,t + b2 Qi,t−1 + b3
+ εi,t
Ki,t−1
Ki,t−2

(3)
I

i,t
The dependent variable is individual firms’ investment-capital ratios ( Ki,t−1
) where invest-

ment, Ii,t , is capital expenditure and capital, Ki,t−1 , is beginning-of-year net property, plant,
and equipment. Tobin’s Q, Qi,t−1 is beginning of period market-to-book.
Market value of assets equals the book value of assets plus the market value of common stock
less the sum of book value of common stock and balance sheet deferred taxes. CFi,t−1 /Ki,t−2
equals the sum of earnings before extraordinary items and depreciation over beginning-of-year
capital.
Our analysis critically depends on identifying situations where firms are mispriced (α). The
problem with that identification is the classic joint hypothesis problem of Fama (1970). Predictable movements in price may just as well be a result of compensation for risk as a consequence
of bias in investors’ expectations. The model of market equilibrium is what distinguishes those
two possibilities: one researcher’s anomaly is another researcher’s risk factor.
As a consequence, we identify mispricing in the capital markets using three different measures. These measures operate through different channels: firm opaqueness / information distortion, slow incorporation of information, and overreaction to firm stock performance. The key
characteristic that all three measures have in common is that they are linked to cross-sectional
4

See Stein (2001) for a recent summary of that literature.

10

patterns in average returns that are not well explained by asset-pricing models.

C

Discretionary accruals and investments

Accruals represent the difference between a firm’s accounting earnings and its underlying cash
flow. For example, large positive accruals indicate that earnings are much higher than the cash
flow generated by the firm. Our first proxy relies on the evidence that firms that have atypically
high accruals have low subsequent stock returns. Accruals (ACCRi,t ) are measured by
ACCR(i,t) = ∆N CCA − ∆CL − DEP
where ∆N CCA is the change in non-cash current assets. ∆CL is the change in current
liabilities minus the change in debt included in current liabilities and minus the change in income
taxes payable. DEP is depreciation and amortization. See Sloan (1996) for more discussion of
earning accruals.
The differences between earnings and cash flow arise because of accounting conventions as to
when, and how much, revenues and costs are recognized. Within those conventions, managers
have discretion over accruals adjustments and may use them in order to manage earnings.5 In
principle, if investors can detect earnings manipulation, higher accruals should not affect the
stock price. However, a large body of evidence shows that though investors focus on earnings,
they fail to distinguish between the accrual and cash flow components (see Hand (1990) and
Maines and Hand (1996)).
In order to distinguish earning-manipulation from the non-discretionary component of accruals, the literature has focused on discretionary accruals, defined as those accruals which are
abnormal given firm characteristics, relative to the past tendencies of the firm, and/or compared
with other firms in the same industry. Several papers show a strong correlation between discretionary accruals and subsequent stock returns, suggesting that firms with high discretionary
accruals are overpriced firms relative to otherwise similar firms.
For example, Sloan (1996) finds that those firms with relatively high (low) levels of abnor5

For example, a manager can modify accruals by delaying recognition of expenses after cash is advanced to
suppliers, by advancing recognition of revenues with credit sales, by decelerating depreciation, or by assuming a
low provision for bad debt.

11

mal accruals experience negative (positive) future abnormal stock returns concentrated around
future earning announcements. Teoh, Welch, and Wong (1998a, 1998b) find that firms issuing
secondary equity and IPO firms who have the highest discretionary accruals have the lowest abnormal returns. More recently, Chan, Chan, Jegadeesh, and Lakonishok (2001) also investigates
the relation between discretionary accruals and stock returns. Confirming previous results, they
find that firms with high (low) discretionary accruals do poorly (well) over the subsequent year.
Most of the abnormal performance is concentrated in the firms with very high discretionary
accruals.
We use this past evidence on the correlation between discretionary accruals and stock returns
to justify the use of discretionary accruals as our first mispricing proxy. We construct this
component of accruals using the cross-sectional adaptation developed in Teoh, Welch, and Wong
(1998a, 1998b) of the modified Jones (1991) model. Specifically, we estimate normal accruals
for each firm in a given year by estimating the following cross-sectional regression for the firm’s
two-digit SIC code peers (i.e. excluding the firm under consideration),

N ORM ALACCRjt = β 0

1
T Aj,t−1

!

+ β1

∆SALESj,t
T Aj,t−1

!

+ β2

P P Ej,t
T Aj,t−1

!

+ j,t

We then apply these estimates to the firm under consideration.6
b
N ORM ALACCRit = β
0

1
T Ai,t−1

!

b
+β

1

∆SALESi,t − ∆A/Ri,t
T Ai,t−1

!

b
+β

2

P P Ei,t
T Ai,t−1

!

Note that as in Teoh, Welch, and Wong (1998a, 1998b), before applying the estimates, we
first subtract the increase in accounts receivable from sales to allow for the manipulation of
credit sales. We then compute discretionary accruals by subtracting normal accruals from total
accruals,

DACCRi,t =

ACCRi,t
− N ORM ALACCRi,t
T Ai,t−1

We have also estimated discretionary accruals using the approach of Chan, Chan, Jegadeesh,
6

We require that a firm has 25 two-digit SIC code peers.

12

and Lakonishok (2001). All our results are substantially the same when we use this alternative
measure as well as when we replace contemporaneous observations with lagged versions of either
measure.
We estimate the basic regression:
CFi,t−1
Ii,t
= fi + γ t + b1 DACCRi,t + b2 Qi,t−1 + b3
+ εi,t
Ki,t−1
Ki,t−2

(4)

Column (1) of Table 2, Panel A displays the results of regression (4). Controlling for investment
opportunities and cash flow, firms with high discretionary accruals invest more. The coefficient
of investment on discretionary accruals measures 0.1266 with an associated t-statistic of 7.32.
Firms with abnormally soft earnings invest more than the standard model would indicate.
This effect is economically important. A typical (one-standard deviation) change in a typical
firm’s level of discretionary accruals is associated with roughly a two percent change in that
firm’s investment as a percentage of capital. Recall that Abel and Blanchard (1986) suggests
that mispricing may smear the information in Q concerning investment opportunities.

This

possibility actually works against us finding any independent effect of discretionary accruals.
If Q is correlated with mispricing, the coefficient of discretionary accruals underestimates the
effect of mispricing on investment.
There are several potential problems in our baseline regression that might undermine the
interpretation of the results. The most obvious arises from the fact that the disappointing
performance of our measure of Q, even if consistent with the results in the rest of the literature,
suggests that this measure may be a poor proxy for true marginal Q.7
The existence of measurement error in Tobin’s Q is a problem in our analysis if our mispricing variable is a good indicator of unobserved investment opportunities. For example, one
7

Several papers have address this issue and found different results. For example, Abel and Blanchard (1986)
construct aggregate marginal Q and find little support for the view that the low explanatory power of average
Q is because it is a poor proxy for marginal Q. Similarly, Gilchrist and Himmelberg (1995) exploit Abel and
Blanchard’s technique at the level of the individual firm. Though their marginal Q series seems to perform
better than Tobin’s Q, their qualitative results are not very different from the previous literature. Of course,
their results critically depend on the quality of the alternative measure used. In a recent paper, Erickson and
Whited (2000) point out that the alternative measures generally used in the literature may also be flawed by
similar errors-in-variables problems and suggest an alternative solution. Erickson and Whited use a measurement
error-consistent generalized method of moments estimator that relies on information in higher moments of Q.
With this estimator, they find that the accepted results in the previous literature (low explanatory power of
Tobin’s Q and high explanatory power of cash flow) disappear.

13

may argue that firms with high discretionary accruals may have very profitable growth options
that their average Q only partially reflects. These firms should invest more. Empirically, the
existing evidence suggests the opposite: firms with soft earnings are firms with poor growth
opportunities. Teoh, Welch, and Wong (1998b) document that firms with high discretionary
accruals tend to be seasoned equity issuers with relatively low post-issue net income. Chan,
Chan, Jegadeesh, and Lakonishok (2001) show that in general firms with high discretionary
accruals subsequently have a marked deterioration in their cash flows.

Based on these find-

ings, we think that it is hard to argue that the average Q for this type of firm systematically
understates marginal Q.
Even if we cannot think of any plausible reason why abnormal non-cash earnings should be
correlated with investment opportunities, we feel it is important to address measurement errors
problems in our proxy for investment opportunities. We take several different approaches. First,
we include in our baseline regression analysts’ consensus estimate of future earnings. As long
as analysts’ forecasts are a good proxy for expected future profitability, this variable should be
a good proxy for marginal Q: controlling for average Q, higher marginal Q should be positively
correlated with higher expected future profitability. This correction is along the lines of the
previous literature that has focused on obtaining better measures of Q. Columns (2) through
(4) add the ratio of consensus analyst forecast of cumulative firm profitability over assets one,
two, and five years out to our baseline specification.
positive effect on investment decision.

The one-year earnings forecast has a

The effect is small, but statistically significant at the

five percent level. A one-standard deviation change in one-year earning forecast is associated
with roughly a .5 percent change in that firm’s investment to capital ratio. This suggests that
this non-financial measure of future profitability has some information, even when we control
for Tobin’s Q, as suggested by previous findings (Bond and Cummins, 2000). However, the
coefficient on discretionary accruals actually increases from .1266 to .1586.

Moreover, the

estimate is measured with close to the same precision, even though the sample is cut almost in
half due to data limitations.
In Column (4) of Table 2-A we add both one- and two-year profitability estimates to our
baseline regression.

Discretionary accruals continues to be quite significant.

14

In Column (5)

of Table 2-A we add one-, two-, and five-year profitability forecasts.
forecasts are significant at the five percent level or better.8

Interestingly, all three

Discretionary accruals remain

economically and statistically significant.
We also follow Abel and Eberly (2001) and use the mean long-term consensus earning forecast
as an instrument for Q. This variable is a good instrument as long as it is not correlated with
the measurement error in Tobin’s Q. We report the results in Column (5). The magnitude and
statistical significance of the discretionary accruals coefficient is similar to our previous results
when we use instrumental variables estimation.9
The second way to deal with the measurement error problem is to follow the approach of
Erickson and Whited (2000, 2002). Those papers exploit the information contained in higher
moments to generate measurement-error consistent GMM estimators of the relation between
investment and Q.10 As in Erickson and Whited (2000), we find that using this estimator
increases the coefficient on Q by an order of magnitude.11 However, the coefficient on discretionary accruals remains economically and statistically significant. Those results are available
on request.
Another potential problem with our baseline regression is that we measure average Q at
the beginning of the year in which we measure the firm’s investment. It may be the case that
over the year the firm’s investment opportunities change and as a consequence our discretionary
accruals measure is picking up this change in investment opportunities.
Therefore, in column (6) of Table 2-A, we add to the baseline specification, end-of-period
Qi,t . Controlling for the change in Q over the investment period has no effect on our result.
Investment opportunities as measured by end-of-period Tobin’s Q are not statistically significant
and the estimated coefficient is 1/5 of that on Qi,t−1 in the baseline regression. Moreover, the
estimated coefficient on discretionary accruals and the statistical significance of that estimate
8
One might be initially surprised by the negative coefficient on Et−1 [EARNi,t+1 ]/Ai,t−1 . However since
earnings estimates are for cumulative earnings from t − 1 to t, the negative coefficient indicates that consensus
one-year earnings two years from now has a relatively smaller impact on investment than consensus one-year
earnings one-year from now. In that light, the result seems reasonable.
9
Also, the coefficient on Tobin’s Q increases and the coefficient on cash flow decreases as in Abel and Eberly
(2001) despite the sample restrictions.
10
As in Erickson and Whited (2000) we only use the estimator in those cross-sections that satisfy the identifying
assumptions concerning the information in higher moments.
11
We thank Toni Whited for providing the Gauss code implementing their estimator.

15

do not change.
Our controls for investment opportunities may be inadequate if there is a lag between when
a firm has investment opportunities and when the actual investment is measured. These lags
may be for such superficial reasons as accounting practices or due to more fundamental sorts
of frictions. The next two specifications include lags of Q in response. In column (7), we add
Qt−2 to the specification in column (6). Though lagged investment opportunities explain firm
investment, discretionary accruals still have a positive and significant effect on firm investment.
Column (8) adds Qt−3 to our specification. This variable is not significant and our results do
not change. We conclude that the timing of our Tobin’s Q variable is not an issue.
Another objection to our results is that if discretionary accruals are correlated with lagged
financial slackness, then our variable may picking up the fact that financially constrained firms
have less financial slack to invest. Of course, firms with high discretionary accruals are those
firms where earnings are not backed by cash flow. Firms with high discretionary accruals have
in general little financial slack. However, to take care of this concern we augment our baseline
regression with contemporaneous, two-years lag and three-years lag of our cash flow variable,
CFi,t−1 /Ki,t−2 as well as with measures of the cash stock. The results (unreported) are robust
to this modification. One possible reason for firms to manipulate earnings is in order to meet
bond covenants; our results are also robust to including leverage as an additional explanatory
variable.
There might be some concern that the relation between discretionary accruals and investment
is hardwired. For example, firms with multi-year investment projects may pay for investment
in advance. When doing so, firms will book future investment as a pre-paid expense, a current
asset. As a consequence, current investment and discretionary accruals (the prepaid expense)
will exhibit a positive correlation. Presumably such a tactic would be an industry-wide practice, controlled for by the intercept in regression estimating normal accruals. Nevertheless, we
re-estimated the regression (4) measuring normal accruals using only accounts receivables in the
definition of accruals. In that regression (not reported) the coefficient associated with discretionary component of accounts receivable remained economically and statistically significant.

16

We conclude that this hardwired link is not driving our result.

12

Previous literature provides additional tests of our hypothesis based on sub-sample and crosssectional evidence. We explore these implications in Table 2, Panel B. Chan, Chan, Jegadeesh,
and Lakonishok (2001) as well as D’Avolio, Gildor, and Shleifer (2001) point out that the ability
of discretionary accruals to predict negative stock returns is concentrated in the top 20% of firms
ranked on accruals. In column (1) of Table 2-B, we add a dummy, HIGHDACCRi,t , to our
baseline discretionary accruals specification. The dummy takes the value of one if the firm is
in the top 20% of firms based on discretionary accruals and zero otherwise.

This dummy is

significant at the five percent level of significance.
Teoh, Welch, and Wong (1998) show that firms issuing equity who have the highest discretionary earnings have the lowest abnormal returns.

In column (2) of Table 2-B, we interact

our discretionary accruals variable with a dummy, HIGHEQISSU Ei,t , that takes the value
one if the firm has an equity issuance value in the top 25 percent. We find that the variable is
statistically significant with an associated t-statistic of 2.84. We explore the relation between
equity issuance/repurchase activity and investment more fully in the next section.
Column (3) of Table 4-B reports our baseline discretionary accruals specification with our
sample restricted to only Internet firms. We define Internet stocks as all the firms that were
included in the ISDEX Internet Stock Index. We identified 107 firms that belonged to the Index,
thus we have only 121 firm-years observations. As a consequence, though the point estimate of
the coeffcient on discretionary accruals is of the same order of magnitude as the estimate for
the whole sample, the estimate for the Internet sample is extremely imprecise.
D’Avolio, Gildor, and Shleifer (2001) argue that in recent years the marginal investor may
have become less sophisticated providing more incentives to distort earnings.

In particular,

they show that the mean discretionary accruals for the top decile has been increasing over the
past twenty years, more than doubling since 1974.
12

Mean discretionary earnings for the top

Hribar and Collins (2002) argue that the Jones method is potentially flawed as it calculates accruals indirectly
using balance sheet information rather than directly using income statement information. In particular, they point
out that the presumed equivalence between the former and the latter breaks down when nonoperating events such
as reclassifications, acquisitions, divestitures, accounting changes, and foreign currency translations occur. Hribar
and Collins show that these “non-articulating” events generate non-trivial measurement error in calculations of
discretionary accruals. Unfortunately, the necessary income-statement accruals information is only available after
1987. Fortunately, our results still hold even when we restrict the analysis to a sub-sample of firms that do not
have such non-articulation events or when we use income statement accruals in a post-1987 sample.

17

decile was close to 30% in 1999. As a consequence, we re-estimate our baseline specification
for the firm-years in the subperiod 1995-2000 in column (4) of Table 2-B. Consistent with
the D’Avolio, Gildor, and Shleifer (2001) hypothesis, the estimated coefficient on discretionary
accruals is roughly a third bigger, moving from 0.1127 to 0.1507.

Though we are left with

only a quarter of the number of observations, the estimate is statistically significant at the one
percent level of significance. In column (5), we restrict the sample further, to only those firmyears in the subperiod 1998-2000. Consistent with the hypothesis that manipulating earnings
has become more effective, we find that the coefficient on discretionary accruals is almost 25%
higher than in the baseline regression.
Finally, in the last four columns of Table 2-B we split the sample in accordance with the
cross-sectional implications of our model. In particular, our model suggests that the greater
the expected duration of mispricing, the greater the incentive to overinvest (underinvest) when
overpriced (underpriced). We use firm R&D intensity to proxy for firm transparency based on
the simple assumption that the resolution of all valuation uncertainty (which would necessarily
eliminate any mispricing) takes longer for R&D projects than for the typical project. Column
(6) re-estimates our baseline regression for those firms below the median value of R&D intensity.
Note that we calculate medians yearly in order to isolate pure cross-sectional differences across
firms.

Column (7) shows the results for the sub-sample of firms with R&D intensity above

the median. Consistent with our model, we find economically important variation across the
two sub-samples.

Firms that engage in a lot of R&D invest more when they have a lot of

discretionary accruals. The sensitivity of these firms’ investment to discretionary accruals,
.2428, is almost four times as large as the sensitivity of firms that we argue are relatively more
transparent.
Our model also suggests that the incentive to overinvest or underinvest is stronger for
those firms with short-term investors.

We use firm share turnover to proxy for the relative

amount of short-term investors trading a firm’s stock.

We measure turnover as the average,

in Decembert−1 , of the daily ratio of shares traded to shares outstanding at the end of the
day. Column (8) re-estimates our baseline regression for those firms each year with turnover
below the yearly median, while column (9) reports the regression results for above-the-median

18

firms. We find that the coefficient on discretionary accruals for high-turnover firms is .0413,
30% higher than the corresponding coefficient for firms with low turnover.

D

Equity issuance and investment

A substantial literature documents two important facts. First, that firms tend to time equity
issues, repurchases, and dividends initiations. Second, that equity market timing is successful
on average as equity issuers (repurchasers) have low (high) subsequent returns.13 This empirical
evidence suggests that equity issuance activity is a good predictor of subsequent returns.
Indeed, Daniel and Titman (2001) construct a measure of net equity issuance that combines
firm’s equity issuance, repurchase activity, dividends initiation (omission). They show that firms
with high net equity issuance in the past five years have subsequent low stock returns in the
next year suggesting that they are overpriced.
Based on this evidence, we use net equity issuance in the past five years as our second
mispricing proxy. This variable is positively correlated with discretionary accruals (0.1180) and
the correlation is economically significant. The correlation confirms the results of the previous
literature that firms that issue equity are more likely to have higher discretionary accruals (Teoh,
et al.). However, the correlation is low enough that it is plausible to think of these two variables
as two alternative ways of measuring mispricing. We analyze them separately here, and combine
them later on.
Following Daniel and Titman (2001), we construct a measure of a firm’s equity issuance
/ repurchase activity, EQISSU Ei,t , over a five-year period.14 They construct their measure
to also capture the evidence in Michaely, Thaler, and Womack (1995) showing that abnormal
returns are high (low) for five years subsequent to dividend initiations (omissions). We define
EQISSU Ei,t as the log of the inverse of the percentage ownership in the firm one would have
at time t, given a one percent ownership of the firm at time t − 5, assuming full reinvestment of
13

See, for example, Asquith and Mullins (1986), Korajczyk, Lucas, and McDonald (1991), Ikenberry, Lakonishok
and Vermaelen (1995), Loughran and Ritter (1997), and Baker and Wurgler (2000, 2002).
14
We also measured the same variable over a one-year period and produced similar results. Note that set our
EQISSU Ei,t variable equal in absolute magnitude to Daniel and Titman (2002)’s n0 variable but opposite in
sign in order to facilitate interpretation. Thus firms issuing equity have a positive EQISSU E.

19

all cash flows,
EQISSU Ei,t = log(

M Ei,t
) − ri,t−5:t ,
M Ei,t−5

where Ni,t is the number of shares outstanding at time t, M Ei,t is the market value of equity
at time t, and ri,t−5:t is the log stock return from t − 5 to t. Therefore our measure includes
equity issues, employee stock options plans, share repurchase, dividends, and other actions that
pay cash out of the firm, or trade ownership for cash or services (e.g., stock options plans).
Our specification is the following:
CFi,t−1
Ii,t
= fi + γ t + b1 EQISSU Ei,t + b2 Qi,t−1 + b3
+ εi,t
Ki,t−1
Ki,t−2

(5)

Column (1) of Table 3, Panel A displays the results of regression (5). Controlling for investment opportunities and financial slack, firms that are net equity issuers over the past five years
invest more. The coefficient of investment on the equity issuance activity measure, b1 , measures
0.0259 and is statistically significant at the one percent level of significance. The economic
importance of the effect seems on the order of magnitude as before. A typical (one-standard
deviation) change in a firm’s equity issuance indicator is associated with roughly a two percent
change in that firm’s investment as a percentage of capital.
Unlike the discretionary accruals measure, where it is hard to think of alternative stories
generating a link with investment, one expects issuance activity to be tied to investment. Of
course, our regressions acknowledge the direct link by controlling for investment opportunities
and financial slack. However, these controls are now crucial. Specifically, it very important
to rule out that EQISSU Ei,t is correlated with Q’s measurement error. Thus, the remaining
columns in Table 3-A repeat the robustness checks we did with our previous variable.
In columns (2) through (4) of Table 3-A, we add analysts’ expectations of future profitability.
Recall that these variables are designed to pick up variation in future investment opportunities
not picked up by Tobin’s Q. Consistent with our expectations that EQISSU Ei,t may proxy
for unobserved investment opportunity, the coefficient on EQISSU Ei,t becomes smaller when
we include analysts’ consensus earning forecasts. However, we still find that controlling for
investment opportunities, firms that are expected to underperform (overperform) benchmarks

20

have investment that is too high (low).
In column (5) we instrument Q with the mean long-term consensus earning forecast. The
magnitude and statistical significance of the EQISSU Ei,t coefficient is similar to our previous
results when we use instrumental variables estimation. Finally, our results are robust to using
the Erickson and Whited (2000, 2002) measurement-error consistent estimator.
In columns (6) through (8) we control for future and past values of Q. Qt and Qt−2 are
statistically significant, though with the wrong sign. However, the coefficient on our equity
issuance indicator is essentially unchanged. The effect remains economically and statistically
significant. Table 3, Panel B reports the results from sub-sample analysis. Column (1) of Table
3-B restricts the sample to those firm-years in the subperiod 1995-2000 while column (2) restricts
the sample to those firm-years in 1998-2000. We find that the effect is still strong in the longer
subperiod. In the shorter subperiod, the effect disappears. As before, we split the sample in
accordance with the cross-sectional implications of our model.
Column (3) re-estimates our baseline regression for those firms below the median value of
R&D intensity while column (4) re-estimates the regression for firms above the median value of
R&D intensity. Firms with less R&D activity have a weaker relation between equity issuance
and equity issuance activity. Firms involved in more R&D activity have a stronger relation
between investment and equity issuance activity. In columns (5) and (6), we split the sample
based on share turnover. Consistent with our model, firms with a relatively high amount of
share turnover have a coefficient on equity issuance activity, .0493, that is twice as large as firms
with a relatively low amount of share turnover.

E

Price momentum and investment

One problem with the previous two proxies of mispricing is that managers affect discretionary
accruals, equity issuance, and investment. Our results indicates that there is correlation between investment and both discretionary accruals and equity issuance, but they can hardly say
anything about the direction of the causality. While high discretionary accruals may cause suboptimal investment decision, managers may decide to manipulate accruals to be able to invest
more. In fact, the model presented in Section II shows that initial mispricing causes suboptimal

21

investment that in turn causes more mispricing.
Our next measure of mispricing suffers less from the reverse causality problem because it is
not directly chosen by the manager, and more generally reflects investors’ sentiments. Our next
measure exploits the firm and industry momentum phenomenon documented by Jegadeesh and
Titman (1993) and Moskowitz and Grinblatt (1999). Yearly excess returns at either the firm
or industry level exhibit positive serial correlation. Also, Jegadeesh and Titman (1993, 2001)
document long-term reversal of momentum profits. For example, Jegadeesh and Titman (2001)
find that cumulative profits reach 12.17 percent after one year and then steadily decline to -0.44
percent after five years. Similar patterns exist in industry returns.
Several conflicting theories have been offered to explain momentum and reversal. According
to Daniel, Hirshleifer and Subrahmanyan (1998), investor overconfidence results in overreaction
to private information, implying long-run negative autocorrelation. Barberis Shleifer and Vishny
(1998) assume that investors are subject to a conservatism bias and representativeness heuristic.
Thus in their model investors underreact to earnings, causing short-lag positive autocorrelations.
However, when investors observe trends of rising earnings, representativeness causes them to
switch to overreaction, resulting in long-lag negative autocorrelation. In Hong and Stein (1999),
there are two types of investors: investors who focus only on fundamentals and ignore the
market price and investors who focus only on market price and follow price trends. The first
group causes underreaction, the second group induces overreaction.
These three different theories agree that momentum is a mispricing phenomenon, but disagree on whether serial correlation of excess returns is consistent with stock prices slowly moving
towards their fundamental price (underreaction) or stock prices moving away from their fundamental price (overreaction). The evidence is mixed as to which explanation best describes the
data. For this reason, this measure is the weakest of our three. The interpretation of our result
depends on which description is appropriate. Nonetheless, we think it is interesting to investigate the relation between momentum and investment decisions. That is because this measure
is tied more directly than the previous two measures to investor sentiment uncorrelated with
managerial decisions. In fact, the correlation between this measure and the previous two is
positive, but not very high (14 percent with DACCR and 21 percent with EQU ISSU E).

22

We use lagged firm and industry momentum as our final indicator of firm mispricing. Firm
lagged momentum (M OMi,t−1 ) is the cross-sectionally demeaned (using the universe of all CRSP
stocks) stock return over the period Januaryt−1 to Novembert−1 . Industry lagged momentum
(IM OMt−1 ) is the cross-sectionally demeaned (using the universe of all CRSP stocks) industry
return over the period Januaryt−1 to Novembert−1 .
We lag momentum for two reasons. The first is so that our Q variable will incorporate
any news concerning future returns and/or cash flows contained in the price run-up. More
importantly, we interpret momentum as a characteristic predicting future mispricing. Firms
that are winners and losers are the firms that investors typically overreact to. Momentum
firms have negative stock returns in the years following the initial year of positive stock return
performance. This is in contrast to our other mispricing measures. We identify firms with
extreme DACCRi,t and EQISSU Ei,t as the firms which are typically currently mispriced.
Our specification is:
CFi,t−1
Ii,t
= fi + γ t + b1 M OMi,t−1 + b2 IM OMi,t−1 + b3 Qi,t−1 + b4
+ εi,t
Ki,t−1
Ki,t−2

(6)

Column (1) of Table 4, Panel A displays the results of regression (6). Controlling for investment opportunities and financial slack, firms experiencing price momentum invest more. The
coefficient of investment on firm momentum, b1 , measures 0.0282 with an associated t-statistic
of 7.3. A similar response occurs for the industry momentum variable. The coefficient of investment on industry momentum, b2 , is 0.0468. Thus, firms in price momentum industries invest
more than the standard model would indicate. This coefficient is statistically significant; the
associated t-statistic is 3.9.
A typical (one-standard deviation) change in a firm’s price momentum is associated with
roughly a three percent change in that firm’s investment as a percentage of capital.15 One
percent movements in investment ratios are associated with typical moves in a firm’s industry
15

These results relate to those of Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny (1990). That paper predicts three-year investment
growth using lagged CAPM alphas over a three-year period. These alphas do a good job predicting investment
alone. However, in a horse race with future fundamentals, CAPM alphas have little additional explanatory
power. High alphas are related to high stock returns, our variable. However, we compare momentum to the level
of stock market valuation, Q. Thus the variable we pit against momentum contains expectations of all future
firm profitability. Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny’s control variables are purely accounting ones and therefore are
realizations of these expectations, and then only one year out.

23

momentum.
These results are consistent with at least two alternative explanations. First, if momentum firms are overpriced firms as in Daniel, Hirshleifer and Subrahmanyan (1998) our result
is consistent with the story that overpriced firms invest more than otherwise identical firms.
Alternatively, if momentum is evidence of underreaction (e.g., Hong, Lim, and Stein, 2000), our
result may suggest that firms (at least those that are not cash constrained) invest optimally,
ignoring the market’s underreaction. Unfortunately, it is hard to distinguish between these two
cases.
Furthermore, there is more concern than with our previous variables that momentum is
correlated with our benchmark variables. First, price momentum may just reflect information
concerning the firm’s profitability and/or degree of financial constraints not contained in Q or
CF
K .

One could argue that sensitivity of investment to stock returns may indicate financial

constraints being binding. More simply, firms with high stock returns may have very profitable
growth options that their average Q only partially reflects. These firms should invest more. For
example, it is possible that the market has information about the firm that the manager does
not have. Dow and Gorton (1997) model the investment decisions of rational managers under
this hypothesis. In equilibrium, stock prices convey information to managers that they use to
allocate investment capital optimally. In their model rising stock prices cause higher investment
and the resulting investment allocation is efficient. So far, we are not able to separate our model
from this particular alternative interpretation. We address this possibility later in the paper.
Our response to these alternative interpretations is to point out that we find an effect not
only at the firm level but also at the industry level. It is harder to argue that entire industries
are financially constrained or have systematic differences between average and marginal Q.
The rest of Table 4-A estimates regressions with the same alternative specifications and
control variables as before. In columns (2), (3), and (4) we add the consensus analyst’s estimates
of future earnings. Both momentum variables remain economically and statistically significant.16
In column (5) when we instrument Q with analyst’s long-term estimates of future earnings we
16

The fact that in the final specification, which includes forecasts one, two, and five years out, the coefficient
on firm momentum is over fifty percent higher than the baseline is mostly due to sample selection requirements
due to using the five-year forecast.

24

instead find that the momentum coefficient increases by roughly 40 percent and the industry
momentum coefficient increases by 100 percent.17 Also, columns (6),(7), and (8) show that the
timing of when we measure Q does not matter for our results. Finally, our results are robust to
using the Erickson and Whited (2000, 2002) measurement-error consistent estimator as well.
In Table 4, Panel B we explore some of the cross-sectional findings in the literature concerning
momentum. Various studies have shown that momentum is stronger for losers than for winners.
Column (1) repeats the regression for firms experiencing negative momentum while column (3)
estimates the relation among winner firms. Recall that the coefficient on firm momentum was
0.0282 in our baseline specification. The estimate for firms with negative momentum is twice
as large, 0.0564, while the estimate for winning firms is 0.0188. Both estimates are significant
at the one percent level of significance.
In an attempt to distinguish between the overreaction and the underreaction hypothesis we
rely on the finding of Lee and Swaminathan (2000). They find that overreaction patterns are
more pronounced for losers with low turnover and for winners with high turnover. In columns (2)
and (4) we interact firm momentum and turnover for loser firms and winner firms respectively.
In column (2), the coefficient on the interaction term is negative and statistically significant at
the ten percent level of significance. This result is consistent with Lee and Swaminathan (2000).
In column (4) the coefficient on the interaction term is 0.0034 with an associated t-statistic
of 1.55. Though not statistically significant, the result is in line with Lee and Swaminathan’s
result that winners overreact more when turnover is high.
Column (5) of Table 4-B reports our baseline momentum specification with our sample
restricted to only Internet firms. The coefficient of interest is an order of magnitude higher for
these firms. This estimate is statistically significant at the one percent level. This result is very
strong despite the limited number of observations and is in contrast to the weak corresponding
evidence concerning the sensitivity of Internet firms’ investment to discretionary accruals. We
think that this result is quite reassuring, since at least for this sample of firms it is hard to claim
that momentum is evidence of underreaction. And it is difficult to interpret this subsample
evidence as consistent with the Dow and Gorton (1997) model. Recall that their model argues
17

In this sample we find, consistent with Abel and Eberly (2001), that the coefficient of Q becomes one order
magnitude bigger, but the cash-flow coefficient does not change significantly.

25

that market returns are a signal from informed investors to managers to allocate investment
efficiently. Most researchers would agree that much of the return volatility of Internet stocks
was due to uninformative noise trading.
Column (6) of Table 4-B restricts the sample to those firm-years in the subperiod 1995-2000
while column (7) restricts the sample to those firm-years in 1998-2000. We find that the effect
is stronger in these two subperiods. As before, we split the sample in accordance with crosssectional implications of our model. Column (8) re-estimates our baseline regression for those
firms below the median value of R&D intensity while column (9) re-estimates the regression for
firms above the median value of R&D intensity. The results are consistent with our model’s
conclusions. The momentum effect on investment is stronger for firms that engage in a lot of
R&D. The coefficients on firm and industry momentum are more than twice as large for those
firms that we argue are relatively opaque. Columns (10) and (11) report the sample split based
on firm turnover. This split is not as successful as there is little or no difference in the coefficients
on momentum for the two types of firms.

F

Combining all three measures into a mispricing metric

Our final measure uses the three variables in a firm-level vector autoregression (VAR) in order
to create a mispricing metric. This metric has the advantage that the information in the three
variables used in previous sections is used simultaneously. More importantly, the ability of each
of our measures to predict stock returns is measured at the price level. This is important as
even if all variables predict one-period returns with the same magnitude, those variables which
are more persistent have a larger price-level impact. Finally, the VAR lets us control for risks
so that mispricing is explicitly dependent on a model of market equilibrium.
A detailed description of the specification and the results of the VAR is contained in the
appendix. We use this mispricing metric in our investment regressions and estimate the basic
regression:
CFi,t−1
Ii,t
= fi + γ t + b1 M ISP RICIN Gi,t + b2 Qi,t−1 + b3
+ εi,t
Ki,t−1
Ki,t−2

(7)

Column (1) of Table 5 displays the results of regression (7). Controlling for investment opportu26

nities and financial slack, firms that are overpriced invest more. The coefficient of investment on
our mispricing metric, b1 , measures 0.2124 with an associated t-statistic of 7.37. Firms whose
current price is high relative to the CAPM invest more than the standard model would indicate.
This effect is economically important. A typical (one-standard deviation) change in a typical
firm’s level of discretionary accruals is associated with roughly a four percent change in that
firm’s investment as a percentage of capital.
This finding is robust to using alternative specifications. In columns (2) through (4) of
Table 5, we add analysts’ expectations of future profitability. We hope these variables pick up
variation in future investment opportunities not picked up by Tobin’s Q. Though the coefficient
on M ISP RICIN Gi,t is smaller, we still find that controlling for investment opportunities, firms
that are “overpriced” (“underpriced”) invest more (less). In column (5) we follow our previous
specification and we instrument Tobin’s Q with analysts’ expectations of long-term profitability.
Our coefficient is still positive, but become insignificant. However, our mispricing variable is
measured with error and it is correlated with our instrument (the correlation is 25%). Therefore,
the conditions that analysts’ expectations of long-term profitability is a good instrument are
violated. In principle, we would need to find another instrument for mispricing to solve the
problem. In columns (6) through (8) of Table 5, we include end-of-period Q as well lags of
Q. Neither the point estimate nor the precision of that estimate is affected by these additional
controls.
We also estimated a version of Panel B of Tables 2, 3, and 4 using our composite mispricing
proxy. That table is available upon request. We find that we are unable to reject the hypothesis
that the sensitivity of investment to mispricing varies with R&D intensity. The coefficient on
mispricing for firms with R&D intensity below the median is 0.2294 while for firms with higher
R&D intensity, the coefficient is 0.1725. However the split based on share turnover lines up with
the prediction of our model. The coefficient on mispricing for relatively high share turnover firms
is 0.2183 while the coefficient on mispricing for relatively low share turnover firms is 0.1251.
The results in Table 5 are robust to varying the characteristics used to predict future returns and risks in the VAR. For example, using a long (1928-2000) panel, Cohen, Polk, and
Vuolteenaho (2002) argue that mispricing relative to the CAPM is not an important factor in

27

determining the prices of high and low BE/ME stocks if CAPM risk is measured using longhorizon covariances of cash-flow fundamentals. Our short panel precludes such an approach.
Moreover, one might also be worried that BE/ME is too correlated with Tobin’s Q causing
collinearity in regressions of investment on Q and mispricing measures derived from BE/ME.
Therefore we repeat the analysis in Table 5 but manually set the ability of BE/ME to predict
returns equal to zero. Those results are qualitatively similar; mispricing explains investment
after controlling for investment opportunities and financial slack.18
In summary we find that our mispricing metric explains investment in a manner consistent
with our model. This finding is comforting as many alternative explanations as to why our three
proxies come in individually do not obviously extend to this composite measure.

G

Efficient or inefficient investment?

So far, we have found a consistently strong positive correlation between our measures of mispricing and investment. According to the model, the positive correlation is due to the fact
that over-priced firms take investment projects that have negative net present values. Similarly,
underpriced firms forego investment projects with positive net present value. While the empirical results are consistent with inefficient allocation of resources in equilibrium, there are other
potential explanations.
First, it is possible that equity-dependent firms with good investment opportunities manage
earnings (i.e. generate high discretionary accruals) to manipulate their stock price, facilitating
investment. The investment allocation in this case is efficient and temporary mispricing helps
financially constrained firms make investments that they otherwise would not be able to make.
This interpretation, though plausible, is not consistent with the previous findings that show
that firms with abnormally soft earnings actually have relatively poor operating performance in
subsequent years.
Another potential explanation for our results is outlined in Dow and Gorton (1997). In that
model, when the market has information that managers do not have, it is efficient for managers
to make investment decisions taking into account stock prices. While this story does not explain
18
Mispricing continues to explain investment if we manually set the ability of both momentum and BE/ME to
predict returns equal to zero.

28

the relation between discretionary accruals and investment as discretionary accruals are set by
the manager, the Dow and Gorton explanation may partially explain why firms with high equity
issues and/or high stock returns invest more.
Finally, our mispricing proxies may instead represent rational heterogeneity in discount
rates. In this alternative explanation, firms with high discretionary accruals and high equity
issuance have low discount rates. It is hard to reconcile this explanation with our results
relating investment and price momentum at the firm or industry level as those characteristics
are associated with relatively higher realized returns.
One way we can provide additional evidence distinguishing our model from these alternative
explanations is to measure the relation between investment and future stock returns. In our
model there is a negative relation between investment and subsequent risk-adjusted returns as
firm business investment is linked to the market’s misvaluation of the firm’s equity.
We estimate cross-sectional regressions of monthly stock returns including investment, Tobin’s Q and a control for cashflow sensitivity:19
Ri,t = at + b1,t ln

CFi,t−1
Ii,t−1
+ b2,t ln Qi,t−1 + b3,t
,
Ki,t−2
Ki,t−2

(8)

where returns are measured in percent. The regression identifies cross-sectional variation in
returns that is correlated with investment, controlling for investment opportunities and financial
slack, thus tying together return predictability and investment behavior.20
As in Fama and MacBeth (1976), we average the time-series of bt ’s and report both the
mean and the standard error of the mean estimate. Column (1) of Table 6 shows the result of
estimating equation (8). The coefficient on investment is -0.1579 with an associated t-statistic
of 3.96. Consistent with our model, firms that overinvest (underinvest) on average have returns
that are low (high).
Note that identification is easier in this framework. In our previous investment regressions,
19

We are not the first looking at the relation between investment and returns. Titman, Wei, and Xie (2001)
show that firms that spend more on capital investment relatively to their sales or total assets subsequently have
negative benchmark-adjusted returns. See also Baker, Stein, and Wurgler (2003).
20
Unlike the previous sample which used only December year-end firms, we use all available data as long as
there is a five-month lag between the month in which we are predicting returns and the fiscal year-end so that the
regression represents a valid trading rule. As in the previous sample, we eliminate firms with negative investment
and/or otherwise extreme accounting ratios.

29

controls for marginal profitability were crucial in order to isolate variation in investment linked
to mispricing. In these return regressions, we need only control for risk. Column (2) of Table 6
includes three firm characteristics that are associated with cross-sectional differences in average
returns: firm size (market capitalization), firm book-to-market equity, and firm momentum.
These characteristics are arguably proxies for risk. As in previous literature, each characteristic
predicts returns with a positive coefficient. More importantly, these controls do not subsume
the investment effect as the relevant coefficient only drops two basis points and remains quite
statistically significant.
One nice feature of the Fama-MacBeth approach is that the resulting time series of coefficients is simply a time series of realized returns on a portfolio. In results not shown, we have
benchmarked the coefficient time series related to abnormal investment to the CAPM as well as
to other asset-pricing models. In all cases, abnormal returns remain negative and statistically
signficant.
Our model predicts that this effect will be stronger for firms facing a greater degree of
information asymmetry and/or short-term investors. In columns (3) through (6) we test these
predictions by splitting the sample based on R&D intensity and share turnover. Column (3)
of Table 6 re-estimates the relation between investment and subsequent stock returns for those
firms with below-median R&D each year while column (4) re-estimates the relation using only
those firms whose R&D is above the median each year. The effect is nearly two and a half times
stronger for high R&D firms. The ability of investment to predict cross-sectional differences in
returns is not statistically significant for low R&D firms. A full-sample regression (not shown)
which interacts investment with a dummy for above-median R&D documents that the difference
between the two coefficients on investment in columns (3) and (4) is statistically significant at
the one percent level.
Column (5) of Table 6 re-estimates the full regression for those firms with below-median
share turnover while column (6) re-estimates the relation using above-median share turnover
firms. Our model predicts that the effect will be stronger for those firms with above-median
turnover. The results in those two columns are consistent with our model. The coefficient on
investment is eighty percent higher for firms with high turnover. Firms with low share turnover

30

have a coefficient on investment that is not statistically significant from zero. A full-sample
regression indicates that the difference between the two coefficients is statistically significant.
Of course, it is always possible that we are not appropriately controlling for risk. Perhaps
all of the predictive power of investment is due to cross-sectional variation in discount rates.21
However, it is hard to explain why variation in those discount rates is primarily found in firms
with above-median R&D and above-median turnover.
The next two columns split the sample according to firms’ Kaplan and Zingales index (1997).
Kaplan and Zingales (1997) classify firms into discrete categories of financial constraint, and then
use an ordered logit regression to relate their classifications to accounting variables (using the 49
firms in the Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen (1986) sample of low dividend manufacturing firms
with positive real sales growth). As in Lamont, Polk, and Saá-Requejo (2001), we construct a
KZ index using their regression coefficients and five accounting ratios. The KZ index is higher
for firms that are more constrained. The five variables, along with the signs of their coefficients
in the KZ index, are: cash flow to total capital (negative), the market to book ratio (positive),
debt to total capital (positive), dividends to total capital (negative), and cash holdings to capital
(negative). We provide additional information in the appendix.
We split the sample according to firms’ degree of financial constraints in order to distinguish
our model, where unconstrained firms may invest in negative NPV projects when overpriced,
from other models, where financially constrained firms are able to invest more efficiently when
overpriced. Column (7) estimates the relation between investment and subsequent stock returns for below-median KZ firms; column (8) estimates the relation for above-median KZ firms.
Though the coefficient of returns on investment is higher for firms with above-median KZ index,
the difference is not statistically significant. The investment of unconstrained firms still predicts
negative future returns. This effect is economically and statistically strong.
The final regression in column (9) adds our previous mispricing proxies, discretionary accruals and equity issuance, to the right-hand side. If the ability of these two proxies to explain
investment actually works through a mispricing channel rather than a profitability channel then
21

Other papers find similar results at the aggregate or industry level. Cochrane (1991) finds that investment
has significant forecasting power for aggregate stock returns. Lamont (2000) documents that planned investment
has substantial forecasting power at both the aggregate and industry level. Both authors argue that their findings
are consistent with variation in discount rates.

31

we should see the coefficient on investment move closer to zero. This is exactly what happens.
Recall that the coefficient on investment for the full sample was -0.1372. After the inclusion
of our two mispricing proxies, that coefficient drops by almost fifty percent to -0.0702. In fact
the coefficient is now no longer significant at the five percent level. This result brings the analysis full circle, linking the previous investment-Q regressions with these return predictability
regressions in a manner consistent with our model.22

IV

Conclusions

We present a simple framework that shows that a firm’s investment decision is affected by the
market (mis)valuation of the company even if new investment projects are not financed by
new equity. In the model managers with private information about the quality of the firm’s
investment may invest inefficiently on behalf of shareholders. The reason is that the investment
decision serves as a signal of firm value and can be used to manipulate stock prices to shareholders’ advantage. If firms are mispriced, inefficient investment can be predicted with ex-ante
variables.
In the empirical part of the paper we show that variables which predict relatively low stock
returns are positively correlated with investment, controlling for investment opportunities and
financial slack. In particular we show that a typical change in one of our “mispricing proxies”
results in roughly a two to four percent change in the firm’s investment as a percentage of
capital. This relation is robust to formally measuring mispricing using the output from a firmlevel VAR. Our model predicts that these sensitivities should be greater, the greater the degree
of asymmetric information between firms and investors. We find that is generally the case as
the effect is weaker for firms with relatively low R&D intensity. Our model also predicts that
22

A potential problem with this result is that if Q is measured with error, the regression coefficients may be
biased. We tried to apply the Erickson and Whited (2002) high-order moment estimators to our larger, longer
sample. However, use of these estimators requires first passing a test of the model’s two identifying assumptions:
i) Q predicts future returns, controlling for other variables and ii) the residuals in a linear regression of Q on
these control variables are skewed. Even for the simplest specification in column (1), we are unable to reject
the null hypothesis implied by the model’s identifying assumptions for half of the cross sections. For the other
specifications which include book-to-market equity as a control variable, more than 75% of the cross-sections
fail the Erickson-Whited identification test. In both cases, OLS estimates are statistically insignificant for the
cross sections that pass the Erickson-Whited identification test. This suggests that any failure to reject the null
hypothesis using their estimator on those cross section may simply be due to a lack of power.

32

the effects should be stronger for firms with short-term investors. We find that this is generally
the case as the effect is stronger for firms with relatively high share turnover.
The thrust of these results are generally consistent with Baker, Stein, and Wurgler (2003)
and Chirinko and Schaller (2001) as sentiment affects real investment. However our results differ
in the fact that in our paper, the influence of sentiment on real investment works through a
catering rather than an equity-issuance channel.
We also show that patterns in the cross-section of average returns are consistent with those
patterns in investment. Firms with high (low) investment have low (high) subsequent stock
returns, controlling for investment opportunities and other characteristics linked to return predictability. As in our model, this relation is stronger for firms with above-median R&D intensity
or above-median turnover. We argue that these findings represent evidence that mispricing in
the capital markets may have significant consequences for the real economy. Our paper focuses
on one important capital allocation decision. Similarly, one can study other corporate decisions
such as hiring employees or engaging in acquisition activity within this context. For example,
Shleifer and Vishny (2001) argue that the cost of equity is a strong determinant of merger
activity.

33

References
[1] Abel, 1980,, Empirical investment equations: an itegrative framework, in K. Brunner and
A. Meltzer (eds.), On the state of macroeconomics, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series,
vol. 12.
[2] Abel, A. and O. Blanchard, 1986, The present value of profits and cyclical movements in
investment, Econometrica 54, 249-274.
[3] Abel, A. and J. Eberly, 2002, Investment and q with fixed costs: An empirical analysis,
Northwestern University working paper.
[4] Asquith Paul, and David Mullins, 1986, Equity issues and offering dilutionsJournal of
Financial Economics, 15, 61-89.
[5] Baker, M., J. Stein, and J. Wurgler, 2003, When Does the Market Matter? Stock Prices and
the Investment of Equity-Dependent Firms, Quarterly Journal of Economics, (3):203218.
[6] Baker, Malcolm, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2000, The Equity Share in New Issues and Aggregate
Stock Returns, Journal of Finance, 55, 2219-2257.
[7] Baker, Malcolm, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2002, Market timing and capital structure, Journal
of Finance, 57, 1-32.
[8] Barberis, N., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, 1998, A Model of Investor Sentiment,Journal of
Financial Economics, 49: 307-345.
[9] Barberis, N. and R. Thaler, 2001, A survey of behavioral finance, University of Chicago
working paper.
[10] Benabou, R. and G. Laroque, 1992, Using priviledged information to manipulate markets:
insiders, gurus, and credibility, Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, 921-948.
[11] Bernstein, L., 1993, Analysis of Financial Statements, 4th ed. Homewood, IL: Irwin.

34

[12] Bond, S. and J. Cummins, 2000, The stock market and investment in the new economy:
some tangible facts and intangible fictions, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 200:1,
61-124.
[13] Brainard, W. and J. Tobin, 1968, Pitfalls in financial model building, American Economic
Review Papers and Proceedings 58, 99-122.
[14] Chan, K., K.C. Chan, N. Jegadeesh, and J. Lakonishok, 2001, Earnings quality and stock
returns, NBER working paper 8308.
[15] Cochrane, J., 1991, Production-based asset pricing and the link between stock returns and
economic fluctuations, Journal of Finance, 46: 209-237.
[16] Cohen, R., C. Polk, and T. Vuolteenaho, 2002, Does risk or mispricing explain the crosssection of stock prices?, Northwestern University working paper.
[17] Corbett, J. and T. Jenkinson (1997), How is investment financed? A study of Germany,
Japan, the United Kingdom and the United States, Manchester School, 65, 69-93.
[18] D’Avolio, E. Gildor, and A. Shleifer, 2001, Technology, information production, and market
efficiency, Harvard University working paper.
[19] Daniel, K., D. Hirshleifer and A. Subrahmanyam, 1998, Investor Psycohology and Security
Market Under- and Overreaction, Journal of Finance, 52: 1-33.
[20] Daniel, K. and S. Titman, 2001, Market reactions to tangible and intangible information,
Northwestern University working paper.
[21] Dow, James and Gary Gorton, 1997, Stock Market Efficiency and Economic Efficiency: Is
There a Connection?, Journal of Finance, 52: 1087-1129.
[22] Erickson, Timothy and Toni M. Whited, 2000, Measurement error and the relationship
between investment and q, Journal of Political Economy, 108: 1027-1057.
[23] Erickson, Timothy and Toni M. Whited, 2002, Two-step GMM estimation of the errors-invariables model using high-order moments, Econometric Theory, 18: 776-799.
35

[24] Fama, E., 1970, Efficient capital markets: a review of theory and empirical work, Journal
of Finance 25, 383-423.
[25] Fazzari, S., R. G. Hubbard, and B. Petersen, 1988, Financing constraints and corporate
investment, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 141-195.
[26] Froot, K., D. Scharfstein, and J. Stein, 1994, A framework for risk management, Harvard
Business Review 72, 91-102.
[27] Gilchrist, S. and C. Himmelberg, 1995, Evidence on the role of cash flow for investment,
Journal of Monetary Economics 36, 541-572.
[28] Gilchrist, S., and C. Himmelberg, and G. Huberman, 2002, Do Stock Price Bubbles Inuence
Corporate Investment?, working paper, Columbia University.
[29] Hand, J., 1990, Did firms undertake debt-equity swaps for an accounting paper profit or
true financial gain?, The Accounting Review 64, 587-623.
[30] Hayashi, F., 1982, Tobin’s average q and marginal q: a neoclassical interpretation, Econometrica 50,
[31] Hirshleifer, 2001, Investor psychology and asset pricing, Journal of Finance 56, 1533-1598.
[32] Hong, H. and J. Stein, 1999, A Unified Theory of underreaction, momentum trading and
overreaction in financial markets, Journal of Finance 54, 2143-84.
[33] Hong, H., T. Lim, and J. Stein, 2000, Bad news travels slowly: size, analyst coverage, and
the profitability of momentum strategies, Journal of Finance 55, 265-295.
[34] Hribar, P. and D. Collins, 2002, Errors in estimating accruals: Implications for empirical
research, Journal of Accounting Research 40, 105-134.
[35] Ikenberry, D., J. Lakonishok, and T. Vermaelen, 1995, Market underreaction to open market
share repurchases, Journal of Financial Economics 39, 181-208.
[36] Jegadeesh, N. and S. Titman, 1993, Returns to buying winners and selling losers: Implications for stock market efficiency, Journal of Finance 48, 65-91.
36

[37] Jegadeesh, N. and Titman, 2001, Profitability of momentum strategies: an evaluation of
alternative explanations, Journal of Finance 48, 699-720.
[38] Jones, J., 1991, Earnings management during import relief investigation, Journal of Accouting Research 29, 193-228.
[39] Kahneman, D. and A. Tversky, 1973, On the Psychology of Prediction, Psychological Review
80, 237-51.
[40] Kaplan, S. and L. Zingales, 1997, Do financing constraints explain why investment is correlated with cash flow?, Quarterly Journal of Economics112, 168-216.
[41] Korajczyk Robert, Deborah Lucas, and Robert McDonald, 1991, The effects of information
releases on the pricing and timing of equity issues, Review of Financial Studies 4, 685-708.
[42] Lamont, O., 2000, Investment plans and stock returns, Journal of Finance 55, 2719-2745.
[43] Lamont, O., C. Polk, and J. Saá-Requejo, 2001, Financial constraints and stock returns,
Review of Financial Studies 14, 529-554.
[44] Lee, C. and B. Swaminathan, 2000, Price momentum and trading volume, Journal of
Finance 55, 2017-2069.
[45] Loughran, T. and J. Ritter, 1997, The operating performance of firms conducting seasoned
equity offerings, Journal of Finance 52, 1823-1850.
[46] Lucas, D. and R. McDonald, 1990, Equity issues and stock price dynamics, Journal of
Finance 45, 1019-1043.
[47] Maines, L. and J. Hand, 1996, Individuals’ perceptions and misperceptions of the time
series properties of quarterly earnings, The Accounting Review 71, 317-336.
[48] Mayer, C. (1988), A new test of capital structure, European Economic Review, 32, 11671189.
[49] Mayer, C. and O. Sussman (2003), New issues in corporate finance, working paper.

37

[50] Morck, R., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, 1990, The stock market and investment: is the
market a sideshow?, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 157-215.
[51] Moskowitz, T. and Grinblatt, 1999, Do industries explain momentum?, Journal of Finance
54, 1249-1290.
[52] Myers, S. and N. Majluf, 1984, Corporate financing and investment decisions when firms
have information that investors do not have, Journal of Financial Economics 13, 187-222.
[53] Rajan, R. and L. Zingales (1995), What do we know about capital structure? Some evidence
from international data, Journal of Finance, 50, 1421-1460.
[54] Shleifer, A., 2000, Inefficient markets, an introduction to behavioral finance, Oxford University Press.
[55] Shleifer, A. and R. Vishny, 1990, Equilibrium short horizons of investors and firms’, American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 80, 148-153.
[56] Shleifer, A. and R. Vishny, 2003, Stock market driven acquisitions, Journal of Financial
Economics.
[57] Sloan, Richard, 1996, Do Stock Prices Fully Reflect Information in Accruals and Cash
Flows About Future Earnings?, The Accounting Review 71, 289-315.
[58] Stein, Jeremy, 1988, Takeover threats and managerial myopia, Journal of Political Economy
96, 61-80.
[59] Stein, Jeremy, 1996, Rational capital budgeting in an irrational world, Journal of Business
69, 429-455.
[60] Stein, Jeremy, 2001, Agency, information and corporate investment, forthcoming in The
Handbook of the Economics of Finance, editors: G. Constatinides, M. Harris, and R. Stulz.
[61] Teoh, S. H., I. Welch, and T. J. Wong, 1998, Earnings management and the long-term
market performance of initial public offerings, Journal of Finance 53, 1935-1974.

38

[62] Teoh, S. H., I. Welch, and T. J. Wong, 1998, Earnings management and the underperformance of seasoned equity offerings, Journal of Financial Economics 50, 63-99.
[63] Tobin, J., 1969, A general equilibrium approach to monetary theory, Journal of Money,
Credit, and Banking 1, 15-29.
[64] Vuolteenaho, T., What drives firm-level returns?, Journal of Finance 57, 233-264.

39

Table 1:

Summary Statistics
The data comes from both the merged CRSP-COMPUSTAT database and the Zacks database. Investment,
Ii,t−1 , is capital expenditure (COMPUSTAT item 128). Capital, Ki,t−1 , is net property, plant, and equipment
(COMPUSTAT item 8). We define discretionary accruals, DACCRi,t , as the difference between realized accruals
and normal accruals as forecast by the modified Jones (1991) model, where normal accruals are computed by a
simple regression of total accruals on non-credit sales growth and capital across all firms with the same two-digit
SIC code. See the appendix for details. Our measure of equity issuance activity, EQISSU Ei,t , captures equity
issues, share repurchases, dividends, and other actions that pay cash out of the firm, or trade ownership for
cash or services (e.g., stock options plans) over the period t − 5 to t. Lagged firm momentum, M OMi,t−1 , is
the cross-sectionally demeaned (using the universe of all CRSP stocks) stock return over the period Januaryt−1
to Novembert−1 . Lagged industry momentum, IM OMi,t−1 , is the cross-sectionally demeaned (using the universe of all CRSP stocks) industry return over the period Januaryt−1 to Novembert−1 using the two-digit SIC
classification. Tobin’s Q, Qi,t−1 , is defined as the market value of assets divided by the book value of assets,
Ai,t−1 (COMPUSTAT item 6). A firm’s market value of assets equals the book value of assets plus the market
value of common stock less the sum of book value of common stock (COMPUSTAT item 60) and balance sheet
deferred taxes (COMPUSTAT item 74). Cash flow, CFi,t−1 /Ki,t−2 , equals the sum of earnings before extraordinary items (COMPUSTAT item 18) and depreciation (COMPUSTAT item 14) over beginning of year capital
which we define as net property, plant, and equipment (COMPUSTAT item 8). One-year expected profitability,
Et−1 [EARNi,t ]/Ai,t−1 , is the median analyst year t − 1 forecast of earnings in year t divided by the book value
of assets in year t − 1. Two-year expected profitability, Et−1 [EARNi,t+1 ]/Ai,t−1 , is the median analyst year t − 1
forecast of earnings in years t and t + 1 divided by the book value of assets in year t − 1. Five-year expected
profitability, Et−1 [EARNi,t+4 ]/Ai,t−1 , is the median analyst year t − 1 forecast of earnings in years t through
t + 4 divided by the book value of assets in year t − 1. R&Di,t−1 /Ai,t−1 measures R&D intensity (R&D expense
(COMPUSTAT item 46) over the book value of assets). Share turnover, T U RNi,t−1 is the average, in December
t−1 ,

of the daily ratio of shares traded to shares outstanding at the end of the day. BE/M Ei,t is firm book-to-

market equity (described in the appendix). KZi,t is Kaplan-Zingales index of financial constraints, defined in the
appendix

40

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

Obs.

Ii,t /Ki,t−1

.31543318

.40981705

.000055

9.8948135

53585

DACCRi,t

0.0037146

0.1735791

-1.901459

1.466965

48340

EQISSU Ei,t

.34047265

1.2368979

-8.5319862

16.595188

37761

M OMi,t−1

.02231656

.8655887

-3.3779354

19.338051

53585

IM OMi,t−1

.03217884

.89540824

-3.5319417

4.8756251

53585

Qi,t−1

1.5613214

1.5692514

.074246

82.470253

53585

CFi,t−1 /Ki,t−2

.46286134

1.1810156

-9.9966278

9.9881659

53585

Si,t−1

1017.1091

3938.6659

10.002

160883

53585

Ai,t−1

1277799.8

5897335.8

1878

3.281e+08

53585

Et−1 [EARNi,t ]/Ai,t−1

.04385347

.13160954

-6.1592259

13.147612

25249

Et−1 [EARNi,t+1 ]/Ai,t−1

.07059737

.08605749

-3.8495162

2.0628276

24278

Et−1 [EARNi,t+4 ]/Ai,t−1

1.746586

3.7817765

-2.403513

120.72811

20628

R&Di,t−1 /Ai,t−1

.04555467

.07023887

0

2.051975

24153

T U RNi,t−1

1.4973921

2.3476327

0

252.16142

27834

BE/M Ei,t−1

0.975

0.992

0.100

47.287

106,960

KZ

-0.118

2.239

-4.999

46.843

90132

41

Table 2:

Discretionary accruals and Firm Investment
The dependent variable is the proportion of investment over beginning of year capital. High discretionary
accruals, HIGHDACCRi,t−1 , is a dummy equal to one if the firm has discretionary accruals in the top 20th
percentile, and zero otherwise. High equity issuance activity, HIGHEQISSU Ei,t−1 , is a dummy equal to one
if the firm has equity issuance in the top 25th percentile, and zero otherwise. For a description of all the other
variables see the legend of Table 1. Panel A shows the results for the entire sample. All columns are OLS
regressions with the exception of column (5) that reports an IV regression where we instrument Tobin’s Q, Qi,t−1
with five-year expected profitability (as described in Table 1). In Panel B Columns (1) and (2) show results for
the whole sample. Column (3) shows the results only for internet stock firms. Internet stock firms are defined
as the firms that have been included in the ISDEX (Internet Stock Index). Column (4) shows results for the
firm-years in the subperiod, 1995-2000. Column (5) shows results for the firm-years in the subperiod, 1998-2000.
Column (6) shows results for the firms that have below-median R&D intensity. Column (7) shows results for those
firms that have above-median R&D intensity. Column (8) shows results for those firms that have below-median
firm share turnover. Column (9) shows results for those firms that have above-median firm share turnover. We
calculate medians on a year by year basis. All regressions include firm and year fixed effects. The standard errors
reported in parentheses are corrected for clustering of the residual at the year level. Coefficients starred with one,
two, and three asterisks are statistically significant at the ten, five, and one percent level respectively.

42

Panel A

DACCRi,t

Qi,t−1

CFi,t−1 /Ki,t−2

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.1266***

0.1586***

0.1555***

0.1678***

0.1303***

0.1200***

0.0762***

0.0705***

(0.0173)

(0.0200)

(0.0224)

(0.0251)

(0.0249)

(0.0180)

(0.0153)

(0.0170)

0.0576***

0.0532***

0.0493***

0.0449***

0.1404***

0.0661***

0.0564***

0.0571***

(0.0077)

(0.0097)

(0.0091)

(0.0091)

(0.0233)

(0.0054)

(0.0055)

(0.0056)

0.0725***

0.0659***

0.0680***

0.0706***

0.0454***

0.0754***

0.0695***

0.0703***

(0.0079)

(0.0081)

(0.0087)

(0.0086)

(0.0154)

(0.0085)

(0.0103)

(0.0099)

0.1082***

0.1147

0.6140***

(0.0288)

(0.1662)

(0.2348)

0.1670

-0.5106

(0.2781)

(0.3976)

0.0089

0.0079

0.0040

(0.0064)

(0.0055)

(0.0058)

-0.0105**

-0.0076

(0.0042)

(0.0058)

Et−1 [EARNi,t ]/Ai,t−1

Et−1 [EARNi,t+1 ]/Ai,t−1

43

Et−1 [EARNi,t+4 ]/Ai,t−1

0.0136***
(0.0035)

Qi,t

Qi,t−2

Qi,t−3

-0.0043
(0.0040)

Observations

48340

23229

22354

18678

18982

46099

39010

35669

R-squared

0.5054

0.5974

0.6063

0.6232

0.0296

0.4420

0.4393

0.4393

Panel B

DACCRi,t

Qi,t−1

CFi,t−1 /Ki,t−2

HIGHDACCRi,t

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

0.1127***

0.0874***

0.1071

0.1507***

0.1390***

0.0655*

0.2428***

0.0317

0.0413*

(0.0187)

(0.0173)

(0.7567)

(0.0242)

(0.0534)

(0.0389)

(0.0335)

(0.0261)

(0.0246)

0.0574***

0.0576***

0.0116

0.0490***

0.0352***

0.1122***

0.0456***

0.0324***

0.0590***

(0.0077)

(0.0077)

(0.0173)

(0.0119)

(0.0095)

(0.0125)

(0.0084)

(0.0049)

(0.0071)

0.0725***

0.0724***

0.0879

0.0473***

0.0238

0.0910***

0.0575***

0.0635***

0.1299***

(0.0079)

(0.0079)

(0.1098)

(0.0074)

(0.0148)

(0.0173)

(0.0122)

(0.0147)

(0.0219)

0.0100**
(0.0049)

DACCRi,t ∗ HIGHEQISSU Ei,t

0.0605***
(0.0213)

44

Observations

48340

48340

113

12933

6534

11473

11455

12288

12216

R-squared

0.5054

0.5055

0.6439

0.6103

0.7446

0.5649

0.5755

0.3853

0.4531

Table 3:

Equity issuance and Firm Investment
The dependent variable is the proportion of investment over beginning of year capital. High discretionary
accruals, HIGHDACCRi,t−1 , is a dummy equal to one if the firm has discretionary accruals in the top 20th
percentile, and zero otherwise. High equity issuance activity, HIGHEQISSU Ei,t−1 , is a dummy equal to one
if the firm has equity issuance in the top 25th percentile, and zero otherwise. For a description of all the other
variables see the legend of Table 1. In Panel A we report the results for the entire sample. All columns are
OLS regressions with the exception of column (5) that reports an IV regression where we instrument Tobin’s
Q, Qi,t−1 with five-year expected profitability (as described in Table 1). In Panel B, Column (1) we report
the results for the firm-years in the subperiod, 1995-2000. Column (2) shows results for the firm-years in the
subperiod, 1998-2000. Column (3) shows results for the firms that have below-median R&D intensity. Column
(4) shows results for those firms that have above-median R&D intensity. Column (5) shows results for those firms
that have below-median firm share turnover. Column (6) shows results for those firms that have above-median
firm share turnover. We calculate medians on a year by year basis. All regressions include firm and year fixed
effects. The standard errors reported in parentheses are corrected for clustering of the residual at the year level.
Coefficients starred with one, two, and three asterisks are statistically significant at the ten, five, and one percent
level respectively.

45

Panel A

EQISSU Ei,t

Qi,t−1

CFi,t−1 /Ki,t−2

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.0259***

0.0166***

0.0162***

0.0164***

0.0183***

0.0287***

0.0264***

0.0266***

(0.0030)

(0.0033)

(0.0032)

(0.0043)

(0.0043)

(0.0032)

(0.0032)

(0.0033)

0.0454***

0.0491***

0.0452***

0.0453***

0.0461***

0.0540***

0.0593***

0.0603***

(0.0040)

(0.0055)

(0.0046)

(0.0064)

(0.0125)

(0.0059)

(0.0054)

(0.0055)

0.0789***

0.0493***

0.0526***

0.0639***

0.0727***

0.0789***

0.0805***

0.0795***

(0.0119)

(0.0098)

(0.0114)

(0.0146)

(0.0106)

(0.0121)

(0.0122)

(0.0120)

0.3281***

0.4055***

0.4920***

(0.0831)

(0.0840)

(0.0921)

-0.0374

-0.1021

(0.1597)

(0.1993)

-0.0126**

-0.0113**

-0.0119***

(0.0050)

(0.0047)

(0.0048)

-0.0165***

-0.0162***

(0.0039)

(0.0048)

Et−1 [EARNi,t ]/Ai,t−1

Et−1 [EARNi,t+1 ]/Ai,t−1

46

Et−1 [EARNi,t+4 ]/Ai,t−1

0.0021
(0.0038)

Qi,t

Qi,t−2

Qi,t−3

0.0004
(0.0036)

Observations

37761

17283

16631

14220

14451

36212

35366

34867

R-squared

0.409

0.571

0.578

0.548

0.100

0.415

0.419

0.424

Panel B
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.0187***

0.0026

0.0210***

0.0279***

0.0224***

0.0493***

(0.0055)

(0.0062)

(0.0039)

(0.0057)

(0.0039)

(0.0092)

0.0566***

0.0517***

0.0534***

0.0432***

0.0177***

0.0283***

(0.0063)

(0.0032)

(0.0104)

(0.0066)

(0.0056)

(0.0047)

0.0403***

0.0245

0.0974***

0.0646***

0.0874***

0.1572***

(0.0138)

(0.0245)

(0.0135)

(0.0158)

(0.0228)

(0.0257)

Observations

8346

4327

8631

8558

11784

11301

R-squared

0.563

0.668

0.454

0.543

0.328

0.406

EQISSU Ei,t

Qi,t−1

CFi,t−1 /Ki,t−2

47

Table 4:

Momentum and Firm Investment
The dependent variable is the proportion of investment over beginning of year capital. For a description of
this and all the other variables see the legend of Table 1. Panel A reports results for the whole sample. All
columns are OLS regressions with the exception of column (5) that reports an IV regression where we instrument
Tobin’s Q, Qi,t−1 with five-year expected profitability (as described in Table 1). In Panel B, Columns (1) and
(2) show results for the sample of firms that have negative momentum. Columns (3) and (4) show results for
the sub-sample of firms that have positive momentum. Column (5) shows the results only for internet stock
firms. Internet stock firms are defined as the firms that have been included in the ISDEX (Internet Stock Index).
Column (6) shows results for the firm-years in the subperiod, 1995-2000. Column (7) shows results for the firmyears in the subperiod, 1998-2000. Column (8) shows results for the firms that have below-median R&D intensity.
Column (9) shows results for those firms that have above-median R&D intensity. Column (10) shows results for
those firms that have below-median firm share turnover. Column (11) shows results for those firms that have
above-median firm share turnover. We calculate medians on a year by year basis. All regressions include firm
and year fixed effects. The standard errors reported in parentheses are corrected for clustering of the residual at
the year level. Coefficients starred with one, two, and three asterisks are statistically significant at the ten, five,
and one percent level respectively.

48

Panel A

M OMi,t−1

IM OMi,t−1

Qi,t−1

CFi,t−1 /Ki,t−2

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.0282***

0.0356***

0.0381***

0.0461***

0.0700***

0.0262***

0.0282***

0.0276***

(0.0032)

(0.0050)

(0.0052)

(0.0065)

(0.0106)

(0.0030)

(0.0034)

(0.0034)

0.0126***

0.0057**

0.0042*

0.0073**

0.0113***

0.0137***

0.0147***

0.0135***

(0.0025)

(0.0024)

(0.0024)

(0.0030)

(0.0404)

(0.0026)

(0.0022)

(0.0023)

0.0532***

0.0508***

0.0460***

0.0419***

0.1345***

0.0606***

0.0467***

0.0476***

(0.0068)

(0.0084)

(0.0069)

(0.0063)

(0.0241)

(0.0055)

(0.0051)

(0.0054)

0.0732***

0.0642***

0.0662***

0.0696***

0.0561***

0.0755***

0.0675***

0.0678***

(0.0081)

(0.0083)

(0.0089)

(0.0092)

(0.0144)

(0.0087)

(0.0097)

(0.0093)

0.1071***

0.0805

0.5430**

(0.0275)

(0.1603)

(0.2216)

0.2221

-0.4319

(0.2669)

(0.3733)

0.0060

0.0055

0.0020

(0.0056)

(0.0048)

(0.0050)

-0.0061

-0.0026

(0.0040)

(0.0054)

Et−1 [EARNi,t ]/Ai,t−1

49

Et−1 [EARNi,t+1 ]/Ai,t−1

Et−1 [EARNi,t+4 ]/Ai,t−1

0.0132***
(0.0035)

Qi,t

Qi,t−2

Qi,t−3

-0.0052
(0.0036)

Observations

53585

25249

24278

20290

20628

51045

43008

39255

R-squared

0.495

0.603

0.611

0.630

0.070

0.495

0.442

0.444

Panel B

M OMi,t−1

IM OMi,t−1

Qi,t−1

CFi,t−1 /Ki,t−2

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

0.0564***

0.0366***

0.0188***

0.0176**

0.2358*

0.0340***

0.0348**

0.0157***

0.0339***

0.0215***

0.0204***

(0.0084)

(0.0074)

(0.0048)

(0.0086)

(0.1228)

(0.0065)

(0.0147)

(0.0056)

(0.0057)

(0.0049)

(0.0037)

0.0111***

0.0112***

0.0165***

0.0136***

0.0060

0.0024

0.0046**

0.0170***

0.0094***

0.0115***

(0.0032)

(0.0029)

(0.0033)

(0.0029)

(0.0051)

(0.0137)

(0.0027)

(0.0049)

(0.0022)

(0.0032)

0.0733***

0.0336***

0.0397***

0.0342***

0.0271

0.0489***

0.0364***

0.1153***

0.0443***

0.0250***

0.0531***

(0.0089)

(0.0046)

(0.0050)

(0.0060)

(0.0173)

(0.0111)

(0.0064)

(0.0143)

(0.0066)

(0.0038)

(0.0078)

0.0660***

0.0880***

0.0863***

0.1144***

0.0536

0.0434***

0.0206

0.0918***

0.0558***

0.0672

0.1259***

(0.0093)

(0.0126)

(0.0121)

(0.0241)

(0.0830)

(0.0075)

(0.0169)

(0.0199)

(0.0119)

(0.0124)

(0.0195)

M OMi,t−1 ∗ T U RNi,t−1

-0.0035*

0.0034

(0.0018)

(0.0022)

50

Observations

30216

15232

23369

12602

121

14069

7136

12086

12067

13957

13877

R-squared

0.539

0.487

0.646

0.451

0.671

0.610

0.746

0.558

0.579

0.469

0.440

Table 5:

Mispricing and Firm Investment
The dependent variable is the proportion of investment over beginning of year capital. M ISP RICIN Gi,t is
the mispricing metric derived from the firm-level VAR model of Table 8 and described in the text. All the other
variables are described in the legend of Table 1. All columns are OLS regressions with the exception of column
(5) that reports an IV regression where we instrument Tobin’s Q, Qi,t−1 with five-year expected profitability
(as described in Table 1). All regressions include firm and year fixed effects. The standard errors reported in
parentheses are corrected for clustering of the residual at the year level. Coefficients starred with one, two, and
three asterisks are statistically significant at the ten, five, and one percent level respectively.

51

M ISP RICIN Gi,t

Qt−1

CFt−1 /Kt−2

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.2124***

0.1535***

0.1464***

0.1542***

0.0936

0.2102***

0.2229***

0.2221***

(0.0288)

(0.0312)

(0.0275)

(0.0278)

(0.0620)

(0.0286)

(0.0294)

(0.0296)

0.0390***

0.0394***

0.0398***

0.0383***

0.0703***

0.0376***

0.0437***

0.0440***

(0.0048)

(0.0043)

(0.0047)

(0.0075)

(0.0216)

(0.0062)

(0.0060)

(0.0059)

0.0909***

0.0652***

0.0611***

0.0641***

0.0667***

0.0910***

0.0914***

0.0914***

(0.0146)

(0.0083)

(0.0080)

(0.0108)

(0.0175)

(0.0146)

(0.0146)

(0.0146)

0.3145***

0.4774***

0.4610***

(0.0955)

(0.1344)

(0.1626)

-0.0984

-0.1310

(0.1814)

(0.2105)

0.0026

-0.0009

-0.0004

(0.0051)

(0.0058)

(0.0057)

-0.0209***

-0.0169**

(0.0052)

(0.0068)

Et−1 [EARNi,t ]/Ai,t−1

Et−1 [EARNi,t+1 ]/Ai,t−1

Et−1 [EARNi,t+4 ]/Ai,t−1

0.0060

52

(0.0062)
Qt

Qt−2

Qt−3

-0.0084
(0.0071)

Observations

23347

12914

12520

10787

10923

23347

23347

23347

R-squared

0.460

0.587

0.608

0.576

0.108

0.460

0.461

0.461

Table 6:

Investment and future stock returns
The table reports the results from Fama-MacBeth cross-sectional monthly stock return regressions.

The

independent variables include investment over beginning of year capital, Tobin’s Q, cash flow, book-to-market
equity, firm size, price momentum, discretionary accruals, and equity issuance. For a description of the variables
see the legend of Table 1. Columns (1), (2), and (9) show results for the whole sample. Column (3) shows results
for the firms that have below-median research and development intensity. Column (4) shows results for those firms
that have above-median research and development intensity. Column (5) shows results for the firms that have
below-median firm share turnover. Column (6) shows results for those firms that have above-median firm share
turnover. Column (7) shows results for the firms that have below-median values of the Kaplan-Zingales index of
financial constraints, defined in the appendix. Column (8) shows results for those firms that have above-median
values of the KZ index. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. Coefficients starred with one, two, and three
asterisks are statistically significant at the ten, five, and one percent level respectively.

53

intercept

ln Ii,t−1 /Ki,t−2

ln Qi,t−1

ln CFi,t−1 /Ki,t−2

ln M Ei,t−1

ln BE/M Ei,t−1

54
ln M OMi,t−1

DACCRi,t−1

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

1.1561***

3.2108***

2.7542***

3.9667***

1.9802***

3.0249***

2.7679***

3.7459***

3.7119***

(0.3109)

(0.6949)

(0.7680)

(0.8771)

(0.6625)

(0.7845)

(0.6639)

(0.7248)

(0.7449)

-0.1579***

-0.1372***

-0.1058

-0.2489***

-0.0670

-0.1151***

-0.1182***

-0.1624***

-0.0702*

(0.0399)

(0.0342)

(0.0794)

(0.0887)

(0.0417)

(0.0491)

(0.0451)

(0.0417)

(0.0385)

-0.4161***

0.3061***

0.2219

0.1909

0.3818**

-0.0970

0.2946

-0.0307

0.1055

(0.1067)

(0.1131)

(0.2723)

(0.2355)

(0.1882)

(0.1664)

(0.2008)

(0.1663)

(0.1355)

0.0714*

0.0179

0.0310

-0.1420

-0.0266

0.0193

-0.0089

0.0413

-0.0089

(0.0389)

(0.0318)

(0.1315)

(0.1737)

(0.0640)

(0.0512)

(0.0733)

(0.1030)

(0.0404)

-0.1900***

-0.1447***

-0.2351***

-0.0901**

-0.1755***

-0.1400***

-0.2488***

-0.2044***

(0.0474)

(0.0514)

(0.0588)

(0.0451)

(0.0518)

(0.0440)

(0.0518)

(0.0525)

0.3541***

0.5003***

0.2643

0.2888***

0.1681

0.3443**

0.2199**

0.1625*

(0.0762)

(0.1815)

(0.1893)

(0.1183)

(0.1033)

(0.1518)

(0.0995)

(0.0867)

0.9665***

0.8603***

0.7332***

0.7992***

1.2381***

0.9160***

0.9153***

0.7033***

(0.1840)

(0.2472)

(0.2457)

(0.2115)

(0.2066)

(0.1977)

(0.1939)

(0.2036)
-0.6917***
(0.2678)

EQISSU Ei,t−1

-0.1814
(0.1490)

Appendix
A. Description of the Data
Investment (It ) is capital expenditure (COMPUSTAT item 128).
and equipment (COMPUSTAT item 8).

Capital (Kt−1 ) is net property, plant,

Qt−1 equals the market value of assets divided by the book value of

assets (COMPUSTAT item 6). Market value of assets equals the book value of assets plus the market value of
common stock less the sum of book value of common stock (COMPUSTAT item 6) and balance sheet deferred
taxes (COMPUSTAT item 74) in year t-1. Cash flow (CFt−1 ) equals the sum of earnings before extraordinary
items (COMPUSTAT item 18) and depreciation (COMPUSTAT item 14) over beginning of year capital. Sales
(COMPUSTAT item 12) is net sales. One-year expected profitability (Et−1 [ROAt ]) is the median analyst year
t-1 forecast of earnings in year t divided by the book value of assets (COMPUSTAT item 6). Two-year expected
profitability (Et−1 [ROAt+1 ]) is the median analyst year t-1 forecast of earnings in year t+1 divided by the book
value of assets (COMPUSTAT item 6) in year t-1. Five-year expected profitability (Et−1 [ROAt+4 ]) is the median
analyst year t-1 forecast of earnings in year t+4 divided by the book value of assets (COMPUSTAT item 6) in
year t-1. R&D intensity is R&D expense (COMPUSTAT item 46) over the book value of assets (COMPUSTAT
item 6). We ignore firms with negative accounting numbers for book assets, capital, or investment. We drop
those firms with extreme values for the accounting ratios we study as those observations probably represent data
errors.
We construct this component of accruals using the cross-sectional adaptation developed in Teoh, Welch,
and Wong (1998a, 1998b) of the modified Jones (1991) model. Accruals (ACCRt ) equal the change in accounts
receivable (COMPUSTAT data item 2) plus the change in inventories (COMPUSTAT data item 3) plus the change
in other current assets (COMPUSTAT data item 68) minus the change in accounts payable (COMPUSTAT
data item 70) minus the change in other current liabilities (COMPUSTAT data item 72) minus depreciation
(COMPUSTAT data item 178). A model of normal accruals is first computed by a regression of total accruals
on sales growth (the change in COMPUSTAT data item 2) and capital (COMPUSTAT data item 8) across all
firms with the same two-digit SIC code, but excluding the firm under consideration). We require at least 25
observations for these estimates.
N ORM ALACCRjt = β 0



1
T Aj,t−1



+ β1



∆SALESj,t
T Aj,t−1



+ β2



P P Ej,t
T Aj,t−1



+ j,t

We then apply these estimates to the firm under consideration.

b0
N ORM ALACCRit = β



1
T Ai,t−1



b1
+β



∆SALESi,t − ∆A/Ri,t
T Ai,t−1



b2
+β



P P Ei,t
T Ai,t−1



Note that as in Teoh, Welch, and Wong (1998a, 1998b), before applying the estimates, we first subtract the increase
in accounts receivable (the change in COMPUSTAT data item 12) from sales to allow for the manipulation of
credit sales. We then compute discretionary accruals by subtracting normal accruals from total accruals,

55

DACCRi,t =

ACCRi,t
− N ORM ALACCRi,t
T Ai,t−1

Following Daniel and Titman (2002), we construct a measure of a firm’s equity issuance / repurchase activity,
EQISSU Ei,t , over a five-year period. We define EQSSU Ei,t as the log of the inverse of the percentage ownership
in the firm one would have at time t, given a one percent ownership of the firm at time t − 5, assuming full
reinvestment of all cash flows,
EQISSU Ei,t = log(

M Ei,t
) − ri,t−5:t ,
M Ei,t−5

where Ni,t is the number of shares outstanding at time t, M Ei,t is the market value of equity at time t, and
ri,t−5:t is the log stock return from t − 5 to t.
We compute book-to-market equity, BE/M Ei,t . Book equity is defined as stockholders’ equity, plus balance
sheet deferred taxes (COMPUSTAT data item 74) and investment tax credit (data item 208) (if available), plus
post-retirement benefit liabilities (data item 330) (if available) minus the book value of preferred stock. Depending
on availability, we use redemption (data item 56), liquidation (data item 10), or par value (data item 130) (in
that order) for the book value of preferred stock. We calculate stockholders’ equity used in the above formula
as follows. We prefer the stockholders’ equity number reported by COMPUSTAT (data item 216).

If neither

one is available, we measure stockholders’ equity as the book value of common equity (data item 60) plus the par
value of preferred stock. (Note that the preferred stock is added at this stage because it is later subtracted in
the book equity formula.) If common equity is not available, we compute stockholders’ equity as the book value
of assets (data item 6) minus total liabilities (data item 181), all from COMPUSTAT.
The price-to-book ratio used to form portfolios in May of year t is book common equity for the fiscal year
ending in calendar year t-1, divided by market equity at the end of May of year t. We require the firm to have
a valid past price-to-book ratio. Moreover, in order to eliminate likely data errors, we discard those firms with
price-to-book ratio less than 0.01 and greater than 100. When using COMPUSTAT as our source of accounting
information, we require that the firm must be on COMPUSTAT for two years. This requirement alleviates most
of the potential survivor bias due to COMPUSTAT backfilling data.
The KZ index is: -1.001909*[(Item 18+Item 14)/Item 8]+.2826389*[(Item 6+CRSP December Market EquityItem 60-Item 74)/Item 6]+3.139193*[(Item 9+Item 34)/(Item 9+Item 34+Item 216)] -39.3678*[(Item 21+Item
19)/Item 8]-1.314759*[Item 1/Item 8]. Item numbers refer to COMPUSTAT annual data items. Data item 8 is
lagged.

B. Mispricing Metric
Let zi,t be a vector of firm-specific state variables describing a firm i at time t.
vector is the firm’s market-adjusted annual stock return, ri,t .

56

The first element of the

The second element of the vector is the yearly

measure of the firm’s systematic risk according to the CAPM, β i,t , while other firm characteristics that predict
future risks and returns make up the rest of the elements in zi,t . An individual firm’s state vector is assumed to
follow a linear law:
zi,t = Γzi,t−1 + ui,t
The linear nature of the VAR easily generates forecasts of the state, Et [zi,t+j ] = Γj zi,t . Define e10 ≡ [1 0
... 0] and e20 ≡ [0 1 ... 0]. At a particular point in time, we take the VAR’s forecasts for J future cross-sections
of returns, e10 Γj zi,t , and risks, e20 Γj zi,t , and run a cross-sectional regression of forecasted returns on forecasted
risks, period by period.
e10 Γj zi,t = a + be20 Γj zi,t + ei,t+j
We then compound the residuals from the J cross-sectional regressions into a mispricing metric, M ISP RICIN Gi,t =
J
Q

(1 + ei,t+j ). In theory, for each year of the sample we should predict returns and risk into the infinite future;

j=1

in practice, any impact to M ISP RICIN Gi,t is negligible after 15 years.
In estimating the VAR coefficient matrix, we follow Vuolteenaho (2002) and use weighted least squares,
deflating the annual data for each firm by the number of firms in the corresponding cross-section. We calculate
standard error estimates correcting for clustering of the residual at the year level.
We consider the following parsimonious specification of the VAR. The vector contains the stock return, ri,t ;
the market return beta measured over the previous 12 months, β short
; the market return beta, β long
i,t
i,t , measured
using at least 36 and as many as 60 of the previous months; log book-to-market equity, BE/M Ei,t ; as well as
our previous measures DACCRi,t and EQISSU Ei,t .
demeaned.

All variables are market-adjusted, i.e. cross-sectionally

The appendix describes how we calculate book-to-market equity.

Note that we use forecasts of

future 12-month return betas as our measure of risk so that return forecasts exactly correspond to risk forecasts.
However we also include a more precise three to five year estimate of beta to help us forecast that risk. Finally,
we include four lags of the stock return in the vector, zi,t , in order to measure the long term effect of our third
variable, lagged momentum, on stock returns.23
Table A.1 reports the result of the VAR. The model variables include the market-adjusted stock return, ri,t
(the first element of the state vector z); the market-adjusted 12-month beta, β short
(the second element), the
i,t
market-adjusted beta, β long
i,t , estimated using from 36 to 60 months of data, the market-adjusted log of the firm
book-to-market equity, lnBE/M Ei,t ; market-adjusted discretionary accruals, DACCRi,t ; and market-adjusted
equity issuance activity, EQISSU Ei,t . We find that point estimates of the coefficients on the lagged stock
return, log book-to-market equity, and discretionary accruals are economically large and have the same sign
as previous research.

Due to the severe data restrictions required in order to measure discretionary accruals,

23

We also estimated the VAR excluding four lags of stock returns and all the results reported in Table 9 are
essentially the same.

57

only the coefficient on discretionary accruals is statistically significant at conventional levels, with a t-statistic of
-2.41. The coefficient on book-to-market is close to being marginally statistically significant (t-statistic of 1.64).
However the point estimates for book-to-market as well as the lagged stock return are similar to estimates from
longer periods where we do not include discretionary accruals.

The ability of the equity issuance variable to

predict subsequent stock returns is subsumed by the other variables in the VAR.
The coefficients on lagged returns may help answer the question as to whether momentum profits reverse.
Though the coefficients on returns three to five years in the past are large and jointly similar to the coefficient
on the lagged stock return, in a test not reported we cannot reject the hypothesis that the coefficients are jointly
equal to zero. This result suggests that overall the reversal of momentum profits is not significant. One possible
explanation for this is as suggested by the corresponding theories, momentum may measure overreaction in some
cases and underreaction in others, therefore for the overall sample we do not find that momentum profits reverse
in a statistically significant way.
The remaining columns in Table document the predictability of each element in the VAR. Our measure of
risk, β short
, is forecastable using both lagged own values as well as lagged values of β long
i,t
i,t . Interestingly, firms
with relatively high levels of discretionary accruals have relatively lower betas over the subsequent year. As is
well-known, firms’ book-to-market ratios are persistent.

Other strong results include market-adjusted returns

being positively related to subsequent market-adjusted discretionary accruals.
The one-period predictability of market-adjusted stock returns in combination with the estimates relating
current characteristics to future characteristics generates a mispricing measure for each firm at each point in
time. Figure 1.A plots the histogram of these estimates. The average mispricing is about 1.64%. The standard
deviation is approximately 18.65%. As one might guess, the distribution of the estimates is right-skewed.
Table I.A: Firm-level VAR of risk and return
For a detailed description of the variables see the legend of Table 1. The standard errors reported in parentheses are corrected for clustering of the residual at the year level. Coefficients starred with one, two, and three
asterisks are statistically significant at the ten, five, and one percent level respectively.

58

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

rt

β 12
i,t

36−60
β i,t

B/M Ei,t

DACCRi,t

EQISSU Ei,tt

0.0241

-0.2905***

0.0019

0.0872***

-0.0031

-0.1542*

(0.0243)

(0.0100)

(0.0059)

(0.0283)

(0.0023)

(0.0264)

0.0056

0.0328**

0.0418***

-0.0057

0.0004

0.0051

(0.0050)

(0.0141)

(0.0065)

(0.0040)

(0.0016)

(0.0117)

-0.0119

0.4110***

0.8006***

0.0161

-0.0067**

-0.0715*

(0.0220)

(0.0447)

(0.0398)

(0.0198)

(0.0025)

(0.0411)

0.0365

-0.0347

-0.0213**

0.8746***

-0.0082***

-0.0556

(0.0223)

(0.0322)

(0.0100)

(0.0217)

(0.0017)

(0.0347)

-0.1021**

0.0042

-0.0016

-0.0081

0.0202***

0.6140***

(0.0423)

(0.0637)

(0.0199)

(0.0267)

(0.0293)

(0.0872)

-0.0021

0.0290

-0.0736***

0.1248***

-0.0064

0.5408***

(0.0081)

(0.0822)

(0.0260)

(0.0084)

(0.0021)

(0.0691)

-0.0030

0.0369

0.0127

0.0729***

0.0225***

0.2398***

(0.0221)

(0.0379)

(0.0153)

(0.0171)

(0.0052)

(0.0404)

-0.0166

0.0642

0.0255

0.0547**

0.0002

0.1722***

(0.0171)

(0.0494)

(0.0167)

(0.0203)

(0.0019)

(0.0152)

-0.0160

0.0053

0.0098

0.0286**

-0.0039

0.2392***

(0.0147)

(0.0240)

(0.0123)

(0.0106)

(0.0025)

(0.0293)

-0.0178

0.0571**

0.0025

0.0216*

-0.0100**

-0.2303***

(0.0153)

(0.0270)

(0.0123)

(0.0118)

(0.0036)

(0.0325)

Observations

45440

45440

45440

45440

45440

45440

R-squared

0.005

0.057

0.749

0.704

0.028

0.552

ri,t−1

β 12
i,t−1
36−60
β i,t−1

lnBE/M Ei,t−1

DACCRi,t−1

EQISSU Ei,t−1

ri,t−2

ri,t−3

ri,t−4

ri,t−5

59

Figure 1: Histogram of the mispricing metric
1400

number of firm-years per percent bin

1200

1000

800

600

400

200

0
-0.5

0

0.5

1

1.5

2
2.5
mispricing metric

3

3.5

4

4.5

