                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            PETRODOLLARS AND THE DIFFERENTIAL GROWTH
          PERFORMANCE OF INDUSTRIAL AND MIDDLE-INCOME
                     COUNTRIES IN THE l9TOs




                         Michael Bruno




                     Working Paper No. 1056




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138




                          January 1983




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                NBER Working Paper #1056
                                                      January 1983



         Petrodollars and the Differential Growth Performance of
           Industrial and Middle—Income Countries in the l970s




                                 ABSTRACT



The paper attempts to account for the differential growth performance of

the industrial countries and the middle income developing countries in the

1970s in terms of economic theory and some international cross-section

comparisons. The theory of adjustment to supply price shocks in an

individual country is coupled with the world equilibrium determination of

capital flows and interest rates. The supply shocks suffered by the

industrial countries during the first oil shock were compounded by

relative real wage rigidity and contractionary macro-economic response.

The middle-income countries, at least initially, showed greater real wage

flexibility and also followed a much more expansionary policy by borrowing

the equivalent of the large OPEC surplus at very low or negative real

interest rates. Their faster growth in output and productivity was

attained at higher current account deficits and more accelerated inflation.

     At the time of the second oil shock this differential strategy could

no longer be pursued by many of the middle income countries as the real cost

of foreign borrowing as well as that of domestic labour increased

substantially.




                                    Michael Bruno
                                    The Maurice Falk      Institute for
                                     Economic Research in Israel
                                    P. Naphtali Building
                                    Mount Scopus
                                    91905 Jerusalem
                                    Israel

                                    Tel.:   (02) 883130
PETRODOLLARS AND THE DIFFERENTIAL GROWTH PERFORMANCE

OF INDUSTRIAL AND MIDDLE-INCOME COUNTRIES IN THE 1970s




The limits to growth and structural change imposed by the ability to

borrow occupied much of the attention of the trade and development

literature in the great l960s development decade.1 A popular strand of

analysis was the two-gap approach to the current account and the associated

dual role of foreign borrowing. One aspect of foreign borrowing is the

financing of the ex ante gap between potential export proceeds and the

imports required as a major input into production. Alternatively it could

be looked upon as the foreign supplement to domestic savings in the finance

of long-term investment. In the one case the main role of foreign

borrowing is to smooth economic activity in the short-run; in the other

the emphasis is on accumulation and output growth in the medium and long

runs. In retrospect the actual input-output models within which these

trade-offs were measured may look somewhat rigid and simplistic but the

basic theoretical insight remains relevant and could be reformulated in

the language of a modern disequilibrium approach.

*   This   paper grew out of a project conducted at the National Bureau for
    Economic Research in Cambridge, Mass. and at the Falk Institute for
    Economic Research in Jerusalem. Thanks go to the Ford Foundation and
    to the National Science Foundation for financial support.    I am indebted
    to Jeffrey Sachs, Lance Taylor, and a referee for helpful comments on an
    earlier draft.    I am also grateful to Susanne Freund for editorial
    assistance.
1 Some of the earlier studies and a recent restatement of the issues are

    given in Chenery (1979).
                                  -2—

     A closely related branch of the trade and development literature

dealt with the extension of the static investment—savings balance into

an intertemporal, dynamic, view of the balance of payments, raising the

question of optimal borrowing and resource allocation over time. Oddly

enough, this model, which usually entailed free capital mobility, was first

applied in a world of highly restricted capital markets. Given the changed

world of capital mobility in the 1970s it is perhaps no wonder that the

intertemporal view of the balance of payments was trediscoveredi by open-

economy macro-economists whose own concern had for many years centred

                                                                   with
exclusively on short-run balance-of-payments adjustment problems

overriding emphasis on imports and exports rather than on long-term

saving and investment. Some of these ideas will be applied here to the

post-1973 world development scenario in which long-term structural change

and short-term macro—economic response have become very closely

intertwined.   I turn first to some aspects of the oil shock and the

recycling of petrodollars.

     In the early days after the first oil price shock the main issue

discussed by economists and policy makers was the difficulty that might

be posed by the recycling of petrodollars. This involved at least one

basic misconception and one error of judgement. The misconception

concerned the view of the contraction and unemployment in the industrial

countries as a pure demand-insufficiency phenomenon. If only OPEC

recycled their oil proceeds quickly enough into the commodity markets of

the industrial countries (ICs), so the conventional Keynesian wisdom said,

normal economic activity and growth would be resumed. It took some time

to be grasped that at least part of the contraction in the industrial

countries had to do with aggregate supply shifts due to a rise in input
                                    -3-

prices and that the oil and raw—material price increase could cause a

direct profit and productivity squeeze, which would be aggravated by a

failure of real wages to adjust downwards. Under such circumstances

excessive expansion of demand would accelerate inflation but would not

solve the unemployment problem.2 To that must be added the long-term

implications of the profit squeeze on capital accumulation and economic

growth.

       If recycling is not primarily a commodity market problem--what is

it? Obviously it has a capital flow side to it, whose consequences turned

out to be somewhat different from what was thought at the time. This is

where the error of judgement comes in. It was thought that the world

would have great difficulty in intermediating the enormous flows of

petrodollars through the financial system from OPEC to the large oil

users. The ease with which the system intermediated between the

unprecedented surpluses and deficits in balances of payments was truly

remarkable. Moreover, no one at the time thought that the OPEC surplus

would by and large be confined to the financing of an increasing debt of

the middle-income countries (MICs), instead of financing the deficit of

the large oil-importing industrial countries. One of the interesting by-

products in the aftermath of the first oil price shock was the sharp fall

in real interest rates in the major financial markets, a phenomenon that

can be analysed in terms of shifts in world investment and savings

schedules.3
2
    Unemployment, however, was not entirely classical in nature. Both in
    1975 and in 1981 a good part of it was conventional (partly self-imposed)

    Keynesian unemployment.
    For a lucid description of the main financial developments of the 1970s
    in the wake of the oil shocks, see World Development Reports 2982,
                                       -4-

        The   main object of the present paper relates to an apparent puzzle.

How is it that the industrial countries performed so miserably after the

 first oil shock while the middle-income oil importing countries seem to

have flourished? While GDP growth approximately halved it hardly fell

 for the MICs. Although part of the increased expenditure went into public

 consumption one of the most marked differences between the two groups of

countries is in the relative investment performance (to a considerable

degree    financed by external debt in the MICs) ? Taking the manufacturing
sector by itself, how does one explain the fact that the MICs accounted
for    one quarter of the increase in manufacturing output of the world's

market economies between 1970 and 1978 (double the base level of 1970)?

As the last column of Table 1 shows, this is of the same order of magnitude

as the marginal share of the United States or of Japan and Germany combined

and more than that of all other OECD countries taken together, all of which

 (with the exception of Japan) have reduced their average share in the total

during this period.

        The present paper attempts to account for this differential performance

in terms of the theory of adjustment to supply price shocks in an individual

country and the world equilibrium determination of capital flows and

interest rates. It is argued that the supply shocks suffered by the

industrial countries were compounded by relative real wage rigidity and

contractionary macro-economic response, while the middle-income countries,

at least initially, showed greaterreal wage flexibility and also followed

     Chapter 5. For a theoretical and empirical discussion of the
     implications for investments, savings, and current accounts of countries
     see Sachs (1981, 1982). Also relevant are the theoretical papers by
     Marion and Svensson (1981), Schmid (1980), and Dixit (1981).
3a   Detailed   data are given in Tables 3-5 below.
                                          - 5-

Table   1. Shares in World Manufacturing Output--Market Economies:
             1970 and 1978



                              Value added        Percent-           Percent of total
                              ($   billions,       age
                              1975 prices)       growth      1970        1978   Increment
                                                 1970-78                         1970-78
                              1970      1978

Low income countries          18.5      27.5       48.3       1.7         1.9     2.2
Middle income
  countries               127.6        229.3       79.7      12.0        15.6    25.1

Oil exporters                 30,9      54.8       77.3       2.9         3.7     5.9

Oil importers                 96.7     174.5       80.4       9.1        11.9    19.4

Industrial market
  econcmies               914.2 1206.5             31.9      86.1       82.2     72.1
United States             331.5        434.4       31.0      31.2        29.6    25.4

Germany and Japan         264.5        366.1      38.4       24.9       24.9     25.1
Other OECD                318.2       406.0        27.6      30.0       27.7     21.6

Capital-sur3,us oil                                           0.2        0.3      0.6
  exporters—                   2.4       4.8      100.0

 Total                  1O62.7 1463.1             37.9      100.0      100.0    100,0

—
a!
   Iraq,        .
            Kuwait, Libya, Saudi-Arabia, Qatar, and the United Arab Emirates.
Source: Estimated on the basis of World Development Report 1981,
           Table 6 (annex) corrected (by 5 percent on average) for
           missing data on basis of 1979 relative population levels,
           Table 1 (annex).
                                  -6

a much more expansionary policy by borrowing the equivalent of the large

OPEC surplus at very low or negative real interest rates. Faster growth

in output and productivity was attained at higher current account deficits

and more accelerated inflation.

     Section I describes a fairly standard two-period model of tradable

goods production, with raw materials. Particularly relevant to the present

topic is the combined welfare effect of a rise in raw-material prices on

a net importer (exporter) of materials and the effect of a fall in the

real interest rate on a net debtor (creditor). Section II extends the

model to a world with many countries, and states the general conditions

under which the world aggregate savings schedule would be upward sloping

and how a material (oil) price increase might shift it either way. The

possible reasons for the difference in real interest behaviour after the

two oil shocks are also discussed. Section III takes up the issue of

differential performance in terms of short-run real-wage flexibility and

the long-run response to the changing conditions in the capital market.

Section IV provides an international comparison of samples of OECD countries

and MICs. Comparative productivity, employment, and real wage data are

briefly analyzed. It is also shown that a clear trade-off existed between

the current account and the productivity performance, due to both long-

term investment finance and short-term demand smoothing. The middle-income

countries utilized this trade-off to their advantage in the period between

the two oil shocks. Towards the end of the l970s this differential

strategy could no longer be pursued as the real cost of borrowing as well

as that of labour increased substantially. Section V concludes with a few

open questions.
                                        -7-


I.     PRODUCTION, INVESTMENT., AND THE BALANCE OF PAYMENTS


Let us start off with a single-country, one-final-good, three-factor
framework which is the simplest model appropriate for the problem discussed

here. The country produces one tradable final good (of quantity Q and

price P) and uses a material (e.g., oil) input, N, whose relative

price (II = Pa/P)      is given, in production, Q = Q(L, K, N), together

with labour, L, and capital, K. Linear homogeneity and factor corn-

plementarity (positive cross derivatives) are assumed. The final good

can be traded (net exports =     X)     and is used for domestic private (C)

and public (G) consumption as well as for investment,             I, in future

capacity.

        A common procedure, to be followed here, is to confine the discussion

to a two-period horizon. Superscripts denote the period (t = 1, 2).

Period 1, the short run, is characterized by the fact that the capital

stock is fixed (K = K).      By period 2, the expected long run, the capital

stock may be augmented or contracted by the amount of investment or dis-

investment5 carried out in period 1        (K2 = K +   11).   Zero depreciation and

no investment is assumed in period 2, since K2 stays on for posterity.

'
     For recent closely related work see Sachs (1981), Svensson (1981),
     Razin (1980), and Bruno (l98lb).
     Under a raw material price shock capital may have to be adjusted down-
     wards. If one adds the realistic assumption of population growth or
     independent labour-augmenting technical progress the interpretation is
     that capital should be lower relative to its previous trend growth, not
     necessarily that it should actually be reduced in absolute size.
     Depreciation could also be introduced. These modifications are ignored
     here only to keep the analysis to its essentials. Negative investment
     should be interpreted in this light.
                                                           -8-

Labour supply in both periods is assumed to be given and labour-augmenting

technical change is allowed for by measuring labour in intensity units

(Lt).

        The commodity balance in the two periods takes the form


(1)                          Ct + Ct +           + x Qt
where t = 1, 2 and, by assumption, 12 =                            0.   All these magnitudes are

measured in real output units.

        While a single-sector specification for production of final goods is

maintained, the model is extended by introducing domestic production of

the raw material N.                  Its production will be assumed fixed at the quantity

Ut in both periods and will have the exogenous nominal market price Pt

(and relative price fl). Since the production of H is held fixed in

this country, the input of factors into it can be ignored and it is only

taken into account in the calculation of real income (yt) and the trade

balance (Ft). Total real income will be yt = Qt                              -   litNt   +
                                                                                             ]IHt
                                                                                                       =   Qt   +


Tt(Ht
         -   Nt).    It can be expressed as a value-added (or revenue) function:


(2)                          yt =    yt(Lt      Kt; fit Ut)


where ayt/aLt =              Qt/Lt            YtIKt = Qt/aKt,            yt111t = Ut         -
                                                                                                 Nt,       and

Yt/IIt =      lit.
                n
        Note that (Ht - Nt)                   is net exports of the material (negative for

a net importer). The trade balance in traded-goods units                                 (Ft) can be

written as


(3)                          Ft =    X    +   Itt(Ht   -   Nt)
                                 =Xt+Yt_Qt=St -                   It
where S =           \t   -   t   -   Ct   =   domestic      savings.
                                        -9-

        Assume now that the country's residents are free to borrow or lend

between the two periods at a given interest factor R or (real) rate of

interest (R - 1)      (this particular 'small-economy' assumption will be

relaxed later). This implies the intertemporal borrowing or lending

constraint


(4)                 F1 +p2/R=O

        Another way of stating this equation is to say, for the case of bor—

rowing, that the second periodts current account surplus, F2 + (R -

which consists of the trade surplus corrected for net interest payments,

must exactly match first period's deficit, -F'.

        Using equation (3), the intertemporal borrowing constraint can

alternatively be stated as a household budget constraint,


(5)                 C' + C2/R = Y1 + Y2/R — T -    I'   =



where    T = G' + G2/R =   total   government budget (taxes).

      This again states the well-known property that the present value of

the consumption flow must equal the present value of the income stream

minus the change in physical wealth, which is net household wealth, .

Alternatively,   if firm investment is financed by selling financial assets

to households (which must bear the same rate of interest, R -    1),
equation (5) states that the total consumption flow of households plus

total incremental investment in the asset must equal total income accruing

to households.



Firm behaviour


Before returning to household behaviour let us digress for a moment to
                                                - 10   -




consider   the firm's investment behaviour. It is assumed, along with much

of the optimum investment literature, that firms in the Q industry choose

i1 so as to maximize their discounted cash flow:


[Q'(K, L', N') -   W'L'   -
                              llN']    -   Ii    +   [(Q2(K   +   K1, L2, N2) - W2L2   llN2]/R


subject to the labour and production constraints.

      Such intertemporal optimization leads to two kinds of conditions. One

is the usual set of static first-order conditions for the marginal products

of the two variable factors in each period separately,


                   Qt/Lt = wt               (product       wage)
(6)
                   Qt/Nt =       lit

      The second, intertemporal, condition comes from maximization with

respect to investment in the first period, i.e., choice of the capital

stock K      in the second period. This gives


(7)                Q2/3K2 = R,              I'         L2K(Tl, R) - K,


where K is the capital-labour ratio at relative prices l[ and R.

      What (7) implies is that while the marginal product of capital may

shift in the short run (fixed capital), in the long run (second period) the

capital stock must be adjusted6 so that its marginal product equals the

long-run external interest factor, R. With constant returns to scale the

product wage in period 2 (W2) is thus also determined exogenously. We



6 The present analysis amounts to assuming investment behaviour under
 perfect foresight (or rational expectations), without having to introduce
  costs of adjustment (or Tobin's q) explicitly, since the adjustment
  takes place in one period.
                                            — 11 —



shall   make considerable use of these simplifying properties.

       Having stated the equilibriun conditions for firm behaviour, one can

now deduce some simple properties of the net wealth (2) concept intro-

duced in equation (5). Using (2) and (5) and the fact that K2 = K                                   +   i1

one can write

                     =         + Y2/R   -   T   -   I'
(5')
                     =                      K, Ht, Lt; Ji)
                          c1(ll, ri1, R,

       For optimum investment (7) we have: Q =c(ll, fl2, R, K, Ht, Lt)

which is net wealth optimized with respect to investment. Differentiating

with respect to I, one gets Q/I' =                       [Y2/K2]/R              - 1   =   0.   Therefore,

2 and 2* must have the same response to the exogenous variables.

       The response of net wealth to changes in the price of the raw

material is


                   Q*/fll =
                           n
                                            = Y'/ll1       = H1       -   N1
(8)
                               =            = (aY2/rI)/R          =       (H2    -
                                                                                      N2)/R


       This is a simple and intuitively plausible result. It says that an

increase in the price of raw materials in either period increases or

decreases net wealth by the net export of the material input (H -                                 N),
properly discounted. A net exporter gains in net wealth and a net

importer loses. The welfare implications of such changes and responses

to changes in R will be discussed later. Letus first turn toconsumption

and savings behaviour.



Household   consumption   and savings behaviour


Suppose now that household behaviour can be represented as maximization,
                                                 - 12   —




by a representative household, of a concave intertemporal utility function
U(C', C2) subject to given net wealth, .                        The consumption goods of the

two periods are assumed to be gross substitutes (U,2 ? 0), implying that

both consumption goods are normal with respect to increases in wealth.

The consumption function is


(9)                  Ct =   Ct(2,   R)



       As is well known from Fisherian theory, an increase in the rate of

interest will in general lead to ambiguous effects on present consumption

since the substitution and wealth effects of an interest-rate change work

in opposite directions. Only for a net borrower (or initial balance) can

we make unambiguous statements. This also applies to the present model.

       Differentiating equation (5) and the first-order condition for utility

maximization (u, = Ru2,         where u =               U/C')     with respect to R, one

gets


(10)                 C'/R =     —u2/A
                                             +   (C'/l)F'/R
where A is the (positive) Hessian determinant of U and the related

first term in (10) is the pure compensated substitution effect. Thus

         =   -C'/R   > 0    if F'        0.

       Since investment is negatively related to the rate of interest it

follows that aF'/R =         S1/R        -
                                             I'/3R >        0   for F'   0. Thus a net

borrower will borrow more (less) when the interest rate falls (rises).



Welfare analysis

One can summarize the effects of changes in relative prices by looking at

the components of welfare change in terms of the utility function.
                                                — 12a—



       Again making use of equation (5) and the first-order condition, and

remembering that changes in j1 do not affect the value of ,                          we get


                     dU =               +           =
                                u1dC'       u2dC2

                                Ru2(dC' + dC2/R)         Ru2(dY' + dY2/R +
                                                                             c        dR)

                           =
                                u2(R dY' + dY2 + F'dR)

Thus one can write
                                                                                 2
                                              H2 - N2
(11)       dU/u1 =   (H'    -
                                 N')dll'    +         d112 +     dR + fl'dH' +       dH

As one would expect, the welfare indicator depends on the respective raw-

material price changes weighted by the self-sufficiency measurefor each

period. The third term in (11) stands for the welfare effect of a change

in the interest rate (i.e., the rate of intertemporal substitution). A

net debtor gains while a net creditor loses from a fall in R (and

conversely for an increase in R).

       This finding suggests an interesting application to the effect of

the oil price shock on a net importer who also happens to be a net debtor

in the world capital market, the situation of a large number of LDCs. It

may very well be that after the first oil shock, the welfare gain from

the fall in the real interest rate could in some ofthese countries have

compensated for or even outweighed the direct loss due to the rise in real

oil prices. We return to this topic below.




 It is a straightforward extension of the model to assume that at the
 beginning of period 1 there is a net asset endowment B° (negative for
 net debt). We ilow have B° + F1 = -F2/R                   and therefore total assets
  (B° + F') must replace F' in equation (11).
                                                     - 13     -




II.    DETERMINATION OF THE REAL INTEREST RATE                             IN A MULTI-COUNTRY MODEL


The model will now be extended to a world with many countries; each of

them has the same basic technology as the single economy described in the

preceding section, but different initial factor endowments are allowed.

We preserve the simplicity of a single final tradable good and an exogenous

relative price, 11n' confronting all countries. However, one country

(the OPEC country, subscript 0), which is a net exporter of the material

input, is singled out, while all other countries (1 = 1, 2, .                               .., m)    are

net importers. The output of the raw material by all other countries is
                                                t   -t
assumed exogenously fixed (H =                               while that of country 0 will be
                                                    H)
endogenously determined by world demand given the fixed relative price,
 t
       which is       assumed to be set by country 0. We thus have:


(12)                       H -        >    0,       1-Ii -
                                                             N    <   0,       Z(H - N)    =   0


where t = 1,          2;   i =   1,   2,    .   .., m.
       In aggregating real income over all countries, using the world balance

equation (12) for the material, we find that world income (Y) equals

world production of final goods (Q) and the world-market balance of

final goods can be written as


(13)

               m
where C =         E    C., etc.
              1=0
       While the exogeneity of the real price of oil is kept for simplicity

(see further comment in Section V), the real rate of interest now becomes

endogenous. It will be assumed that R is determined by the world

equilibrium of savings supply and investment demand in the first period.
                                                   - 14       -



The main object of this section is thus to consider the factors determining

the world savings and investment schedules. Consider first aggregate

investment demand which is obtained by aggregating the investment function

of the individual countries (we continue to ignore investment in the

production of H). Assuming constant returns to scale and summing 11( )

from (7) over countries, world investment can be written as

                                   m
                                                                       - K'
(14)                   w
                           =
                               .
                               i= a
                                        i
                                       1.1 = K2(112
                                                   n'    R)       L2
                                                                   w      w'

where L2 is second period's world labour input (in intensity units) into

final goods production.

       Figure 1 (below) shows the world investment schedule as a downward sloping

curve in         R]        space. An increase in the expected cost of oil or in

the capital stock will shift the I curve down and to the left.

       The world savings schedule raises more ambiguities. Consider aggregate

savings as the difference between world income and consumption. Assume

first that labour markets clear. Then



                      S1 =
                               Q,(ll')
                                            -
                                                C{It',   fl2, H(ll), H2(ll), R] -
(15)
                               S'(ll',
                                w   n
                                       112,
                                         n        R)



       From the earlier analysis we know that gross output in each country

in the first period depends only on the first-period relative price and on

the given quantities of labour and capital (here omitted). Private

consumption in each country depends on R and on wealth which in turn

varies with the various relative prices. We have also inserted                      to

express the indirect dependence of OPEC consumption on its own price

through the real income effect on total oil revenues. The C function
              / I I
          I       II
                 II
                       I



    / I
0
                                           - 16 -


is   where the aggregation ambiguities come in, so it will be discussed in

greater detail.

       Consider first the aggregate response Of C (and of S,) to changes

in the rate of interest. Aggregating (10) over countries, we can write


                            =
(16)                             -BC/R     uz1/Ai +


       The first term on the right-hand side of (16) is positive, as in the

single-country case. For the second term we know that the aggregate current
                                                   m
account balance for the whole world must be zero ( Z F = 0). The second
                                                                     1=0
summation is the world aggregate propensity to consume out of wealth. Let

us divide the countries into net debtors (F < 0)                        and net creditors

(F >     0).   A simple proposition follows:

World savings will be positively related to the rate of interest if                     the
deficit-weighted      marginal propensity to consume of the                net debtors is

greater    thcm (or equal to) thc surplus-weighted marginal propensity to
consume of the net       creditors.
       __..   __1 1iy uiie L IflIJJ.
       11ILpiLiLdi          -: -, _-__ 1     __             ——.  u
                                                             .. 11-4-             ÷h
income    countries for which one would assume that MPCs tend to be higher
than in countries with higher levels of income. It thus makes sense to
assume that the world savings schedule is upward sloping (or flat)

       The dependence on input price changes is more problematic. Consider

the first-period price first. We have


(17)            -C/ll =          E(C/1)(N         -
                                                      Hi)    +
                                                                 (aC/0)(-nH'/an)
       The second term in (17) is the negative real income effect on OPEC

consumption coming from the fall in demand for                          as fl is raised.

For the first term we apply an argument very similar to the one underlying
                                                      - 17     —




(16), i.e., the first term is E(C/1)(N - H)                                           -   (C'/)(H'          -
                                                                                                                 N'),

where (N - H)            =
                               H
                                    -
                                         N. Thus, -C/ll > 0 if                                         <



                                         -
l/(H -                                         Hi).

        Thus we have the proposition:

Aggregate world consumption falls with an increase in the real price of

oil   if the marginal propensity to consume of the ret oil ecporter(s) is
less than the weighted marginal propensity to consume of the net importers.
        While the condition may have held immediately after the oil price
shock of 1973-74, it can at best be assumed to have been temporary, as

OPEC countries may have taken time to adjust consumption (the absence of

infrastructure may have held up imports, etc.). Even if it holds, however,

there is another force working in the opposite direction, that is, current

oil prices reduce real income and output (Q). A temporary price

increase may thus move savings either way. This argument does not hold

for an anticipated price increase (II) which will affect C but not

Q'.
                                                                                                =
        Now consider a permanent increase in price (dUn =                                 dIt       dI[).       Suppose

        N =     - N1    (t =   1,       2) .     Repeating the derivation of (17) for II,
                                                           m
and using the fact that C1/T[1 =         w n           .
                                                               (H.1 -       N.)
                                                                             1
                                                                                  + II'BH'/fl1 and
                                                                                     n o n
                                                       1=0

           + 1/RC/1 =          1        (for all i) we eventually get



(17')                  R(BS/ll) =                E(C/1              -
                                                                            C/a1)(H1
                                                                                          -   N.)

                        +                                               -
                                                - 18   -



The first term in (17') will be positive (or zero) if Ct/10 >

(for OPEC) and                    ?              for all oil importers (i =

The second term in (17') represents net savings of OPEC from the real

income effect of a change in 1I in both periods; it will be positive if

the fall in the demand for H is sufficiently smaller than the fall in

the demand for H'           (note that the demand for the material will contract
                        0

in period 1 because the reduced capital input bears part of the adjustment

to higher material prices in that period).

       So far we have assumed full wage flexibility in face of an oil

shock. To the extent that real wages are sticky in at least some oil

importing countries, Q,               now dependent on real wages in different

countries, will fall by more, with a further depressing effect on aggregate

savings.

      The analysis has been conducted all along under the assumption that

producers always operate on their supply schedule and equate prices to

marginal costs. There is good reason to suggest that the contractionary

policies pursued by the major industrial countries after the first oil

shock (1975-76) and again in 1980-81 have temporarily placed some of them

in a short-term Keynesian disequilibrium (excess supply) situation. The

detailed analysis of savings and investment determination in a demand-

constrained situation will not be given here (for additional discussion

see Bruno and Sachs, 1979). For the present purpose suffice it to state

that contractionary demand policies in response to an input price shock

may further reduce aggregate savings along with aggregate output.8

      Figure 1 depicts one case in which the savings schedule shifts to the

8 A fall in G will increase savings but the resulting contraction in Q
 may more than offset it.
                                                 - 19       -



left   and there is also a substantial shift in the investment schedule.

Equilibrium moves from A to At and there is a drop in R from R°                              to

R' (in the case shown here both S and I also fall). When the

temporary effect on S wears off and the S curve shifts back R will

gradually increase. This may correspond to the developments in the world

capital market in the years immediately after the first oil crisis.

       The alternative case depicted in Figure 1 is one in which the output-

depressing effect dominates and S shifts to the right (to S't). Suppose

the investment schedule shifts to the left by less (to I") after an oil

shock. This might correspond to the case in which an oil price increase

is perceived to be temporary or when there are other long-run expansionary

effects on I. A movement from A to A't will involve an increase in

R after an oil shock rather than a decrease.

       These possibilities can be summarized in analytical form. For a

permanent change in ll the equilibrium interest rate has to satisfy


(18)                         R) =
                                          S(ll,       R)



It follows that9

                             as            alw             asw   aiw
(19)
                   BR    =        w   -           .
                                                           —+
                     n                                      n     n

       The numerator in (19) is positive while the denominator is positive

or negative according as BS/Bll                       (_BIw/Bfln) >    0.   Thus R will be

expected to fall whenever world savings shift up with fl or S shifts

down by less than I. However, for R to rise in the wake of an oil

price increase SW must shift down by more than

   The partial derivative B5/Bll should be interpreted as comprising
   the effects of both aggregate supply and aggregate demand shifts.
                                  - 20   -



     The two cases just described may be relevant for an explanation of

the differences in real-interest behaviour after the two oil shocks. As

is well-known, one of the concomitants of the first supply shock (1973-74)

was a sharp reduction in real interest rates in the financial markets of

most industrial countries. Very small or negative rates were recorded

throughout 1974-77. As noted by Sachs (1981) and others, this drop can

mainly be attributed to the sharp fall in investments in the industrial

countries that followed the profit squeeze. While savings also contracted

substantially during 1974-75 in the industrial countries, it seems that

the temporary increase in OPEC savings more than compensated for the fall in

IC savings, so that the representation of the movement from point A to

A' in Figure 1 seems pertinent. The combined surplus of OPEC countries

and the ICs was matched by a rising deficit in the oil-importing countries,

financed to an increasing degree by private commercial loans which, in

turn, were funded by the recycling of petrodollars. Between 1972 and 1978

the flow of nonconcessional finance to LDCs more than quadrupled, from $13

billion to $56.1 billion at current prices. By 1978 this formed over 50

percent of total external finance in the oil-importing and over 60 percent

in the oil-exporting MICs (see World Bank, 1981, p. 53, Figure 5.3). All

of this increase was obtained at zero or negative real interest rates.

     The OPEC surplus fell substantially between 1974 and 1978, before the

next oil shock set in. On the eve of the second shock (1978), the real

interest rates and relative current-account positions of the various country

groups were of roughly the same order of magnitude as in 1973. Yet the

second shock seems to have been followed by quite different developments

in the world capital market. By 1980 real rates had in most markets

reached high positive values above their pre-1973 levels, the United States
                                   - 21   —




being a temporary exception.1° A glance at relative current account
developments may suggest part of the answer. This time round the ICs

were running large and persistent deficits (unlike with the first oil

shock, when their combined deficit was small and quickly disappeared) and

so were the oil exporting MICs (which in 1974 were running surpluses).

    While a full answer to the question must await more detailed analysis

one may at least speculate that there has been a change in post-shock

investment behaviour. Figure 2 compares the combined quarterly investment

and savings developments of the three large industrial countries (United

States, Japan, and Germany) before and after the two oil shocks. The most

marked difference between the top and bottom parts of the figure seems to

lie in the much more moderate fall in investment immediately after the

shock and a very slight downward movement later on. While the three

countries represent only close to half the IC group, and the figures

represent ex-post rather than ex—cznte movements, they may be indicative

of the aggregate shifts. It is highly likely that the aggregate world

investment schedule (see Figure 1) shifted down by much less this time,

with the savings schedule possibly shifting down by more, especially with

the sharp 1980-81 contraction in the major industrial countries (and a

higher marginal propensity to consume in OPEC).

     It is an open question, and one that is not directly relevant to our

present discussion, why investments have responded more moderately after

the second shock. The fall in investments after 1973 may in part have



10 E.g., the 90-day bill rate for the United States implied negative real
   rates between the second quarter of 1979 and the third quarter of 1980
   (this was not so in Germany and Japan). Only then did the U.S. real
   rate rise to positive levels.
                                       - 22 -



Figure 2. Savings and Investment Under Two Oil Shocks--United
            States, Germany, and Japan (billions of 1975 dollars)



          III        I                     I                                I
                    '79                    '80                             '81
          1978
                                       1I                ——
                                                                  I    I             I




  700 -


                                                     1979-81




 600 —
                                                                                         I
                                                                                         S




                  1973-75                       \                                        S
 500 —
                                                 \                                       I

                                                                      ———




    F"                                      I                 I

           II             I                          I                           I
          1973            '74                    '75                             '76


 Source: OECD, Quarterly        National Accounts Statistics.
                                   - 23   -




been compensation for an excessive earlier boom. The profit squeeze may
have been smaller this time, owing to a more moderate rise in oil and raw-

material prices or a more flexible downward real wage adjustment.      Another

reason could be perception of the second shock as a temporary (in terms of

our previous analysis the eec—ante rise in rt may have been perceived as

less than that of TI'). Also, investment in energy-replacing equipment

may have become a more important factor than in 1974.




III.   THE DIFFERENTIAL RESPONSE OF ICs AND MICs


We can now go back to consider some additional aspects of the differential

response of individual countries to the combination of a raw-material

price shock and the concomitant change in real interest rates. We shall

confine ourselves here to the aftermath of the first oil and raw-material

price shock. It is too early to say anything definite about the more

recent developments, and even the earlier episode still needs to be

analysed in greater detail than can be done here.

       The question to which we now return is how to account for the

different responses of the ICs and the MIC5 to a similar exogenous shock.

To keep the analysis as simple as possible and also stay within the

framework discussed earlier, let us assume that production in both types

of country uses the same technology in terms of the basic production

 function Q = Q(L, K, N), but that they might differ in the (intensity

 units) x (employment) decomposition of the labour input (L)     and in its

 rate of growth. An IC (subscript a) would initially have more intensity

 units represented by each employed person than a MIC (subscript m),

 while the time rate of change of total Lm supplied exogenously would
                                   - 24   -



be higher than that of La on account of faster population growth and

faster labour-augmenting technical progress (being further away from the

technology frontier).

      As long as we confine ourselves to the measurement of labour in

intensity units, the factor-price frontier for both types of country will

be the same. The curve q in [R, W] space (see Figure 3) is drawn for

a given initial relative price of the raw material             Suppose the

IC is initially producing at the point Aa on the FPF, being in

equilibrium at the real rate of interest (= rate of return on capital),

R°, and paying a real wage        per (intensity) unit of labour. The

slope of the tangent TS to the FPF at the point Aa measures the

capital-labour ratio (Ka/La = Ka) and the intercept OT measures

real income per unit of labour (Ya/La) For simplicitly assume that

the initial rate of return to capital in the IC is also the world rate of

interest on borrowing. It is also realistically assumed that a MIC

initially operates with a rate of return to capital above R°, either

because it does not have free access to the relevant private capital

market or because its domestic capital market is segmented and there is

a high risk premium. The MIC thus produces at the point Am with rate

of return R > R°, real wage W m< W°, capital-labour ratio K /L <
          m                                                       mm
K a/La,   and real income per unit of labour Y IL < Y IL •12
                                              mm a a
      Consider now a permanent shock to the relative price, 11n• This


   The use of the factor-price frontier for both theory and empirical
   estimation is discussed in greater detail in Bruno (l981a).
12 This could be represented by a tangent to FPF at Am with slope and
   W intercept less than those of TS. Note that per employed person
   (instead of units of labour) the initial difference in K/L and Y/L
   between ICs and MICs would be much larger.
               - 25 -




          Figure 3.

w
 T




T'




                        Aa


                              Am
WI




0    R,   R'        R°       Rm    SR
                                    - 26   -



will   show as an inward contraction of the FPF from     to ',       like   the

effect of technical regress. The way in which the FPF contracts depends

on the general specification of the production function. As long as one

considers a general increase in raw-material prices, the assumption of

weak separability is probably empirically valid and it is made here,13

i.e., it is assumed that Q = Q[N; V(K, L)]. In this case the FPF shifts

inward homothetically and the tangent at Ca on the new FPF would be

parallel to IS. In other words, Ca represents the new short-run, full-

employment, full-capacity equilibrium point for the IC, and Cm fulfils

the same role for the MIC.

       The immediate response of the two economies to the same exogenous

price shock is probably different. Consider the extreme case in which

real wages are rigid in the IC and fully flexible in the MIC. In that

case the IC moves from Aa to B, there is a sharp profit squeeze (with

quasi-rents falling from R° to Rh), and unemployment emerges (at B

the capital-labour ratio is higher than at Aa)•' In the MIC, on the

other hand, the movement is from Am to Cm as real wages adjust

downward and employment need not fall (partial empirical evidence is

discussed below).

       One can also tell a short-run story about differential demand

management in the two types of country. A contractionary fiscal or

monetary policy may push the IC further away from $' and cause an even



  If one considers only the oil input, it might be more valid to assume
  something closer to fixed proportions between N and K.        In that case

  '     would be parallel to .    See discussion in Bruno (l98la).
1'. This would not be so under the alternative assumption, when FPF moves
  to a position parallel to the original one.
                                     - 27   —




tighter   profit squeeze.'5 This undoubtedly characterized most ICs after

1973 but did not happen in the typical MIC. As will be shown below, the

latter pursued expansionary policies and were willing and able to incur

higher current-account deficits and higher rates of inflation, an option

not pursued by the major industrial countries. In any case, even if real

wages were temporarily rigid in many ICs, unemployment helped to reduce

real wages with varying lags. In terms of Figure 3 the implication of IC

short-run adjustment is a gradual movement along q' from B towards Ca•

      The long-run behaviour depends, as we have seen, on what happens to

the real rate of interest. Suppose it falls from R° to Rt. In that case

a new long-run equilibrium for the ICwould be at the point E, at which

the capital-labour ratio is lower than at Ca (or Aa)• In our simplified

two-period model this move will take place in one period. In a more

realistic model it will be a gradual development. One would thus observe

a slowdown in capital accumulation (Ka/La falls but since La goes on

rising, Ka need not fall but investment will). Note that the new long-

run equilibrium need not lie to the right of Ca but could be at a point

such as F, if R'        falls enough. In the latter case real wages (relative

to productivity trend) might first fall in response to unemployment and

then rise again as the capital-labour ratio adjusts upwards. This is less

likely to have actually happened, especially since the sharp fall in real

interest rates did not last very long.

'   Formally,   the argument is that firms will no longer be on their supply
    curves. The curve '       remains the relevant frontier for the marginal
    product of labour and capital but not for actual rates of return. In
    such a disequilibrium situation prices are above marginal costs, so
    that the actual FPF would be shifted further inwards, homothetically,
    as is illustrated by, say, the curve
                                    — 28 —



     The long- or medium-run story may again be different for the MICs.

The rate of return at C      is higher than the newly established rate of

interest, R', and the extended private capital market has now become

fully accessible to MICs. There is an incentive to borrow, invest, and

increase the capital-labour ratio towards its long-run level at E. The

movement along the FPF is from Cm to E. In the process the real wage

may or may not rise above its original level Wm (it will obviously

rise per employed pereon).

     The analysis is thus consistent with a marked difference in the

effect of the same exogenous shocks on the two groups of countries.'6

Clearly there was also a third group of countries. A net importing

country that does not have access to the capital market or that does not

have the industry base to which the private loans could be channeled would

obviously not enjoy the full benefits of recycling and would suffer the

terms-of-trade loss due to rising oil and raw-material prices. This

probably happened in most of the lower income LDCs in the 1970s. However,

quite a few of the MICs may have benefitted, at least temporarily, from

the combination of events after the first oil shock.17




16 If, as is likely, for the aggregate economy the shock itself was
    smaller for a MIC than for an IC (see next section), the relevant FPF
    a fortiori shifts inwards by less, adding another component to the
    difference in response between countries.
'   This   does not seem to have happened after the second shock. An
    increasing number of MICs ran into trouble at the end of the 1970s
    (e.g., Korea, Brazil, Mexico). This is probably not unconnected with
    the sharply rising cost of foreign borrowing and the rising real cost
    of labour.
                                  - 29   -




IV. COMPARATIVE EMPIRrCAL EVIDENCE


The difference in aggregate performance of the two types of country in

the 1970s will first be illustrated by an international comparison of 38

countries, 19 OECD countries and 19 MICs. While the OECD group covers

almost all the industrial market economies, the MICs comprise only about

two thirds, in terms of population, of the class of middle-income oil

importers (as defined in World Development Report 1981). Aggregate

employment data could be found for only 10 of these, comprising 43 per-

cent of the population of all MICs. Table 2 accordingly gives averages

for both subgroups of MICs.'8

     Note the group differences in average growth performance, comparing

pre-1973 (period I, 1960-73) and post-1973 (period II, 1973-80). The

growth of both GDP and GDP per employed person slowed down sharply in the

OECD group. The MICs hardly slowed down in terms of total GDP growth and

they may on average have improved their labour-productivity performance.

Growth was by no means even during the subperiod in either group of

countries. Table 3 gives more detail for a subsample of countries.

Immediately after the first shock (1973-75) the difference between the

groups was even sharper, with only partial recovery for OECD countries in

1975-78, while most MICs represented here grew faster during the period.

The second shock (1978-80) was followed by a slump in both groups, again

more pronounced in OECD countries. All countries seem to show a close

relationship between GDP growth and labour-productivity growth, a point

to which we shall return later.


18 Below (Table 5) we also give data of manufacturing employment for a
   group of 17 MICs.
                                       - 30    -



Table 2. Annual Average Rate of Change of Selected              Variable8,"
            by Country   Group: 1960-73 and 1973-80k'




                           19 OECD countries'        10 MICs'             19 MICs'

                           1960-73   1973-80       1960-73   1973-80   1960-73   1973-80

1. Gross domestic
       product                4.7     2.6            6.7      6.0       6.6
                                                                        3.6
                                                                                  6.3
                                                                                  3.4
                              1.8     2.2            &.9      3.8
2.                            1.2     0.7            4.0        2.9       -          -
      Employment
3..   GDP per employed                                                               -
       person                 3.6     2.0            2.7        3.0       -
4.    Gross investment        6.4     0.4            8.9      6.6       9.7       8].

5.    Public consumption      4.8     2.3            9.9        6.6     8.4        7.7

6.    Import/export
                             -0.5     1.5           -0.5      -0.5      0.2        0.5
       prices
7.    Consumer prices         4.7     10.8           6.3      18.5      7.2       19.5
                              1.8      2.9           3.8        9.0      4.8       9.4

8.    Current-account
       deficit/GDP            1.5     0.9            3.9        8.0     0.3       3.6
                              1.5     2.0            '+.6       4.6      3.0       3.2


      Small numerals are mean standard deviation.
      Line 8, 1965-73 for first period, 1973-79 for some MIC countries in
      second period.
      Comprising all OECD countries with the exclusion of Greece, Iceland,

      Luxembourg, Portugal and Turkey.
      See list in Table 3.
      As above, with the addition of: Ivory Coast, Morocco, Malaysia, Pakistan,
      Thailand, Greece, Turkey, Brazil, and Colombia.

Source: Line 1. For OECD: Divisia index based on OECD accounts.
            Lines 4 through 6, 8: OECD, National Income A.'counte, and
            IBRD World Tables (for LDC).
            Line 7: IMF, International Financial Stcztietics.
                                    - 31     -




Tü.ble 3. Growth Rate of Gross Domestic Product (Q) and Gross Domestic
          Product per Employed Person (Q/L)., in Nine Major OECD Countries
          and Ten MICs: 1966-80
                                    (annual average rate of change, percent)

                      1966-73          1973-75            1975-78         1978—80

                      Q       Q/L      Q          Q/L    Q     Q/L       Q     Q/L

Nine major OECD countries-'
United States        3.4      1.3    -0.8        -1.0    5.1    1.4      1.3   -0.2
United Kingdom       3.3      3.4    -0.8        -0.9    2.7    2.8     -0.0    0.5
Belgium              5.2      4.4      1.2        1.2    3.2    3.5      2.4    1.9
France               5.5      4.7      1.7        1.9    4.0    3.3      2.3    2.2
Germany              4.5      4.6    -0.7         2.1    3.8    3.9     3.2     2.0
Italy                5.3      5.3     0.2        -1.2    3.5    2.7     4.4     3.1
Sweden               3.6      3.0     3.3         0.9    0.2   -0.3      2.8    1.3
Canada               5.3      2.5     2.3        -0.6    4.1    1.6      1.5   -1.8
Japan                9.7      8.3     0.6         1.0    5.2    4.0     4.9     3.7
  Mean               5.1      4.2     0.8         0.4    3.5    2.5     2.5    1.4
Ten MICs-"
Kenya                6.9      2.7     5.2         1.4    7.6    3.8      2.5     -
Mauritius*           3.7   -0.9       4.8         0.1    9.5    4.6     -1.4   -0.9
Korea*              10.1      6.4     8.2         5.0   11.7    7.0      1.7   0.9

Philippines          5.6        -     6.0         3.3    6.6        -   5.9         —



Singapore*          12.9        -     5.2         3.1    8.0    3.1     9.8    3.8

Yugoslavia*          5.7      2.9     7.6         2.2    7.4    3.1     4.0     0.3

Syria                6.4     -       25.3        20.2    4.7    1.2      7.1     -
Zambia*              3.2   -0.3       2.1        -0.6    0.5    2.8     -3.0   -5.2
Egypt                3.1      1.1     5.7         3.0   10.3     -       6.9     -
Israel*              9.6      6.1     4.2         3.3    2.2   -0.7      1.6   -0.2
  Mean               6.7      —       7.4         —      6.9    —       3.5     —


  Mean*              7.5      2.4     5.4         2.2    6.6    3.3      2.1   -0.2

   Ten smaller countries not shown here are: Australia, Austria, Denmark,
   Finland, Ireland, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Spain, Switzerland.
   Asterisk denotes the subsample of six countries for which all observa-
   tions are available.
                                    - 32   —




     Coming back to Table 2, note the important related intergroup difference

in the variability of output growth. For the OECD countries the mean

standard deviation of annual growth rose from fast growth (period I) to

slow growth (period II). For the MICs the opposite was true. The coef-

ficient of variation rose from less than 0.5 in OECD to 0.8 after 1973,

while for the nineteen MICs it fell from 0.7 to 0.6. This difference is in

turn related to differential demand management (the data for growth in public

consumption and gross investment in the samples are also given in Table 2).

     The terms of trade on average deteriorated in the OECD group (relative

import/export prices fell by an average of 0.5 percent in period I and rose

by 1.5 percent in period II), while they hardly changed for the MICs (slight

deterioration for the entire group of 19, slight improvement for the sub-

           1 9 This difference probably stems from exports of primary commodi-
sample).

ties which were (and still are) sizeable in most MICs.

     The trade-off for the more expansionary stance of the MICs is

indicated in the lower part of Table 2. The acceleration of inflation

was greater (and the coefficient of variation was higher). A more

pronounced difference, which brings us back to the main topic of this

paper, is the sizeable increase in the relative foreign-resource gap of

the MICs shown by the rise in the real current-account deficit relative

to GDP (with more or less constant average variability), while the OECD

on average reduced an already small resource gap.20

19 There is reason to think that the average difference in the magnitude
   of the input price shock was similar for manufacturing in the two groups
   but we have no data for the MICs.

20 There was some difference between large and small industrial countries,
   the smaller tending to borrow more. For the 9 major OECD countries the
   change in percentage gap was from 0.5 (±1.0) to -0.4 (±1.3); for the
   remaining, smaller 10 the change was from 2.3 (±1.9) to 2.0 (±2.7).
                                             - 33   -




        Regression of the difference in labour productivity growth between
the two periods, 60-73 and 73-80 [A(r -                         on the difference in terms-

of-trade change [L( -           )J     and   in the growth of public expenditures

(i) gives the following equation, based on 29 country observations,



(i)         t('' -   = -0.460 -      O.309A(        -       +    O.l33A               (R2 = 0.22)
                        0•'+67       0.136                       0.080



where small numerals are standard errors. The ten smaller MICs on average

show a positive deviation of 1.25 percentage points from this regression

(and the nineteen OECD countries, a negative deviation of 0.66, on

average). This could be accounted for by the differential growth in the

capital-labour ratio, a variable missing from the regression owing to lack

of data. The importance of demand management and of differential output

variability can alternatively be seen in the cross-section regression (for

the    same 29 countries) of employment increments or input price                              -
on    total demand acceleration () and the change in output variability



(ii)                 = 0.065 - 0.O58AQ          -       +   O.223        +
                       0,'+13    0.061                      0.091            0.211


                                                                                     (R2   = 0.26).


The fact that the coefficient of output is substantially less than unity

indicates the positive relationship between output and labour productivity

growth (the implied elasticity of 0.78 seems too high — see below). This

coefficient is hardly affected by the introduction of the variability

measure, which turns out to be quite important in its own right. This result

makes sense. On theoretical grounds, one would expect average employment
                                       - 34   -




requirements (for given output growth) to rise (and productivity to fall)
as output (demand) becomes more uncertain, thus bearing out the importance

of sustained expansion for productivity growth.

        When one breaks up the sample into its OECD and MIC components, the

following two improved regressions are obtained



(iii)        (19 UECD) A = -0.906 + 0.079
                                    0.300A( -
                                           m               %)   + 0.524M + 0.7O8Aa
                                                                   0169     0.336 V
                               0.707

                                                                          (2 = 054)


(iv)         (10 MICS)   M.= -0.362 -
                              0.7L.5
                                         0.l47t(f
                                         0•086    m
                                                      -   f C) +   0.325AI + O.275A
                                                                   0151     0.369 V

                                                                          (r(   = 0.39).


Note the fact that output variability played an important role for OECD

and was of no significance for the MICs and that the demand variable is

higher in the first regression. Finally, we note that the positive

coefficient for the relative input to wage cost in the first equation

while there is a negative response to the real input price in the second

equation are both consistent with a conjecture that the OECD countries

were closer to being demand-constrained while the MIC's may have been closer

to being supply-constrained. The latter point is strengthened when we

widen the MIC sample but narrows our view to the manufacturing sector

across countries. Table 4 gives a set of figures for 17 MICs, again

compared with the 19 OECD countries. This suggests that there was a

slowdown in both output and labour productivity for the manufacturing

sector also in the MICs.21 The relative increase in the MICs' share of


21 The variability among MICs was quite large, however, for both output

   and output per employed person.
                                      - 35   -



Table 4. Annual Average Rate of Change, Selected Variables in Manufacturing,
            by Country Group: 1960(66)—73, 1973—79




                            19 OECD countries                  17   MICs
                           1960-73           1973-79   1966-73        1973-79

1.   Manufacturing
       output
     (mean stand. dev.)
                                6.1
                                                 6
                                                 2.0    10.1
                                                         7•k
                                                                           6.4
                                                                           7.L


2.   Employment                 0.4           -1.0      5.0                5.4
3.   Ouput per employee         5.7              2.9    5.1                1.0
                                                        +.6                k.O

4.   Real wag&'                 4.7              2.7    2.0                08E!
5. Total uses                   5.7              2.7    6.6                6.1


6. Import/export
       prices               -0.5                 1.5   -1.1            -0.3
7.   Consumer prices            4.7           10.8      6.0!'          19.O1

     List of 10 countries as in Table 3 with the addition of: Hong Kong,

     Chile, India, Greece, Venezuela, Mexico and Peru.

     Nominal wage rate in manufacturing deflated by consumer price index.

     Excluding Chile.

Source: Output: IMF (IFS) and IBRD (World Tables)
           Employment: ILO Bulletin
           Real wage: Nominal wage (IMF and ILO) divided by consumer prices
                        (IMF)
                                           - 36      -




world   manufacturing output, mentioned at the beginning of the paper (see

Table 1) was thus primarily due to sizeable employment growth in this

sector, which on average continued unabated at a rate of 5.4 percent (see

Table 4, line 2).

        The fact that labour productivity fell in the manufacturing sector

for both types of countries is consistent with the overall rise in real

oil and raw-material prices which has afflicted this sector more than the

aggregate economy (no data exist for the MICs). Next we note that in the

period preceding 1973 real wages in the MICs grew much more slowly than

labour productivity, providing support to the argument that by 1973 profits

in the MICs may have been relatively high. Next, Table 5 provides some

evidence to our claim that real wages in 1973-75 were on average downward

flexible in the MICs, much less so in the major OECD countries, and not at

all in the smaller OECD countries.22 This was most probably reversed in

the subsequent upswing in 1975-78 when an increasing number of MICs

encountered rising real labour costs.

       A regression of the change in manufacturing employment growth for the

17 MICs between 1966-73 and 1973-79 on real import prices                               -


real    wages A(' -   i,), and       total aggregate uses (Aa) yields the following

significant results:



                     = 1.503                                                  5 C ) + 0.7l6Ad
                                                         c)   - 0.l3OA(
                               -                 -                        -
(v)            L2,
                       0.861
                                   0.l9OA(1!
                                   0.031     m                                        0.167

                                                                                       (R2 =    0.62).


Obviously capital stock growth is missing from this regression and it may be


22 Of course, there are always exceptions (e.g., Austria and Finland).
                                     - 37   -



Table 5. Average Real Wage Growth in Manufacturing by Sub-Period and
              Country Group




                          1966—73    1973-75    1975-78    1978-81

7    major OECD               4.8       3.4        3.2        1.6w
12 small OECD                 4.4       5.3        1.7        0.7
15   MICs'                    0.9      -1.7         -          -
12   MICs'                     -       -1.4        4.4         -

      Excluding U.S.

      Group of 17 excluding Hong Kong, Kenya

     Group of 17 excluding Hong Kong, Syria, Zambia, Egypt,
      Chile

Source:       Nominal wage (IMP and ILO) divided by consumer prices (IMF).
                                                 — 38      -




proxied    by the significant positive intercept and possibly also by the

total expenditure variable (Aa)
      Finally, we turn back to the current account. The trade-off between

demand or output growth and the current account is borne out by a
regression     (based on the full sample of 38 countries represented in Table 2)

of the change in relative resource gap [A(-F/V)} on the change in import-

weighted (with weight y) terms-of-trade [A(Pm -                                f)y] and     in the growth

of   public consumption ()                 and   investment (A1).


(vi)        A(-F/V)                    -
                                           :?m         -              0.39A    +   0.26A1

                                                                                            (2 = 0.51).


        The terms-of-trade factor represents the substitution between domestic

and foreign goods while the other two variables may be thought of as

representing shifts in aggregate saving and investment. The relative

deficits of the nineteen MICs deviate by an average of 0.6 from this

regression (-0.6 for the OECD countries). An alternative view which would

lead to similar results is represented by the pair of regressions



                            3.98       2.27(f      -                 l.27A'r
                                                           X)y
(vii)       t(-F/V) =              -
                                              m
                                                                 +                          (2 = 0.51)
                            0.92       0.70                          0.38

(viii)      't' =   -0.44
                     0.19
                            +   0.l3
                                0.0k
                                     + 0.24k
                                       0.03
                                                                                            (f2 = 0.79).


        Here the interpretation of the model would be in terms of a direct

trade-off between current-account and GDP growth derived from the import-

requirement side, with GDP growth in turn generated by the two aggregate-

demand components, g and k. When one substitutes from regression (viii)
                                 - 39   -



into   (vii), the resulting equation resembles (vi), except for a smaller

coefficient of public consumption.23 The model underlying (vi) is consistent

with an ex—ante investment-savings-gap view while that of (vii)-(viii) is

consistent with an ex—ante import-gap viewof the current account. In the

aggregate and for the period averages it is difficult to distinguish between

the two. When the data are broken down into the two country groups, there

is some indication that a model such as (vii)-(viii) may have worked better

for the industrial countries.2' A more detailed investigation would be

required to substantiate this statement, but here1 as in the case of

employment, it does at least make sense to conjecture that the industrial

countries were on average and by choice more demand-constrained while the

MICs were on average more supply-constrained in their balance of payments

behaviour during much of the post-1973 period. Whichever is the more

accurate view of the role of foreign borrowing, there seems little doubt

that there was a pronounced trade-off between aggregate productivity and

the current account, both short-run and long-run, which the MICs actively

used to their advantage in the period between the two oil shocks. There

are also clear indications that this 'free-ride' was over by 1979-80 as

the real costs of foreign borrowing as well as the real costs of domestic

labour were rising substantially.




23 When t or 1k are added into regression (vii) as separate variables,
   a positive but not very significant role is indicated for t but
  none for Ak.
2+ Model (vi) does not seem to yield anything, while the other model,
   (vii)-(viii), yields some, though not highly significant, results.
                                   - 40   -



V.    CONCLUDING REMARKS


The analysis of capital market equilibrium and the differential impact of external

shocks, as discussed here, leaves some incomplete answers and several open

questions. On the level of economic theory, the single-good model, although

simple and transparent, is also too simple to take account of some important

aspects of the world adjustment problem. Since no change in final-goods

terms of trade are allowed there is no room for expenditure-switching

effects and for real exchange-rate adjustments, which were of considerable

importance in the 1970s. It also does not enable one to put the proper

emphasis on the role of internal demand-management policies of different

countries in the determination of world equilibrium. A step in this

direction has been taken in a recent three-country model by Marion and

Svensson (1981), in which the final-goods terms of trade are allowed to

change. A simpler, though less ambitious, alternative would be to extend

the present model by adding a domestic nontradable-goods industry in each

country.25

       Another set of issues raised by the world equilibrium analysis is the

interplay of OPEC oil pricing, IC response and interest rate effects. We

have taken the simplistic view that the real price of oil is fixed

exogenously and that OPEC adjusts its output accordingly. The two-period

model leaves open the question of oil depletion, or what happens to oil



     The single-economy, two-good, two-period model is worked out in Bruno
     (1981b). If one keeps the assumption that capital goods are fully
     traded, the determination of the world interest rate would retain the
     single-sector simplicity, while the introduction of the nontradable
     good allows for domestic changes in sectoral allocation and an explicit
     role for domestic demand management.
                                    - 41   -



that   is left over at the end of the second period (here it is valueless).

Next, while we believe that OPEC has had some command over the

real price of oil its nominal price has certainly not been indexed on a

continuous basis. Part of the adjustment problem has had to do with the

ratchet effects of increases followed by decreases in relative oil prices.

There is also the interesting strategic question of how OPEC's pricing

behaviour is affected by the experience of the resulting change in real

interest rates, an externality which in turn affects the rate of return

on its own assets (there is always the alternative of leaving oil in the

ground). There is a similar externality problem for the ICs whose

contractionary policies have indirectly enabled the MICs to expand at the

ICs' expense. Some of these interesting game-theoretic questions have

been raised in a recent paper by Dixit (1981).

       Finally, there is need to study in greater detail the actual recent

experience of the MICs, particularly in the area of real-wage and

profitability behaviour. A more detailed comparison of the experience of

a number of these countries with that of the industrial countries would

no doubt throw much more light on the questions discussed here and probably

raise some new ones.
                                  - 42   -



REFERENCES



Bruno, M. Rain Materials, Profits and the Productivity Slowdown. (Discussion

     Paper No. 812), Jerusalem: Falk Institute, 1981. Revised December 1981

     in NBER Working Paper No. 669 (1981a). Forthcoming in Q.J.E.

        "Adjustment and Structural Change under Supply Shocks." Institute

     for International Economic Studies, December 1981 (forthcoming in

     Sccmdinavian Journal of Economics) (1981h).

        and J. Sachs. "Supply versus Demand Approaches to the Problem of

     Stagflation." In Macroeconomic Policies for Growth and Stability.

     Kiel: Institut für Weltwirtschaft, 1981. Pp. 15-72 (1981).

Chenery, H. Structural Change   and Development   Policy. Oxford University

     Press, 1979.

Dixit, A. "A Model of Trade in Oil and Capital." Princeton University,

     August 1981.

Marion, N.P. and L.E.O. Svensson, "Structural Differences and Macroeconomic

     Adjustment to Oil Price Increases in a Three-Country Model." Stockholm:

     Institute for International Economic Studies, December 1981.

Razin, A. capital Movements, Intersectoral Resource Shifts and     the   Trade

    Balance. (Institute for International Economic Studies Seminar Paper

     No. 159.) Stockholm: University of Stockholm, 1980.

Sachs, J. "The Current Account and Macroeconomic Adjustment in the l97Os,"

    Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (No. 1, 1981), pp. 201-68.

       Energy and Growth under   Flexible    Exchange Rates: A Simulation Study

     (NBER Working Paper No. 582), November 1980. (Forthcoming in

    J. Bhandari and B. Putnam (eds.), The International Transmission of

    Economic Disturbances under Flexible Exchange Rates, M.I.T. Press,

     1982).
                                     - 43

Schmid, M. "International Adjustment to an Oil Shock: The Role of

     Competitiveness." Washington: Board of Governors of Federal Reserve

     System, 1980.

Svensson, L . E .0. Oil Prices   and a Small   Oil-Importing Economy 's Welfare

     and Trade Balance: An Intertemporal Approach. (Institute for

     International Economic Studies Seminar Paper No. 184.) Stockholm:

     University of Stockholm, October 1981.

World Bank. World Development Report 1.981. Washington, D.C., 1981.
