                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           SEC REGULATION FAIR DISCLOSURE,
                        INFORMATION, AND THE COST OF CAPITAL

                                          Armando Gomes
                                            Gary Gorton
                                         Leonardo Madureira

                                        Working Paper 10567
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w10567


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2004




We thank Thompson Financial for providing access to the First Call database, the Rodney White Center for
Financial Research for financial assistance, and Andrew Metrick for providing the Investor Responsibility
Research Center governance index data. We also thank Marshall Blume, Brian Bushee, John Core, Wayne
Guay, David Musto, Mitch Petersen, Michael Roberts, Catherine Schrand, Nick Souleles, Ayako Yasuda, and
seminar participants at Wharton Finance, Wharton Accounting, and Moody’s Investors Services for their
helpful comments.The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Armando Gomes, Gary Gorton, and Leonardo Madureira. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
SEC Regulation Fair Disclosure, Information, and the Cost of Capital
Armando Gomes, Gary Gorton, and Leonardo Madureira
NBER Working Paper No. 10567
June 2004
JEL No. G10, G12, G14
                                        ABSTRACT


We empirically investigate the effects of the adoption of Regulation Fair Disclosure ("Reg FD") by

the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission in October 2000. This rule was intended to stop the

practice of "selective disclosure," in which companies give material information only to a few

analysts and institutional investors prior to disclosing it publicly. We find that the adoption of Reg

FD caused a significant reallocation of information-producing resources, resulting in a welfare loss

for small firms, which now face a higher cost of capital. The loss of the "selective disclosure"

channel for information flows could not be compensated for via other information transmission

channels. This effect was more pronounced for firms communicating complex information and,

consistent with the investor recognition hypothesis, for those losing analyst coverage. Moreover, we

find no significant relationship of the different responses with litigation risks and agency costs. Our

results suggest that Reg FD had unintended consequences and that "information" in financial

markets may be more complicated than current finance theory admits.

Armando Gomes                     Gary Gorton                        Leonardo Madureira
Department of Finance             Department of Finance              Department of Finance
The Wharton School                The Wharton School                 The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania        University of Pennsylvania         University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367       Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367        Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
gomes@wharton.upenn.edu           and NBER                           madureil@wharton.upenn.edu
                                  gorton@wharton.upenn.edu
                                                                                                          1

1. Introduction
    In this paper we empirically investigate the effects of the adoption of Regulation Fair
Disclosure (“Reg FD”) by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”). Reg FD,
which took effect on October 23, 2000, was intended to stop the practice of “selective
disclosure,” in which companies give material information only to certain selected analysts and
institutional investors prior to disclosing it publicly.1 The adoption of the rule was extremely
controversial.2 Proponents argued that selective disclosure was unfair, that it undermined the
integrity of capital markets. Opponents asserted that information transfer between companies and
investors would deteriorate, that there would be a “chilling effect” on communication between
firms and investors.3 To provide an evaluation of Reg FD it is important to understand both how
information is transmitted from firms to capital markets and how the allocation of information-
producing resources affects securities prices. We find that the adoption of Reg FD caused a
significant reallocation of information-producing resources, resulting in a welfare loss for small
firms, which now face a higher cost of capital. The loss of the “selective disclosure” channel for
information flows could not be compensated for via other information transmission channels.
This unintended consequence of Reg FD shows that “information” in financial markets is more
complicated than current theory admits and has some public policy implications.
        There were three reasons given by the SEC for the adoption of Reg FD. First, it was
argued that selective disclosure leads to a loss of investor confidence. If small investors fear that
insiders will regularly profit at their expense, they will not be nearly as willing to invest. For
example, Arthur Levitt (1999) (then SEC chairman) argued that: “…the behind-the-scenes
feeding of material non-public information from companies to analysts is a stain on our markets.
This selectiveness is a disservice to investors and it undermines the fundamental principle of

1
  “Selective disclosure” is not the same as insider trading. “Selective disclosure” means revealing material
nonpublic information by a corporate insider to an analyst, information which could be used profitably.
“Insider trading” refers to trading on the basis of material nonpublic information by a company’s own
officers and directors in the absence of disclosure to the SEC. Other investors could engage in illegal
insider trading by trading based on nonpublic information received from a corporate insider. Rule 10b-5 of
the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 sets out that trading on the basis of material nonpublic information is
prohibited.
2
  The SEC received nearly 6,000 comment letters. See SEC Final Rule: Selective Disclosure and Insider
Trading (2000). Arthur Levitt, the then SEC chairman, describes the intense political environment in
which Reg FD was finally adopted. See Levitt (2002).
3
   Laura Unger, the only commissioner to vote against FD, was at least partially sympathetic to the
arguments of both Wall Street and public companies. She previously voiced concern that FD would
compromise the integrity of American public markets by decreasing the level and quality of
communication between companies and investors, a point Wall Street has pressed since even before its
enactment. A survey of analysts administered by the Association of Investment Management and Research
                                                                                                       2

fairness.” The reason, according to the SEC, is that “...those who were privy to the information
beforehand were able to make a profit or avoid a loss at the expense of those kept in the dark”
(SEC (2000, p.2)). This has been a long-standing concern, at the root of mandatory disclosure in
general.4
        A second rationale concerned the link between corporate governance and the incentives
to engage in selective disclosure. This problem was the use of information by management to
essentially bribe analysts, perhaps in exchange for a quid pro quo, i.e., “…the potential for
corporate management to treat material information as a commodity to be used to gain or
maintain favor with particular analysts or investors” (SEC (2000, p. 3)). In other words, a CEO
could essentially “spin” or “frame” information about his company by trading it in exchange for
favorable analyst reports or kickbacks, e.g., allocations in initial public offerings. In fact, the
SEC also noted the problem that (prior to Reg FD) “analysts may feel pressured to report
favorably about a company or otherwise slant their analysis in order to have continued access to
selectively disclosed information” (see SEC (2000)).5
        Finally, the SEC stated the view that selective disclosure is not required for market
efficiency because of technological change: “…technological limitations no longer provide an
excuse for abiding the threats to market integrity that selective disclosure represents” (Release, 65
Fed. Reg. at 51716). As one SEC commissioner put it: “The mechanisms by which our markets
become efficient are changing…Institutions and analysts’ brokerage firms are no longer the
primary means by which our markets achieve efficiency” (Hunt (2000)). The basic idea seems to
be that companies can now use websites and/or “webcast” conference calls via the internet,
making the channel of information flow from firm managements to analysts less important.
        The intention of Reg FD was not to change the informativeness of prices, that is, market
efficiency. According to Laura Unger, the acting SEC Chairman after Arthur Levitt’s term
ended, “the impetus for Regulation FD was to prevent analysts from passing material nonpublic
information on to others so that those individuals could trade” (SEC (2000)). The way in which
communication occurred was to change, but not the information content of what is transmitted
from firms to markets. Under the Reg FD regime instead of a firm’s management selectively



(AIMR) found that 57 percent believe the volume of substantive information decreased in the six months
after FD was enacted.
4
  Government-mandated disclosure of information by corporations dates from the New Deal era and has
always been controversial. See Loss (1983).
5
  The canonical example of this quid pro quo is the twenty-one of the hottest IPOs that were allocated in
part to Bernie Ebbers of Worldcom by Jack Grubman and Salomon Smith Barney apparently in exchange
for the selective disclosure of information by Ebbers to Grubman. See Lowenstein (2004).
                                                                                                        3

communicating with one or a few analysts, firm management would say the same thing publicly.
The same information would be released, but without privately benefiting particular analysts and
managers.
        Is Reg FD a desirable public policy? Clearly, it is difficult to assess notions of “fairness,”
even if that is interpreted to mean social welfare. Our view is that some assessment is warranted
in order to understand public policies with regard to disclosure in securities markets, in particular,
Reg FD.6 We focus on assessing the effects of Reg FD on information production and
transmission in capital markets; we ask whether the same information is transmitted to capital
markets since the passage of Reg FD, just via a different channel now (albeit in a possibly
“fairer” way), or whether, for some reason, there is less information transmitted to capital
markets. We view this issue as of independent interest. Little is known about whether the sources
of information or the costs of producing the information have any impact on firm values and
security prices. Ultimately, we care about the effects on security prices and the resulting
allocation of resources. We use the natural experiment of the adoption of Reg FD to investigate
these issues.
        Information can be transmitted from firms to markets via four channels: (1) firms, in
addition to mandatory disclosures, can disclose information to the public voluntarily (e.g.,
earnings pre-announcements); (2) firms can selectively disclose information, e.g., phone calls, or
one-on-one meetings; (3) “sell side” analysts can produce research which is released to the
public, e.g., analysts reports; (4) private information can be produced by outsiders, “informed
traders,” who then trade on the basis of their information.7 Reg FD sought to eliminate the second
channel of information flow, under the implicit assumption that the same information would still
flow into markets but by the other channels, particularly channel (1). But, Reg FD also affects
channel (3) because the biggest impact of Reg FD is on analysts. Reg FD “has made most
analysts stock-guessers rather than [stock-] pickers because they do not receive that wink and nod
from company management” (Syre and Stein (2001, p. F1)). Consequently, some have predicted
that Reg FD will either lead to a diminished role for analysts since the information will now be
available for everyone or a large-scale reduction in analysts’ jobs since many simply cannot
perform an adequate analysis without the aid of selective disclosure (Coffee (2000)). If analysts’
previous role is subsumed by the other channels of information flow, then market efficiency is not
changed. This is the logic of Reg FD that is our focus.


6
  It is not, however, our intention to assess the idea of mandatory disclosure generally. There is a large
literature on that topic. Recent examples include Glaeser, Johnson, and Shleifer (2001) and Greenstone,
Oyer, and Vissing-Jorgensen (2003).
                                                                                                                 4

           Our main empirical strategy is to explore various cross-sectional differences among firms
pre- and post-Reg FD. In this regard, our prior belief is that there are important cross sectional
differences with regard to firm size. There are two reasons to believe that Reg FD had different
impacts on firms of different size. First, there is survey evidence. A survey of members of the
securities bar by the American Bar Association (2001) found that 67 percent of respondents
believed that Reg FD had a greater impact on small and mid-cap companies than on large-cap
companies. A survey by the National Investor Relations Institute (2001) found that the fraction of
firms that responded that less information was being provided post-FD was higher for low-cap
firms when compared to the group of mid- and high-cap firms. The same survey found that the
fraction of firms that perceived a decrease in analyst following post-FD was higher for the group
of low-cap firms, while the fraction of firms that perceived an increase in analyst following was
higher for the group of big firms
           Secondly, there are theoretical reasons to believe that there is a link between firm size
and the amount of information produced. King, Pownall and Waymire (1990) argue that large
firms have better disclosure policies because the incentives for private information acquisition are
greater in their case. Lang and Lundholm (1993) argue that production of information entails
fixed costs and thus disclosure costs per unit of size are more likely to decrease with size.
Moreover, Goshen and Parshomovsky (2001) argue that small firms may need selective
disclosure of information to maintain and/or attract analyst following, because for small firm
liquidity may be so low that the costs of obtaining private information may be higher than the
gains from selling or trading on private information.
           Our main finding is that there was a reallocation of information-producing resources and
that this reallocation had asset pricing effects. We document that small firms on average lost 17
percent of their analyst following, and big firms increased theirs by seven percent, on average.
Moreover, while big firms are almost twice as likely to make voluntary earnings announcements
(pre-announcements), small firms did not increase their pre-announcements significantly. We find
consistent effects of this reallocation on earnings forecast errors and market responses to earnings
announcements: small firms experience higher forecast errors (Agrawal and Chadha (2002) find
similar results) and volatility, consistent with a higher information gap; no significant increases
occur for big firms. These results suggest that big firms were able to replace the loss of channel
(2) with channels (1) and (3), but that small firms were not able to do so.




7
    This could include illegal trading based on inside information (by the legal definition); see Loss (1983).
                                                                                                              5

         We demonstrate that this reallocation resulted in a higher cost of capital for small firms
(and no significant change for big firms). Grossman and Stiglitz (1987) were the first to recognize
that the costs of producing information have asset pricing effects; several other papers that
followed focused on the link between disclosure of information and the cost of capital (recently
Easley and O’Hara (2003); see also the survey by Verrecchia (2001)). Our empirical results
suggest that increases in the costs of producing information had a measurable impact on the asset
prices of small firms. We also find evidence in support of the investor recognition hypothesis of
Merton (1987). The stocks of small firms that completely lost analyst coverage after Reg FD
experienced significant increases in the cost of capital, while small stocks with no previous
analyst coverage—which presumably did not have any analysts benefiting from selective
disclosure pre-FD—experienced no significant change in the cost of capital.
         Information disclosed by firms differs in its complexity and in its litigation risk (risk of
shareholder lawsuits), and these factors could explain why different firms responded to the
regulation differently. We find that more complex firms (using intangible assets as a proxy for
complexity) overall are being more adversely affected by the policy change than less complex
firms. After controlling for size, we find that the subgroups of firms with high intangibles tend to
suffer a significantly bigger loss of analyst following than the subgroup of firm with low
intangibles, and larger increases in the cost of capital. The changes in public voluntary disclosure
are consistent with the view that the public channel is an imperfect substitute for private
communications, especially with respect to complex information, and this effect is reflected in
variables such as the cost of capital.             Aumann and Hart (2003) provide a theoretical
demonstration that more is “achieved by a long conversation than by a single message—even
when one side is strictly better informed than the other” (p. 1619).8 Also, we find no evidence of
a chilling effect of Reg FD on high litigation risk firms, a concern expressed by some critics in
their comments on initial drafts of the regulation. This finding is consistent with high litigation
risk firms making less use of selective disclosure pre-FD or with the final draft of the regulation
properly mitigating criticism regarding legal liability concerns (SEC (2000)).



8
  The idea that one-on-one communication, where there are long conversations, might be valuable is one of
the reasons that courts did not interpret the existing laws to prohibit selective disclosure. In general, courts
have been sympathetic to the difficulties of legally overseeing communication between managers and
analysts, describing such discussions as “a fencing match conducted on a tightrope,” in which the managers
are “compelled to parry often incisive questioning while teetering on the fine line between data properly
conveyed and material inside information that may not be publicly revealed” (SEC v. Bausch & Lomb, Inc.
F. 2d 8, p.9 (2d Cir. 1977’ quoted in Tishbi (2002)). To protect such communication the U.S. Supreme
Court decided a series of cases, most notably Dirks v. SEC (463 U.S. 646 (1983)), in which managers and
analysts were shielded from liability (see Tishbi (2002)).
                                                                                                    6

        We test for a link between agency problems and incentives to make selective disclosures.
To proxy for the degree of agency costs we use the corporate governance provisions in firms’
charters and by-laws and state takeover laws (see Gompers et al. (2003)) to break-up the sample
into groups of firms with “good” and “bad” governance. We show that analyst following exhibits
a significantly higher increase in the good governance sample, but there is no significant
difference between the two groups based on all other measures that we follow, such as pre-
announcements, forecast errors, volatility, and the cost of capital. This result is consistent with
the view that bad governance firms became less attractive to analysts relative to the good
governance firms, because perhaps now they cannot be “spoon fed” information anymore, but
this reallocation has had no significant asset pricing effects.
        Several papers examine the impact of Reg FD in the information environment. There is a
consensus in the literature that the quantity of voluntary public disclosures increased as reported
in, for example, Heflin et al. (2003), Bailey et al. (2003), and Straser (2002). However, the
evidence is mixed on other relevant aspects such as the dispersion and accuracy of analyst
forecasts, volatility around earnings announcement, and the degree of information asymmetry and
informed trading. For example, with respect to the accuracy or dispersion of analyst forecasts,
Shane, et al. (2001) and Heflin, et al. (2003) find no significant change in either, and Bailey et al.
(2003) find no increase in the accuracy but significant increases in dispersion. However, Agrawal
and Chadha (2002) and Mohanram and Sunder (2001) find increases in both, and Irani and
Karamanou (2002) find increases in dispersion. On measures of the information gap, like return
volatility around earnings announcement, Heflin, et al. (2003), Shane, et al. (2001), and
Eleswarapu, et al. (2002) find decreases, but Bailey et al. (2003) find no increase after controlling
for important factors. Similarly, with respect to the level of information asymmetry reflected in
trading costs, Eleswarapu, et al. (2002) find that it decreases, consistent with SEC goals to level
the playing field, but Straser (2002) finds opposite results. Other studies that explored interesting
aspects of Reg FD include Bushee et al. (2003), who analyzed how firms previously using closed
or open conference calls responded to the rule change, and Jorion et al. (2003), who investigated
whether credit rating agencies -- exempted from the application of Reg FD -- gained an
informational advantage.
        The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 contains a discussion of the data sets and broad
methodology. In Section 3 we investigate the reallocation of information-producing resources
following the enactment of Reg FD. In Section 4 we look at the effects of this reallocation, in
terms of the effects on earnings forecast errors, market responses to earnings announcements, and
the cost of capital. In Section 5 we investigate whether characteristics aside from size help
                                                                                                              7

explain the results. Some robustness results are discussed in Section 6. The implications for
inferences about information and public policy are in the final section, Section 7.

2. Data and Methodology
    We collect NYSE and NASDAQ firm-quarter observations from CSRP for the period
1997:2002 and merge them with information from First Call (actual earnings announcements,
analysts forecasts and pre-announcements), COMPUSTAT (accounting data) and IRRC
(corporate governance index). The Appendix describes details on the construction of our sample.

    Motivated by the previous discussion, many tests are based on a break-up of the sample
according to firm size. Each firm is allocated to one of three groups based on its average size
during the entire sample period, 1997-2002. The group of small firms is formed by taking firms
with average size below the 50th percentile of the distribution; the group of mid-size firms is
formed by firms with average size between the 50th and the 80th percentiles and the group of big
firms is formed by firms in the upper quintile of the distribution (see Appendix for details).
    We analyze the effects of Reg FD on market variables (analyst following, use of pre-
announcements, forecast error and volatility at earnings announcements) by running panel data
(cross-sectional time series) fixed-effects regressions on the variables of interest. For each such
variable, we run panel data regressions with the aggregated data from the pre-FD and post-FD
subsamples, using as explanatory variables one or more variables related to the Reg FD period
and other variables that control for factors other than Reg FD. Panel data regression is particularly
interesting in that it allows for a better treatment of the omitted variables problem (in fact, in
many setups, the primary motivation for using panel data is to solve this omitted variables
problem).9 Using fixed effects panel data is equivalent to running a regression with a dummy for
each firm in the sample. These dummies control for each firm’s fixed effects, i.e. for cross-
sectional differences that are due to firms’ fixed characteristics. Adding these firms’ dummies
also simplifies the data collection, since any control variable that can be deemed a firm
characteristic (i.e., one that that does not change through time) does not need to be included in the




9
  In general, if in a regression specification the set of explanatory variables does not include a variable (the
omitted one!) which itself is correlated with at least one of the explanatory variables, then typical –in this
case, pooled - OLS results are biased and inconsistent. In a panel data setup, the inclusion of a ci intercept
specific to each cross-sectional unit allows the regression to capture this omitted variable as long as it is
(roughly) constant through time.
                                                                                                              8

regression, because its effects will be absorbed by the firm’s dummy in the panel data
specification.10
     Panel data allows us also to maximize the use of the data in the time series dimension. First,
by including all available data in just one regression, we avoid the difficulties of identifying
effects that occur gradually through time. If firms gradually adapt to the new regulation, using
shorter periods (e.g., regressing data for one period post-FD and one corresponding period pre-
FD) may fail to identify Reg FD effects even if they do happen. Moreover, by using longer period
data we reduce the likelihood of spuriously interpreting circumstantial patterns over shorter
periods as effects of the regulation. On the other hand, increasing the time span of our
examination increases the risk that some market effects being examined here might be driven by
some contemporaneous economic factors not related to Reg FD; 11 this risk can be attenuated by
using proper control variables in the multivariate regressions.


3. The Post-Reg FD Reallocation of Information-Producing Resources
     In this section we first investigate whether there is a change in information production by
analysts (channel (3)), and then we look at whether firms have changed the use of voluntary
disclosures (pre-announcements) – channel (1).

A. The Reallocation of Analysts
         Analyst following is an important part of a firm’s information environment.12,13 In order
to proxy for the activity of production of public information by market professionals, we track



10
   In a panel data setup, one always faces the issue of whether to adopt the fixed or random effects model. A
basic requirement for using random effects is that the effect ci must be uncorrelated with the other
explanatory variables. This requirement seems very stringent when referring to firm’s characteristics.
Fortunately, the requirement is dropped for the fixed effects model. The drawback of using fixed effects -
that there is no way to distinguish the effects of time-constant observable characteristics from the time-
constant fixed effects term ci - is not an issue here since we are mainly interested in the effect of Reg FD,
which is not a time-constant characteristic. The other important requirement for the estimation of (both
fixed and random effects) panel data is strict exogeneity, which implies that explanatory variables in each
time period be uncorrelated with the idiosyncratic error in each time period; it does not seem to present a
concern in our specification.
11
   In this regard, we decided to end the post-FD period in the 3rd quarter of 2002 even though data beyond
that quarter is already available. The increasing scrutiny of the analysts’ industry by the media and
regulators (e.g. the Global Settlement of May 2003) is an example of another exogenous shock that could
affect the allocation of analysts; thus, it would be difficult to isolate effects from Reg FD from this shock if
data from more recent periods were used.
12
   There is a long list of papers that examine the activity of security analysts as a component of the firm’s
information environment. Some examples are: Bhushan (1989a), Brennan and Hughes (1990), Shores
(1990), Skinner (1990) and Brennan and Subrahmanyam (1995).
13
   We are abstracting from what motivates the analysts to produce earnings forecasts for the firm. Brennan
and Hughes (1991), for example, argue that the analysts are rewarded by brokerage commissions, in that
                                                                                                             9

analyst following of firms by sell-side financial analysts.14 Sell-side analysts release different
kinds of information, from forecasts about upcoming financial releases to more complex text
reports analyzing the firm’s status, future prospects, state of the industry, etc. These text reports
are subjective, qualitative in nature and not broadly tracked by financial databases, making it very
difficult to statistically analyze them. None of these shortcomings are present for data on financial
analysts’ forecasts of upcoming earnings releases. Moreover, earnings forecasts are closely
tracked, and they can be compared with the subsequent actual earnings releases, so we can extract
a simple measure of the quality of the analyst’s research. Thus, we adopt the release of sell-side
earnings forecasts as our proxy for information production by market research professionals
(hereafter referred to as “analyst following”).

         Our first measure of analyst following is NOFORi,q: the number of outstanding analyst
forecasts for firm i’s upcoming earnings release for quarter q, released up to 2 days before the
quarter q’s actual earnings release. However, since we are trying to examine the determinants of
this variable along a time series dimension, we have to worry about possible time trends in the
market for financial analysts. To tackle this issue, we define a measure of standardized analysts
following, NOFOR_STDi,q, which is computed by dividing NOFORi,q by the total amount of
analyst forecasts available for all firms in quarter q. Roughly speaking, NOFOR_STDi,q is firm i’s
share of the market for financial analysts in quarter q, measured in percentage terms.15
         Table 1 presents univariate statistics on analyst following before and after Reg FD. Panel
A reports results based on all the sample data. They indicate that, after Reg FD is adopted, there
is a significant increase in the average number of forecasts accompanied by a decrease in the
median number of forecasts, which might suggest a shift in the distribution of the number of
forecasts, with the mass being more concentrated on the right side of the distribution.16 The
results in Panel B, which repeat the univariate statistics for each group of firms based on size,


investors will trade only on stocks they “know about”, that is, stocks for which earnings forecasts have
been produced by analysts.
14
   Analyst following involves both buy-side and sell-side professionals. Buy-side analysts generally
produce information to trade on. Their research output is generally not available to the public. Sell-side
analysts produce information that is sold to a broader class of clients, so their research does become public.
Data availability limits us to sell-side analysts but, more importantly, sell-side analysts provide information
that is more publicly available than information produced by buy-side analysts, and thus is a better proxy
for the production of public information by market professionals.
15
   Notice that our measures of a firm’s analyst following are more informative than simply counting the
analysts that are assigned to that firm. This is because being assigned to do research on a firm does not
imply necessarily that any information will actually be produced; in other words, releasing a forecast is a
signal that an analyst is actively tracking a firm.
16
   The difference in the mean standardized number of forecasts is driven by the fact that the two samples
have different sizes. If the two samples had the same size then the mean values would be exactly the same.
                                                                                                 10

allow us to better assess the shift in the distribution of the number of forecasts. The average
number of forecasts significantly increases for the big firms and decreases for small firms, and the
results are robust to using the standardized measure of analyst following. For the portfolio of
mid-size firms, the results are not clear cut: the average number of forecasts seems to increase,
but one cannot reject the hypotheses that the median number of forecasts and the standardized
measures of analyst following are the same for the periods pre- and post-FD.

        Overall, the univariate show a reallocation of analyst coverage after Reg FD was adopted,
with big firms enjoying an increase in analyst following at the expense of a decrease in analyst
following of small firms. However, a multivariate analysis is necessary in order to control for
other factors that might influence analyst following as well as to avoid biases from the portfolio
formation procedure. In the multivariate setup, we estimate a panel data (cross-sectional time
series) fixed effects regression of number of forecasts. Let the subscript q indicate the quarter of
the year, and i indicate firm i. Then the basic regression model is:

 Ni,q=a0iFIRMi+a1 POSTFDi,q+a2 SIZEi,q+a3 LOSSi,q+a4 ABSCARi,q+a5 SIGNCARi,q +εi,q             (1)
where

             Ni,q             =   Dependent variable, either NOFORi,q or NOFOR_STDi,q
             FIRMi            =   Dummy set to 1 for the ith firm
             POSTFDi,q        =   Dummy set to 1 when the data point is observed after Reg FD
                                  was adopted
             SIZEi,q          =   Log of market value of the firm i at the end of the quarter q
                                  divided by the market index
             LOSSi,q          =   Dummy set to 1 when the actual earnings for firm i in quarter
                                  q are negative
             ABSCARi,q        =   The absolute value of the cumulative abnormal return for firm
                                  i in quarter q
             SIGNCARi,q       =   Dummy set to 1 when the cumulative abnormal return for firm
                                  i in quarter q is negative
        To assess the importance of Reg FD, we include dummies that identify whether the data
point is from the period after Reg FD was adopted. These dummies should then capture any effect
of Reg FD on analyst following. The control variables are motivated by the extant literature on
analyst following. First, there is overwhelming evidence that SIZE can explain analyst
                                                                                                         11

following.17 The three other explanatory variables – whether the firm is about to release a
negative earnings report and the recent path of abnormal returns for the firm - are different
dimensions of firm performance, which might influence an analyst’s decision to track a firm.18

         By having one intercept a0i for each company in the sample (estimates for these intercepts
are not shown), we can abstract from company characteristics that explain analyst following and
rather focus on determinants of changes in analyst following associated with the adoption of Reg
FD. The only exception to this rule is the use of SIZE as an explanatory variable; we opt to keep
SIZE in the regression because in the period over which the panel data is applied – 20 quarters,
composed of eight quarters pre-FD, four quarters in which Reg FD was put into discussion,
passed and put into effect, and eight quarters post-FD – a firm might have changed its size to such
an extent that it would influence analyst following. The other explanatory variables are firm
characteristics that are clearly dependent on the time-period in which they are measured, and thus
are not likely to be absorbed by the company fixed effects’ intercept.

         According to the literature on the determinants of analyst following, there are other
characteristics that might be necessary to control for when studying analyst following, such as the
firm’s industry, the firm’s riskiness, variability of earnings, past performance, institutional
ownership etc. However, these results are mostly based on cross-sectional regression; here the use
of a panel data is likely to diminish the problems of not including them. If the variables are firm
characteristics that do not change much over time, then the firm fixed effect will absorb this.
This is the case for variables related to industry such as industry membership, whether the
industry is regulated, etc. Others variables could indeed change over time, but not enough to be
captured over our sample period. For example, since a proxy for past performance or variability
of earnings needs a considerable time series (say five or ten years), we do not expect much
variation on the measure from 1998 to 2002, and therefore its effects will also be embedded in the
company fixed effects’ intercept.19

         The results for the panel data fixed effects of analyst following are reported in Table 2.
When all the data are examined together, in specifications I and V in panel A of Table 2, the


17
   The literature is extensive; examples are Bhushan (1989b), Brennan and Hughes (1991), Lang and
Lundholm (1993, 1996) and Chung and Jo (1996).
18
   See Bhushan and O’Brien (1990).
19
   The results regarding Reg FD reported here are robust to the inclusion of institutional ownership holdings
as an explanatory variable in regression (1). However, causality inferences are particularly problematic
when using institutional holdings as a control variable (see Bhushan and O’Brien (1990)). Coupled with the
fact that the inclusion of such explanatory variable forces the sample size to be reduced due to missing data
on institutional holdings, we opt not to include it in our specification. Results are also robust to the
inclusion of volume (turnover) as an explanatory variable.
                                                                                                         12

coefficient on the post-FD dummy is positive and statistically significant, indicating an overall
increase in the number of quarterly forecasts available after Reg FD is adopted. However, a more
distinctive picture is available when we examine differential effects on groups of firms based on
size. For this, we break down the post-FD dummy in specifications II and VI into different
dummies according to the size group each firm belongs to. The results indicate that while big
firms have increased their analyst following post-FD, mid and small firms suffered the opposite
effect, having their analyst following decreased. The models in panel A of Table 2 have
significant explanatory power: the R2 is around 15 percent even after accounting for firms’ fixed
effects characteristics.20,21
         All the results discussed above are from an unbalanced panel, so there is the question of
whether survival issues could be playing a role in driving these results. It could be the case, for
example, that small firms would be dying post-FD more often than big firms, forcing a decrease
in analyst following over time. We argue that such issues are not likely to explain the differential
effects we observe on firms grouped by size. First, the inclusion of size and performance proxies
as control variables can account for a decrease in the analyst following due to a decrease over
time in firm’s size and performance. Also, we repeat the same regression for a balanced panel in
which only companies that have observations available for all 16 quarters under examination are
included and the results are qualitatively the same.
         Another concern regarding the results reported in panel A of Table 2 is that the models
impose the same regression coefficients independently of the size group that the firm belongs to.
Since specifications II and VI allow for different patterns of an explanatory variable – the post-
FD dummy – depending on the firm’s group, one might argue that we should allow for other


20
   All the R2’s reported for OLS panel data are within-groups R2’s. The within R2 is obtained from a
regression using demeaned variables. Since we are mostly interested in the effect of the post-FD dummy,
we avoid using the between or overall R2’s because they are driven more by the explanatory power coming
from the cross-sectional variation between firms. For example, the between R2 for specification VI in Table
2 is 0.60, but this is largely due to the high correlation between size and analyst following. Therefore, we
use a more conservative measure of how the time-series variation in the control variables – including
whether the observation is from the period before or after Reg FD is adopted – helps explain variation in
analyst following.
21
   Notice that we report simple OLS results. There is, though, a concern regarding the characteristics of the
dependent variables that proxy for analyst following: NOFOR can be considered a count variable and
NOFOR_STD can be considered a censored variable. Alternatively, we ran panel data Poisson regressions
when using NOFOR and the results are qualitatively similar to the ones reported in Table 2 (although there
is also a concern that analyst following does not conform to all the requirement of a count variable in a
Poisson context). For the censored nature of NOFOR_STD, first notice that this is a minor issue for the
groups of big and mid-size firms, given that almost all observations have at least one analyst, and so in
practice are not censored. Anyway, running a Tobit regression with panel data fixed effects does not affect
the results reported here.
                                                                                                        13

explanatory variables’ responses to vary as well with the firm’s group. To address this concern,
we repeat the panel data fixed effects regression (1) separately for each group. The results
reported in panel B indicate that the coefficients on the control variables indeed vary among the
groups. However, the results regarding the effects of Reg FD on analyst following do not change
qualitatively: each model keeps its high explanatory power and big firms experience an increase
in analyst following at the expense of mid-sized and small firms, which have their following
decreased post-FD.

         To give a sense of the magnitude of the changes in analyst following post-FD, we can
compare the coefficients on the post-FD dummy to the pre-FD mean analyst following. The
comparison using the coefficients in specification VI of panel A of Table 2 and the pre-FD
averages from Table 1 indicates that big firms on average experience an increase of about 7
percent in quarterly analyst following; mid-size firms have an average decrease of 5 percent and
small firms face an average decrease of 17 percent in the their analyst following.


B. Response of Firms’ Pre-Announcements to Reg FD
         In this section we examine whether firms changed the way they employ voluntary public
disclosures after Reg FD. We focus on the firm’s use of public pre-announcements that refer to
future annual earnings, quarterly earnings, or both, as our proxy for firms’ voluntary
disclosures.22 It is common that more than one pre-announcement is issued on a specific date
(e.g., one for the upcoming quarterly earnings and another for the next annual earnings
announcement). Firms make pre-announcements all during the quarter, sometimes together with
earnings announcements. Finally, there are different types of pre-announcements, either of a
quantitative (e.g. point or range estimate) or qualitative nature. These different characteristics
have to be considered when defining the specific measure of the use of pre-announcements to
adopt.

         In adopting a definition of a measure of a firm’s propensity to voluntarily disclose
information we want to discriminate among pre-announcements in terms of their relevance as
instruments of information dissemination, and also based on the firm’s motivation for using pre-
announcements. This leads us to treat pre-announcements differently according to the date they
are issued. For example, a pre-announcement issued on the last day of a quarter is likely to be
more relevant (in terms of incremental information) than a pre-announcement issued


22
   We collected data on pre-announcements from the CIG (Company Issued Guidelines) file in the First
Call Historic Database. First Call emphasizes in the description of this file that “companies make earnings
forecasts in press releases and interviews before they report the actual earnings”.
                                                                                                       14

concomitantly with the release of the previous quarter’s earnings announcement. During an
earnings announcement event, the volume of information produced – by the firm as part of a
mandatory release, by security professionals, by the media etc. – is already high and is likely to
contain, to some extent, information of a forward-looking nature, even when the firm does not
mention it explicitly, for example, the next quarterly earnings number. And if the firm does
include some specific information that can be classified as a pre-announcement in the First Call
database, it is likely it will be at most of marginal importance given the volume of information
that already comes with the mandatory release. Moreover, it is natural to think that at the end of
the current quarter the firm has a much better picture regarding the upcoming earnings release
than it does on the day of the previous quarter’s earnings announcement. Thus, we assume that
the closer a pre-announcement is to the actual earnings announcement that it refers to, the more
relevant it is likely to be.

         The approach we pursue is to examine the likelihood that a company, as of date τ, will
voluntarily disclose information of a forward-looking nature – by means of using one or more
pre-announcements - given the conditions holding at this date. For example set τ to 15 days
before the end of the calendar quarter.         Since we are trying to examine the use of pre-
announcements that can convey useful information, it is important not to have τ much before the
end of the quarter. Around this period we can assume that managers have a good picture of what
the upcoming earnings will be, so that a voluntary disclosure will be viewed with confidence by
the market. On the other hand, having τ ahead of the end of the quarter will result in a loss of data
points, since as we go further ahead we will have firms already issuing their mandatory earnings
announcements.

         We include all pre-announcements, whether they refer to quarterly or annual earnings.
Our examination focuses on the dissemination of information regarding the next earnings
announcement release; since this information is a subset of the information that can be released
regarding other future earnings announcements - for example, the next annual earnings number -,
we interpret the release of a pre-announcement for a future annual number as containing
information for the upcoming quarterly release.23 For the same reason, we do not try to
distinguish whether a pre-announcement is for the upcoming earnings release or for a future one.


23
  Moreover, this choice turns out not to be restrictive based on how annual pre-announcements are used. In
our sample, 55 percent of annual pre-announcements were released together with actual earnings
announcements. An extra 14.9 percent of the pre-announcements described as referring to annual numbers
were actually for the upcoming release that includes both annual and quarterly numbers, and therefore can
be considered as well to be quarterly pre-announcements. Another 16.3 percent were issued concomitant
                                                                                                        15

        Given that we do not try to explore the information content of pre-announcements, we
also do not distinguish pre-announcements according to their nature, whether qualitative or
quantitative. We are trying to identify if and when firms disclose information voluntarily to the
market, without a precise characterization - from both theoretical and empirical standpoints – of
the relative merits of qualitative or quantitative pre-announcements; the approach is to treat them
equally. Therefore, we examine the propensity of a firm to voluntarily disclose information; we
do not ask at this point about the quality of the information released when the firm does so.

        Table 3 presents some descriptive statistics on the issuance of pre-announcement before
and after Reg FD. Panel A includes the results for the complete sample. Overall, we observe a
steep increase in the use of pre-announcements, from 5,582 before Reg FD to 12,162 after the
regulation was adopted, and the fraction of firm-quarters with at least one pre-announcement
doubled, from 14.9 percent to 30.6 percent.24 Moreover, the increase after Reg FD in the number
of pre-announcements issued and in the number of firms that used at least one pre-announcement
is significant for all the subperiods of the analysis. If we consider only pre-announcements in the
period that comprises the end of previous quarter up to date τ, the fraction of firms that voluntary
discloses goes from 3.5 percent to 5.6 percent; for the pre-announcements released from τ up to 2
days before the current quarter’s actual earnings release, the fraction of quarters in which firms
voluntarily disclose jumps from 8.8 percent to 12.7 percent; finally, when we consider only pre-
announcements issued together with mandatory earnings release, this percentage increases even
more, from 4.3 percent to 20.3 percent. Therefore, although the biggest increase in the issuance of
voluntary disclosures occur for pre-announcements released together with mandatory earnings
releases, the general pattern of increase is observed no matter how we define the relevance of a
pre-announcement. In particular, the increase for the period between τ and the mandatory
earnings announcement, which will be the focus of our multivariate analysis, is very significant.

        A more interesting picture is presented in Panel B, where the summary statistics are
broken down according to groups of firms based on size. Focusing on the pre-announcements not
released with actual earnings announcements we observe that the increase in the use of pre-



with another quarterly pre-announcement. From the remaining, sample, 3.8 percent were doubled pre-
announcements. Therefore, if we choose to analyze pre-announcements that are not doubled and are not
issued with mandatory earnings announcement, the decision to drop from our sample the annual earnings
announcement would amount to a removal of, in fact, only 10 percent of the initial sample of annual pre-
announcements.
24
   We also report in Table 3 the number of ‘doubled’ pre-announcements, i.e. pre-announcements that were
issued in a day where another pre-announcement is also issued. Given that our focus is on instances where
a firm voluntarily discloses, no matter whether it refers to one or more future earnings releases, we do not
use the information whether a pre-announcement is doubled or not in any further analysis.
                                                                                                            16

announcements after FD is confined to the big and mid-size firms. Regarding pre-announcements
released between τ and the actual earnings releases, for big (mid-size) firms voluntary disclosure
is present in 10.1 percent (9.6 percent) of firm-quarters pre-FD and in 18.1 percent (14.6 percent)
of the firm-quarters post-FD, while if we restrict the analysis to pre-announcements before date τ,
for big (mid-size) firms we observe voluntary disclosures in 6.4 percent (3.5 percent) of firm-
quarters pre-FD and in 12 percent (5 percent) of the firm-quarters post-FD. However, for small
firms, the univariate analysis indicates a small, albeit not significant, decrease in the use of
voluntary disclosures after Reg FD for either period in which pre-announcements are issued. If
we consider all pre-announcements in the sample, independently of when they are issued along
the quarter, the fraction of small firms voluntarily disclosing indeed increases significantly after
Reg FD, but we can see that this result is misleading in that it is driven by an increase in the pre-
announcements that are issued together with mandatory earnings releases.

         Figure 1 plots the quarterly fraction of companies (inside each group based on size) that
issue pre-announcements. The picture reinforces the consistency of the different patterns,
according to firm size, on how use of pre-announcements changes in relation to Reg FD. Before
Reg FD, bigger firms indeed pre-announce more, but the differences in the average use of pre-
announcements among the size groups is not striking. After Reg FD we observe a steep increase
in the fraction of big and mid-size firms that issue pre-announcements, while small firms keep
their average use of pre-announcement similar to the pre-FD numbers.
         We now turn to multivariate analysis, with the objective of examining the determinants of
the firm’s decision to issue pre-announcements. Our dependent variable is a dummy that, for each
firm-quarter, is set to one whenever the firm issues one or more pre-announcements in the period
from date τ until two days before the actual earnings release.25 Our first step is to check the
validity of the control variables to be used later when examining whether and how the use of pre-
announcements change with the adoption of Reg FD. For this purpose, we run the following
quarterly cross-sectional logistic regressions:



25
  This defines a binary variable. We could instead use a model of multiple choices, e.g. measuring whether
the firm issues only one or more than one pre-announcement during a certain period. However, the
summary statistics on Table 3 indicate that (e.g., for pre-announcement issued between date τ and the actual
earnings announcement) the fraction of firms with more than one pre-announcement is very small
compared with the fraction of firms with at least one pre-announcement, and the evolution post-FD of these
two fractions is very similar. This suggests that it would be very difficult to capture the effect on a decision
to issue more than one pre-announcement when compared with the decision to issue only one. Based on
this and on the fact that the econometric treatment of the panel data fixed effects logistic regression is much
simpler when dealing solely with a binary dependent variable, we opt to use the binary decision only.
                                                                                                 17

Prob[PREANNi,q=1] = f(a0+ a1 SIZEi,q+a2 NASDAQi,q +a3 SURPRISEi,q+a4 NEG_SURPRISEi,q+
        a5 ABSCARi,q+a6 SIGNCARi,q +a7 PA_INDUSTRYi,q+Σ a8,n INDUSTRYi,q,n + εi,q )       (2)

and

                Prob[PREANNi,q=1] = f(a0+ a1 SIZEi,q+a2 NASDAQi,q +a3 LOSSi,q+

      + a4 ABSCARi,q+a5 SIGNCARi,q +a6 PA_INDUSTRYi,q+Σ a7,n INDUSTRYi,q,n + εi,q )        (3)

where

                PREANNi,q =     Dummy set to 1 when there is at least one pre-announcement
                                issued by the firm from the period between 15 days before the
                                end of the quarter q (date τ) and 2 days before the actual release
                                of that quarter’s earnings announcement
                    SIZEi,q =   Log of market value of the firm i at the end of the quarter q
                                divided by the market index
               NASDAQi,q =      Dummy set to 1 when firm i is traded on NASDAQ
                   LOSSi,q =    Dummy set to 1 when the actual earnings are negative
              SURPRISEi,q =     Absolute value of the difference between the actual earnings and
                                the consensus mean forecast at date τ, scaled by the end of the
                                quarter book equity per share
        NEG_SURPRISEi,q =       Dummy set to 1 when the actual earnings is below the consensus
                                forecast available at date τ
                ABSCARi,q =     The absolute value of the cumulative abnormal return for firm i
                                along quarter, up to date τ
               SIGNCARi,q =     Dummy set to 1 when the cumulative abnormal return for firm i
                                along quarter q (up to date τ) is negative
         PA_INDUSTRYi,q =       Log of the number of the pre-announcements issued by firms in
                                the same industry 10 days before the firm i’s pre-announces (or
                                10 days before date τ if no pre-announcement is issued by firm i)
            INDUSTRYi,q,n =     Industry dummy set to 1 if firm i belongs to industry n


         The explanatory variables are motivated by extant literature on the firm’s decision to
disclose information. First, firm size seems to be an important determinant of a firm’s disclosure
policy. King, Pownall and Waymire (1990) hypothesize that big firms have better disclosure
policies because the incentives for private information acquisition are greater for them when
                                                                                                           18

compared to small firms. Diamond and Verrecchia (1991) present a model in which firms use
disclosure to reduce information asymmetry and thus to decrease the cost of capital, and big firms
disclose more information because they are the ones that benefit most from the mechanism. From
the point of view of costs, Lang and Lundholm (1993) argue that disclosure costs are more likely
to decrease with size, so that, other things equal, the amount of disclosure should increase with
firm size. Skinner (1994, 1997) suggests that litigation costs, which increase with firm size,
would be especially important for bigger firms when deciding whether and when to disclose
information.26 From an empirical perspective, Lang and Lundholm (1993) provide evidence that
size is positively correlated with analysts’ evaluations of the firm’s voluntary disclosure practices.
More recently, a survey conducted by the National Investor Relations Institute (NIRI (2001))
found responses that differ, based on size of the firm, as to whether firms are releasing more or
less information after Reg FD: the fraction of firms that responded that less information is being
provided post-FD is higher for the group of low-cap firms when compared to the group of mid-
and high-cap firms.

         The inclusion of SURPRISE and NEG_SURPRISE is motivated by research that posits
voluntary disclosures as instruments used to align market expectations with the manager’s private
information.27 Skinner (1994) argues that firms tend to be more forceful in disclosing bad news
than good news, first because of fear of lawsuits if a big negative surprise at the earnings
announcement provokes a large decline in stock price, but also to maintain a good reputation with
security professionals; to account for this possibility we include the LOSS control variable.
PA_INDUSTRY allows for the possibility of an idiosyncratic effect taking place among firms in
the same industry around the time the firm issues a pre-announcement. For example, some
turmoil in an industry that leads some of firms to issue pre-announcements to correct market
expectations might cause another firm in the same industry to pre-announce even when it does
not have any news per se; it pre-announces simply to calm down the market. Finally, we include
dummies for membership in the 48 industries defined in Fama and French (1997).28 29


26
   The fact that small firms have fewer mandatory disclosure requirements mandated by FASB and SEC
can be taken as indirect evidence that smaller firms face a bigger cost per unit of size to disclose. Empirical
evidence on the differential marginal disclosure costs by firms of different sizes can be found in Bushee
and Leuz (2003): they document that the regulatory change mandating firms on the OTC Bulletin Board to
comply with disclosure requirements under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 had a negative effect
specially for small firms, which could not cope with the significant disclosure costs and were essentially
forced off the OTC Bulletin Board. These arguments relate to costs of mandatory disclosures, but a similar
relation can be expected between size and costs of voluntary disclosures.
27
   See, for example, Ajinkya and Gift (1984) and Matsumoto (2002).
28
   Notice that some of the variables defined in the regression model above have a forward-looking nature.
SURPRISE, NEG_SURPRISE and LOSS use in their definition the actual value of the earnings to be
                                                                                                           19

         The first regression specification uses only a subset of the data available on pre-
announcements. For a data point to be included in the regression it is necessary that a proxy for
market expectations regarding future earnings releases can be obtained; using the analysts’
consensus forecast as a proxy for this expectation, our sample selection requires that at date τ
there must be at least one valid earnings forecast available. In order to avoid the data restriction
on market expectations, the second specification drops the explanatory variables based on market
expectations and instead use only a dummy based on the actual earnings value to be released.
Thus, all data points can be used in the second regression specification.

         Results of regressions (2) and (3) are reported in Table 4 (results on dummies for industry
membership are omitted). The coefficient on SURPRISE is significantly positive throughout the
quarters, suggesting that managers use pre-announcements to correct market expectations and
increase their use when the consensus forecast prevailing in the market is far away from the
actual earnings to be released in the future. The coefficient on NEG_SURPRISE is also
consistently positive and significant, indicating that managers’ motivation for use of pre-
announcements to correct expectations is amplified when the prevailing consensus is below the
actual earnings. That firms like to avoid bad news is also suggested by the positive (although not
always significant) coefficient on LOSS in Panel A: in the face of upcoming negative earnings
numbers firms are more willing to release pre-announcements, thus bringing the consensus
forecast closer to the actual earnings and reducing an expectations gap more likely to be negative.
         There is limited evidence that firms trading on NASDAQ make less use of pre-
announcements: the coefficient on NASDAQ is negative for most of the quarters in panels A and
B, but most of the times not significant. Regarding industry clustering, we observe that, except
for the first quarter of the sample, the coefficient on PA_INDUSTRY is significantly positive in




announced in the future days. This definition is not troublesome if we assume that at date τ the manager
already has this knowledge (that’s why it is crucial to establish τ at a point in time not much before the end
of the quarter, when decisions about what and when to announce might be already done), because we are
trying to model exactly the manager’s decision on whether to pre-announce.
29
   Other control variables could be included. As an example, Lang and Lundholm (1993) try to explain
“better” disclosure firms (as proxied by analyst ratings of corporate disclosures) using performance
variables (returns and forecast errors), structural variables (size, return variability and correlation between
annual returns and earnings) and an offer variable (whether the firm is active in issuing securities). In our
setup, we are not using performance variables (other than size) and the offer variable. However, our panel
data specification mitigates the problems of not including these extra variables, because their effects can be
considered firm fixed effects. According to Lang and Lundholm (1993), “structural variables measure firm
characteristics that are widely known and likely to remain stable over time”, more so over the relatively
short period of this study and in a similar way we can assume the classification of a firm as of an offer class
is unlikely to change over this period.
                                                                                                         20

both specifications. Finally, we observe that SIZE is very positively correlated with the use of
pre-announcements, corroborating the univariate results seen in Table 3.
         Both models have a good explanatory power. Panel A has quarterly pseudo R2 on average
around 17 percent and panel B has an average pseudo R2 around 22 percent. The pseudo R2 for
the specification using surprise measures are consistently higher than the specification using all
sample data, suggesting that using explanatory variables based on market consensus forecast
prevailing prior to the issuance of pre-announcement adds a good deal in explaining the use of
pre-announcements.

         We now turn to the examination of the use of pre-announcements over time, in relation to
the period Reg FD is adopted. Our univariate analysis indicated an overall increase in the use of
pre-announcements by firms, but this increase seems to be confined to the big and mid-size firms.
This pattern is also suggested by the estimates of SIZE coefficient in the cross-sectional
regressions in Table 4. The estimated coefficient gets bigger and more significant as we go from
the pre-FD to post-FD quarters, suggesting that firm’s size plays a more important role in
explaining whether a firm issues pre-announcements during the period in which Reg FD is in
place.

         However, a more thorough investigation of the effects of Reg FD on the use of pre-
announcements requires a multivariate cross-sectional approach that also takes the time-series
dimension into consideration. For this, we run a cross-sectional time-series (fixed effects) logistic
regression. Similarly to the traditional panel data regression, the fixed effects logistic regression
is equivalent to having one intercept for each firm.30 The fixed effects logistic models are
presented below. They are similar to the cross-sectional regression models, with the differences
that we now include a dummy for post-FD quarters and we remove the dummies for NASDAQ
and industry membership because these dummies do not change for each firm over time, so that
their effects are incorporated into the firms’ fixed effect dummies.31




30
   Although in this case these intercepts are not estimated because, given the formulation of the logistic
function, the conditional likelihood does not include the firms’ dummies. This is also important in that, by
avoiding the inclusion of the firms’ dummies, the estimation procedure does not face the incidental
parameters problem. For details on the fixed effects logistic regression, see Chamberlain (1980) and Greene
(1997).
31
   Another way to explore this question is to collect all pre-announcements and include a control sample
such that each pre-announcement has a corresponding control observation, e.g. matching the day of the pre-
announcement for a firm in a similar industry or with similar size etc. This is the approach taken by Soffer,
Thiagarajan and Walther (1998). This alternative approach does not control directly for fixed effects, but
rather through the inclusion of the control sample.
                                                                                                       21

         Prob[PREANNi,q=1] = f(aoi FIRMi+ a1 POSTFDi,q+a2 SIZEi,q+a3 SURPRISEi,q+

      a4 NEG_SURPRISEi,q+ a5 ABSCARi,q+a6 SIGNCARi,q +a7 PA_INDUSTRYi,q + εi,q ) (4)
and

                        Prob[PREANNi,q=1] = f(aoi FIRMi+ a1 POSTFDi,q+

      a2 SIZEi,q+a3 LOSSi,q+ a4 ABSCARi,q+a5 SIGNCARi,q +a6 PA_INDUSTRYi,q + εi,q ) (5)


        The results of the fixed effects logistic regressions are reported in Table 5.32 In general,
the sign and significance of the control variables in the fixed effects logistic regressions
strengthen the results obtained in the cross-sectional regressions presented in Table 4. Even after
controlling for companies’ fixed effects, pre-announcements are more frequently used by big
firms, when there is a gap between market expectations and the manager’s private information,
with upcoming bad news or when more firms in the same industry are also issuing more pre-
announcements.
        Regarding the effects of Reg FD, we observe that in specifications I and IV of Table 5,
that investigate post-FD effects for all companies as just one group, the coefficient on the post-FD
dummy is significantly positive, confirming the univariate results we saw above of an overall
increase in the use of pre-announcement by all the firms. A more detailed and interesting picture
emerges from specifications II and V, though. When breaking up the post-FD dummy according
to the size group the firm belongs to, only the coefficients identifying post-FD observations of big
and mid-size firms are significantly positive: in other words, the increase in the use of pre-
announcements occurs for big and mid-size firms, but not for small firms.33

        In panel B of Table 5, we repeat the fixed effects logistic regression separately for each
group, thus addressing the concern that the models reported in panel A impose the same
regression coefficients for the control variables independently of the group the firm belongs to,
even when we allow the post-FD dummy to vary among groups. The results reported in panel B
indicate that the coefficients on the control variables indeed vary among the groups, but are


32
   Notice that the number of observations of the fixed effects model is substantially reduced. This occurs
because firms which have pre-announcements in all quarters in which they appear in the sample, or that do
not have pre-announcements in any of these quarters, are dropped from the sample, since they do not
contribute to the maximum likelihood estimation procedure.
33
   Specifications III and VI of Table 5 provide for an even higher pseudo R2. However, we view these
results with caution. The improvement of R2 is obtained after the inclusion of PA_INDUSTRY, but since
PA_INDUSTRY is likely to be affected by Reg FD effects, we prefer to focus on specifications II and V
when analyzing Reg FD effects on the use of pre-announcements.
                                                                                                         22

qualitatively similar to the results from the regressions using aggregated data. Most importantly,
the results regarding the effects of Reg FD on the use of pre-announcements do not change.
         To give a sense of the magnitude of the changes in the use of the voluntary disclosure we
examine the odds ratio associated with the post-FD dummies in panel A of Table 5. For big firms,
the odds ratio of the post-FD dummy is 1.97, that is, controlling for the explanatory variables
discussed above, the big firms are twice as likely to voluntarily disclose information after Reg FD
compared to the period before Reg FD; for mid-size firms, the effects are also substantial, with an
odds ratio of 1.65; finally, the odds ratio of small firms is indistinguishable from 1, indicating no
change in the likelihood of occurrence of voluntary disclosure associated with the adoption of the
regulation.

         In terms of an assessment of the overall use of pre-announcements by the market, our
results indicating an increase in the use of pre-announcements by firms after Reg FD confirm the
current literature by using a more stringent definition of the use of pre-announcements, more data
both in the dimension of the number of firms and the time period, and a robust logistic regression
that takes care of company fixed effects. 34 More importantly, though, is that our analysis makes
clear the cross-sectional differences in the behavior of firms regarding the use of pre-
announcements according to firm’s size.


4.   Effects of the Reallocation


A. Forecast Errors
         News shocks at earnings announcement dates are a result of a gap between the
information contained in the (mandatory) earnings announcement and the amount of information
available about the firm prior to the earnings announcement. That information could be privately
produced or voluntarily released by the firm.35 In this section we examine whether earnings
announcement date surprises change in relation to Reg FD.


34
    Straser (2002), Heflin et al. (2003) and Bailey et al. (2003), using different definitions of pre-
announcement and different statistical tests, all report increases in the use of pre-announcements after Reg
FD. Bailey et al. (2003) and Heflin et al (2003), for example, use as a measure of voluntary disclosures the
total number of pre-announcements issued by the firm between two consecutive quarterly earnings
announcement. Bailey et al. then make use of a univariate analysis based on matched pairs of pre-FD and
post-FD quarters. Heflin et al. (2003) also uses logistic regression to explain the use of pre-announcements,
although in their case, by summing up pre-announcements during the entire quarter, they are not able to use
the current market consensus inside the quarter as an explanatory power, which as we see from Table 5
adds much explanatory power to the regression.
35
   In a survey released by the Association of Information Management and Research in March 2001 (AIMR
(2001)), 71 percent of the respondents reported that Reg FD had contributed to an increase in market
                                                                                                          23

         We first examine forecast errors at earnings announcement dates. We define the
“unscaled forecast error” as the absolute value of the difference between the actual earnings per
share for firm i at quarter q and the consensus (mean) forecast as of two days before the actual
earnings announcement day for firm i’s quarter q.36 In order to get a comparable measure across
firms, we define the “scaled forecast error” (henceforth simply “forecast error”) as the unscaled
measure described above divided by firm i book equity per share computed at the end of quarter
q.

     To examine the effects of Reg FD, we run the following panel data regression:

                  EA_SURPRISEi,q= a0iFIRMi+a1 POSTFDi,q+a2 SIZEi,q+

                a3 LOSSi,q+a4 ABSCARi,q+a5 SIGNCARi,q +εi,q                              (6)
where

               EA_SURPRISEi,q         =    Absolute value of the difference between actual earnings
                                           per share for firm i at quarter q and the consensus (mean)
                                           forecast as of 2 days before the actual earnings
                                           announcement day for firm i’s quarter q, divided by firm i
                                           book equity per share computed at the end of quarter q
               FIRMi                  =    Dummy set to 1 for the ith firm
               POSTFDi,q              =    Dummy set to 1 when the data point is observed after Reg
                                           FD was adopted
               SIZEi,q                =    Log of market value of the firm i at the end of the quarter q
                                           divided by the market index
               LOSSi,q                =    Dummy set to 1 when the actual earnings for firm i at
                                           quarter q are negative
               ABSCARi,q              =    Absolute value of the cumulative abnormal return for firm
                                           i along quarter q
               SIGNCARi,q             =    Dummy set to 1 when the cumulative abnormal return for
                                           firm i along quarter q is negative




volatility, with many blaming it on a reduction of earnings guidance (from firms), that is, on an increase in
forecast errors at the earnings announcement.
36
   We repeat the tests described subsequently using an alternative definition of forecast error that takes the
median forecast instead of the mean forecast as the consensus measure, and the results do not change
qualitatively.
                                                                                                       24

Besides the dummies that isolate effects of Reg FD, we include control variables. Given that firm
size seems to be an important determinant of the quality of the firm’s information environment,
the ability of analysts to forecast earnings could be related to SIZE. LOSS is included because
there is evidence that forecast errors at earnings announcements differ between profits and losses
(see Brown (2001)). Finally, we include ABSCAR and SIGNCAR to analyze possible effects
from contemporaneous firm’s return on the ability of analysts to predict upcoming earnings.

        Table 6 presents results of the panel data regressions to explain scaled forecast error. If
we scale forecast error by share price, the results indicate an overall increase in forecast error
post-FD: the post-FD coefficients for the sample as a whole (specification I) as well as for each
group of firms (specification II) is positive and highly significant. In fact, these results are
distorted by the fact that the post-FD period is a period of market decline. The market decline
induces a downward trend in the deflator measure used as the denominator in the definition of the
scaled forecast error; therefore, even if the forecast error had not decreased post-FD, the scaled
forecast error could still have increased due solely to the declining share price.37
        Our main interest is in assessing possible changes in the forecast error scaled by book
equity per share.38 These results are reported in specifications III and IV of panel A of Table 6.
When all firms are examined together as just one group in specification III, the coefficient on the
post-FD dummy is insignificant, i.e. there is no evidence of change in scaled forecast error
measure after Reg FD is adopted. However, the break-up of the post-FD dummy - according to
the size group each firm belongs to – provides evidence of movements in scaled forecast error
that are negatively correlated with size: forecast error increases for small firms, decreases for big
firms and reveals no significant change for mid-size firms. The result is robust to whether we also
allow the coefficients on the other explanatory variables to vary according to the firm’s group, as
evidenced by the results in panel B of Table 6.
        Given the definition of forecast error, all the inferences seen so far apply to the sample of
firm-quarters having at least one earnings forecast issued for the quarter.         However, taking the
presence of forecasts as a proxy for the knowledge of the market regarding the upcoming
numbers, it is reasonable to think that, for a firm-quarter with no forecasts available, the surprise
– as a measure of how much news was really incorporated in the released number - at the


37
   To examine further this issue, we simulate a distribution of each company’s unscaled forecast errors for
the post-FD period based on the actual distribution of unscaled forecast errors pre-FD for that same
company (i.e., by construction forecast errors do not change post-FD). Regressions on forecast error scaled
by share price indicate an increase in forecast error post-FD (results not reported).
38
   We also examine effects of scaling forecast error by assets per share. The results do not change
qualitatively.
                                                                                                  25

earnings announcement can be even more substantial than that for a firm-quarter with some
earnings forecasts available. Therefore, the results above support the view that for small firms,
forecast error at earnings announcement increases after FD, but that does not necessarily implies
that the average surprise at earnings announcement also increases.

        In order to get more robust inferences regarding the information environment of firms
before earnings announcements, we have to examine whether Reg FD is associated with any
patterns based on the sample of firm-quarters without forecasts. For a firm-quarter with no
earnings forecast available, we do not have a comparable measure of surprise at earnings
announcements, and, therefore, we can not compare amongst firm-quarters without an available
forecast. A simple examination can be done, though, by looking at whether the sample of firm-
quarters without forecasts changed after Reg FD. For this, Figure 2 plots, for each group of firms,
the quarterly fraction of firm-quarters that have analyst following (i.e. at least one forecast
available about upcoming quarterly earnings).

        The graph indicates that the groups of big and mid-size firms have a very large and
constant fraction of observations with analyst following. However, for the group of small firms,
the fraction of firms-quarters with analyst following seems to follow two different regimes in
relation to Reg FD: before Reg FD around 65 percent of the quarterly observations have forecasts
available, while after Reg FD this number runs close to 50 percent, and the difference on these
averages is both significant and substantial. Given that the average number of forecasts increases
with size, small firms are more likely to have their status, regarding whether there is at least some
analyst following, changed as result of a change in the number of forecasts. This is reflected in
the figure: the deterioration in analyst following for small firms diagnosed in Section 3
materializes also as a reduction in the number of firm-quarters being researched at least by one
analyst, while the increase (decrease) in analyst following for big (mid-size) firms does not lead
to a substantial change in the fraction of observations with at least one analyst following

        Figure 2 corroborates inferences from the panel data regressions. For big and mid-size
firms, regression results indicate no degradation in forecast error in relation to Reg FD (in fact,
forecast errors decrease for the sample of big firms), while the figure suggests no change in the
(small) fraction of observations with no forecast available after Reg FD was adopted; taken
together, they suggest that the surprise component of earnings announcements does not change
after Reg FD. But, after Reg FD small firms face both an increase in forecast error for the sample
with analyst following and an increase in the number of observations with no forecast at all,
leading to increases in the surprise news component at quarterly earnings announcements.
                                                                                                        26

        In conclusion, the multivariate analysis indicates no reliable evidence of an overall
increase in forecast errors at quarterly earnings announcements, corroborating some results from
other papers in the literature.39 However, our panel data adds to the picture by revealing strong
evidence of size as a cross-sectional determinant of the effect of Reg FD on surprises at earnings
announcements. While no deterioration is observed for big and mid-size firms, small firms were
indeed affected by Reg FD. Small firms lost analyst following after Reg FD was adopted, and for
those still covered by analysts there are larger forecast errors.


B. Market Response to Earnings Announcements
        The market response to news shocks at earnings announcements is another dimension
likely to be affected by changes in the way information about the firm is produced and released.
In fact, one main argument of critics of Reg FD is that the regulation would cause an increase in
volatility because information would not be released smoothly as when there is constant contact
between the company and the analysts, but rather in lumps, e.g. if information is held up until the
next mandatory earnings announcement. In this section we investigate this possibility by
examining whether volatility at earning announcements changes in relation to Reg FD.

        Volatility at earnings announcement dates is computed as the cumulative absolute
abnormal return over the window [-1,+1] around the earnings announcement day, where the
abnormal return is obtained as the residual of a market model based on the value-weighted market
index returns.40
        Figure 3 depicts the univariate behavior of volatility at earnings announcement, by
plotting the quarterly average volatility for each group of firms. In the cross-sectional dimension,
we observe that volatility is correlated across groups. Since this volatility measure is idiosyncratic
(by the definition of market model residuals), the pattern seen in the figure suggests the existence
of a common factor in volatility across size (that is not part of the market model). When we
compare volatility levels across groups, the small (mid-size) firms consistently have higher
average volatility than the mid-size (big) firms do, which corroborates evidence in the literature
that volatility is negatively correlated with size. 41
        When we look at the time-series evolution of average volatility before and after Reg FD,
there is a discernable pattern of decreasing volatility for three consecutive quarters right after Reg

39
   Heflin et al. (2003) investigate pairs of pre-FD and post-FD quarter and also find evidence of no change
in forecast error for the sample of firm-quarters that indeed have some analyst following.
40
   We use as an alternative simple excess returns, i.e. the residuals from a constant-mean-return model, and
all the results are qualitatively the same.
                                                                                                           27

FD was adopted (Q3:2000, represented by the horizontal line to the right of the figure, is the last
quarter before Reg FD is adopted). In addition, decreasing volatility can also be observed if one
takes pairs of quarters separated by one year right around the adoption of the regulation (more
specifically, Q1:2000 against Q1:2001, Q2:2000 against Q2:2002 or Q3:2000 against Q3:2001).42
However, when we extend the analysis to other quarters, post-FD, and to the quarters before Reg
FD was proposed, the pattern of decreasing volatility after Reg FD is missing. For example, in
the last quarter before Reg FD was proposed, the average volatility for each group is higher than
in the first quarter after Reg FD was adopted. To take into account seasonality in quarterly results,
we can compare the volatility in Q2:1999 - two quarters before Reg FD was proposed - with
Q2:2001 (or, for that matter, with all the three consecutive quarters right after Reg FD was
adopted), and we see an increase in the volatility post-FD for all groups of firms.

         To summarize, univariate analysis of average volatility across size and through time does
not suggest any specific effect related to the adoption of Reg FD. Of course, univariate pictures
do not control for changes in firms’ characteristics that are determinants of market responses to
earnings announcements. Regarding market wide conditions, the use of residuals from a market
model theoretically controls for possible changes in non-idiosyncratic determinants of volatility,
although the correlation among groups’ average volatility through time suggests the presence of a
systematic component of volatility not captured by firm size. To tackle these issues, we use
multivariate panel data (cross-sectional time series) regressions to explain the market response at
the time of earnings announcement as follows:

                     VOLATi,q=a0iFIRMi+a1 POSTFDi,q+a2 SIZEi,q+a3 LOSSi,q+

     a4 NEG_SURPRISEi,q+a5 SURPRISEi,q+a6 ABSCARi,q+a7 SIGNCARi,q + a8 VIXi,q+εi,q                   (7)
where

                       VOLATi,q =       Cumulative absolute abnormal return during the 3 days
                                        (window [-1,+1]) around the earnings announcement day,
                                        where the abnormal return is obtained as the residual from
                                        the market model
                          FIRMi =       Dummy set to 1 for the ith firm
                     POSTFDi,q =        Dummy set to 1 when the data point is observed after Reg


41
  For example, see Atiase (1980, 1985) and Freeman (1987).
42
  Bailey et al (2003) report results on these matched pairs without taking into consideration the separation
of firms in groups based on size. Eleswarapu et al. (2003) analyzes effects of Reg FD based on comparison
of Q4:1999 (pre-FD) and Q4:2000 (post-FD) quarters.
                                                                                                        28

                                        FD was adopted
                          SIZEi,q =     Log of market value of the firm i at the end of the quarter q
                                        divided by the market index
                         LOSSi,q =      Dummy set to 1 when the actual earnings for firm i at
                                        quarter q are negative
            NEG_SURPRISEi,q             Dummy set to 1 when the actual earnings is below the
                                        consensus forecast available two days before the earnings
                                        announcement
                   SURPRISEi,q =        Absolute value of the difference between the actual earnings
                                        and the consensus mean forecast 2 days before the earnings
                                        announcement, scaled by the end of the quarter book equity
                                        per share
                     ABSCARi,q =        Absolute value of the cumulative abnormal return for firm i
                                        along quarter q
                    SIGNCARi,q =        Dummy set to 1 when the cumulative abnormal return for
                                        firm i along quarter q is negative
                           VIXi,q =     Value of the VIX index at the earnings announcement day


        In the regression specification above, the dummy variable POSTFD allows for the
examination of whether changes in volatility are related to Reg FD. The other control variables
are motivated by an extensive literature related to volatility and returns at earnings announcement
dates. As mentioned before, there is evidence in the literature that SIZE is correlated with
volatility; besides, firm size can account for differences in risk that are not captured by the market
model.43 LOSS is included to allow for possible differences in market responses to negative
earnings.44 SURPRISE accounts for effects of news content of released earnings that goes
beyond the consensus forecast, and NEG_SURPRISE tries to capture the asymmetric responses
of returns to good and bad shocks.45 ABSCAR tries to control for patterns of volatility that are
contemporaneous to the earnings announcement period. SIGNCAR is included due to evidence
that volatility tends to be higher in down markets.46


43
   See Fama and French (1992, 1993).
44
   Hayn (1995) hypothesizes that, because shareholders have a liquidation option, losses are not expected to
be perpetual. Therefore, losses are less informative that profits about firm’s prospects. Hayn (1995) and
Lipe, Bryant and Widener (1998) provide empirical evidence supporting this conjecture.
45
   For a review of the literature on the subject see Kothari (2001).
46
   See for example Christie (1982) and Wu (2001).
                                                                                                           29

         Despite using an ‘idiosyncratic’ measure of volatility at earnings announcement dates
(market model residuals), the correlation of the measure of volatility among groups of firms
suggests that there might still be some general component of volatility that we are not capturing.
This motivates incorporating the VIX index on the earnings announcement day as an explanatory
variable in the regressions. VIX is an expected volatility index traded on the Chicago Board
Options Exchange; it is calculated by taking a weighted average of the implied volatilities from
eight calls and puts on the S&P 100 index.47 By including it, we are investigating whether the
market reaction to earnings news somehow relates to a proxy for the market expectations about
future market volatility.

         The results of running the panel data regressions to explain volatility at earnings
announcements are presented in Table 7. First take a look at panel A. Overall, controlling for
firms’ fixed effects, the coefficients on the explanatory variables are in the predicted direction
and, in general, are significant. Volatility decreases with firm size. In terms of information
contained in the released earnings numbers, volatility increases with the surprise that comes with
the earnings announcement and increases even more when the surprise is negative. The
coefficient on LOSS is significantly negative, supporting the hypothesis in Hayn (1995) that
losses are less informative than positive profits. The positive coefficient on ABSCAR confirms
the contemporaneous relation between the market return and the pattern of cumulated returns
along the quarter, and the positive coefficient on SIGNCAR supports the idea that volatility is
higher in down markets.

         The effects of Reg FD on volatility at earnings announcements are captured by the
dummies for post-FD periods. In specifications I and III, in which all firms are treated as a single
group, the coefficients on the post-FD dummy are significantly positive, indicating that there is an
increase in the volatility at earnings announcements after Reg FD is adopted.

         The VIX index does have explanatory power with respect to the market reaction to
earnings announcements: the inclusion of the VIX index as a control is responsible for an
increase in the R2 of the regression from 3.5 percent to 5.4 percent. Moreover, after the inclusion
of VIX, the effect of Reg FD as measured by the post-FD dummy is reduced by 75 percent,


47
  There could be a concern, of course, as to whether the left-hand side variable, volatility, is used to define
VIX (so that we would be ultimately regressing a variable on itself!). However, according to the CBOE,
VIX is supposed to be a measure of “investors' expectations about future stock market volatility”, not of the
current market volatility. Moreover, even if the expected future volatility is related to the current market
volatility (e.g. if market volatility has a persistent component), the left-hand side is a measure of
idiosyncratic volatility that is independent of market volatility. Thus, we interpret the VIX index as an
appropriate control variable in regression (7).
                                                                                                        30

suggesting that a big part of what might be interpreted as an effect of the regulation is in fact
related to an increase in expectations about future volatility of the market.
         Differential effects of Reg FD on firm groups based on size are analyzed by breaking up
the post-FD dummy in specifications II and IV. Without the inclusion of the VIX index, the
coefficients on all post-FD dummies are positive, indicating that market reaction to earnings
announcement consistently increases across all the groups. However, after controlling for VIX in
specification IV, only mid-size and small firms have significant post-FD dummies. Moreover, in
panel B of Table 7 we report results from running regressions separately for each group, and they
indicate that only the group of small firms has a significant coefficient on the post-FD dummy.48


C. The Cost of Capital
     The results presented in Section 3 suggest that the adoption of Reg FD caused changes in the
way information is produced for groups of firms based on size. Small firms did not increase their
use of voluntary disclosures after Reg FD – in stark contrast to mid-sized and big firms, which
substantially increased the use of these disclosures– and they also face a decrease in analyst
following in the post-FD period. Taking the use of pre-announcements as a proxy for the quality
and quantity of public release of information by firms, public release of information (channel (1))
by small firms has not improved after Reg FD. Taking sell-side analyst activity as a proxy for
information production by analysts, these results indicate that activity in channel (3) above has
also worsened for small firms after Reg FD. If Reg FD shut down channel (2), and if informed
trading (channel (4)) for small firms has not increased enough to compensate for the lower level
of information production in other channels, then there would be an overall deterioration in the
information environment for the group of small firms.

         For mid-size firms, results regarding their information environment are ambiguous. They
increase the use of voluntary disclosures (channel (1)), but still face a decrease in analyst
following after Reg FD (channel (3)). Finally, the information environment for big firms seems to
unambiguously improve: big firms make more use of voluntary disclosures and face an increase
in analyst following after Reg FD.



48
   The evidence of an increase in the market response to earnings announcements – at least for small firms -
contrasts with some other results in the Reg FD literature. Shane, Soderstrom and Yoon (2001), Heflin,
Subramanyan and Zhang (2001), Eleswarapu, Thompson and Venkataraman (2002), Bailey, Li, Mao and
Zhong (2003), find no significant evidence of increase, and sometimes evidence of a significance decrease,
in market reactions to earnings announcements. However, none of these references investigate the
possibility of cross-sectional differences on market reactions to earnings announcements based on firm
size.
                                                                                                 31

        Evidence of changes in the information environment of groups of firms is reinforced by
the results in this section that some market variables behave as if less information is being
produced about small firms. Forecast errors about earnings announcements, a proxy for overall
market lack of knowledge about firms’ future prospects, seem to increase after Reg FD is
adopted, and this is also reflected in a larger market response to earnings announcement news.
On the other hand, forecast errors seem to decrease for big firms post-FD, and there is no
significant change in the market response to earnings announcements. For mid-size firms, the
ambiguity of what happens in the information environment is also translated in terms of market
variable effects: while forecast error significant decreases post-FD, market response at earnings
announcement seems to increase, although not significantly.

        We now turn to the question of whether the changes in the information environment of
small firms materialize as a risk factor, that is, whether they are priced in the cost of capital of
those firms. The motivation for linking the quality of information environment to cost of capital
comes from an extensive literature. In an asset pricing model developed in Easley and O’Hara
(2003), linkage between a firm’s information environment and its cost of capital is caused by
investors demanding a higher return to hold stocks with more private than public information
(and, in general, demand lower returns when more public and private information is produced). In
particular, the authors argue that, as a recipe to reduce its cost of capital, firms can adapt their
corporate disclosure policies, e.g. releasing more public information or attracting an active
analyst following.

        In another stream of this literature, improved disclosure might play a role in reducing
information asymmetries among informed and uninformed investors, so that investors are more
confident that the stock will be traded at a ‘fair price’, thus reducing liquidity risk (see, e.g.,
Diamond and Verrecchia (1991) and Kim and Verrecchia (1994)). Assuming liquidity risk as a
sizable component of the firm’s cost of capital, improved disclosure can lead to a lower cost of
capital. More directly, Diamond (1985) argues that firms have incentives to make information
available to shareholders in order to reduce the costs of private information acquisition, and Barry
and Brown (1984) propose the existence of an “information risk” in that securities with less
information available will be deemed riskier because investors will face more uncertainty
regarding their future payoffs.

        From an empirical standpoint, there are many studies that investigate the relationship
between disclosure of information and the firm’s cost of capital. Leuz and Verrecchia (2000) find
evidence that increased levels of disclosure lowers the information asymmetry’s component of
the cost of capital. Likewise, Botosan (1997) and Botosan and Plumlee (2000) find evidence that
                                                                                                           32

increased disclosure is associated with a lower cost of capital, and Sengupta (1998) provides
evidence that firms with high disclosure quality ratings from financial analysts are rewarded with
a lower cost of issuing debt.

         To investigate whether and how the cost of capital of small firms relates to the adoption
of Reg FD, we adopt the Fama-French three-factor framework. Given that the evaluation of the
cost of capital for individual firms can lead to very imprecise measures (see Fama and French
(1997)), we opt to analyze the cost of capital for each portfolio based on firm size.

         Table 8 presents the results of estimating Fama-French three-factor regressions for
monthly returns on the value-weighted size-based portfolios during the period 1997:2002.
Specification I reproduces the basic Fama-French regressions, while specifications II through IV
include some additional variables in order to examine potential effects of Reg FD. A POSTFD
dummy allows us to investigate shifts in the cost of capital unrelated to the three risk factors in
the Fama-French model. Given that the portfolios are constructed based on the size characteristic,
we also interact POSTFD with the SMB factor to investigate whether there are changes in cost of
capital related specifically to the loading on SMB—the factor intended to capture firm size
differences.49

         The results indicate no evidence of changes in cost of capital that are unrelated to the
Fama-French risk factors: the coefficients on POSTFD are insignificant in all specifications.
However, the coefficient on the interacted variable POSTFD_SMB shows changes in the cost of
capital formation in the period post-FD. This coefficient is significantly positive for the portfolios
of mid-sized and small firms, whether it is modeled together with POSTFD or not, while it is
negative for the portfolio of big firms (although not significantly so).

         The results suggest a significant increase in the loading of the SMB risk factor for the
period in which Reg FD is operating: for the group of small (mid-size) firms the coefficients
indicate that the SMB loading pre-FD is 0.46 (0.47), while the same loading post-FD is 1.18
(0.96). Taking the three-factor model as a valid specification model for the riskiness of a portfolio
and assuming the same pattern of the risk factors before and after Reg FD, the results here
indicate a significant increase in the unconditional cost of capital for the portfolio of small and
mid-size firms after Reg FD is adopted. SMB is the difference between average return on

49
   Fama and French (1993) showed that, beyond the CAPM market risk factor, two other factors are
important in explaining the cross-sectional variation in equity returns: one is related to book-to-market
(HML) and another is related to size (SMB). SMB (“Small Minus Big”) is the monthly difference between
returns on small- and big-stock portfolios, thus is “meant to mimic the risk factor in returns related to size”
                                                                                                       33

portfolios of small stocks and average return on portfolios on big stocks. Our POSTFD_SMB for
small stocks is 0.71. Thus, the effect is 0.71 * (expected SMB). The average SMB over the
sample is 0.16 (sixteen basis points), meaning that the effect would be 11 basis points per months,
or 138 basis points per year.

        A caveat to this inference is that these results might be driven by the way the portfolio of
small firms is formed. In particular, in the Appendix we show that this portfolio has a small
decrease in average market value through time, so it is reasonable to expect that the loadings on
the size risk might change as well through time - although the magnitude of changes in risk
loading does not seem to conform to the small changes in average market value of the portfolio.
Instead of trying to correct the Fama-French regression for this change in size, we take a different
approach to check the robustness of the results in Table 8. For this analysis, we repeat the Fama-
French three-factor regressions with the addition of the POSTFD_SMB variable for the 25
portfolios formed on size and book-to-market from Fama and French (1993). Since these
portfolios are also formed based on the size dimension, we are able to investigate the effects of
Reg FD period on portfolios of small firms without depending on the details on how our
portfolios were constructed. The results are reported in Table 9.

        As a check on how well our size-based portfolios in reality proxy for Fama-French
portfolios’ returns, we present in Panel C of Table 9 the correlation between monthly returns of
our portfolios and monthly returns of Fama-French portfolios. The correlation between our
portfolio of small firms and Fama-French small portfolios reaches 0.93 and decreases as Fama-
French portfolios increase in size. The results suggest that our portfolios represent well the Fama-
French portfolios across size. Similarly, the correlation between our portfolio of mid-size firms
and the Fama-French portfolios peaks at the second and third quintile, and our portfolio of big
firms indeed mirrors the Fama-French big portfolios.50
        Panel A of Table 9 reports the Fama-French regressions for the period between 1997 and
2002, in which our portfolio of small firms is defined. We observe that the t-statistics for the
POSTFD_SMB are positive for all portfolios in the first three size quintiles, above one for 14 out
of 15 portfolios, significantly positive at the 5 percent level in eight out of 15 portfolios, and
significantly positive at the 5 percent for all portfolios in the second quintile. As a final


(Fama and French (1993, p. 9)). See Fama and French (1993) for a detailed description of these factors as
well as how to construct them.
50
   Our portfolio of small firms very closely matches Fama-French portfolios at the fifth quintile. The
average size of our portfolio through time is 0.66 million while the average size of the Fama-French fifth
quintile is 0.69 million (although, as discussed in the Appendix, the Fama-French portfolio formation
procedure allows firms to switch portfolios every month).
                                                                                                   34

robustness check, we run the Fama-French regressions extending the pre-FD period to July 1963.
Results reported in Panel B of Table 9 indicate that, even with this long specification, we still
observe the POSTFD_SMB as significantly increasing post-FD for all portfolios in the second
quintile.


5. Understanding the Factors behind Reg FD Effects
         The cross-sectional differences reported so far are based on the size dimension. The
relationship is expected given that, as we argued before, size is an important determinant of a
firm’s information environment. In this section, we explore other firm characteristics besides
firm size that might contribute to cross-sectional variation in the information environment pre-
and post-Reg FD. This analysis allows us to better understand how information is transmitted
and incorporated into asset prices, and also serves as additional robustness test of the empirical
methodology used throughout the paper.

         We first test whether our small-firm effect is related to the investor recognition
hypothesis. There was a reallocation of analysts from small to large stocks and as a consequence
many small stocks completely lost analyst coverage. We analyze whether the loss of investor
recognition is the factor behind the increase in the cost of capital for small stocks. Second, we
predict that the “complexity” of the information communicated by the firm leads to changes in
outcomes before and after the rule change. The rationale for this prediction is that more complex
information can be better communicated in private one-on-one meetings. Third, we test whether
firms with more severe management-shareholder agency problems are more affected by the
policy change. Possibly managers of firms with more severe agency problems are more likely to
treat information as a commodity and selectively disclose it in exchange for private benefits.
Finally, we investigate whether firms in “high litigation” industries experience the most
deterioration in the information environment and, in particular, whether the small-firm effect is
related to this litigation risk.


A. Investor Recognition Hypothesis
         Our results so far show that the rule change had a particularly adverse effect on small
firms. The analysis indicates that the loss of channel (2) – selective disclosure – was associated
with a loss of analyst coverage (channel (3)), no significant increases in the amount of public
voluntary disclosures (channel (1)), and a resulting increase in the cost of capital for small firms.

         In this subsection we explore whether the investor recognition hypothesis can explain our
small-firm effect. Merton (1987) developed an asset pricing model in which investors are not
                                                                                                 35

aware of the existence of some assets, and he showed that firms with a smaller investor base have
lower values (and higher costs of capital). The investor recognition hypothesis has received
substantial empirical support and has been extended in many directions.51

        The passage of Reg FD was an exogenous shock that provoked a change in analyst
coverage leading to a reallocation of analyst following from small to large stocks. Goshen and
Parshomovsky (2001) argue that small firms may need selective disclosure of information to
maintain and/or attract analyst following because the “cost of gathering and processing
information to the market does not guarantee any individual analyst a sufficient return to justify
the coverage…For small companies whose shares are traded with low liquidity the exclusivity
generated by selective disclosure is analogous to that created by patent or copyright protection.
In all cases, the loss associated with the grant of temporary exclusivity is presumably outweighed
by the ensuing long-term benefits” (p. 1268). In this view, while large firms may respond well to
the loss of selective disclosure, because the private gains to produce information are sufficient to
compensate the costs, it may be difficult for small firms, without being able to enhance private
gains by means of selective disclosure, to attract analyst coverage.52
        As result of this reallocation, many small stocks lost analyst coverage, and thus are likely
to also have lost recognition among investors. We test whether changes in the cost of capital of
firms losing all analyst coverage are consistent with the predictions of the investor recognition
hypothesis. Moreover, we hypothesize that the group of small firms with no analyst following
pre-Reg FD should not be affected by the adoption of Reg FD because they did not have any
analysts benefiting from selective disclosure to start with. Thus, the subgroup of firms with no
coverage is a control group against which to make comparisons. This control group is also useful
because it helps to separate the effect of the regulation from other concomitant and unrelated
changes over the sample period.

        Thus, to empirically evaluate the hypothesis we divide our sample of small firms into
further groups: those that had no analyst following before Reg FD and those that had at least one
analyst covering before. This division only makes sense for the group of small firms because a
large majority of mid-size and big firms have analyst coverage (see Figure 2). The results are
reported in Table 10. The results in the table show that there is no increase in the cost of capital

51
  Empirical papers are numerous, including Kadlec and McConnell (1994), Foerster and Karolyi (1999),
and more recently Kaniel et al. (2003). Theoretical developments include Basak and Cuoco (1998) and
Shapiro (2002).
                                                                                                              36

for the group with no analyst coverage before Reg FD (the POSTFD_SMB dummy is not
significantly different from zero). The cost of capital increases significantly only when we look
at the groups of small firms with some analyst coverage before the rule change. Notice that we
break the sample of firms with some analyst covering before between those who completely lost
coverage and those who lost coverage but not completely. This allows us to isolate a subgroup
that had some coverage before and with very comparable sizes pre- and post-FD. The results
indicate that the loading on the size factor increases for both subgroups (the POSTFD_SMB
dummy is 0.58 and 0.77, both significant at 5 percent).53


B. Information Complexity
         Another firm characteristic that may exhibit differences in outcomes before and after the
policy change is the “complexity” of the information communicated to the market by the firm.
Other things equal, a more complex information environment surrounding a firm (e.g. firms with
high intangibles, complex business models, or opaque growth opportunities) would lead to more
information asymmetry between informed and uninformed investors and, in general, to more
uncertainty about the firm’s value.

         There are both empirical and theoretical reasons to believe that more complex
information can be better communicated in private one-on-one meetings than publicly before a
large audience. Bushee et al. (2003) empirically find that firms with more complex information
(as proxied for by the level of intangible assets) were more likely in the pre-FD period to use
closed conference calls to disseminate information (i.e., calls that restrict access to invited
professionals, typically buy- and sell-side analysts). And, as mentioned in the Introduction,
Aumann and Hart (2003) provide a theoretical demonstration that information can be better
communicated by a long conversation than by a single message. These results lead us to predict
that firms with more complex information to transmit are more likely to be affected by the Reg
FD policy change.



52
   A related point is raised by King et al. (1990) who predict that disclosure increases with firm size
because incentives for private information acquisition are greater as a result of higher profits to trading on
private information.
53
    The way the subgroups are defined precludes us from analyzing effects on forecast error and volatility
for some of the subgroups. For the first (second) subgroup, forecast error is not defined in any of the pre-
FD (post-FD) observations, therefore precluding us of running a panel data on forecast error and volatility
(given that we need the consensus forecast as an important explanatory variable). In results not reported,
the regressions results on forecast error and volatility for the third group, “all other small firms”, are similar
to the results of running the regressions for all small firms.
                                                                                                        37

        We hypothesize the following changes in the outcome variables before and after the
policy change for groups of firms with different complexity. First, the change in analyst coverage
is expected to be negatively related to measures of complexity. This is so because without
selective disclosure analysts will face additional burdens in gathering and interpreting complex
information without as much ability to engage in valuable one-on-one communication with
managers.54 Second, the direction of the change in firms’ voluntary public disclosures is less
clear. On the one hand, the firm might want to disclose more information in order to resolve the
asymmetries and uncertainty coming from its complex information environment--if this was
happening pre-FD by direct contact between the firm and analysts, in order to compensate for the
shut-down of this channel the firm would have to release more information publicly. But on the
other hand, public communication may be an imperfect substitute for private communication of
complex information as both theory indicates (e.g., Aumann and Hart (2003)) and also empirical
evidence. E.g., Bushee et al. (2003) argue that firms with complex information are likely to
“…prefer closed calls to ensure that information is filtered through more sophisticated sources,
such as financial analysts, reducing the potential for misinterpretation and excess volatility” (p.
155); they have evidence indicating that volatility increases when firms open access to conference
calls to the public. Finally, changes in the other outcome variables are predicted to be positively
related to complexity, to the extent that the substitution of private and public channels is
imperfect. That is, we predict higher forecast errors, volatility, and cost of capital for firms with
more complex information that were unable to substitute the private for the public channel.
        Having argued that a firm’s complexity works as a determinant of the change in firm’s
behavior around Reg FD, we now empirically explore this possibility by taking complexity as
another dimension, subordinate to firm’s size, when defining groups of firms. Firms are first
sorted and divided into groups based on size; then each firm is classified into low or high
complexity, relative to the median complexity inside the firm’s size group. 55 The six resulting
groups (big, mid-size and small firms combined with low and high complexity) are then
examined using the same multivariate regression setups from Table 2 through Table 7.

        Table 11 presents the results of the estimation taking the presence of intangible assets (as
a fraction of the firm’s assets) as a proxy for complexity.56 To save space, the estimates of the


54
   Alternatively, though, private research could exploit that complexity increases information asymmetries
and thus coverage could be more profitable and positively related to complexity.
55
   More details in the formation of the groups are in the Appendix.
56
   We also used low versus high book-to-market as a proxy for complexity. The results are qualitatively the
same. However, we decide to focus the results on intangibles as a proxy for complexity because book-to-
market is highly correlated with our first determinant of the partitioning of group, size.
                                                                                                  38

other explanatory variables are omitted from the table. First note that the results indicate that
firms of the same size behave qualitatively as before, regardless of their complexity level: for
example, big firms in both complexity subgroups enjoy an increase in analyst coverage and
increase the use of pre-announcements; both subgroups of mid-size firms have analyst coverage
decreased post-FD but increase the use of pre-announcements; and both subgroups of small firms
have analyst coverage decreased post-FD and do not increase significantly the use of pre-
announcements.

        However, within size groups, the differences in output variables among complexity
groups are largely as predicted.      First, changes in analyst following are as predicted: the
subgroups of firms with high intangibles tend to suffer a significantly larger loss of analyst
following than the subgroup of firm with low intangibles and similar size (the difference is
significant for mid-size and small firms, but not significant for big firms). This difference is also
economically significant (high-intangible and low-intangible small firms lost 21 percent and 11
percent of analyst coverage, and high-intangible and low-intangible mid-size firms lost 9 percent
and 5 percent, respectively). Second, the changes in public voluntary disclosure are consistent
with the view that the public channel is an imperfect substitute for private communications: there
is no significant difference at the 5 percent level between the subgroups of high and low
intangibles of same size with respect to the propensity to release pre-announcements. Finally, the
differences in changes in forecast error, volatility and cost of capital among high- and low-
intangibles are only significant for small firms: volatility increases significantly more for high-
intangibles than low-intangibles for small firms (p-value <.0001), and the cost of capital for high-
intangibles small firms seem to have increased by more than low-intangibles firms
(POSTFD_SMB coefficients are respectively 0.75 (p-value 0.02) and 0.65 (p-value 0.05)).
Overall the results are consistent with the view that more complex small firms were more
adversely affected by the policy change than less complex firms.

C. Governance
        One of the goals of the SEC when adopting Reg FD was to curb managers from treating
material information as a commodity by selectively disclosing it to analysts in exchange for
private gains (e.g., allocations in hot IPOs) or slanted analysis (SEC (2000), Lowenstein (2004)).
We investigate in this section whether firms with more severe management-shareholder agency
problems were particularly affected by Reg FD--because perhaps managers of these firms were
using more selective disclosure in order to extract private benefits. The hypothesis we test is
whether firms with more significant agency problems experienced bigger changes in their
information environment and asset prices after Reg FD.
                                                                                                       39

        A widely held view in corporate finance is that agency problems are particularly severe
when managers are entrenched and can resist hostile takeovers (Jensen and Ruback (1983),
Shleifer and Vishny (1989)). Corporate governance provisions such as antitakeover charter and
bylaw clauses are commonly used mechanisms to entrench management,57 and extensive
empirical evidence links the use of these provisions with agency problems. For example,
Borokhovich et al. (1997) and Bertrand and Mullainathan (1999) find that firms adopting
antitakeover provisions and firms newly covered by state takeover laws increase CEO
compensation. Garvey and Hanka (1999) found that the adoption of such state antitakeover laws
led to reductions in leverage, and several event studies (e.g., Jarrell and Poulsen (1987) and
Karpoff and Malatesta (1989)) indicate that antitakeover provisions reduce firm value.

        To evaluate the cross-sectional variation in agency costs, we use the corporate
governance provisions in firms’ charters and bylaws and state takeover laws, as proxies for the
degree of agency costs. The data on the corporate governance provisions for each individual firms
is from the Investor Responsibility Research Center (IRRC), and we follow the approach used in
Gompers et al. (2003) to compute for each firm a governance index (G index). We use all IRRC
observations from 1993 to 2000 to compute the average G for each firm, and then use this
average G to partition the sample of big firms according to their governance structures. Firms
with good governance (democracies) are defined as the ones with average G in the lower quintile
of the distribution, while firms with bad governance (dictatorships) are the ones in the upper
quintile of the distribution. Unfortunately, the partition based on G cannot be carried out for the
group of mid-size and small firms, as G is defined primarily for big firms: while the fraction of
big firms without G is only 15 percent, for mid-size and small firms this fraction jumps up to 65
percent and 90 percent, respectively.

        Table 12 reports the results based on breaking up the sample into high and low G (again
we only report the post-FD dummies for both groups). Analyst following exhibits a significantly
higher increase in the good vs. the bad governance group. This result is consistent with the view
that bad governance firms became less attractive to analysts relative to the good governance
firms, because perhaps now they cannot be spoon fed anymore to the same extent. However, we
find that there is no significant difference between the two groups in all other measures that we
follow such as pre-announcement, forecast error, volatility, and cost of capital. In summary, the



57
   Examples of antitakeover provisions are the prohibition of shareholder voting by written consent or
calling of special meetings, classified board, supermajority requirements to approve mergers, and adoption
of poison pills (see Daines and Klausner (2001) and Gompers et al. (2003)).
                                                                                                         40

analysis suggests that overall the flow of information and asset prices did not change in any
significantly different way between firms with good and bad governance.

D. Litigation Risk
         The risk of shareholders lawsuits is an important factor that firms take into account when
deciding whether or not to disclose information and, if they choose to disclose, which channel to
use. The relationship between disclosure decisions and litigation risks is illustrated by Johnson et
al. (2001) who find that after congress revised the federal securities law, enacting the Private
Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 (this legislation was intended to reduce abusive class
action securities lawsuits), firms increased the frequency of earnings and sales forecasts. There
is, however, no consensus in the literature as to whether disclosure deters or triggers litigation
(see, e.g., Kasznik and Lev (1995)). Voluntary disclosure of information, especially of material
bad news, can potentially reduce expected litigation cost as shown by Skinner (1994). On the
other hand, voluntary disclosure of information can also increase expected litigation costs by
imposing a duty to update the information and increasing the risk of making selective disclosures
of material information. For example, Francis et al. (1994) find that firms that issued earnings
warnings were actually more likely to be sued by shareholders.
         Our goal in this section is to investigate whether Reg FD has had any differential impact
on the level of information produced by firms with ex-ante different exposures to litigation risk.
In particular, we also want to understand whether the adverse impact on small firms is associated
with litigation risks. In light of the complex relationship between litigation costs and disclosure
of information, there is no clear prediction about how the imposition of Reg FD affected firms
facing different litigation risks. Public announcements may create higher legal liability costs than
private communication because the latter is off-the-record, and it may be harder for shareholders
to file lawsuits on the basis of a duty to update information. This view would suggest that less
information would be produced by high litigation firms after Reg FD. The concern that legal
liability could create a chilling effect under Reg FD influenced the SEC in the original drafting of
the regulation.58 But Frankel et al. (2003) find that after Reg FD there was a substantial increase
in the number of firms adopting a “quiet period” in order to reduce the legal risks associated with
selective disclosures, and this increase was particularly pronounced among firms with high

58
   The SEC attempted to mitigate legal liability concerns by drafting the rule so that failure to make a
public disclosure required by Reg FD: (1) is not a breach of the anti-fraud provision of Rule 10b-5 (so there
is no private right of action for violations of Reg FD); (2) has no effect on a company’s eligibility to use
short-from registration under the Securities Act; (3) has no effect on whether a company is in compliance
with the current public information requirements of Rule 144; and (4) does not result in a loss of the
                                                                                                         41

litigation risks.59 This evidence suggests that it is possible that high litigation risk firms were ex-
ante already more concerned about the risks of disseminating information privately--selective
disclosure of material information can provide an additional motive for shareholders facing
trading losses to file lawsuits. This counterintuitive reasoning implies that high litigation firms
were actually less impacted in terms of the amount of information that is produced than low
litigation risk firms.
         Francis et al. (1994) find that biotechnology, computers, electronics, and retailing are the
industries with a higher incidence of litigation. Therefore, similarly to Frankel et al. (2003), we
consider firms in these industries as having ex-ante higher litigation risk. Table 13 reports the
results of the estimation taking litigation risk into account (again we just report variables related
to the change post Reg FD). The first key finding of the analysis is that litigation risk does not
seem to explain why small firms were adversely impacted by the rule change; small firms in both
high and low litigation risk categories seem to have been equally negatively affected.
Interestingly, mid-size and big firms in the high litigation risk category seem to have increased
their analyst following and increased the use of pre-announcements by more than firms of the
same size and but in the low litigation risk category. This evidence is not consistent with the
view that Reg FD had a chilling effect on high litigation risk firms. The evidence seems more
consistent with the view that high litigation firms were less exposed to the change in legislation,
presumably because they made less use of selective disclosure beforehand. This puzzling finding
is an interesting issue for future research to explore.


5. Robustness Checks and Other Issues
    In this section we briefly report on some results that take into account the onset of recession.
Also, we summarize results on the use of conference calls by firms, another way to publicly
disclose information. Finally, we report on the effects of Reg FD on American Depository
Receipts (ADRs) and foreign common stock.




availability of the “safe harbor” protections under the Private Litigation Reform Act of 1995. The SEC
enforces Reg FD through administrative actions.
59
   The term "quiet period" refers to the period that begins when a company files a registration statement
with the SEC and lasts until the SEC's staff has declared the registration statement "effective." During this
period, the federal securities laws limit what information a company and related parties can release to the
public. There is no required quiet period before a company announces its quarterly or year-end financial
results, but firms may voluntarily adopt such quiet periods.
                                                                                                              42

A. The 2001 Recession
         The post- Reg FD period coincides with the business cycle downturn in early 2001. The
business cycle downturn might play a role in the analyst coverage scenario. If a general recession
also means recession in the sell-side industry, then the downturn in early 2001 could have caused
the reduction in the supply of analysts. This could mean an overall reduction in the coverage of
firms in the market.60 However, what we see in the post-FD period is that only mid-size and
small firms suffer this reduction in coverage, while big firms actually enjoy an increase in
coverage. Even this pattern could be related to the business cycle if a reduced supply of analysts
is consistently linked to a reshuffling of coverage between firms of different sizes.61 To control
for this we reran the multivariate regressions on analyst following including a recession dummy62
- for the quarters classified by NBER as recessions (2001:2 through 2001:4) - interacted with the
post-FD dummies for each group (i.e. allowing for the computation of two post-FD coefficients
for each group, one related to the recession quarters and another related to the non-recession
quarters) and the results presented before do not change qualitatively.


B. Conference Calls
         Conference calls are another important method used by firms to voluntarily disclose
information (alongside earnings pre-announcements which we analyzed before). Former SEC
Chairman Arthur Levitt explicitly noted that closed conference calls (those where only invited
investors have access) put the general public at a competitive disadvantage. However, advances
in information technology now allow firms to “webcast” conference calls via the internet at low
cost, disseminating the information promptly to all investors. Curbing the widespread use of

60
   If this is the case, the recession effect is likely to be captured in a panel data design because the recession
would also affect the explanatory variables.
61
   This hypothesis is tested by Gorton and Madureira (2004).
62
    The period in which Reg FD operates also coincides with some other important exogenous shocks that
might, as well, have influenced the market variables we examine in this paper, namely, the emergence of
accounting scandals (starting with the Enron debacle in late 2001) and the attempts to regulate the security
analysts (such as the National Association of Security Dealers and New York Stock Exchange new
regulations on the security industry put into effect starting in the Summer of 2002 and the Global
Settlement in May 2003). Regarding accounting scandals, the oversight of corporate governance issues by
the media and regulators is likely to affect the way information is disseminated about a firm, both from the
sell-side industry and from the firm standpoints, although it is not quite clear how the effects would be felt.
Anyway, assuming that these effects would be felt starting in late 2001, the patterns of reshuffle in analyst
coverage and changes in the use of pre-announcements would be robust to the presence (and effects) of the
accounting scandals. The increasing oversight of the securities industry and the resulting legislation
specifically aimed at it are also likely to be strong determinants of changes in the way the industry operates.
However, if these changes were not anticipated well ahead in time, this does not seem to pose a problem to
our research given that only our last two quarters coincides with the NASD and NYSE changes – and the
results are robust to eliminating these two quarters.
                                                                                                       43

closed conference calls and enhancing the use open-access conference calls were an important
motivation behind the adoption of Reg FD.
        In order to have a more complete picture of how the information environment changed
around Reg FD, it is also important to examine changes regarding the use of conference calls (see
Bushee et al. (2003) for an in-depth analysis of this issue). Figure 4 shows a plot of the quarterly
fraction of firms within each size group that use conference calls around earnings announcements.
The figure displays a pattern of sharp increase in the use of conference calls, but there are no
cross-sectional differences between groups based on size: big, mid-size and small firms all
present a pattern of increasing the use of conference calls. More importantly, the increase seems
to have no relation to the timing of the adoption of Reg FD; it starts well before the beginning of
the discussion on Reg FD - actually, starting in the beginning of our sample - and continues
steadily through time. By the time Reg FD was proposed, around 70 percent of big firms were
already using quarterly conference calls. While a multivariate regression would indicate a
significant post-FD dummy for the use of conference calls, the pattern in Figure 4 does not lend
much credibility to the view that this increase is related solely to the adoption of the regulation.

C. American Depository Receipts (ADRs) and Foreign Common Stocks
        U.S. listed ADRs and foreign common stock (foreign private issuers) are exempted from
Reg FD. These exempted firms have no compelling legal reason to change their behavior due to
the new regulation, and thus might provide a natural control sample. However, as suggested in the
SEC comments about Reg FD, foreign issuers were also expected to follow the practices of U.S.
companies subject to the legislation because the SEC is seriously investigating extending the
regulation to foreign issuers or simply because of herd behavior.63 Moreover, companies
incorporated outside US are also subject to their own home country legislation, and some
countries already have regulations that mirror, to some extent, the goals of Reg FD - e.g. United
Kingdom and Canada - making it difficult to isolate a sample of firms that are really free from the
requirements of Reg FD. These considerations cast doubt on the idea that foreign private issuers
constitute a good control sample.



63
  Celanese AG, a company incorporated in Germany and trading at NYSE, illustrates the case. Although
exempted from Reg FD, it professes on its web page that: “Fair Disclosure: The Board of Management and
the Company's employees, as a matter of Company policy, are required to comply with all legal
requirements concerning disclosure of information. This not only includes compliance with applicable
German law, but also with various SEC and NYSE rules and regulations such as those concerning selective
disclosure          and          insider          trading.”        (see          http://www.celanese.com/
print/index/about_index/governance/governance_guideline/governance_guidelinedisclosure.htm).         Herd
behavior may be rational if the markets penalize companies not acting according to Reg FD requirements.
                                                                                                44

        To evaluate the impact of Reg FD on U.S. listed ADRs and foreign common stocks, we
repeat the regressions in Table 2 through Table 7 after adding two new groups: one for ADRs and
another for foreign common stocks. The results (not reported here; available upon request) do not
contribute to disentangling Reg FD effects from other possible intervening events. Overall,
foreign firms and ADRs behave according to their size: foreign firms, which on average are big
firms, increase analyst following and increase their use of pre-announcements post-FD, like big
US firms. ADRs, which on average are smaller in size, resemble the behavior of small U.S. firms;
they do not increase analyst following and the use of pre-announcements marginally decreases.


6. Discussion
        Efficient securities markets depend on the flow of information. There are different
channels through which information can be transmitted from firms to market participants.
Regulation Fair Disclosure closed one of these channels (labeled channel (2) above): firms are no
longer permitted to selectively disclose information to some market participants, but not others.
For the information previously transmitted via this channel to still be transmitted in the post-Reg
FD period, it must be transmitted by some other channel: by public disclosure (channel (1));
through information production and public release by sell-side analysts (channel (3)); or by
private information production (channel (4)). Our analysis has focused on whether the remaining
three channels are sufficient to provide the same information post-Reg FD as pre-Reg FD.
        We found that small firms were adversely affected by Reg FD; their cost of capital rose.
This finding is reminiscent of the "small-firm effect," which was first documented by Banz
(1981) and Reinganum (1981). They found that risk-adjusted returns to stocks with relatively low
equity capitalization were significantly positive, on average. This was viewed as an anomaly.
But, subsequent to its discovery it has been reported to have largely disappeared; that is, the
differential risk premium for small firms has been much smaller since 1982 than it was during the
period 1926-1982. See Schwert (2003) for a review. Our finding of the return of a small firm
effect suggests a reason for the original finding, namely, there was a lack of information, perhaps
a certain kind of information about small firms. Schwert (2003) suggests that this information
was subsequently forthcoming because investors responded to the academic studies. But that was
prior to Reg FD.
        Our investigation allows us to say more about the information at the root of the “small
firm effect.” We can draw inferences about how the forms of communication outlined above
differ by their costs, and hence by the complexity of the information that can be communicated. If
there is no difference between what is communicated via channels (1) and (2), other than who is
                                                                                               45

told first, then under Reg FD firms would simply announce everything publicly that previously
was communicated via selective disclosure. Otherwise, channels (3) and (4) could take over. But,
for small firms, this is not what happened. Some small firms just completely stopped being
followed by analysts, and consistent with the investor recognition hypothesis, the cost of capital
increased for those firms. Moreover, public communication does not seem to be a good substitute
for private one-on-one communication, where there is a free give and take, especially for firm
communicating complex information, consistent with ideas in Aumann and Hart (2003)—the
increase in cost of capital was more pronounced for firms communicating complex information.
Overall, our results suggest that Reg FD had unintended consequences and that “information” in
financial markets may be more complicated than current finance theory admits.
                                                                                                        46

                                     Appendix: Data Description


Data Sources and Data Requirements

        We use the First Call Historic Database to collect data on analyst following and forecasts,
actual earnings announcements and pre-announcements. Data on prices, returns and shares
outstanding come from the CRSP database and are complemented with some additional
information on firm characteristics from COMPUSTAT.
        We study firm-quarter data points. Our sample consists of all firms on the NYSE and
NASDAQ (common stocks; share code 10 or 11), ADRs (share code 30, 31 or 32) and foreign
stocks (share code 12) that are in the CRSP database at any point between 1997 and 2003. For
each of these firms, we collect all quarterly earnings announcement data from Q4:1997 to
Q3:2002 that are in the pre-FD and post-FD subsamples as defined below.64 We then complement
our data with security returns and prices from CRSP and additional firm characteristics from
COMPUSTAT.
        Reg FD was formally proposed by SEC on December 20, 1999, was approved on August
10, 2000 and became effective on October 23, 2000. These are the relevant dates we use to
establish our pre- and post-FD subsamples. A firm-quarter data point is considered post-FD when
the observation refers to a quarter equal to or after Q4:2000 and whose earnings announcement
day is after October 23, 2000, i.e. after the adoption of the rule.65
        The definition of the pre-FD period is a more contentious one. Some studies have used
the date of the adoption of the regulation as the milestone to define both post- and pre-FD
periods. We opt instead to view the period between the date Reg FD was proposed and the date it
was adopted as a transition period, in which it is especially difficult to predict the behavior of
firms and markets in regard to the regulation. If the firms indeed changed their behavior as a
result of the regulation, was it a sudden change that took place only after the final rule was in
place, or was it a gradual one? Reg FD has attracted a lot of attention since it was proposed, and it
is possible that firms would somehow prepare themselves for when the new rules would take


64
  We use only the original reported earnings number, thus ignoring the presence of restated numbers.
65
  It is possible that for some of the observations classified as post-FD, the period in which the effects of
Reg FD could be felt would in fact fall before the adoption of the rule. For example, if there is an
observation with fiscal quarter at October 2000 and that releases its earnings on Nov 1, 2000, most of the
period in which the production of information for that quarter would occur would fall before the limit date
of October 23, 2000, but the observation would still be deemed as post-FD according to the classification
procedure above. However, this does not seem to be a concern given that 87 percent of the firms in the
Q4:2000 sample has fiscal calendar in December and that the median earnings announcement day for that
quarter is January 31, 2001.
                                                                                                       47

place. In other words, given that the adoption of the rule was a completely anticipated event,
treating observations during the transition period as functioning under pre-FD status can be
misleading. On the other hand, we can not assume that the effects of Reg FD can be observed in
the transition period: firms could as well simply keep on functioning under pre-FD rules (e.g.,
providing selective disclosure) up to the effective date of the regulation. Thus, we decide to drop
the transition period and instead define the pre-FD period as the one before the date Reg FD was
proposed: a firm-quarter data point is considered pre-FD when the observation refers to a quarter
equal or before Q3:1999 and whose earnings announcement day is before December 20, 1999.
         The post-FD sample contains data from 8 quarters, from Q4:2000 to Q3:2002. In order to
use a pre-FD sample of comparable size, we define our pre-FD sample also with 8 quarters, from
Q4:1997 to Q3:1999. Notice that by using 8-quarters subsamples, we guarantee that both
subsamples have 2 of each calendar quarter (i.e. 2 first quarters, 2 second quarters etc). This can
ameliorate effects of potential seasonal differences in measured variables across calendar and/or
fiscal quarters.66
         For a firm-quarter to be included in the sample, some conditions must hold. The usual
availability restrictions apply regarding First Call, CRSP and COMPUSTAT databases. For
example, when examining data on market returns we require that price and return data from
CRSP be available for that firm-quarter. In particular, in order to use the market model to
compute abnormal returns, we require that returns over the window [-200,-11] must also be
available in CRSP.
         The measurement of some variables can be conditioned on the contents of available data.
For example, forecast error at earnings announcement can be properly defined only when we
have data available for (besides the actual earnings number) at least one analyst’s forecast for that
quarter. Therefore, a legitimate firm-quarter observation - in terms of availability of data from
CRSP, COMPUSTAT and First Call - can be deemed invalid to examine forecast error if the
number of analysts posting forecasts for that quarter is zero. This firm-quarter observation will
also be dropped from the sample if we use forecast error as a control variable to explain market
response at earnings announcement. For this reason, sample sizes of different statistical tests will
differ according to which specific variables these tests require.
         Regarding earnings announcements, besides data on the current quarter being analyzed,
we require that data on earnings announcements for the previous quarter must also be available in
First Call. Moreover, since we try to measure conditions holding at the interval between

66
   For example, Mendenhall and Nichols (1988) report differences in market responses to bad news at
earnings announcements when they are released in earlier quarters versus the firm’s fiscal fourth quarter.
                                                                                                          48

consecutive earnings announcements, we drop from the sample observations in which this
interval is smaller than 20 days. We also drop from the sample firm-quarters whose share price at
the end of the quarter is below $1.
         Finally, to reduce the impact of outliers, all statistical tests that involve a variable that is
subject to the presence of big outliers are preceded by a procedure to winsorize the variable. We
winsorize data on earnings surprises and volatility.


Subgroups Based on Firm Size
         As was discussed in the Introduction, in order to allow for the identification of cross-
sectional differences in the way Reg FD affected firms we analyze the effects of the regulation on
groups that are defined based on firm’s size. Each firm is allocated to one of three groups based
on its average size through the complete sample 1997-2002. The group of small firms is formed
by firms with average size below the 50th percentile of the distribution; the group of mid-size
firms is formed by firms with average size between the 50th and the 80th percentiles and the
group of big firms is formed by firms in the upper quintile of the distribution. Then the statistical
tests can be run taking into consideration these groups; for example, regressions can be run
separately for each group, allowing the relationship between the variables we ought to explain
                                                 67,68
and Reg FD to take a piecewise linear form.
         Table 14 presents summary statistics on size for these 3 groups. Bigger firms are also
older and more likely to belong to NYSE instead of NASDAQ, and Panel B indicates no clear
industry clustering in the groups’ samples. One concern is that this method can lead to patterns in
the evolution of average size of each group through time. Certainly each firm’s size fluctuates
through time, but a general pattern of change in the size of firms can cause the average size of
groups also to evolve through time; thus, some changes in market variables that are known to be
correlated with size would be nothing more than adjustments to the changes through time in the
average size of the components of each group. For example, if it is the case that small (big) firms
are decreasing (increasing) in size in the post-FD period, due to the market crash of 2000, then

67
   Notice that we do not reallocate a firm to a different group each quarter; instead, a firm is classified as
belonging to one and only one group throughout the whole sample. This is essential for our research design
based on panel data, since we will use group membership as a company characteristic and thus as criteria to
break up the sample: if a firm were allowed to change groups through time, we would not be able to use the
fixed effects control in the regression specification, given that the same firm would show up in two
different groups.
68
   As a robustness check, we repeat the univariate tests in Section 2 with a time-varying definition of group
membership, by which a firm is allocated to a (possibly) different group each quarter, according to the
                                                                                                        49

the average size in the group of small (big) firms will be decreasing (increasing) through time,
and a finding that analyst following for the group of big firms increase through time at the
expense of the analyst following for the group of small firms would be a direct result of the way
we partitioned our groups. Fortunately, the results in Table 14 suggest that the problem might not
be severe: the average size of the components of each group seems stable through time, and the
range of one standard deviation of size around the average measure suggests that the
methodology does provide for good break points in firm size. More important, though, is that we
still use firm size as a control variable when analyzing the evolution of market variables through
time, therefore controlling for any size pattern that might take place inside each group in the time
series dimension.69




percentile of that firm’s size compared to the distribution of size among all firms on that quarter. The
results (not reported) do not change qualitatively.
69
   That average size in the group of small (big) firms decreases (increases) through time can result simply
from the sorting of the firms based on average size over the whole period: for example, a firm classified as
small is more likely to have their size decreased -- than increased -- through time. As an alternative
definition, we classify firms based on their average size pre-FD (except for firms entering the sample after
Reg FD was adopted), and the results reported in this study to not change qualitatively.
                                                                                            50


                                         References
Agrawal, Anup and Sahiba Chadha (2002), “Who is Afraid of Reg. FD? The Behavior and
   Performance of Sell-Side Analysts Following the SEC’s Fair Disclosure Rules,” working
   paper.

Ajinkya, B. and M. Gift (1984), “Corporate Managers’ Earnings Forecast and Symmetrical
    Adjustments of Market Expectations. Journal of Accounting Research 22, 425-444.

American Bar Association (2001),           “FD    Task    Force    Survey,”   retrieved   from
  www.abanet.org/buslaw/fedsec.

Association for Investment Management and Research (2001), “Analysts, Portfolio Managers say
   Volume, Quality of information have fallen under Regulation FD AIMR member survey
   shows,” http://www.aimr.org/pressroom/01releases/regFD_survey.html.

Atiase, R. (1980), “Predisclosure Informational Asymmetries, Firm Capitalization, Financial
    Reports, and Security Price Behavior,” PhD dissertation, University of California.

Atiase, R. (1985), “Predisclosure Information, Firm Capitalization, and Security Price Behavior
    around Earnings Announcements,” Journal of Accounting Research, 21, 36.

Aumann, Robert and Sergiu Hart (2003), “Long Cheap Talk,” Econometrica 71, 1619-1660.

Bailey, Warren, Haitao Li, Connie X. Mao and Rui Zhong (2003), “Regulation FD and Market
    Behavior around Earnings Announcements: Is the Cure Worse than the Disease?,” Journal of
    Finance, 2487-2514.

Banz, R.W. (1981), “The Relationship between Return and Market Value of Common Stocks,”
   Journal of Financial Economics 9, 3-18.

Barry, C. and Stephen Brown (1984), “Differential Information and the Small Firm Effect,”
    Journal of Financial Economics 13, 283-294.

Basak, Suleyman and D. Cuoco (1998), “An Equilibrium Model with Restricted Stock Market
    Participation”, Review of Financial Studies 11, 309-341.

Bertrand, Marianne, and S. Mullainathan (1999), “Corporate Governance and Executive Pay:
        Evidence from Takeover Legislation,” MIT Working Paper.

Bhushan, R. (1989a), “Collection of Information about Publicly Traded Firms: Theory and
   Evidence,” Journal of Accounting and Economics 11, 183-206.

Bhushan, R. (1989b), “Firm Characteristics and Analyst Following,” Journal of Accounting and
   Economics 11, 255-274.

Bhushan, R. (1989b), “Firm Characteristics and Analyst Following,” Journal of Accounting and
   Economics 11, 255-274.

Bhushan, R. and P. O’Brien, P., R. (1990). “Analyst Following and Institutional Ownership,”
   Journal of Accounting Research 28 (Supplement), 55-76.
                                                                                           51


Borokhovich, Kenneth, K. Brunarski, and R. Parrino (1997), “CEO Contracting and Antitakeover
       Amendments,” Journal of Finance 52, 1495-1518.

Botosan, C.A. (1997), “Disclosure Level and the Cost of Equity Capital,” The Accounting
   Review 72, 323-349.

Botosan, C.A. and M.A. Plumlee (2000), “A Re-examination of Disclosure Level and Expected
   Cost of Capital. Working Paper, University of Utah.

Brennan, M and P. Hughes (1991), “Stock Prices and the Supply of Information,” Journal of
   Finance 46, 1665-1691.

Brennan, M and A. Subrahmanyam. (1995), “Investment Analysts and Price Formation in
   Securities Markets,” Journal of Financial Economics 38, 361-381.

Bricker, R., J. Grant, T. Fogarty and G. Previts (1999), “Determinants of Analyst Following,”
    Journal of Corporate Communications 1 (1999), 1-29.

Brown, L. (2001), “A Temporal Analysis of Earnings Surprises: Profits versus Losses,”
   Journal of Accounting Research 39 (2), 221-241.

Bushee, Brian L., D. Matsumoto, and G. Miller (2003), “Managerial and Investor Responses to
   Disclosure Regulation: The Case of Reg FD and Conference Calls,” University of
   Pennsylvania, working paper.

Bushee, Brian L. and Christian Leuz (2003), “Economic Consequences of SEC Disclosure
   Regulation,” University of Pennsylvania, working paper.

Chamberlain, G. (1980), “Analysis of Covariance with Qualitative Data,” Review of Economic
   Studies 47, 225-238.

Christie, A. (1982), “The Stochastic Behavior of Common Stock Variances - Value, Leverage
   and Interest Rate Effects,” Journal of Financial Economics 10, 407-432.

Chung, K. H. and H. Jo. (1996), “The Impact of Security Analysts’ Monitoring and Marketing
   Functions on the Market Value of Firms,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 31,
   493-512.

Coffee, John (2000), “Tackling New Regulation FD,” National Law Journal, September 18, 2000,
   p. B6.

Daines, Robert, and M. Klausner (2001), “Do IPO Charters Maximize Firm Value?
   Antitakeover Protection in IPOs,” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 17, 83-120.

Diamond, D. (1985), “Optimal Release of Information by Firms,” Journal of Finance 40, 1071-
   1094.

Diamond, D and R. Verrecchia (1991), “Disclosure, Liquidity, and the Cost of Capital,” The
   Journal of Finance 66, 1325-1355.
                                                                                            52

Easley, David and Maureen O’Hara (2004), “Information and cost of capital,” Journal of Finance,
    forthcoming.

Eleswarapu, Venkat R, Rex Thompson, Rex and Kumar Venkataramn (2002), “Measuring the
    Fairness of Regulation Fair Disclosure through its Impact on Trading Costs and Information
    Asymmetry,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, forthcoming.

Fama, E. and K. French (1992), “The Cross Section of Expected Returns,” Journal of Finance 47,
   no.2, 427-465.

Fama, E. and K. French (1993), “Common Risk Factors in the Returns of Stocks and Bonds,”
   Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3-56.

Fama, E. and K. French (1997), “Industry Costs of Equity,” Journal of Financial Economics 43,
   153-193.

Foerster, Stephen and A. Karolyi (1999), “The Effect of Market Segmentation and Investor
    Recognition on Asset Prices: Evidence from Foreign Stock Listing in the U.S.,” Journal of
    Finance 54, 981-1013.

Francis, J., D. Philbrick, and K. Schipper (1994), “Shareholder Litigation and Corporate
    Disclosures,” Journal of Accounting Research 32, 137-164.

Frankel, Richard, Peter Joos, and Joseph Weber (2003), “Litigation Risk and Voluntary
    Disclosure: The Case of Pre-Earnings Announcement Quiet Periods,” MIT, working paper.

Freeman, R. (1987), “The Association Between Accounting Earnings and Security Returns for
    Large and Small Firms,” Journal of Accounting and Economics 9, no. 2 195-228.

Garvey, Gerald and G. Hanka (1999), “Capital Structure and Corporate Control: The Effect of
       Antitakeover Statutes on Firm Leverage,” Journal of Finance 54, 519-546.

Glaeser, Edward, Simon Johnson, and Andrei Shleifer (2001), “Coase versus the Coasians,”
   Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 401-425.

Gompers, Paul, J. Ishii, and A. Metrick (2003), “Corporate Governance and Equity Prices,”
   Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 107-155.

Goshen, Zohar and G. Parchomovsky (2001), “On Insider Trading, Markets, and “Negative
   Property Rights in Information,” Virginia Law Review 87, 1229-1277.

Greene, W. H. Econometric Analysis. 3d ed. 1997. Prentice Hall.

Greenstone, Michael, Paul Oyer, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen (2003), “Mandated Disclosure,
   Stock Returns, and the 1964 Securities Acts Amendments,” Kellogg School, Northwestern
   University, working paper.

Grossman, Sanford and Stiglitz, J. (1987), “On the Impossibility of Informationally Efficient
   Markets,” American Economic Review 70, 393-408
                                                                                           53

Hayn, C. (1995), “The Information Content of Losses,” Journal of Accounting and Economics 20,
   125-153.

Heflin, Frank; Subramanyam, K. R.; Zhang, Yuan (2001), “Stock Return Volatility Before and
   After Regulation FD,” working paper,

Heflin, Frank, K. R. Subramanyam, K. R. and Yuan Zhang (2003), “Regulation FD and the
    Financial Information Environment,” The Accounting Review 78, 1-37.

Hunt, Isaac (2000), Remarks given at the 26th Annual Cleveland Securities Law Institute on
   Securities      Regulation,    Cleveland,     Ohio       (February      28,      2000);
   http//www.sec.gov/news/speeches/spch349.htm.

Irani, Afshad and Karamanou, I. (2002), “Regulation Fair Disclosure, Analyst Following and
    Analyst Forecast Dispersion,” forthcoming Accounting Horizons.

Jarrell, Gregg and A. Poulsen (1987), “Shark Repellents and Stock Prices: The Effects of
    Antitakeover Amendments since 1980,” Journal of Financial Economics 19, 127-168.

Jensen, Michael, and R. Ruback (1983), “The Market for Corporate Control: The Scientific
    Evidence,” Journal of Financial Economics 11, 5-50.

Johnson, Marilyn, R. Kasznik, and K. Nelson (2001), “The Impact of Securities Litigation
   Reform on the Disclosure of Forward-Looking Information by High Technology Firms,”
   Journal of Accounting Research 39, 297-327.

Jorion, Philippe, and Z. Liu and C. Shi (2003), “Informational Effects of Regulation FD:
    Evidence from Rating Agencies,” working paper Univ. of California at Irvine.

Kadlec, Gregory and J. McConnell (1994), “The effect of market segmentation and illiquidity on
    asset prices: Evidence from exchange listings,” Journal of Finance 49, 611-636.

Kaniel, Ron, D. Li and L. Starks (2003), “The investor Recognition Hypothesis: International
    Evidence and Determinants,” working paper Duke University.

Karpoff, Jonathan and P. Malatesta (1989), “The Wealth Effects of Second-Generation State
    Takeover Legislation,” Journal of Financial Economics 25, 291-322.

Kasznik, R. and B. Lev (1995), “To Warn or Not to Warn: Management Disclosures in the Face
   of Earnings Surprise,” The Accounting Review 70, 113-134.

Kothari, S.P., T. Lys, C. Smith, and R. Watts (1988), “Auditor Liability and Information
   Disclosure,” Journal of Accounting, Auditing, and Finance 3, 307-339.

Kim, O. and R. Verrecchia (1994), “Market Liquidity and Volume around Earnings
   Announcements,” Journal of Accounting and Economics 17, 41-68.

King, R., G. Pownall and G. Waymire (1990), “Expectations Adjustments via Timely
   Management Forecasts: Review, Synthesis and Suggestions for Future Research,” Journal of
   Accounting Literature 9, 113-144.
                                                                                          54

Kothari, S. (2001), “Capital Markets Research in Accounting,” Journal of Accounting and
   Economics, 105-231.

Lang, M and Russell Lundholm (1996), “Corporate Disclosure Policy and Analyst Behavior,”
   The Accounting Review 71, no. 4, 467-492.

Lang, M and Russell Lundholm (1993), “Cross-sectional Determinants of Analyst Ratings of
   Corporate Disclosures,” Journal of Accounting Research 31, no. 2, 246-271.

Leuz, C. and R. Verrecchia (2000), “The Economic Consequences of Increased Disclosure,”
   Journal of Accounting Research 38, Supplement, 91-124.

Levitt, Arthur (1999), speech October 18, 1999, to the Economic Club of New York, “Quality
   Information: The Lifeblood of Our Markets,”
   www.sec.gov/news/speech/speecharchive/1999/spch304.htm.

Levitt, Arthur (2002), Take on the Street (Pantheon Boos; New York).

Lipe, R., L. Bryant and S. Widener (1998), “Do Nonlinearity, Firm-specific Coefficients, and
    Losses Represent Distinct Factors in the Relation between Stock Returns and Accounting
    Earnings?,” Journal of Accounting and Economics 25, 195-214.

Loss, Louis (1983), Fundamentals of Securities Regulation (Little Brown and Company; Boston).

Lowenstein, Roger (2004), Origins of the Crash (Penguin Press; New York).

Matsumoto, D. (2002), “Management's Incentives to Avoid Negative Earnings Surprises,”
   Accounting Review 77, no. 3, 483-514.

Mendenhall, R. and W. Nichols (1988), “Bad News and Differential Market Reactions to
   Announcements of Earlier versus Fourth Quarter Earnings,” Journal of Accounting Research
   26 Supplement, 63-86.

Merton, Robert (1987), “A simple model of capital market equilibrium with incomplete
    information”, Journal of Finance 42, 483-510.

Mohanram, Partha S. and Shyam Sunder (2001), “Has Regulation Fair Disclosure Affected
  Financial Analysts’ Ability to Forecast Earnings?,” New York University, working paper.

National Investor Relations Institute (2001), “Corporate Disclosure Practices Survey 2001,”
    www.niri.org.

Reinganum, Mark (1981), “Misspecification of Capital Asset Pricing: Empirical Anomalies based
   on Earnings’ Yields and Market Values,” Journal of Financial Economics 9, 19-46.

Schwert, William (2003), “Anomalies and Market Efficiency,” chapter 15 of Handbook of the
   Economics of Finance, edited by George Constantinides, Milton Harris, and Rene Stulz
   (North Holland; Amsterdam), 937-972.

Sengupta, Partha (1998), “Corporate Disclosure Quality and the Cost of Debt,” The Accounting
   Review 73, 459-474.
                                                                                           55


Shane, P, N. Soderstrom and S. Yoon (2001), “Earnings and Price Discovery in the post-Reg FD
   Information Environment: A Preliminary Analysis,” University of Colorado, working paper.

Shapiro, Alexander (2002), “The investor recognition hypothesis in a dynamic general
    equilibrium: Theory and evidence,” Review of Financial Studies 15, 97-147.

Shleifer, Andrei, and R. Vishny (1989), “Management Entrenchment: The Case of Manager-
        Specific Investments,” Journal of Financial Economics 25, 123-140.

Shores, D. (1980), “The Association between Interim Information and Security Returns
   Surrounding Earnings Announcements,” Journal of Accounting Research 28, 164-181.

Skinner, D. (1994), “Why Firms Voluntarily Disclose Bad News”, Journal of Accounting
    Research 32, no. 1, 38-60.

Skinner, D. (1997), “Earnings Disclosures and Stockholders Lawsuits,” Journal of Accounting
    and Economics 23, 249-282.

Syre, Steven and Charles Stein (2001), “Boston Capital: After One Year, All’s Fair in
    Disclosure,” Boston Globe, October 21, 2001, p. F1.

Soffer, L., S. Ramu Thiagarajan and Beverly R. Walther (1998), “Earnings Preannouncements,”
    Northwestern University, working paper.

Soffer, L., S. Ramu Thiagarajan and Beverly R. Walther (2000), “Earnings Preannouncement
    Strategies,” Review of Accounting Studies 5, 5-26.

Straser, Verna (2002), “Regulation Fair Disclosure and Information Asymmetry,” University of
    Notre Dame, working paper.

Tishbi, John (2002), “Regulation FD: The Year that Passed and the Years Ahead,” Loyola of Los
    Angeles Law Review 35, 1131-1156.

Verrecchia, Robert (2001), “Essays on disclosure,” Journal of Accounting and Economics 32, 97-
       180.

United States Securities and Exchange Commission (2000), Final Rule: Selective Disclosure and
   Insider Trading, Exchange Act Release No. 33-7881 (Oct. 23, 2000),
   htt://www.sec.gov/rules/final/33-7881.htm.

Wu, G. (2001), “The Determinants of Asymmetric Volatility,” Review of Financial Studies 14,
   837-859.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               56
Table 1. Summary Statistics on Analyst Following
This table presents summary statistics on the measures of quarterly analyst following. Quarterly analyst following is proxied by two measures of number of forecasts
outstanding for firm i in quarter q. Number of forecasts is measured as the number of analyst forecasts outstanding for firm i at the day the earnings for quarter q are
announced; the standardized number of forecasts is a standardized measure of analyst following, computed as number of forecasts for firm i in quarter q divided by the
total number of forecasts available for all firms in quarter q (the summation of number of forecasts across i and keeping q fixed). The standardized number of forecasts
is presented in percentage terms, i.e. multiplied by 100. Details on the construction of subgroups of big, mid-size and small firms are described in the Appendix.
Significance of change presents the p-values of two-tailed test of differences for mean (t-test) and median (Wilcoxon). The sample comprises observations in the periods
Q4:1997-Q3:1999 (pre-FD sample) and Q4:2000-Q3:2002 (post-FD sample), except that observations with actual earnings announcements between 12/20/1999 and
10/23/2000 are excluded.


                                                    Pane A: All observations                                            Panel B: Subgroups based on firm size

                                                                                                           Big firms                                   Mid-size firms                              Small firms




                                                                         Significance of Change




                                                                                                                         Significance of Change




                                                                                                                                                                        Significance of Change




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Significance of Change
                                                              Post-FD




                                                                                                              Post-FD




                                                                                                                                                             Post-FD




                                                                                                                                                                                                           Post-FD
                                                     Pre-FD




                                                                                                  Pre-FD




                                                                                                                                                   Pre-FD




                                                                                                                                                                                                  Pre-FD
                 Number of forecasts
                  Mean                              4.4544    4.772     <.0001                    9.855 10.997          <.0001                    3.9813 4.1066            0.0071                1.3951 1.0031       <.0001
                  Median                                 3        3     <.0001                        9     10          <.0001                         3      3            0.0612                     1      0       <.0001

                 Standardized number of forecasts
                  Mean (x 100)                      0.0247 0.0261       <.0001                    0.055       0.060     <.0001                     0.022    0.022          0.0981                 0.008    0.005     <.0001
                  Median (x 100)                    0.0162 0.0159       <.0001                    0.049       0.055     <.0001                     0.018    0.017          0.0782                 0.005    0.000     <.0001

                 Total number of firm-Quarters      32450     30656                               8495         8257                               10598     10639                                13357     11760
                                                                                                                                                                                 57
Table 2. Panel Data Fixed Effects Regression to Explain Analyst Following
This table presents results of panel data fixed effects regression to explain quarterly analyst following. The dependent variables that proxy for analyst following are
NOFORi,q and NOFOR_STDi,q: NOFORi,q is the number of analyst forecasts outstanding for firm i at the day the earnings for quarter q are announced, while
NOFOR_STDi,q is a standardized measure of analyst following, computed as NOFORi,q divided by of total number of forecasts available for all firms in quarter q (the
summation of NOFORi,q. across i and keeping q fixed). The explanatory variables are defined as follows. SIZEi,q is the log of market value of the firm at the last day of
the month in which the earnings announcement is released, scaled by the market index. LOSSi,q is a dummy variable set to 1 when the actual earnings are negative.
ABSCARi,q is the absolute value of the cumulative abnormal return for firm i along quarter q. SIGNCARi,q is a dummy set to 1 when the cumulative abnormal return
for quarter q is negative. The cumulative abnormal return for firm i during quarter q is the summation of market model’s residuals from 3 days after the previous
quarter’s earnings announcement day up to 2 days before quarter q’s earnings announcement day. POSTFDi,q is a dummy set to 1 for a quarterly earnings release after
the adoption of Reg FD, and 0 otherwise. POSTFD_Bigi,q, POSTFD_Midi,q and POSTFD_Smalli,q are the interactions of POSTFDi,q with dummies identifying whether
the firm belongs, respectively, to the portfolio of big, mid-size or small firms. Details on the construction of portfolios of big, mid-size and small firms are described in
Appendix. The p-values are shown below each coefficient estimate. ). The sample comprises observations in the periods Q4:1997-Q3:1999 (pre-FD sample) and
Q4:2000-Q3:2002 (post-FD sample), except that observations with actual earnings announcements between 12/20/1999 and 10/23/2000 are excluded.
                          Panel A: Aggregating all data together                                                        Panel B: Running regressions in each group

                                    NOFOR                                        NOFOR_STD                                                      NOFOR_STD
                        All Data             Balanced Panel            All Data             Balanced Panel                                  Big           Mid-size     Small
                        I         II           III          IV         V           VI         VII         VIII                             firms            firms       firms
      POSTFD         0.1186        -         0.1669          -     3.72E-06         -      4.46E-06         -        POSTFD              3.49E-05        -1.51E-05   -1.71E-05
                     <.0001        -         <.0001          -      <.0001          -       0.0007          -                             <.0001           <.0001      <.0001
    POSTFD_Big          -      0.8567           -         0.7555       -        4.09E-05       -       3.41E-05        SIZE              1.09E-04         8.99E-05   4.71E-05
                        -      <.0001           -        <.0001        -         <.0001        -         <.0001                           <.0001           <.0001      <.0001
    POSTFD_Mid          -      -0.1868          -        -0.2720       -       -1.25E-05       -       -1.82E-05       LOSS              8.00E-06         6.87E-06   -3.29E-06
                        -      <.0001           -        <.0001        -         <.0001        -         <.0001                           0.0983           0.0024      0.0006
   POSTFD_Small         -      -0.2346          -        -0.2414       -       -1.33E-05       -       -1.49E-05     ABSCAR              4.39E-05         1.42E-05   -1.94E-06
                        -      <.0001           -        <.0001        -         <.0001        -         <.0001                           <.0001           <.0001      0.1457
       SIZE          1.3693    1.3330        1.6233       1.6080   7.72E-05     7.55E-05   9.14E-05    9.06E-05     SIGNCAR              2.87E-05        1.94E-05    9.80E-06
                     <.0001    <.0001        <.0001      <.0001     <.0001       <.0001     <.0001       <.0001                           <.0001           <.0001      <.0001
       LOSS          0.0512    0.0543        0.1042       0.1209   2.22E-06     2.39E-06   4.60E-06    5.47E-06
                     0.0370    0.0258        0.0232       0.0079    0.0975       0.0721     0.0649       0.0273    # Observations          16752           21237      25117
     ABSCAR          0.1954    0.1893        0.4042       0.4005   8.47E-06     8.17E-06   1.79E-05    1.77E-05         R2                 0.133           0.201      0.216
                     <.0001    <.0001        <.0001      <.0001     <.0001       <.0001     <.0001       <.0001
     SIGNCAR         0.3465    0.3410        0.3746       0.3711   1.89E-05     1.87E-05   1.98E-05    1.97E-05
                     <.0001    <.0001        <.0001      <.0001     <.0001       <.0001     <.0001       <.0001
   # Observations    63106     63106          27952        27952    63106       63106       27952       27952
        R2           0.131     0.145          0.138        0.153    0.139       0.150       0.143       0.156
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           58
Table 3. Summary Statistics on the Use of Pre-Announcements before and After Reg FD per Period of Issuance
This table presents summary statistics on the use of pre-announcements (PAs) before and after Reg FD per period of issuance. The first period comprises the interval
between the second day after the previous quarter’s actual earnings announcement (EA) day and date τ, where τ is defined as 15 days before the end of the current
quarter. The second period comprises the interval between date τ and 2 days before the current quarter’s earnings announcement day. The third period is the earnings
announcement period, defined as the window [-1,+1] around the current quarter’s earnings announcement day. Details on the construction of subgroups of big, mid-size
and small firms are described in the Appendix. Significance of change presents the p-value of two-tailed test of differences in proportions. The sample comprises
observations in the periods Q4:1997-Q3:1999 and Q4:2000-Q3:2002, except that observations with actual earnings announcements between 12/20/1999 and 10/23/2000
are excluded.
                                               Panel A: All Observations                                               Panel B: Subgroups Based on Firm Size
                                                                                                       Big firms                                             Mid-size firms                                      Small firms




                                                                     Significance of Change




                                                                                                                           Significance of Change




                                                                                                                                                                               Significance of Change




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Significance of Change
                                                          Post-FD




                                                                                                             Post-FD




                                                                                                                                                                    Post-FD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Post-FD
                                                Pre-FD




                                                                                              Pre-FD




                                                                                                                                                    Pre-FD




                                                                                                                                                                                                        Pre-FD
           PAs in first period:
           (between previous quarter and τ)
              Total of PAs                      1187      1816                                  580           1068                                    381             555                                 226           193
              Doubled PAs                         406       736                                 212            432                                    131             243                                  63            61
              Fraction with at least one PA     0.035     0.056     <.0001                    0.064          0.120       <.0001                     0.035           0.050     <.0001                    0.016         0.016      0.9395
              Fraction with more than one PA    0.002     0.003     <.0001                    0.004          0.009       0.0001                     0.001           0.002     0.0567                    0.001         0.001      0.2513
           PAs in second period:
           (between τ and actual EA)
              Total of PAs                      2990      4078                                  905           1572                                  1055            1619                                1030            887
              Doubled PAs                         886     1451                                  317            633                                    303             543                                 266           275
              Fraction with at least one PA     0.088     0.127     <.0001                    0.101          0.181       <.0001                     0.096           0.146     <.0001                    0.075         0.073      0.5009
              Fraction with more than one PA    0.003     0.005     0.0004                    0.005          0.009       0.0019                     0.004           0.006     0.0607                    0.002         0.002      0.6456
           PAs issued at the EA
           (window [-1,+1] around EA)
              Total of PAs                      1405      6268                                  727           2979                                    421           2322                                  257           967
              Doubled PAs                         407     2645                                  238          1239                                      98           1004                                   71           402
              Fraction with at least one PA     0.043     0.203     <.0001                    0.083          0.358       <.0001                     0.039           0.217     <.0001                    0.019         0.082      <.0001
              Fraction with more than one PA    0.001     0.001     0.0622                    0.002          0.003       0.6843                     0.001           0.001     0.1100                    0.000         0.000      0.0330

           All PAs in the quarter
              Total of PAs                      5582     12162                                 2212           5619                                  1857            4496                                1513          2047
              Doubled PAs                       1699      4832                                  767          2304                                     532           1790                                  400           738
              Fraction with at least one PA     0.149     0.306     <.0001                    0.210          0.494       <.0001                     0.156           0.335     <.0001                    0.104         0.148      <.0001
              Fraction with more than one PA    0.021     0.077     <.0001                    0.042          0.154       <.0001                     0.018           0.077     <.0001                    0.009         0.024      <.0001

              Total number of firm-quarters    32450     30656                                8495            8257                                  10598          10639                                13357         11760
                                                                                                                     59


Table 4. Quarterly Cross-Sectional Regressions to Explain the Use of Pre-Announcements
This table presents results of quarterly cross-sectional logit regression on the presence of a pre-
announcement. For each quarter, the dependent variable PREANNi,q is a dummy set to 1 when there is at
least one pre-announcement issued by the firm from the period between 15 days before the end of the
quarter q (henceforth referred as date τ) and 2 days before the actual release of that quarter’s earnings
announcement. SIZEi,q is the log of market value of the firm at the last day of the month in which the
earnings announcement is released, scaled by the market index at the same day the market value is
measured. NASDAQ,q is a dummy variable set to 1 when firm i is traded on NASDAQ. LOSSi,q is a
dummy variable set to 1 when the actual earnings are negative. SURPRISEi,q is measured as the absolute
value of the difference between the actual earnings and the consensus mean forecast at date τ, scaled by the
end of the quarter book equity per share. NEG_SURPRISEi,q is a dummy variable set to 1 when the actual
earnings is below the consensus forecast available at date τ. ABSCARi,q is the absolute value of the
cumulative abnormal return for firm i up to date τ. SIGNCARi,q is a dummy set to 1 when this cumulative
abnormal return negative. The cumulative abnormal return for firm i up to date τ is the summation of
market model’s residuals from 3 days after the previous quarter’s earnings announcement day up to date τ.
PA_INDUSTRYi,q is the log of the number of the pre-announcements issued by firms in the same industry
as firm i in the 10 days before firm i’s pre-announcement (or 10 days before date τ, if firm i does not issue
pre-announcement on that quarter). Industry dummies are also included (results not reported). The sample
comprises observations in the periods Q4:1997-Q3:1999 and Q4:2000-Q3:2002, except that observations
with actual earnings announcements between 12/20/1999 and 10/23/2000 are excluded. Panel A reports
results using only observations that have at least one earnings forecast not older than 90 days available for
quarter q at date τ. Panel B reports results using all observations from the original sample.

                               Panel A: Using all observations
                                                     Quarters before Reg FD
                     1997:IV      1998:I        1998:II        1998:III       1998:IV    1999:I   1999:II   1999:III
      Intercept      -5.0429     -5.9778        -5.5561         -5.0242       -3.4273   -4.3398   -4.3055   -4.9926
                     <.0001      <.0001         <.0001          <.0001        <.0001    <.0001    <.0001    <.0001
       SIZE            0.224      0.2021        0.1751            0.179        0.0617   0.1182     0.0923   0.0976
                     <.0001      <.0001         <.0001          <.0001         0.0768   0.0011     0.0143   0.0096
     NASDAQ           0.1152     -0.1453        0.1897          -0.4504       -0.1526    -0.171    -0.364   -0.2843
                      0.5197      0.4167          0.22           0.0016        0.2658   0.2407      0.019   0.0604
       LOSS           0.1823      0.5323        0.2229           0.3595        0.0208     0.157    0.4037   0.3397
                      0.3585      0.0036        0.1676           0.0162        0.8836   0.2869     0.0104   0.0292
     ABSCAR           1.1203      1.949         1.4877            1.863        0.4312   1.0833    -0.1869   1.0876
                      0.0188      0.0001        0.0007          <.0001         0.0365   0.0002    0.6748    0.0039
     SIGNCAR         -0.0574      0.4767        0.5569           0.2428        0.3044   0.4108    0.00952   0.5371
                      0.7156      0.0005        0.0002             0.09        0.0053     0.001    0.9383   <.0001
   PA_INDUSTRY       -0.6197      1.3718        1.5057           2.2626        0.2468   1.2674     1.5539   2.5121
                      0.0039     <.0001         <.0001          <.0001         0.0792   <.0001    <.0001    <.0001
   # Observations     3629        3946           4151            4113          4108     4174       4197      4133
                2     0.096       0.162          0.134           0.231         0.062    0.139      0.157     0.250
     Pseudo R
                                                    Quarters After Reg FD
                     2000:IV     2001:I         2001:II       2001:III        2001:IV    2002:I   2002:II   2002:III
      Intercept      -3.4488     -4.483         -6.2335        -5.585         -3.5969   -5.7136   -3.9785   -5.0062
                     <.0001      <.0001         <.0001         <.0001         <.0001    <.0001    <.0001    <.0001
       SIZE           0.1234     0.2401         0.3066         0.2694          0.2008   0.2831     0.197    0.2447
                     <.0001      <.0001         <.0001         <.0001         <.0001    <.0001    <.0001    <.0001
     NASDAQ          -0.2945     0.0269         0.0861        -0.3633         -0.0846   0.1032    -0.0493   -0.0724
                      0.0164     0.8314         0.5331         0.0123          0.5403   0.4921    0.7368    0.5986
       LOSS           0.1536     0.1367         0.2302        -0.0934         -0.0429   -0.0766    0.241    -0.1861
                      0.2031     0.2596         0.0869         0.5045          0.7411   0.6019    0.1096    0.2198
     ABSCAR           0.1852     0.8795         0.9833         0.7413          0.2606   1.2579    1.0689    0.5879
                      0.5107      0.001         0.0042         0.0837          0.4429   0.0039    0.0075    0.1507
     SIGNCAR          0.247      0.1349          0.197         0.1834          0.3097   0.1729    0.2596    0.0903
                      0.0168      0.194         0.0699         0.1071          0.0055   0.1514    0.0278    0.4199
   PA_INDUSTRY        1.1723     0.5282         1.5776         2.4992         -0.5299   1.0238    0.4983    1.2421
                     <.0001      <.0001         <.0001         <.0001         <.0001    <.0001     0.0011   <.0001
   # Observations     4101        4054           4075            3905          3834     3704       3562      3420
                2     0.136       0.153          0.200           0.420         0.110    0.198      0.141     0.190
     Pseudo R
                                                                                                                           60
                 Panel B: Using only observations for which consensus forecast is available
                                                        Quarters before Reg FD
                    1997:IV         1998:I         1998:II        1998:III        1998:IV      1999:I   1999:II   1999:III
   Intercept        -4.6114        -5.1828         -5.3378         -4.5855        -3.0135     -3.9201   -4.0907   -5.6953
                    <.0001         <.0001          <.0001          <.0001         <.0001      <.0001    <.0001    <.0001
    SIZE             0.1907         0.1552         0.1481           0.1312         0.0427     0.0782      0.08     0.1243
                     0.0005         0.0061         0.0022           0.0034         0.3089     0.0737     0.0802    0.0071
  NASDAQ             0.2257        -0.1524         0.2283          -0.3973        -0.1176     -0.1427   -0.3625   -0.3819
                      0.248         0.4474         0.1872            0.012         0.4409     0.3828     0.0414    0.0299
NEG_SURPRISE         0.9202         1.2438         1.3479           1.0639         0.9835     0.9606      1.402    1.1773
                    <.0001         <.0001          <.0001          <.0001         <.0001      <.0001    <.0001    <.0001
  SURPRISE          19.1174        25.1405         26.2663        26.8845         14.3069     20.2016   20.1124   36.8681
                     0.0011        <.0001          <.0001          <.0001           0.007      0.0004    0.0001   <.0001
  ABSCAR             0.5966         2.2315          0.6247          1.1439         0.1489      0.6426   -0.1982    1.4682
                     0.2823         0.0012         0.2325           0.0041         0.7169     0.0918     0.7154    0.0031
  SIGNCAR           -0.1544         0.4525         0.2547          -0.0827         0.2498     0.2766    -0.0226    0.5143
                     0.3787         0.0041         0.1368           0.6026         0.0476     0.0583     0.8735    0.0007
PA_INDUSTRY           -0.79         1.3398          0.8974          2.0965        -0.0566      1.0455    1.5517     2.388
                     0.0008        <.0001          <.0001          <.0001          0.7159     <.0001    <.0001    <.0001
# Observations       2535            2650           2801            2811           2784        2780      2847      2793
             2       0.138           0.233          0.206           0.283          0.110       0.172     0.250     0.330
  Pseudo R
                                                        Quarters After Reg FD
                    2000:IV         2001:I         2001:II        2001:III        2001:IV      2002:I   2002:II   2002:III
   Intercept        -3.2888        -4.7031         -6.2854        -5.1042         -2.8957     -5.4728   -4.1258   -5.2652
                    <.0001         <.0001          <.0001          <.0001         <.0001      <.0001    <.0001    <.0001
    SIZE             0.0541           0.2          0.2486          0.1381          0.1522     0.2457     0.1584   0.2116
                     0.1342        <.0001          <.0001          0.0007         <.0001      <.0001     0.0004   <.0001
  NASDAQ            -0.2674         0.1042          0.2417        -0.2834         -0.0997     0.0504    -0.1377   -0.0905
                      0.056        0.4614          0.1203           0.075          0.5031      0.757    0.3917    0.5487
NEG_SURPRISE         0.9422        1.2833          1.4494          1.0336          0.6565     0.7717     0.971     0.912
                    <.0001         <.0001          <.0001          <.0001         <.0001      <.0001    <.0001    <.0001
  SURPRISE          14.1542        20.717          18.7542        18.0542         18.7575     31.2891    26.725   24.1087
                     0.0042        <.0001          0.0005          0.0075          0.0012     <.0001    <.0001    0.0012
  ABSCAR             0.2138        0.4365          0.4643          -0.018         -0.0569     0.4871    0.9418    0.1339
                     0.5355        0.1829          0.2519          0.9721          0.8877     0.3387    0.0376    0.7664
  SIGNCAR            0.1345        0.0754          0.1287         -0.0645          0.3569     0.0643    0.1266    -0.0146
                     0.2642        0.5262          0.2953          0.6148          0.0037     0.6298    0.3387    0.9051
PA_INDUSTRY          0.2138        0.4365          0.4643          -0.018         -0.0569     0.4871    0.9418    0.1339
                     0.5355        0.1829          0.2519          0.9721          0.8877     0.3387    0.0376    0.7664
# Observations       2637            2666           2685            2647           2663        2583      2594      2496
             2       0.183           0.208          0.271           0.454          0.126       0.228     0.188     0.209
  Pseudo R
                                                                                                                                                                     61
Table 5. Panel Data Regression (Conditional Logit) to Explain the Use of Pre-announcements
This table presents results of conditional (fixed effects) logit regressions of the presence of a pre-announcement. The dependent variable PREANNi,q is a dummy set to 1
when there is at least one pre-announcement issued by the firm from the period between 15 days before the end of the quarter q (henceforth referred as date τ) and 2
days before the actual release of that quarter’s earnings announcement. SIZEi,q is the log of market value of the firm at the last day of the month in which the earnings
announcement is released, scaled by the market index at the same day the market value is measured. LOSSi,q is a dummy variable set to 1 when the actual earnings are
negative. The variable SURPRISEi,q is measured as the absolute value of the difference between the actual earnings and the consensus mean forecast at date τ, scaled by
the end of the quarter book equity per share. NEG_SURPRISEi,q is a dummy variable set to 1 when the actual earnings is below the consensus forecast available at date
τ. ABSCARi,q is the absolute value of the cumulative abnormal return for firm i up to date τ. SIGNCARi,q is a dummy set to 1 when this cumulative abnormal return
negative. The cumulative abnormal return for firm i up to date τ is the summation of market model’s residuals from 3 days after the previous quarter’s earnings
announcement day up to date τ. PA_INDUSTRYi,q is the log of the number of the pre-announcements issued by firms in the same industry as firm i between date τ and
the day of firm i’s pre-announcement (or the actual earnings announcement, if firm i does not issue pre-announcement on that quarter). POSTFD_Bigi,q,
POSTFD_Midi,q and POSTFD_Smalli,q are the interactions of POSTFDi,q with dummies identifying whether the firm belongs, respectively, to the portfolio of big, mid-
size or small firms. Details on the construction of portfolios of big, mid-size and small firms are described in the Appendix. The p-values are shown below each
coefficient estimate. The sample comprises observations in the periods Q4:1997-Q3:1999 (pre-FD sample) and Q4:2000-Q3:2002 (post-FD sample), except that
observations with actual earnings announcements between 12/20/1999 and 10/23/2000 are excluded. The first 2 columns of Panel A report results using all observations
from the original sample, and the last 2 columns report results using only observations that have at least one earnings forecast not older than 90 days available for
quarter q at date τ.
                               Panel A: Aggregating all data together                                       Panel B: Running regressions in each group
                                                                                                                                 Big         Mid-size    Small
                                           I            II          III      IV        V        VI                              firms         firms       firms
                POSTFD                  0.5226          -            -     0.5664      -         -        POSTFD               0.7697        0.5874      0.1572
                                        <.0001          -            -     <.0001      -         -                            <.0001         <.0001      0.0800
              POSTFD_Big                   -         0.7582      0.4927       -     0.7548   0.5067         SIZE              -0.0022        0.1449      0.2764
                                           -         <.0001      <.0001       -     <.0001   <.0001                            0.9710        0.0030      <.0001
              POSTFD_Mid                   -         0.6057       0.3778      -     0.5890    0.3764   NEG_SURPRISE            1.2030        1.4544      1.3010
                                           -         <.0001      <.0001       -     <.0001   <.0001                           <.0001         <.0001      <.0001
             POSTFD_Small                  -         0.0561      -0.1906      -     0.1260   -0.0785     SURPRISE             34.0600        7.8479      4.4843
                                           -         0.3780       0.0040      -     0.1500    0.3260                          <.0001         <.0001      0.2760
                  SIZE                  0.0989       0.0723       0.1047   0.1598   0.1412    0.1644      ABSCAR               0.2168        0.7414      0.3881
                                        0.0010       0.0150      0.0010    <.0001   <.0001   <.0001                            0.3740        <.0001      0.0350
                  LOSS                  0.4012       0.4012      0.4288       -        -         -        SIGNCAR              0.1586        0.1499      0.1605
                                        <.0001       <.0001      <.0001       -        -         -                             0.0040        0.0060      0.0170
             NEG_SURPRISE                  -            -            -     1.3556   1.3500    1.3290
                                           -            -            -     <.0001   <.0001   <.0001     # Observations         11703          12135      7327
               SURPRISE                    -            -            -     6.5455   6.6500    6.1776      Pseudo R
                                                                                                                     2         0.100          0.117      0.857
                                           -            -            -     <.0001   <.0001   <.0001
                ABSCAR                  0.6745       0.6835       0.5229   0.5209   0.5246    0.3565
                                        <.0001       <.0001      <.0001    <.0001   <.0001   <.0001
                SIGNCAR                 0.2603       0.2618       0.1968   0.1595   0.1605    0.1007
                                        <.0001       <.0001      <.0001    <.0001   <.0001   <.0001
             PA_INDUSTRY                   -            -        0.8973       -        -     0.8371
                                           -            -        <.0001       -        -     <.0001
              # Observations             34799       34799        34799    31155    31155    31155
                Pseudo R
                           2             0.019       0.023        0.069    0.098    0.100    0.139
                                                                                                                                                                        62
Table 6. Panel Data Fixed Effects Regression to Explain Forecast Error
This table presents results of panel data fixed effects regression to explain forecast error at quarterly earnings announcements. The dependent variable,
EA_SURPRISEi,q, is the absolute value of the difference between actual earnings per share for firm i at quarter q and the consensus (mean) forecast as of 2 days before
the actual earnings announcement day for firm i’s quarter q, divided by either firm i market value of equity at the end of the quarter (specifications I and II) or firm i
book equity per share computed at the end of quarter q (specifications III and IV). The explanatory variables are defined as follows. SIZEi,q is the log of market value of
the firm at the last day of the month in which the earnings announcement is released, scaled by the market index. LOSSi,q is a dummy variable set to 1 when the actual
earnings are negative. ABSCARi,q is the absolute value of the cumulative abnormal return for firm i along quarter q. SIGNCARi,q is a dummy set to 1 when the
cumulative abnormal return for quarter q is negative. The cumulative abnormal return for firm i during quarter q is the summation of market model’s residuals from 3
days after the previous quarter’s earnings announcement day up to 2 days before quarter q’s earnings announcement day. POSTFDi,q is a dummy set to 1 for a quarterly
earnings release after the adoption of Reg FD, and 0 otherwise. POSTFD_Bigi,q, POSTFD_Midi,q and POSTFD_Smalli,q are the interactions of POSTFDi,q with
dummies identifying whether the firm belongs, respectively, to the portfolio of big, mid-size or small firms. Details on the construction of portfolios of big, mid-size and
small firms are described in The Appendix. The p-values are shown below each coefficient estimate. The sample comprises observations in the periods Q4:1997-
Q3:1999 (pre-FD sample) and Q4:2000-Q3:2002 (post-FD sample), except that observations with actual earnings announcements between 12/20/1999 and 10/23/2000
are excluded.
                              Panel A: Aggregating all data together                                           Panel B: Running regressions in each group
                                        Earning surprise scaled         Earning surprise scaled
                                          by share price               by book equity per share            Earning surprise scaled by book equity per share
                                                                                                                                Big         Mid-size           Small
                                             I                II            III             IV                                 firms          firms             firms
                    POSTFD               0.0019               -          -0.0001             -              POSTFD           -0.0004         0.0000           0.0006
                                         <.0001               -           0.4223             -                                0.0011         0.8936            0.0258
                  POSTFD_Big                 -             0.0006            -           -0.0002             SIZE            -0.0008        -0.0012           -0.0007
                                             -            <.0001             -           0.0387                               <.0001         <.0001            0.0013
                 POSTFD_Mid                  -            0.0019             -           -0.0001             LOSS             0.0020         0.0041           0.0069
                                             -            <.0001             -           0.5107                               <.0001         <.0001           <.0001
                 POSTFD_Small                -            0.0031             -           0.0008            ABSCAR             0.0012         0.0022           0.0016
                                             -            <.0001             -           <.0001                               0.0007         <.0001            0.0007
                     SIZE                -0.0038          -0.0037        -0.0010         -0.0010           SIGNCAR           -0.0004        -0.0005           -0.0006
                                         <.0001           <.0001         <.0001          <.0001                               <.0001         <.0001            0.0029
                     LOSS                0.0048            0.0048         0.0046          0.0045
                                         <.0001           <.0001         <.0001          <.0001           # Observations      15786          17942            11987
                   ABSCAR                0.0014           0.0014          0.0018          0.0018               R   2          0.011          0.031            0.044
                                         <.0001           <.0001         <.0001          <.0001
                   SIGNCAR                0.0002           0.0002        -0.0005         -0.0005
                                         <.0001            0.0005        <.0001          <.0001
                 # Observations           45715           45715          45715           45715
                      R
                          2               0.138           0.137          0.029           0.029
                                                                                                                                                                        63
Table 7. Panel Data Fixed Effects Regression to Explain Volatility (Market Response) at Earnings Announcements
This table presents results of panel data fixed effects regression to explain volatility (market response) at earnings announcements. The dependent variable, volatility, is
defined as the cumulative absolute abnormal return during the 3 days (window [-1,+1]) around the earnings announcement day, where the abnormal return is obtained as
the residual from the market model. The explanatory variables are defined as follows. SIZEi,q is the log of market value of the firm at the last day of the month in which
the earnings announcement is released, scaled by the market index. LOSSi,q is a dummy variable set to 1 when the actual earnings are negative. SURPRISEi,q is
measured as the absolute value of the difference between the actual earnings and the consensus mean forecast two days before the earnings announcement, scaled by the
end of the quarter book equity per share. NEG_SURPRISEi,q is a dummy variable set to 1 when the actual earnings is below the consensus forecast. ABSCARi,q is the
absolute value of the cumulative abnormal return for firm i along quarter q. SIGNCARi,q is a dummy set to 1 when the cumulative abnormal return for quarter q is
negative. The cumulative abnormal return for firm i during quarter q is the summation of market model’s residuals from 3 days after the previous quarter’s earnings
announcement day up to 2 days before quarter q’s earnings announcement day. VIX is the value of the volatility index for the Chicago Board Options Exchange at the
earnings announcement day. POSTFDi,q is a dummy set to 1 for a quarterly earnings release after the adoption of Reg FD, and 0 otherwise. POSTFD_Bigi,q,
POSTFD_Midi,q and POSTFD_Smalli,q are the interactions of POSTFDi,q with dummies identifying whether the firm belongs, respectively, to the portfolio of big, mid-
size or small firms. Details on the construction of portfolios of big, mid-size and small firms are described in the Appendix. The p-values are shown below each
coefficient estimate. The sample comprises observations in the periods Q4:1997-Q3:1999 (pre-FD sample) and Q4:2000-Q3:2002 (post-FD sample), except that
observations with actual earnings announcements between 12/20/1999 and 10/23/2000 are excluded.
                                     Panel A: Aggregating all data together                            Panel B: Running regressions in each group
                                                                                                                         Big            Mid          Small
                                                   I              II             III       IV                           firms          firms          firms
                           POSTFD              0.0091             -           0.0021        -        POSTFD            0.0005         0.0014        0.0046
                                               <.0001             -            0.0023       -                          0.6230         0.2165         0.0077
                         POSTFD_Big                -           0.0081             -      0.0009       SIZE             -0.0078       -0.0091        -0.0176
                                                   -          <.0001              -     0.4052                         <.0001         <.0001        <.0001
                        POSTFD_Mid                 -          0.0093              -      0.0024       LOSS             0.0012        -0.0048        -0.0063
                                                   -          <.0001              -      0.0251                        0.5236         0.0080         0.0027
                        POSTFD_Small               -          0.0109              -     0.0042    NEG_SURPRISE         0.0050         0.0067         0.0021
                                                   -          <.0001              -      0.0045                        <.0001         <.0001         0.1715
                            SIZE               -0.0114        -0.0113         -0.0113   -0.0113     SURPRISE           0.6917         0.6118        0.5159
                                               <.0001         <.0001          <.0001    <.0001                         <.0001         <.0001        <.0001
                            LOSS               -0.0043        -0.0043         -0.0039   -0.0039      ABSCAR            0.0554         0.0371         0.0325
                                                0.0002        0.0002          0.0005    0.0005                         <.0001         <.0001        <.0001
                       NEG_SURPRISE             0.0047         0.0047          0.0048   0.0048      SIGNCAR            0.0084         0.0053        0.0033
                                               <.0001         <.0001          <.0001    <.0001                         <.0001         <.0001         0.0165
                          SURPRISE              0.5589         0.5577          0.5641    0.5626        VIX             0.0015         0.0016        0.0015
                                               <.0001         <.0001          <.0001    <.0001                         <.0001         <.0001        <.0001
                          ABSCAR               0.0424          0.0425          0.0393    0.0393
                                               <.0001         <.0001          <.0001    <.0001     # Observations        16366        18960         13304
                          SIGNCAR               0.0094         0.0094          0.0060   0.0060           R2              0.076        0.054         0.045
                                               <.0001         <.0001          <.0001    <.0001
                             VIX                   -              -           0.0015     0.0015
                                                   -              -           <.0001    <.0001
                        # Observations          48630         48630           48630     48630
                             R
                                 2              0.035         0.035           0.055     0.055
                                                                                                                                                                     64
Table 8. Fama-French Regression on Size-Based Portfolios
This table presents results of regressions motivated by the Fama and French (1993) 3-factor model for the portfolios of firms created based on the division by size. The
dependent variable is the value-weighted monthly return of each size-based portfolio in excess of the T-bill. The explanatory variables RMRF, SMB and HML are
defined in Fama and French (1993). POSTFD is a dummy set to 1 for the months after Oct 2000, and 0 otherwise; POSTFD_SMB is the interaction of POSTFD and
SMB. The sample period is Jan 1997 to December 2002.



                                              Big firms                                 Mid-size firms                             Small firms
                                       I         II         III       IV         I         II            III     IV         I         II           III       IV
                     Intercept      0.0016    0.0017      0.0018    0.0018    -0.0060   -0.0073     -0.0064    -0.0071   -0.0172   -0.0191       -0.0225   -0.0235
                                    0.013     0.0085      0.0251    0.0211    0.2343    0.1408      0.3207     0.2628    0.0160     0.0066       0.0139    0.0088
                      RMRF          0.9789    0.9824      0.9779    0.9815    1.2653    1.2202      1.2672     1.2193    1.0489     0.9828       1.0712    1.0032
                                    <.0001    <.0001      <.0001    <.0001    <.0001    <.0001      <.0001     <.0001    <.0001    <.0001        <.0001    <.0001
                       SMB          -0.0834   -0.0736     -0.0815   -0.0723   0.5982    0.4725      0.5946     0.4738    0.6470     0.4627       0.6048    0.4334
                                    <.0001    <.0001      <.0001    <.0001    <.0001    0.0003      <.0001     0.0005    0.0001     0.0101       0.0005    0.0181
                       HML          -0.0311   -0.0270     -0.0295   -0.0259   0.1342    0.0821      0.1314     0.0833    -0.0606   -0.1370       -0.0941   -0.1623
                                    0.087     0.1401      0.1107    0.1646    0.3631    0.5734      0.3836     0.5754    0.7683     0.5008       0.6524    0.4318
                     POSTFD            -         -        -0.0007   -0.0005      -         -        0.0012     -0.0006      -         -          0.0145    0.0120
                                       -         -        0.6169    0.6904       -         -        0.9096     0.9585       -         -          0.3396    0.4202
                  POSTFD_SMB           -      -0.0381        -      -0.0372      -      0.4874            -    0.4884       -       0.7146          -      0.6932
                                       -      0.1911         -      0.2065       -      0.0393           -     0.0410       -       0.0304          -      0.0367

                   # Observations     72        72          72        72        72        72             72      72        72         72           72        72
                              2
                      Adj R         0.992      0.992      0.991     0.992     0.766      0.778      0.763      0.774     0.606      0.627        0.605     0.625
                                                                                                                             65


Table 9. Fama-French Portfolios and the Period Post-Reg FD
This table analyzes results based on the 25 portfolios formed on size and book-to-market from Fama and
French (1993). Panels A and B presents results of regression based on the Fama and French (1993) 3-factor
model for Fama-French 25 portfolios. The dependent variable is the value-weighted monthly return of each
portfolio in excess of the T-bill. The explanatory variables RMRF, SMB and HML are defined in Fama and
French (1993). POSTFD is a dummy set to 1 for the months after Oct 2000, and 0 otherwise;
POSTFD_SMB is the interaction of POSTFD and SMB. The sample period is Jan 1997 to December 2002.
Panel C presents the correlation of returns between our portfolios of big, mid-size and small firms and the
25 Fama-French portfolios for the period between Jan 1997 and Dec 2002.
               Panel A: Fama-French results for the period between Jan 1997 and Dec 2002

                                               Book-to-market equity (BE/ME) quintiles

        Size            Low       2        3          4     High                   Low      2         3       4      High

                                        RMRF                                                       t(RMRF)
        Small           1.33    1.21     1.01       0.97     0.99                  5.95     6.31      7.50    9.40   11.44
          2             1.35    1.14     1.02       1.09     1.15                   8.56   11.90     17.63   19.95   21.08
          3             1.16    1.20     1.13       1.10     1.13                   8.63   16.05     20.84   18.70   16.83
          4             1.26    1.17     1.17       1.12     1.11                  11.12   20.03     17.16   21.07   12.36
         Big            0.91    1.02     0.98       0.94     0.95                  25.59   14.60     11.88    9.56    8.29

                                        SMB                                                        t(SMB)
        Small           0.44    0.60     0.55       0.61     0.63                   1.77   2.79      3.68    5.26    6.48
          2            0.32     0.51     0.58       0.59     0.61                   1.84   4.73      8.87    9.61    9.92
          3            0.19     0.36     0.40       0.52     0.45                   1.30   4.28      6.52    7.92    6.02
          4            -0.01    0.33     0.26       0.25     0.31                  -0.11   5.04      3.45    4.28    3.08
         Big           -0.25    0.03     0.10       0.13     0.21                  -6.34   0.36      1.11    1.19    1.62

                                        HML                                                        t(HML)
        Small          -0.20    0.30     0.47       0.62     0.67                  -0.70   1.20      2.73     4.66    6.02
          2            -0.04    0.51     0.69       0.91     0.97                  -0.19   4.10       9.17   12.80   13.67
          3            -0.30    0.57     0.83       1.00     0.94                  -1.73   5.92      11.76   13.25   10.84
          4            -0.14    0.66     0.84       0.85     0.87                  -0.98   8.80       9.49   12.32    7.48
         Big           -0.34    0.37     0.42       0.76     0.74                  -7.43   4.09       4.00    5.93    4.99

                                        POSTFD_SMB                                                 t(POSTFD_SMB)
        Small          0.72     0.56     0.30   0.27        0.41                   1.56    1.42      1.07   1.24     2.27
          2            0.76     0.57      0.37  0.37        0.65                   2.35    2.89      3.07   3.25     5.79
          3            0.66     0.19      0.13  0.03        0.31                   2.39    1.26      1.15   0.24     2.22
          4            0.57     0.00     -0.03  0.02         0.03                   2.43   -0.02     -0.25  0.15      0.16
         Big           -0.04    -0.06    0.16  -0.04        -0.69                  -0.59   -0.44     0.93  -0.18     -2.91

                                        R2
        Small           0.59    0.54      0.57      0.67     0.76
          2             0.71    0.78      0.87      0.89     0.91
          3             0.75    0.83      0.88      0.85     0.83
          4             0.79    0.87      0.82      0.87     0.70
         Big            0.96    0.79      0.72      0.59     0.53
                                                                                                                     66

       Panel B: Fama-French results for the period between Jul 1963 and Dec 2002

                                       Book-to-market equity (BE/ME) quintiles

Size            Low       2        3          4     High                   Low      2         3       4      High

                                RMRF                                                       t(RMRF)
Small           1.19     1.09    1.01       0.96     1.02                  27.50   30.58     37.38   42.55   49.06
  2             1.21     1.08    1.01       1.01     1.12                  37.31   47.46     57.70   61.09   67.14
  3             1.16     1.08    1.02       0.99     1.10                  42.88   52.16     55.53   57.38   57.73
  4             1.13     1.09    1.07       1.04     1.15                  47.24   53.61     53.87   58.10   47.78
 Big            0.95     1.01    0.95       0.96     1.00                  66.97   54.99     44.61   44.94   35.67

                                SMB                                                        t(SMB)
Small           1.06     1.02     0.91       0.90    0.99                  18.25   21.35     25.18   29.76   35.59
  2            0.75     0.75      0.70       0.63    0.74                  17.16   24.42     30.04   28.69   33.29
  3            0.53     0.47      0.45       0.42    0.54                  14.53   17.10     18.23   18.28   21.08
  4            0.16     0.23      0.20       0.18    0.33                   5.12    8.27      7.44    7.39   10.35
 Big           -0.23    -0.17    -0.17      -0.10    0.05                 -11.93   -6.80     -5.96   -3.55    1.41

                                HML                                                        t(HML)
Small          -0.13     0.25    0.42       0.54     0.73                  -2.05   4.73      10.29   16.03   23.53
  2            -0.26     0.25    0.45       0.63     0.82                  -5.22   7.40      17.07   25.40   32.77
  3            -0.33     0.25    0.50       0.65     0.81                  -8.21   7.95      18.17   24.98   28.35
  4            -0.33     0.25    0.49       0.63     0.79                  -9.10   8.21      16.53   23.19   21.97
 Big           -0.39     0.10    0.24       0.58     0.74                 -18.47   3.66      7.43    17.91   17.50

                                POSTFD_SMB                                                 t(POSTFD_SMB)
Small           0.19     0.18    -0.05 -0.02         0.07                   0.97    1.14     -0.40 -0.20      0.73
  2            0.29     0.26      0.15  0.24         0.46                   2.00   2.51      1.95   3.26     6.18
  3            0.31     0.00     -0.01  0.02         0.18                   2.51   -0.02     -0.11  0.29      2.12
  4            0.37     -0.01    -0.06  0.04        -0.04                   3.40   -0.09     -0.67  0.45     -0.40
 Big           -0.09    0.04      0.37  0.12        -0.57                  -1.47   0.50      3.82   1.27     -4.47

                                R2
Small           0.79     0.81     0.85      0.88     0.91
  2             0.86     0.89     0.92      0.92     0.94
  3             0.88     0.89     0.90      0.90     0.90
  4             0.89     0.88     0.88      0.89     0.85
 Big            0.94     0.88     0.82      0.81     0.74
                                                                                                                67

Panel C: Correlation of monthly returns of portfolio based on firm size and Fama-French portfolios, 1997:2002

                                           Portfolio of big firms

                                               Book-to-market equity (BE/ME) quintiles
                                   Size         Low       2        3       4      High

                                  Small           0.63      0.57      0.58    0.58    0.61
                                    2             0.73      0.71      0.69    0.65    0.63
                                    3             0.75      0.81      0.76    0.65    0.69
                                    4             0.83      0.84      0.76    0.76    0.68
                                   Big            0.97      0.87      0.81    0.62    0.57



                                           Portfolio of mid-size firms

                                               Book-to-market equity (BE/ME) quintiles
                                   Size         Low       2        3       4      High

                                  Small           0.91      0.91      0.88    0.86    0.83
                                    2             0.94      0.90      0.85    0.78    0.79
                                    3             0.95      0.80      0.64    0.54    0.56
                                    4             0.94      0.66      0.49    0.57    0.43
                                   Big            0.67      0.50      0.48    0.19    0.13



                                           Portfolio of small firms

                                               Book-to-market equity (BE/ME) quintiles
                                   Size         Low       2        3       4      High

                                  Small           0.93      0.91      0.89    0.87    0.86
                                    2             0.89      0.80      0.72    0.66    0.67
                                    3             0.88      0.65      0.49    0.35    0.41
                                    4             0.83      0.51      0.33    0.38    0.26
                                   Big            0.56      0.37      0.37    0.05   -0.01
                                                                                                                           68


Table 10. Summary Results of Breaking Small Firms According to Analyst Following
This table presents results involving the break-up of small firms according to analyst following
characteristics. The first subgroup includes firms present in both pre-FD and post-FD periods and that have
no analyst following in any of the firm-quarters of the sample. The second subgroup includes firms that had
some analyst following in at least one of the pre-FD quarters but no analyst following in any of the post-FD
quarters. The third subgroup includes all the remaining small firms. Panel A present univariate statistics
based on these subgroups. Panel B presents results of running Fama-French regressions (as in Table 8) for
all the small firms taken together as a group as well as for each subgroup of small firms defined above.
.

                                    Panel A: Univariate statistics



                                                 Small firms with no    Small firms with some
                                                  analyst following     analyst following pre-           All other
                          All small firms              pre-FD           FD but none post-FD             small firms

        # firms            3166                         364                     339                     2463


                        Pre-FD     Post-FD       Pre-FD       Post-FD    Pre-FD       Post-FD    Pre-FD        Post-FD

       Size ($MM)         72          68           46           54         76           46         77             76
  Number of forecasts    1.40        1.00         0.00         0.35       1.27         0.00       1.72           1.34
   Pre-announcement      0.08        0.07         0.01         0.02       0.09         0.05       0.08           0.08


                                    Panel B: Fama-French regressions



                                                 Small firms with no    Small firms with some
                                                  analyst following     analyst following pre-           All other
                          All small firms        pre-FD or post-FD      FD but none post-FD             small firms
                           I          II            I           II          I           II          I                 II
       Intercept        -0.0172    -0.0191       -0.0014      -0.0024    -0.0178      -0.0194    -0.0184       -0.0205
                        0.0160     0.0066        0.8163       0.6833     0.0054       0.0023     0.0123         0.0046
        RMRF            1.0489     0.9828        0.8075       0.7716     1.0146       0.9610     1.0965         1.0251
                        <.0001     <.0001        <.0001       <.0001     <.0001       <.0001     <.0001         <.0001
         SMB            0.6470     0.4627        0.4933       0.3932     0.7216       0.5720     0.6675         0.4685
                        0.0001     0.0101        0.0005       0.0122     <.0001       0.0005     0.0001         0.0111
        HML             -0.0606    -0.1370       0.1811       0.1397     0.3167       0.2547     -0.1366       -0.2190
                        0.7683     0.5008        0.3051       0.4321     0.0873       0.1647     0.5201         0.2957
    POSTFD_SMB             -       0.7146           -         0.3878        -         0.5804        -           0.7715
                           -       0.0304           -         0.1741        -         0.0491        -           0.0231

    # Observations        72          72           72           72         72           72         72             72
              2
        Adj R           0.606       0.627         0.475        0.481      0.575        0.593     0.628          0.650
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           69

Table 11. Summary Results of Breaking Firms in Groups based on Size and on Intangibles
This table presents results involving the break-up of sample in groups based on size (big, mid-size and small firms) and intangibles (low and high). Panel A presents
results on panel data regressions. The first column under each variable presents the estimates of post-FD dummies corresponding to each group definition in multivariate
panel data regressions (other coefficients’ estimates are omitted) as done before for the break-up on size alone, with the exception that now we also include book-to-
market and intangibles as control variables; for the analyst following regression we start from specification VI in Table 2, for the pre-announcement regression we start
from specification V in Table 5, for the forecast error regression we start from specification IV in Table 6 and for volatility regression we start from specification IV in
Table 7; and then we add book-to-market and intangibles as regressors. The second column under each variable is computed by dividing the post-FD dummy by the pre-
FD average of that variable (except for pre-announcement, when we show simply the pre-FD average). The intra-group differential impact shows p-values of tests of
differences in intra-group coefficients on high and low intangibles. Panel B presents results of running Fama-French regressions for each group of firms; each row
presents the coefficients estimates of SMB and POSTFD_SMB regressors from running specification type II in Table 8 (other coefficients’ estimates are omitted).
                                                                                       Panel A: Panel data regressions                                                                                                 Panel B: Fama-French Regressions
                         Analyst Following                                    Pre-announcement                    Forecast error                                     Volatility
                                                       % change from pre-FD




                                                                                                                                              % change from pre-FD




                                                                                                                                                                                                % change from pre-FD
                             multivariate regression




                                                                                                                    multivariate regression




                                                                                                                                                                      multivariate regression
                             POSTFD dummy from




                                                                                                                    POSTFD dummy from




                                                                                                                                                                      POSTFD dummy from




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              POSTFD_SMB
                                                                                                 Pre-FD average
                                                                                 Odds ratio
                                                       average




                                                                                                                                              average




                                                                                                                                                                                                average




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SMB
       Big size, low        3.65E-05                   0.0660                    2.32          0.0917             -8.34E-05                   -0.0215                 1.70E-03                  0.0214                          -0.1201      0.0387
        intangible           <.0001                                            (<.0001)                             0.5268                                             0.2744                                                   0.0001      0.4927
       Big size, high       3.13E-05                   0.0581                    1.79          0.1123              7.65E-05                   0.0211                 -1.42E-03                  -0.0175                         -0.0203     -0.1121
        intangible           <.0001                                            (<.0001)                             0.7244                                             0.3796                                                   0.6134      0.1339
       Mid-size, low       -1.13E-05                   -0.0545                   1.83          0.0836              5.58E-04                   0.0908                 -5.44E-04                  -0.0058                         0.4514      0.5467
        intangible           <.0001                                            (<.0001)                             0.0075                                             0.7269                                                   0.0028      0.0435
       Mid-size, high      -2.12E-05                   -0.0902                   1.71          0.1109             2.38E-04                    0.0426                  3.59E-03                  0.0352                           0.5366      0.5065
        intangible           <.0001                                            (<.0001)                             0.2733                                             0.0232                                                   <.0001       0.0367
      Small size, low      -7.63E-06                   -0.1111                   1.08          0.0609             1.57E-03                    0.1596                 -5.40E-03                  -0.0461                          0.4175      0.6534
        intangible           0.0006                                             0.1020                              <.0001                                             0.0219                                                    0.0228      0.0528
      Small size, high     -1.89E-05                   -0.2182                   1.01          0.0871             1.24E-03                    0.1623                  8.70E-03                  0.0769                           0.5248      0.7520
        intangible           <.0001                                             0.6721                              <.0001                                             <.0001                                                    0.0029      0.0195

       # Observations        56634                                              31155                               41399                                             43927
            R
                2            0.152                                              0.096                               0.031                                             0.056

                         Intra-group differencial impact in High vs Low (p-value)

          Big size          0.1011                                              0.1620                              0.5853                                            0.1515
          Mid-size          0.0009                                              0.8870                              0.2764                                            0.0541
         Small Size         <.0001                                              0.0610                              0.4609                                            <.0001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            70
Table 12. Summary Results of Breaking Big Firms between Democracies and Dictatorships
This table presents results involving the break-up of big firms between democracies and dictatorships. Big are defined as described in the Appendix; democracies
(dictatorships) are firms with average G in the lowest (highest) quintile of the distribution of G among all firms in the sample. Panel A presents results on panel data
regressions. The first column under each variable presents the estimates of post-FD dummies corresponding to each group definition in multivariate panel data
regressions (other coefficients’ estimates are omitted) as done before for the break-up on size alone; for the analyst following regression we use specification VI in Table
2, for the pre-announcement regression we use specification V in Table 5, for the forecast error regression we use specification IV in Table 6 and for volatility
regression we use specification IV in Table 7. The second column under each variable is computed by dividing the post-FD dummy by the pre-FD average of that
variable (except for pre-announcement, when we show simply the pre-FD average). The intra-group differential impact shows p-values of tests of differences in intra-
group coefficients on high and low G. Panel B presents results of running Fama-French regressions for each group of firms; each row presents the coefficients estimates
of SMB and POSTFD_SMB regressors from running specification type II in Table 8 (other coefficients’ estimates are omitted).
                                                                                      Panel A: Panel data regressions                                                                                                 Panel B: Fama-French Regressions
                        Analyst Following                                    Pre-announcement                    Forecast error                                     Volatility
                                                      % change from pre-FD




                                                                                                                                             % change from pre-FD




                                                                                                                                                                                               % change from pre-FD
                            multivariate regression




                                                                                                                   multivariate regression




                                                                                                                                                                     multivariate regression
                            POSTFD dummy from




                                                                                                                   POSTFD dummy from




                                                                                                                                                                     POSTFD dummy from




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               POSTFD_SMB
                                                                                                Pre-FD average
                                                                                Odds ratio
                                                      average




                                                                                                                                             average




                                                                                                                                                                                               average




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SMB
     Big size, low g      2.42E-05                    0.0462                    2.28          0.0800             -2.49E-04                   -0.0636                -2.67E-03                  -0.0292                           -0.0875     -0.0169
                           <.0001                                             (<.0001)                             0.2844                                             0.3064                                                      0.0235      0.8096
     Big size, high g     8.14E-06                    0.0138                    2.27          0.1100             -7.81E-05                   -0.0259                -5.06E-03                  -0.0751                            0.0422     -0.2181
                           0.0325                                             (<.0001)                             0.8229                                             0.0535                                                      0.5346      0.0921

     # Observations         56634                                              31155                               41399                                             43927
           R
               2            0.161                                              0.096                               0.032                                             0.056

                        Intra-group differencial impact in High vs Low (p-value)

        Big size           0.0025                                              0.4450                              0.8270                                            0.5152
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         71

Table 13. Summary Results of Breaking Firms in Groups based on Size and on Litigation Risk Industries
This table presents results involving the break-up of sample in groups based on size (big, mid-size and small firms) and industries subject to litigation risk (low and high
risk). Big, mid-size and small firms are defined as described in the Appendix; inside each group of firms based on size, we define a firm as having high litigation risk if
belongs to a high litigation risk industry, i.e. with SICCD in the ranges 2833-2836, 3570-3577, 3600-3674, 5200-5961, 7370-7379 or 8731-8734. Panel A presents
results on panel data regressions. The first column under each variable presents the estimates of post-FD dummies corresponding to each group definition in multivariate
panel data regressions (other coefficients’ estimates are omitted) as done before for the break-up on size alone; for the analyst following regression we use specification
VI in Table 2, for the pre-announcement regression we use specification V in Table 5, for the forecast error regression we use specification IV in Table 6 and for
volatility regression we use specification IV in Table 7. The second column under each variable is computed by dividing the post-FD dummy by the pre-FD average of
that variable (except for pre-announcement, when we show simply the pre-FD average). The intra-group differential impact shows p-values of tests of differences in
intra-group coefficients on high and low litigation risk. Panel B presents results of running Fama-French regressions for each group of firms; each row presents the
coefficients estimates of SMB and POSTFD_SMB regressors from running specification type II in Table 8 (other coefficients’ estimates are omitted).
                                                                                     Panel A: Panel data regressions                                                                                                 Panel B: Fama-French Regressions
                       Analyst Following                                    Pre-announcement                    Forecast error                                     Volatility
                                                     % change from pre-FD




                                                                                                                                            % change from pre-FD




                                                                                                                                                                                              % change from pre-FD
                           multivariate regression




                                                                                                                  multivariate regression




                                                                                                                                                                    multivariate regression
                           POSTFD dummy from




                                                                                                                  POSTFD dummy from




                                                                                                                                                                    POSTFD dummy from




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            POSTFD_SMB
                                                                                               Pre-FD average
                                                                               Odds ratio
                                                     average




                                                                                                                                            average




                                                                                                                                                                                              average




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SMB
     Big size, low        2.34E-05                   0.0458                    1.84          0.0953              5.20E-05                   0.0150                 -1.78E-03                  -0.0258                         0.0713      -0.1108
     litigation risk       <.0001                                            (<.0001)                             0.6399                                             0.1785                                                    0.2530      0.3398
     Big size, high       6.60E-05                   0.1033                    2.23          0.1169             -6.93E-04                   -0.1518                 6.05E-03                  0.0546                          -0.2973      0.0783
     litigation risk       <.0001                                            (<.0001)                             0.0186                                             0.0054                                                   <.0001       0.5248
     Mid-size, low       -2.23E-05                   -0.1035                   1.56          0.0894              6.08E-04                   0.1195                 -1.20E-03                  -0.0138                         0.5657       0.3526
     litigation risk       <.0001                                            (<.0001)                             0.0006                                             0.3626                                                   <.0001       0.0051
     Mid-size, high      4.59E-07                    0.0020                    1.89          0.1146             -1.86E-04                   -0.0233                 8.43E-03                  0.0681                           0.3749      0.7680
     litigation risk       0.8704                                            (<.0001)                             0.5154                                             <.0001                                                    0.0828      0.0592
    Small size, low      -1.35E-05                   -0.1756                   1.08          0.0681             1.73E-03                    0.2375                  1.72E-03                  0.0162                           0.5799      0.3916
     litigation risk       <.0001                                             0.4045                              <.0001                                             0.3586                                                   <.0001       0.0676
    Small size, high     -1.28E-05                   -0.1639                   1.02          0.0854             3.08E-04                    0.0265                  4.05E-03                  0.0300                          0.3512       0.1248
     litigation risk       <.0001                                             0.8752                              0.4859                                             0.1864                                                    0.1365      0.0112

    # Observations         56634                                              31155                               41399                                             43927
          R2               0.154                                              0.096                               0.032                                             0.056

                       Intra-group differencial impact in High vs Low (p-value)
       Big size           <.0001                                              0.0450                              0.0172                                            0.0016
       Mid-size           <.0001                                              0.0350                              0.0158                                            <.0001
      Small Size          0.8388                                              0.8390                              0.0049                                            0.5088
                                                                                                                                                     72

Table 14. Size Summary Statistics for Groups of Firms
This table presents summary statistics on the partition of the sample in groups of big, mid and small firms,
based on firm-quarter observations. Age is defined as the difference between year of current observation
and the first year firm data is available on CRSP database. Size is the market value of the firm at the last
day of the month in which the quarterly earnings announcement is made. Log scaled size is the log of the
market value of firm scaled by the market index. Panel B presents for each group the fraction (in
percentage terms) of firm-quarters that belongs to each Fama and French (1997) industry. Details on the
construction of portfolios of big, mid-size and small firms are described in the Appendix. The sample
comprises observations in the periods Q4:1997-Q3:1999 (pre-FD sample) and Q4:2000-Q3:2002 (post-FD
sample), except that observations with actual earnings announcements between 12/20/1999 and 10/23/2000
are excluded.
                              Panel A: Summary statistics on number of firms, age and size
                       Group of big firms                 Group of mid-size firms                  Group of small firms
                     All      Pre-FD Post-FD                 All     Pre-FD Post-FD                All           Pre-FD Post-FD

# Firms               1371                                    2035                                  3166
     NYSE              925                                     643                                   257
     NASDAQ            446                                    1392                                  2909
Age
      Mean             24.7       24.4             24.9       13.0      12.8         13.2            10.3            9.4     11.4
      Median           18.0       18.0             18.0        9.0       8.0          9.0             7.0            6.0      8.0
# Firm-quarters      16,752     8,495         8,257         21,237   10,598     10,639             25,117         13,357   11,760
Size (MM)
     Mean             9,619    8,854        10,405             432      417          448                   71        73       68
     Median           2,609    2,478         2,731             349      338          359                   53        55       49
     Std Dev         26,734   24,217        29,078             328      322          333                   67        66       69
Log scaled size
    Mean                8.0          7.9            8.1        5.7       5.6          5.8              3.8           3.8      3.7
    Median              7.7          7.7            7.8        5.7       5.7          5.8              3.8           3.9      3.8
    Std Dev             1.2          1.2            1.2        0.7       0.7          0.7              0.9           0.9      1.0


            Panel B: Industry Membership (fraction of the group's observations belonging to the industry)
                                Mid-size




                                                                                        Mid-size




                                                                                                                                          Mid-size
                                           Small




                                                                                                   Small




                                                                                                                                                     Small
                        Big




                                                                               Big




                                                                                                                                    Big

Agriculture             0.4     0.1        0.3       Construction              0.7      1.4        1.0          Business services   10.0 13.4 13.5
Food products           2.3     1.0        1.1       Steel works etc           1.5      2.0        1.3          Computers            3.5 3.3 5.6
Candy and soda          0.2     0.1        0.1       Fabricated prods          0.0      0.5        0.5          Electronic eq.       5.7 5.9 5.7
Alcoholic Bev           0.5     0.1        0.4       Machinery                 2.8      3.4        2.9          Meas. & control eq. 1.5 1.6 2.8
Tobacco prods           0.1     0.1        0.0       Electrical eq.            0.7      1.1        1.0          Business supplies    1.9 1.1 0.7
Recreational prods      0.3     0.7        1.2       Miscelaneous              0.5      0.2        0.5          Shipping Cont.       0.3 0.5 0.1
Entertainment           1.2     1.5        1.2       Auto and trucks           1.4      1.7        1.0          Transportation       2.7 2.6 2.0
Print & publishing      1.9     0.5        0.5       Aircraft                  0.5      0.2        0.2          Wholesale            2.1 3.9 3.9
Consumer Goods          1.5     1.7        1.5       Shipb. , railroad eq.     0.2      0.2        0.2          Retail               6.7 5.0 5.0
Apparel                 0.6     1.5        1.6       Defense                   0.2      0.1        0.1          Restaurantes etc     1.1 1.8 2.2
Healthcare              1.3     1.1        1.5       Precious metals           0.2      0.1        0.1          Banking             10.0 11.1 16.3
Medical eq              1.5     2.6        5.5       Nonmetalic mining         0.3      0.3        0.1          Insurance            6.2 3.4 2.1
Pharmac. prods          4.1     6.7        4.7       Coal                      0.0      0.1        0.0          Real estate          0.2 0.4 0.5
Chemicals               2.8     1.5        0.8       Petro and nat gas         3.7      2.8        2.1          Trading              2.4 1.2 1.2
Rubber and plastic      0.5     0.8        1.1       Utilities                 7.5      2.7        1.2          Unindentified        0.3 0.8 0.8
Textiles                0.1     0.6        0.8       Telecom                   4.1      3.0        0.8
Construction mat.       1.4     2.4        1.4       Personal services         0.5      1.1        1.2
                                                                                                        73

Figure 1. Quarterly Fraction of Companies Using Pre-Announcements
This figure presents the quarterly fraction of companies that issues at least one pre-announcement between
15 days before the end of the quarter and 2 days before the actual release of that quarter’s earnings
announcement. The vertical lines indicate the period when Reg FD was being proposed and discussed; the
pre-FD period thus finishes before the first vertical line and the post-FD period starts after the second
vertical line. The break-up of companies on the groups based on size (big, mid and small companies) is
described in the Appendix.




                                                                                       Big firms
                                                                                       Mid−size firms
                                                                                       Small firms
0.25                                Pre−FD                    Post−FD




 0.2




0.15




 0.1




0.05


       Q1−98               Q1−99               Q1−00              Q1−01               Q1−02
               Quarters (Pre−FD is Q4:1997 thru Q3:1999, Post−FD is Q4:2000 thru Q3:2002)
                                                                                                       74

Figure 2. Quarterly Fraction of Firms without Forecasts Available
This figure presents the quarterly fraction of firm-quarters in each group that have at least one forecast
available for the upcoming earnings announcement. The vertical lines indicate the period when Reg FD
was being proposed and discussed; the pre-FD period thus finishes before the first vertical line and the
post-FD period starts after the second vertical line. The break-up of companies on the groups based on size
(big, mid and small companies) is described in the Appendix.


                                   Pre−FD                     Post−FD
 1


0.9

                                                                          Big firms
0.8
                                                                          Mid−size firms
                                                                          Small firms
0.7


0.6


0.5


0.4


0.3


0.2


0.1


 0
      Q1−98               Q1−99               Q1−00              Q1−01               Q1−02
              Quarters (Pre−FD is Q4:1997 thru Q3:1999, Post−FD is Q4:2000 thru Q3:2002)
                                                                                                          75

Figure 3. Quarterly Average Volatility (Market Response) at Earnings Announcements
This figure presents the quarterly average volatility for each group of firms. Volatility is the cumulative
absolute abnormal return over the window [-1,+1] around the earnings announcement day. The vertical
lines indicate the period when Reg FD was being proposed and discussed; the pre-FD period thus finishes
before the first vertical line and the post-FD period starts after the second vertical line. The break-up of
companies on the groups based on size (big, mid and small companies) is described in the Appendix.

                                                                                         Big firms
                                                                                         Mid−size firms
                                                                                         Small firms

0.15                                 Pre−FD                    Post−FD




 0.1




0.05
       Q1−98                Q1−99               Q1−00              Q1−01               Q1−02
                Quarters (Pre−FD is Q4:1997 thru Q3:1999, Post−FD is Q4:2000 thru Q3:2002)
                                                                                                        76

Figure 4. Quarterly Fraction of Firms Using Conference Calls around Earnings Announcements
This figure presents the fraction of firms in each group that uses conference calls (from FirstCall) at the
window [-1,+1] around the current quarter’s earnings announcement day. The vertical lines indicate the
period when Reg FD was being proposed and discussed; the pre-FD period thus finishes before the first
vertical line and the post-FD period starts after the second vertical line. The break-up of companies on the
groups based on size (big, mid and small companies) is described in the Appendix.



 1
                                                                                      Big companies
                                                                                      Mid companies
0.9                                                                                   Small companies
                                    Pre−FD                     Post−FD

0.8


0.7


0.6


0.5


0.4


0.3


0.2


0.1

      Q1−98                Q1−99               Q1−00              Q1−01               Q1−02
               Quarters (Pre−FD is Q4:1997 thru Q3:1999, Post−FD is Q4:2000 thru Q3:2002)
