                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              DO INSTITUTIONS CAUSE GROWTH?

                                          Edward L. Glaeser
                                            Rafael La Porta
                                      Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes
                                            Andrei Shleifer

                                         Working Paper 10568
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10568


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2004




We thank Philippe Aghion, Olivier Blanchard, Oded Galor, Simon Johnson, Aart Kraay, Ross Levine,
Torsten Persson, Dani Rodrik and an anonymous referee for helpful comments, and Sebastian Brown for
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Edward L. Glaeser, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Institutions Cause Growth?
Edward L. Glaeser, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer
NBER Working Paper No. 10568
June 2004
JEL No. O11, O40
                                         ABSTRACT


We revisit the debate over whether political institutions cause economic growth, or whether,

alternatively, growth and human capital accumulation lead to institutional improvement. We find

that most indicators of institutional quality used to establish the proposition that institutions cause

growth are constructed to be conceptually unsuitable for that purpose. We also find that some of the

instrumental variable techniques used in the literature are flawed. Basic OLS results, as well as a

variety of additional evidence, suggest that a) human capital is a more basic source of growth than

are the institutions, b) poor countries get out of poverty through good policies, often pursued by

dictators, and c) subsequently improve their political institutions.

Edward L. Glaeser                                      Harvard University
Department of Economics                                M9 Littauer Center
Harvard University                                     Cambridge, MA 02138
315A Littauer Center                                   and NBER
Cambridge, MA 02138                                    ashleifer@harvard.edu
and NBER
eglaeser@harvard.edu

Rafael La Porta
Tuck School of Business
Dartmouth College
314 Woodbury
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
rafael.laporta@dartmouth.edu

Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06517
and NBER
florencio.lopezdesilanes@yale.edu


Andrei Shleifer
Department of Economics
I. Introduction.

       Today, both the U.S. and the international community face two major development

challenges around the world, from Iraq, to Haiti, to sub-Saharan Africa: how to ignite growth and

how to establish democracy. Economic research has identified two broad approaches to

confronting these challenges. The first approach emphasizes the need to start with democracy

and other checks on government as the mechanisms for securing property rights. With such

political institutions in place, investment in human and physical capital, and therefore economic

growth, are expected to follow. The second approach emphasizes the need for human and

physical capital accumulation to start the process. It holds that even pro-market dictators can

secure property rights as a matter of policy choice, not of political constraints. From the vantage

point of poor countries, it sees democracy and other institutional improvements as the

consequences of increased education and wealth, not as their causes.

       Both approaches to development have extensive intellectual pedigree. The importance of

constraining government was stressed by Montesquieu (1748) and Smith (1776), as well by the

new institutional economics literature (Buchanan and Tullock 1962, North and Thomas 1973,

North 1981, 1990). DeLong and Shleifer (1993) supplied early empirical support for this view

using data on urbanization of European regions during the last millennium, which showed faster

city growth under more limited governments. More recently, the literature on economic growth,

starting with early contributions by Knack and Keefer (1995) and Mauro (1995), has turned to the

effects of good institutions on economic growth. It is fair to say that recent work, including Hall

and Jones (1999), Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001, 2002), Easterly and Levine (2003),

Dollar and Kraay (2003), and Rodrik, Subramanian, and Trebbi (2002), has reached close to an

intellectual consensus that the political institutions of limited government cause economic growth.




                                                                                          2
       The reverse idea, namely that growth in income and human capital causes institutional

improvement, is most closely associated with the work of Seymour Martin Lipset (1960), who

however himself gives credit to Aristotle. Lipset believed that educated people are more likely to

resolve their differences through negotiation and voting than through violent disputes. Education

is needed for courts to operate and to empower citizens to engage with government institutions.

Literacy encourages the spread of knowledge about the government’s malfeasance. According to

this view, countries differ in their stocks of human and social capital – which can be acquired

through policies pursued even by dictators – and institutional outcomes depend to a large extent

on these endowments (see Djankov et al. 2003). This line of work seems to accord well with the

experiences of South Korea, Taiwan, and China, which grew rapidly under one-party

dictatorships, the first two eventually turning to democracy. Empirically, Lipset’s hypothesis –

that growth leads to better political institutions -- has received considerable support in the work of

Przeworski and his associates (Alvarez et al. 2000) and Barro (1999).

       The two views of economic and political development share some important similarities.

They both emphasize the need for secure property rights to support investment in human and

physical capital, and they both see such security as a public policy choice. However, the

institutional view sees the pro-investment policies as a consequence of political constraints on

government, whereas the development view sees these policies in poor countries largely as

choices of their – typically unconstrained -- leaders.

       In this paper, we revisit these two broad approaches to development in an effort to assess

each one’s empirical validity. Our view is shaped to some extent by the experiences of North and

South Korea, illustrated in Figure 1. Prior to the Korean war, the two countries were obviously

part of one, so it is difficult to think of them as having different histories. They were both




                                                                                            3
exceptionally poor in 1950. Between the end of the Korean war and 1980, both countries were

dictatorships. If institutions are measured by Polity’s “constraints on the executive,” which as we

discuss below is probably the best of the measures commonly used in the literature, then between

1950 and 1980 North Korea had an average score of 1.71, and South Korea 2.16 (out of 7). Yet

South Korean dictators chose capitalism and secure property rights and the country grew rapidly,

reaching per capita income level of US $1589 in 1980. The North Korean dictator, in contrast,

chose socialism, and the country only reached the level of income of US $768 in 1980. Figure 1

also shows that, starting in 1980, South Korea transforms itself into a democracy, while North

Korea remains a dictatorship. While on average, looking over the half century between 1950 and

2000, South Korea obviously had better institutions as measured by constraints on the executive,

these institutions are the outcome of economic growth after 1950 rather than its cause. It would

be wrong to attribute South Korea’s growth to these institutions rather than the choices made by

its dictators.

        Our empirical analysis proceeds in five stages. In section II, we revisit three measures of

“institutions” used in the current economic growth literature: risk of expropriation by the

government, government effectiveness, and constraints on the executive. We show that the first

two of these measures by construction do not describe political institutions: they are outcome

measures that reflect the government’s past restraint from expropriation in the first case, and its

quality in the second. These measures do not code dictators who choose to respect property rights

any differently than democratically elected leaders who have no choice but to respect them. Since

these measures confound constraints on government with dictatorial choices, they do not proxy for

institutions, which in their essence are constraints (North 1981). Moreover, these are both




                                                                                            4
subjective measures which rise sharply with the level of economic development, raising severe

doubts that the causality runs from them to growth rather than the other way around.

       The third measure we consider, constraints on the executive, is in principle linked to

constraints on government, but in reality is constructed to reflect the outcomes of most recent

elections. In developing countries, even this measure is extremely volatile, and cannot be

plausibly interpreted as reflecting durable rules, procedures or norms that the term “institutions”

refers to. Indeed, we show that the three conventional measures of institutions are uncorrelated

with constitutional constraints on government that scholars have just begun to use. All this

evidence sheds doubt on the proposition that the measures of institutions used in the growth

literature reflect any “deep” parameters that they are purported to measure.

       In Section III, we discuss some of the basic OLS evidence on the relationship between

institutions, human capital, and economic growth. We confirm the now well-established

propositions that the initial level of human capital of a country, and the average level of its

institutions over a period of time, predict its level of economic growth over that very same period

of time. But, as section II shows, and the South Korean example illustrates, institutional quality

rises as a country grows richer. In fact, we find that, in a variety of specifications, initial levels of

constraints on the executive do not predict subsequent economic growth, whereas initial levels of

human capital continue to be strong predictors. Thus even the OLS evidence is quite unsupportive

of the proposition that constraints on the executive cause growth, and is supportive of the

proposition that the more basic cause is human capital.

       In section IV, we try to dig deeper into these issues by looking at the universe of poor

countries as of 1960. We find that virtually all of these countries had uneducated populations, and

were moreover run by dictators. Indeed, most countries in this group have spent the vast majority




                                                                                              5
of years since 1960 under dictators. These dictatorships had a large dispersion of growth rates, an

observation itself inconsistent with the view that constraints on government shape growth

experiences of poor countries. The near universality of dictatorships in poor countries suggests

that the security of property in these countries is the result of policy choices, not constraints.

       In Section V, we turn to one of the central strategies that researchers have used to establish

the primacy of political institutions: instrumental variables. We discuss recent work of

Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001, 2002), which shows that, among European colonies,

settler mortality and population density in 1500 predict institutional quality and the level of

economic development today. We show, however, that these results do not establish a role for

institutions. Specifically, the Europeans who settled in the New World may have brought with

them not so much their institutions, but themselves, i.e., their human capital. This theoretical

ambiguity is consistent with the empirical evidence as well. We show that the instruments used in

the literature for institutions are even more highly correlated with human capital both today and in

1900, and that, in instrumental variable specifications predicting economic growth, human capital

performs better than institutions. At the purely econometric level, this evidence suggests that

predictors of settlement patterns are not valid instruments for institutions.

       In Section VI, we conclude the empirical analysis by looking at the timing of human

capital accumulation and institutional quality. We find evidence consistent with the example of

South Korea, namely that economic growth and human capital accumulation cause institutional

improvement, rather than the other way around.

       Finally, Section VII concludes with some implications of our analysis. We find ourselves

much closer to Lipset than to the new institutionalists. If the experience of poor countries in the

last 50 years is a guide, politically constrained government may not be a viable strategy for them




                                                                                             6
to secure property rights. Rather, these countries may need to emphasize economic policies and

choices that ensure such security, even by dictators. Growth in these countries may be feasible

without immediate institutional improvement, and is likely in turn to lead to institutional

improvement. At least this is what the data show.



II. The Measurement of Institutions.

       North (1981) defines institutions as “a set of rules, compliance procedures, and moral and

ethical behavioral norms designed to constrain the behavior of individuals in the interests of

maximizing the wealth or utility of principals” (p. 201-202). A key word that this and other

definitions share is constraints. Thus constitutions or electoral rules are good examples of

institutions, but good policies chosen by dictators who have a free hand are not. But there is

another essential aspect of institutions noted even in dictionaries: the constraints need to be

reasonably permanent or durable. Indeed, transitory “constraints” would not necessarily bind, and

may be changed by those who do not like them. This permanency or “depth” of institutions has

been relied on, for example, to justify using history as an instrument for institutional quality today

(Rodrik et al. 2002). Thus legal systems or electoral rules look more like “institutions” when they

are actually used over time, in contrast, for example, to the presidencies of Bill Clinton or George

Bush, which most people would not regard as “institutions.”

       In this section, we discuss the measurement of political institutions used in recent research.

We ask if these measures of institutions reflect a) constraints on government and b) permanent or at

least durable features of the environment.    We show that, in fact, they reflect neither.

       To measure institutions, the literature has focused on several sets of variables. Here we

discuss three. The first set, used initially by Knack and Keefer (1995) and Hall and Jones (1999),




                                                                                              7
and more recently by Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001), are survey indicators of

institutional quality from the International Country Risk Guide, collected over the 1980s and 1990s.

The second set, used most recently by Rodrik, Subramanian, and Trebbi (2002), is an aggregated

index of mostly survey assessments of government effectiveness collected by Kaufmann, Kraay,

and Mastruzzi (2003). The third set, coming from the Polity IV data set collected by political

scientists (Jaggers and Marshall 2000), aims directly to measure the limits of executive power.

       Below we discuss these measures of institutions. We make three distinct points. First, all

three data sets measure outcomes, not some permanent characteristics that North refers to. As such,

all these measures 1) rise with per capita income, and 2) are highly volatile. Both of these facts are

inconsistent with the view that they measure permanent or even durable features of the political

environment. Second, the first two sets of measures of institutions are constructed so that dictators

freely choosing good policies receive as high evaluations as governments constrained to choose

them. An examination of these variables shows, for example, that dictators who chose to respect

property rights – in the U.S.S.R. or Singapore, for example -- received high scores, which the

literature has interpreted as having “good institutions.” Even if these measures are extremely useful

indicators of policy choices, they are by their very construction not constraints, and therefore

unusable for discussions of how specific constraints on government that would guarantee the

security of property rights. The Polity IV variables are intended to focus on political constraints,

but we show that they too reflect political outcomes rather than durable constraints.

       Third, these measures of political institutions appear to be uncorrelated with the available

constitutional measures of constraints on government coming from either electoral rules or courts. It

is possible that these constitutional measures are noisy, and it is certain that “rules on the books” are

very different from what actually takes place in a country. But this is precisely the point: the




                                                                                            8
institutional outcomes that scholars have used as measures of constraints have very little to do with

the constitutional constraints, raising doubts about the effectiveness of changing political rules.

       Begin with the data from ICRG. The data include subjective assessments of risk for

international investors along such dimensions as law and order, bureaucratic quality, corruption,

risk of expropriation by the government, and risk of government contract repudiation. Of all three

data sets, this one is probably the most problematic. It is plain that these measures reflect what

actually happened in a country rather than some permanent rules of the game. For example, in

1984, the top ten countries with the lowest expropriation risk include Singapore and the U.S.S.R..

In these cases, the data obviously reflect the choices of dictators and not political constraints.

Along similar lines, the data show a bizarre reduction in the risk of expropriation over time.

Between 1982 and 1997, Iran moves from the score of 1 (highest expropriation risk) to 9 (close to

the top score of 10), Libya from 1.5 to 9, and Syria from 1.5 to 9. We are not familiar with

significant institutional constraints on the leaders of Iran, Libya, and Syria, although of course in

the last few years these dictators had stayed away from expropriation and the data reflect their

choices. Indeed, consistent with the intellectual victory of the Washington Consensus, the data

show that the average score on expropriation risk in the sample rises from 5 in 1982 to 9 (with the

median of 9.5) in 1997. Whatever expropriation risk measures, it is obviously not permanent rules,

procedures, or norms supplying checks and balances on the sovereign.

       The Kaufmann, Kraay, and Zoido-Labaton (2002) “government effectiveness” variable is

likewise a clear outcome measure. Starting in 1996, these authors have aggregated a large number

of subjective assessments of institutional quality into broad indices of government effectiveness.

“In Government Effectiveness, we combine perceptions of the quality of public service provision,

the quality of the bureaucracy, the competence of civil servants, the independence of the civil




                                                                                             9
service from political pressures, and the credibility of the government’s commitment to policies

into a single grouping” (p. 8). These are clear ex-post outcomes, highly correlated with the level of

economic development, rather than political constraints per se. Indeed, the country that receives

the highest score in the world is Singapore, a state known both for its one party rule and for this

party’s chosen respect for private property.

       Polity IV data make the greatest attempt at measuring the political environment rather than

dictatorial choices. Constraints on the executive refers to “the extent of institutionalized constraints

on the decision-making powers of chief executives, whether individuals or collectivities.” The

highest score for this variable is 7, the lowest is 1. The rich democracies, but also countries like

Botswana, India, and South Africa, tend to get the perfect score of 7. Dictatorships like Cuba, Iraq,

North Korea, but also Pinochet’s Chile get the worst score of 1, the communist countries such as

China and U.S.S.R. are in the middle with 3’s. It is difficult to see how property is more secure in

Mao’s China than in Pinochet’s Chile, but at least it is clear what the variable is trying to get at.

       The concern of this variable is, according to its creators, with the checks and balances

between the various parties in the decision making process. However, a closer look at how this

variable is constructed immediately reveals that it is an outcome measure, which reflects not the

constraints, but what happened in the last election. When countries have inconsistent electoral

experiences, their scores fluctuate wildly. For example, Haiti gets the worst score of 1 under the

dictatorship during 1960-1989, jumps up to 6 when Aristide is elected in 1990, goes back to 1 when

he is ousted during 1991-1993, rises again to 6 and even a perfect score of 7 during 1994-1998 as

Aristide and his party return to power (even though the elections had been widely criticized), but

falls down all the way to 3 during 2000-2001. Likewise, Argentina fluctuates between the worst

scores under generals, and the best ones after elections, even when the elected leaders undermine




                                                                                            10
the legislature and courts. The data make it obvious that Polity IV provides a rapidly moving

assessment of electoral outcomes over time, not a measure of actual political constraints on

government, and certainly not a measure of anything permanent or durable. And to the extent that,

in richer countries, elections are likely to be cleaner, “constraints on the executive” may well be a

consequence of development rather than the other way around.

       Likewise, the measure of “democracy” in Polity IV reflects the extent to which “the three

essential, interdependent elements” are actually adhered to. These include “the presence of

institutions and procedures through which citizens can express effective preference about

alternative policies and leaders, the existence of institutional constraints of the exercise of power by

the executive (see above), and the guarantee of civil liberties to all citizens in their daily lives and

in acts of political participation.” Although the definition is intended to suggest some permanence,

the construction of the variable, like that of the previous measure, reflects most recent experiences.

       In Tables 1 and 2, we illustrate the “outcome” nature of even the Polity IV measures.

Table 1 shows the average within-country deviations of five variables: autocracy (from Alvarez et

al. 2000, based on Polity), constraints on the executive from Polity, democracy from Polity,

autocracy from Polity, and, for comparison, Barro’s measure of years of schooling. Due to data

availability, all variables are measured every five years, between 1960 and 2000. All individual

year observations are normalized to lie between zero and 1 to make comparison easier. Table 1

shows that even the Polity variables are twice as volatile as the measure of human capital. If

constancy is a measure of depth, then human capital is “deeper” than institutions.

       Table 2 looks at persistence of human capital and politics by regressing 2000 values of the

political variables on their 1960 values. We find that education is much more persistent than the

measures of constraints on the executive from Polity. The amount of mean reversion in political




                                                                                             11
institutions is stunning, suggesting that these variables can hardly be used as assessments of “deep”

or “permanent” features of the political landscape.

       The fact that the measures of institutions used in the literature reflect choices (often made

by dictators) rather than constraints is further illustrated by examining the correlations between

these variables and written constitutional rules. We consider four such measures. The first two are

motivated by the work of Persson and Tabellini (2003) on electoral rules, which these authors see

as one of the important constraints on executive authority. One such variable we use is “plurality”,

which equals one if legislators are elected using a winner-take-all/first past the post rule. The other

objective measure is “proportional representation,” which equals one if candidates to the upper and

lower houses of parliament are elected using a proportional representation system. Both of these

variables come from Beck et al. (2001). In addition, we use two constitutional measures of the

checks on the executive supplied by the judiciary from La Porta et al. (2004). The first is judicial

independence, which measures the permanency in office of supreme court judges. The second is

constitutional review, which measures the extent of judicial review of legislation. Again, all these

are constitutional measures of political rules constraining the executive.

       Table 3 presents the correlations between the outcome measures used in the growth and

institutions literature, per capita income in 2000, and objective institutional rules. For the

traditional institutional measures, we follow the growth literature and use the averages computed

over different time periods. Thus we use the 1960-2000 average for executive constraints, 1982 -

1997 average for expropriation risk, 1960-1990 average for the Alvarez et al. (2000) measure of

autocracy, and the average of 1996, 1998, and 2000 values for government effectiveness. Judicial

independence and constitutional review are available at only one point in time (in 1995), while

plurality and proportional representation are averages over the period 1975-2000.




                                                                                           12
       Three results stand out. First, the traditional indices of institutional quality are strongly

correlated with each other, as well as with per capita income. This result is consistent with

institutions having a causal positive effect on growth, but also with reverse causality. Specifically,

if institutional outcomes improve as a country grows richer, as they clearly do, then both the

average and the end of period institutional assessments will be higher in richer countries. Second,

plurality and proportional representation – both constitutional measures of constraints – are

correlated with per capita income (as well as with the subjective measures), but the correlations are

much smaller than those of the traditional indices. Third, the measures of judicial checks and

balances – judicial independence and constitutional review – are uncorrelated with per capita

income, and only judicial independence is weakly correlated with outcome indices. The weak

correlations may mean either that these constitutional measures of constraints are noisy, or that the

association between “institutions” and development comes from institutional outcomes being better

in richer countries, rather than political rules creating wealth.

       The bottom line of this section is that the commonly used measures of institutions cannot be

used to establish causality. These measures are not constructed to reflect either constraints on

government or permanent features of the political landscape. Instead, they are highly volatile and

mean-reverting. They are barely correlated with the available objective measures of constitutional

constraints on government. Yet these are the variables used to show that institutions cause growth.



III. Political Institutions, Human Capital, and Economic Growth.

       Table 4 presents the standard OLS growth regressions using the various measures of

political institutions we discussed above. As in the correlation Table 3, we follow the literature

and use averages of the assessments of institutional quality over a period of time. In Table 4, the




                                                                                            13
dependent variable is the growth of per capita income between 1960 and 2000, and the independent

variables are initial income per capita (as suggested by Barro 1991), initial education, the share of

a country’s population in temperate zones, as well as eight institutional variables entering one at a

time. The results confirm the now-standard observation of convergence, as well as the benign

influence of temperate weather.

       The results also show that the initial level of education is a strong predictor of subsequent

economic growth. One interpretation of this result would support theories of growth in which

human capital generates significant technological externalities (e.g., Lucas 1988). However,

Pritchett (2000) summarizes evidence suggesting that economic returns to education in developing

countries are not especially high. An alternative interpretation is along the lines of Lipset (1960),

namely human capital leads to more benign politics, less violence, and more political stability. The

key human capital externality is not technological but political: courts and legislatures replace guns.

These improvements in turn bring about greater security of property and economic growth. This

interpretation is consistent with the evidence of Alesina et al. (1996) that political stability predicts

economic growth, and with many findings we discuss below.

       Finally, the evidence shows a strong correlation between economic growth over a period

and the average assessments of institutional quality over that period, including constraints on the

executive, risk of expropriation, government effectiveness, and autocracy. In contrast, there is no

relationship between growth and constitutional measures of institutions, such as judicial

independence, constitutional review, plurality, and proportional representation. The contrast

between the institutional outcome variables used in the growth literature, and the constitutional

constraints on government, is striking.




                                                                                            14
       One reason that average assessments of institutions might enter significantly in the growth

regressions is that these assessments improve as the economy gets richer, so the causality runs in

reverse. Note, in contrast, that growth regressions typically use initial values of education. To

further assess this possibility, Tables 5 and 6 present a series of growth regressions in which the

independent variable is the executive constraints at the beginning of the period. We focus on

executive constraints because it is the only measure that is clearly not a consequence of dictatorial

choices, and hence, even though it reflects electoral outcomes, can at least loosely be thought of as

relating to constraints on government.

       Table 5 presents, starting in 1960, decade by decade growth regressions using initial period

education, initial period per capita income, and initial period constraints on the executive, as

independent variables. It also presents similar regressions for the whole period 1960-2000. (We

have also obtained, but do not report, very similar results using 20-year intervals.) Table 5 shows

that, even in the OLS specifications, initial executive constraints have no predictive power for

subsequent economic growth outside the 1980s, whereas initial human capital is a strong predictor.

These results exacerbate the concern over reverse causality when sample averages of institutional

outcomes are used in growth specifications.

       Table 6 takes advantage of the fact that data on executive constraints are available for a few

countries as far back as the middle of the 19th century, as are data on economic growth from

Maddison (2003). We also have some data on primary school enrollments starting in 1870 from

Lindert (2001). For these small samples, we can regress long term growth on initial executive

constraints, initial income, and initial school enrollments. Again, there is no evidence that

constraints on the executive predict growth, but some evidence that initial human capital does.




                                                                                          15
       The evidence presented in these tables on the relationship between institutions and growth

leaves us skeptical about causality. Nonetheless, an advocate of institutional view might argue that

the average political outcome over time is a good measure of durable constraints. If institutions

reflect “deep” features of the environment, then even if constraints on the executive measure the

cleanness of the last election, the average of such constraints over time is a good proxy for the

“permanent” or “durable” constraints. It is then the average rather than the starting points that

belongs in the growth regression. Moreover, human capital, being not as “deep” as the average of

institutional outcomes, simply does not belong in the regression.

       In light of the results we have brought out, this argument is not persuasive. First, the fact

that even the Polity measures of institutions are more volatile and more mean reverting than years

of schooling raises severe doubts that these variables, even if averaged, reflect anything more

permanent than human capital. Second, this argument does not deal with the obvious point of

reverse causality, and the fact that initial measures of political institutions, in just about any sample,

seem to have no predictive power at all. Indeed, even if we follow the recommendation that

constraints on the executive must be averaged, but regress ten year growth rates on the average

constraints of the executive over the previous decade, these averages do not predict subsequent

economic growth. The results are very similar to those in Table 5. Averaging itself, without

regressing growth on contemporaneous average institutional quality, does not suggest that

institutions predict growth. Third, the lack of correlation between even the average outcome

measures and the constitutional constraints on government raises still further doubts that anything

deep is being measured. In sum, while there might be (though certainly does not need to be)

something “deep” about institutions, it is implausible to argue that the variables used in the

standard growth regressions capture anything “deep”.




                                                                                            16
       What do we learn from this analysis? To us, the principal conclusion is that, at least in the

OLS regressions, the evidence that institutions cause economic growth, as opposed to growth

improving institutions, is non-existent. The objective measures of institutions, those that actually

describe the constitutional rules that limit the power of the sovereign, have no predictive power for

the growth of per capita income. Even the beginning-of-period executive constraints have no

predictive power. In contrast, the political variables that are correlated with development are

themselves by construction a product of development. The OLS cross-country evidence for 1960-

2000 provides no support for the claim that “institutions cause growth.”



IV. Politics and Growth in Poor Countries After 1960.

       Growth regressions are one way to assess the effect of institutions on economic growth.

Another way is to consider human capital and political institutions in the sample of poor countries

circa 1960. To this end, we divide our 1960 sample of countries into those with low human capital

(total years of schooling per capita below the median value of 2.68), intermediate human capital

(schooling between 2.68 and 5.01 years per capita), and high human capital (schooling above the

75th percentile value of 5.01 years per capita). We independently divide this sample into four types

of political regimes using the 1960-2000 average Polity IV democracy score: autocracies (countries

with the average score under 2), stable democracies (countries with the average perfect score of

10), and two intermediate groups: imperfect autocracies (the average score between 2 and 7) and

imperfect democracies (the average score between 7 and 10). Autocracies include places like Saudi

Arabia, Vietnam, and Yemen. Stable democracies cover all the usual developed countries (except

that it includes Costa Rica but not France).




                                                                                          17
       Table 7 presents the number of observations in each of the 12 cells using the two

independent classifications. Nearly all highly educated countries are stable democracies (score =

10), and nearly all stable democracies are highly educated. (The two stable democracies with

intermediate human capital are Italy and Costa Rica.) In contrast, nearly all dictatorships are

poorly educated; the only dictatorships with the intermediate level of human capital are Paraguay,

Singapore, and Taiwan. Put differently, the lowest education countries are never stable

democracies; the highest education countries are generally stable, but sometimes imperfect,

democracies. Consistent with Lipset, over the last 40 years, politics has been much more benign in

well-educated, than in poorly educated, countries.

       Are these differences between educated and uneducated countries reflected in the growth

rates as well? Table 8 presents the data on average growth rates of different groups of countries.

During 1960-2000, countries with high human capital in 1960 have grown 2 times faster, on

average, than low human capital ones. Stable democracies have grown slightly faster than

imperfect democracies, and much faster than dictatorships, on average, but this may of course be

just the human capital effect. In addition, Table 8 shows the dispersion of growth rates among

different groups of countries. It shows the higher dispersion of growth rates across autocracies than

democracies, and across poorly educated countries relative to the well educated ones.

       The evidence in Tables 7 and 8 leads to another reason for skepticism about the primacy of

political constraints for economic development: although nearly all poor countries in 1960 were

dictatorships, some of them have managed to get out of poverty, while others stayed poor. This

kind of evidence is at least suggestive that it is the choices made by the dictators, rather than the

constraints on them, that have allowed some poor countries to emerge from poverty. If being a

stable democracy, with all the effective constitutional constraints on the executive, is not an option




                                                                                            18
for a poor country, and if dictatorship is the more likely political path, then it is crucial to

understand what makes for a successful dictatorship.

        This suggestion receives a further boost from a simple characterization of who actually

leads the less educated countries over time. In Table 9, we continue to separate countries into those

with low and moderate levels of human capital, as before. We then classify for each year the

country’s leader along two dimensions. We follow the Alvarez et al. (2000) classification of

leaders as being democratic or autocratic. In addition, we group the leaders by the length of their

tenure. The Table shows the amount of time spent by countries in our sample being led by

democratic and autocratic leaders of different tenure lengths.

        The least educated countries are overwhelmingly led by long-standing dictators. For 66

percent of the years in our sample, these countries are led by autocratic leaders who eventually last

for at least five years. For 50 percent of the years in our sample, these countries are led by

autocrats who eventually last for at least ten years. In contrast, only 6 percent of the time are the

least-educated countries led by democratic leaders with terms that end up being less than five years,

and only 13 percent of the time, these countries are run by democratically elected leaders that last

for more than five years. Among moderately well educated countries, the situation is more mixed.

About 43 percent of the time, these countries are governed by democratically elected leaders. For

32 percent of the time, they are governed by democratic leaders who last between 2 and 10 years in

office. In contrast, these countries are governed by dictators who last for more than 5 years for 44

percent of the time in the sample. Yet, the dictatorship that lasts for more than 10 years is still the

largest single grouping in the table (32 percent).

        This evidence is at most suggestive. But it does suggest that, from the point of view of

understanding the emergence of countries from poverty, the focus on placing constraints on




                                                                                              19
government as a starting reform may have been misplaced. The focus on factor accumulation,

including the growth in human capital, might have been more productive.



V. Instrumental Variables.

       From the beginning, the growth and institutions research recognized that growth may itself

lead to better institutions. One way in which this literature tried to address this problem is

instrumental variables. Mauro (1995) already recognizes these issues, and uses ethnolinguistic

fractionalization of the population as an instrument for corruption. Hall and Jones (1999) use

ICRG measures of institutional quality, but instrument them using “distance from the equator and

the extent to which the primary languages of Western Europe are spoken today” (p. 110).

Researchers also tried to take advantage of the fact that the European expansion influenced the

countries being conquered and colonized. La Porta et al. (1997, 1998, 1999) take advantage of this

colonial experiment by looking at legal transplantation. They argue that Europeans brought their

legal systems into the countries they conquered or colonized, and that therefore legal origin can be

used as an instrument for the structure of various laws.

       This line of research was subsequently given a substantial boost by a pair of recent papers

by Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001, 2002). These authors argue that central to

understanding each country’s political institutions is not what laws the Europeans brought, but

rather whether they themselves settled in the particular colonies. AJR (2001) argue that the

mortality of European settlers in the countries they colonized shaped their decision to settle or not.

When the Europeans settled, they brought with them the effective European institutions

constraining the executive, whereas when they did not settle, they instituted systems of arbitrary

rule and expropriation of local populations. AJR (2002) further argue that the density of non-




                                                                                           20
European populations in the prospective colonies shaped the European settlement patterns. When

a region was densely settled (or urbanized) by the locals, the Europeans did not settle themselves,

but rather introduced exploitative institutions. In low density areas, in contrast, they settled and

brought their institutions of limited government, thereby causing long run growth. Using this

logic, AJR (2001, 2002) argue that both settler mortality and indigenous population density in 1500

can be used as instruments for modern day political institutions constraining the executive.

       The AJR papers invigorated the institutions and growth literature. Below we discuss their

work. But, as a starting point, it is important to note that, even if one agrees that mortality risk or

indigenous population density shaped the European settlement decisions, it is far from clear that

what the Europeans brought with them when they settled is limited government. It seems at least

as plausible that what they brought with them is themselves, and therefore their know-how and

human capital. (This is the interpretation of the effects of settler mortality suggested theoretically

by Djankov et al. (2003)). If that is the case, then at a purely conceptual level one cannot infer

from the patterns of European settlement that the asset being transplanted is institutions. To put

the same point in econometric terms, valid instruments must be uncorrelated with the error term,

and if settlement patterns influence growth through channels other than institutions, they are not

valid instruments. As we suggest below, this observation has significant implications for the

interpretation of instrumental variables regressions of growth on institutions.

       The correlation between AJR’s proposed instruments and their preferred measures of

institutions is very high indeed. For example, the logarithm of settler mortality is correlated at -.54

with average executive constraints, and -.51 with average expropriation risk, while the logarithm of

population density in 1500s is correlated at -.35 and -.40 with the same measures of institutions.




                                                                                            21
       But are AJR’s proposed instruments valid? We have several concerns, some already

discussed in the literature, but some new and perhaps more important. First, settler mortality is

basically uncorrelated with the constitutional measures of checks and balances we discussed in

Section II, and the logarithm of 1500 population density is only very weakly correlated with

plurality and proportional representation. If the Europeans really brought their institutions

constraining government, one might expect this influence to be reflected in “rules and procedures,”

yet this does not appear to be the case in the data. This is also surprising in light of all the

available evidence that colonial transplantation of legal traditions – the ultimate rules and

compliance procedures -- has been central in shaping the legal and regulatory systems of the

receiving countries. Why would colonial influence on rules and procedures be so strong in one

case, but not in the other?

       Second, an important element of the AJR line of reasoning is that settler mortality reflects

past settlement policies and their modern consequences. Yet the instruments appear to be

correlated with the modern disease environment as well. Jeffrey Sachs and his associates (Gallup

et al. 2001, Kiszewski et al. 2004) present data on modern malaria risk and malaria ecology. The

correlation of the log of settler mortality with malaria risk is .67, and with malaria ecology it is .66.

The log of 1500 population density, however, has a correlation of .38 with malaria risk, but only

.14 with malaria ecology. These correlations raise the question of whether AJR instruments reflect

the historical rather than the modern disease environment, since the latter might have an

independent affect on human capital, development, and institutions.

       AJR are well aware of this concern. As a test, they regress their preferred institutional

variables on settler mortality and malaria together, and find that settler mortality but not modern

malaria is statistically significant. Table 10 presents the results of similar regressions using all




                                                                                            22
available observations (AJR use a subset). Our results are different from those reported in their

work. The impact of settler mortality on today’s institutions remains significant, but so is that of

malaria risk. At least part of what settler mortality captures is the modern disease environment.

These results suggest that the issue of modern disease environment is real, and one should exercise

caution in treating AJR instruments as proxies for the colonial but not modern mortality risk.

       Still, both settler mortality and 1500 population density are strongly correlated with today’s

per capita income. Why might this be so? This gets us to our third and crucial point. A necessary

condition for these variables to be valid instruments for institutions is that they not influence per

capita income through other channels, i.e., be uncorrelated with the error term. We have seen that

human capital is an important determinant of economic growth. The importance of malaria in

determining current income points in the same direction. Could the influence of AJR’s proposed

instruments on today’s development work through human capital? Put differently, perhaps when

colonizers settled, they brought with them their know-how rather than constraints on the executive.

       Figures 2-5 show the relationship between settler mortality and 1500 population density on

the one hand, and total years of schooling in 1960 and 2000 on the other. These correlations are

even stronger than those between settler mortality and the measures of institutions. For example,

the correlation between settler mortality and years of schooling in 2000 is -.73.

       Some additional evidence on the importance of human capital, and its relationship to the

proposed instruments, comes from the small sample of countries for which we have data on

primary school enrollments in 1900. Figure 6 shows that this measure of educational investment a

century ago is a strong predictor of the level of economic development today.       Figures 7 and 8

further show that this measure of education is strongly negatively correlated with the proposed AJR




                                                                                           23
instruments. This evidence may further suggest that human capital, both today and as historically

introduced by the colonizers, drives economic growth.

       Table 11 further investigates the effects of human capital and political institutions in the

instrumental variables framework. We present the first and second stage results from the IV

estimation of the impact of average years of schooling between 1960 and 2000, and average

executive constraints over the same period, on log GDP per capita in 2000. As instruments, we

use French legal origin, log settler mortality, and log 1500 population density (the last two used one

at a time). The AJR instruments are important determinants of both executive constraints and

years of schooling in the first-stage regressions, while French legal origin countries have a lower

level of constraints on the executive, consistent with La Porta et al. (1999). In the second-stage

regression, however, the predicted years of schooling are a statistically significant determinant of

per capita income, but executive constraints are not. If anything, in the IV framework human

capital seems to be a more important variable predicting development than political institutions.

       We do not wish to push these results too far. By our own logic, human capital and

institutions are not the only potentially important baggage that the European colonizers have

brought with them, and so the instrument might still be correlated with the error term. They

brought “guns, germs, and steel” among other things (Diamond 1997, Engerman and Sokoloff

1991). The effects of colonial settlement work through many channels, and the instruments used

in the literature do not tell us which channel matters. Even if one accepts the view that the

variables proposed by AJR (2001, 2002) shaped the European settlement patterns, the data do not

tell us whether the Europeans brought with them their human capital, political institutions, or

something else. The instrumental variable approach does not tell us what causes growth.




                                                                                          24
VI. From Schooling to Institutions

        As a final way to understand whether schooling or institutional outcomes come first, we

follow Barro (1997, 1999) and look at timing. If institutions come first, then lagged values of

political variables should predict improvements in education. If education is the critical input, then

lagged values of education should predict improvement in institutional outcomes. In the top Panel

of Table 12, we regress, using five-year intervals, growth in years of schooling on country fixed

effects, initial schooling, and initial measures of political institutions used in the growth literature

as well as the initial level of GDP per capita. The data show some mean reversion in schooling

(perhaps due to measurement error), a large and positive effect of initial level of income on the

growth of education, and no effect of initial political institutions, no matter how measured, on the

growth of human capital.

        In the bottom panel, we look at the changes in political institutions over five-year intervals

as a function of country fixed effects, initial schooling, initial level of economic development, and

initial levels of these political institutions themselves. The results are striking. Initial levels of

schooling are a strong predictor of improving institutional outcomes over the next five years using

3 out of 4 measures, including executive constraints. Initial per capita income has no predictive

power. And, as we saw before, there is a lot of mean reversion in these measures of institutions.

        As before, we do not want to take these results as dispositive. However, they are strikingly

consistent with the Lipset view that high human capital leads to institutional improvement, even

over a relatively short horizon of 5 years. Moreover, like many of the earlier findings we

presented, the results are inconsistent with the view that high assessments of political institutions

predict subsequent improvement in the years of schooling.




                                                                                             25
VII. Conclusion.

       Exploring the causal link between institutions and economic growth has proved extremely

difficult. Despite creative and insightful efforts, the existing research strategy does not establish

this link, due to both conceptual problems with the measurement of institutions and the limitations

of econometric techniques. In particular, the existing research does not show that political

institutions rather than human capital have a causal effect on economic growth. Indeed, much

evidence points to the primacy of human capital for both growth and democratization.

       Our results are consistent with a perspective on institutions outlined by Djankov et al.

(2003). According to that paper, each community faces a set of institutional opportunities,

determined largely by the human and social capital of its population. The greater the human and

social capital of a community, the more attractive its institutional opportunities. Institutions, in this

framework, are points on this opportunity set, determined by efficiency, history, and politics.

Institutions are highly persistent because history, including colonial history, shapes social choices.

But institutional outcomes also get better as the society grows richer, because institutional

opportunities improve. Importantly, in that framework, institutions have only a second order effect

on economic performance. The first order effect comes from human and social capital, which

shape both institutional and productive capacities of a society.

       Our results have some implications for economic research and for economic policy. They

suggest that research in institutional economics, and in particular on the consequences of alternative

institutional arrangements, must focus on actual rules, rather than on conceptually ambiguous

assessments of institutional outcomes. The results of this paper do not show that “institutions do

not matter.” That proposition is flatly contradicted by a great deal of available empirical evidence,

including our own.    Rather, our results suggest that the current measurement strategies have




                                                                                            26
conceptual flaws, and that researchers would do better focusing on actual laws, rules, and

compliance procedures that could be manipulated by a policy maker to assess what works .

       With respect to policy, our results do not support the view that, from the perspective of

security of property and economic development, democratization and constraints on government

must come first. In many poor countries, such security came from policy choices made by

dictators. The economic success of East Asia in the post war era, and of China most recently, has

been a consequence of good-for-growth dictators, not of institutions constraining them. Indeed,

the Chinese example illustrates this point forcefully: there was nothing pre-destined about Deng,

one of the best dictators for growth, succeeding Mao, one of the worst. More generally, it might

be less profitable to look for the “deep” factors explaining economic development than for policies

favoring human and physical capital accumulation (see also Przeworski 2004a,b).

       None of this is to deny the merits of democracy and the constraints on government as

essential human values in their own right. Mulligan, Gil, and Sala-i-Martin (2004) present

compelling evidence that in such policy areas as freedom of the press, torture, death penalty, and

regulation of religion, democracies are significantly more benign than dictatorships. But our

evidence suggests some skepticism about the viability of democracy in countries with low level of

human capital – there have been few examples of such democracies in the world. Our evidence

suggests in contrast that the Lipset-Przeworski-Barro view of the world is more accurate: countries

that emerge from poverty accumulate human and physical capital under dictatorships, and then,

once they become richer, are increasingly likely to improve their institutions.




                                                                                        27
                                           Bibliography

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. 2001. “The Colonial Origins of
       Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American Economic Review
       91(5): 1369-401.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. 2002. “Reversal of Fortune:
       Geography and Development in the Making of the Modern World Income Distribution,”
       Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(4), 1231-1294.
Alesina, Alberto, Sule Ozler, Nouriel Roubini, and Phillip Swagel. 1996. “Political Instability and
       Economic Growth,” Journal of Economic Growth 1(2): 189-212.
Alvarez, Michael, José A. Cheibub, Fernando Limongi and Adam Przeworski. 2000. Democracy
       and Development: Political Institutions and Material Well-Being in the World, 1950-1990.
       Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Aten, Bettina, Alan Heston and Robert Summers. 2002. Penn World Tables Version 6.1. Center for
       International Comparisons at the University of Pennsylvania (CICUP).
Barro, Robert J. 1991 “Economic Growth in a Cross-Section of Nations,” Quarterly Journal of
       Economics 106(2): 407-43.
Barro, Robert J. 1997. Determinants of Economic Growth. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Barro, Robert J. 1999. “Determinants of Democracy,” Journal of Political Economy 107(6-2): 158-
       183.
Barro, Robert J. and Jong-Wha Lee. 2000. “International Data on Educational Attainment: Updates
       and Implications” Working Paper 42. Center for International Development (February).
Beck, Thorsten, George Clarke, Alberto Groff, Philip Keefer and Patrick Walsh. 2001. “New Tools
       in Comparative Political Economy: The Database of Political Institutions” World Bank
       Economic Review 15(1): 165-76.
Center for International Development, Geography Data sets. Found online at:
       <http://www2.cid.harvard.edu/ciddata/geographydata.htm#General%20measures%20of%20
       geography>
DeLong, J. Bradford and Andrei Shleifer. 1993. “Princes and Merchants: City Growth before the
       Industrial Revolution.” Journal of Law and Economics 36(2): 671-702.
Diamond, Jared. 1997. Guns, Germs, and Steel. New York: Norton.



                                                                                        28
Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes and Andrei Shleifer. 2003. “The
       New Comparative Economics,” Journal of Comparative Economics 31(4), 595-619.
Dollar, David and Aart Kraay. 2003. “Institutions, Trade and Growth.” Journal of Monetary
       Economics 50(1): 133-62.
Easterly, William and Ross Levine. 2003. “Tropics, germs, and crops: how endowments influence
       economic development.” Journal of Monetary Economics 50(1): 3-39.
Engerman, Stanley, and Kenneth Sokoloff. 1991. “Factor Endowments, Institutions, and
       Differential Paths of Growth among New World Economies,” in Stephen Haber (ed.), How
       Latin America Fell Behind, Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Gallup, John L. and Jeffrey D. Sachs. 2001. “The Economic Burden of Malaria.” The Supplement
       to The American Journal of Tropical Medicine & Hygiene, 64(1-2): 85-96.
Hall, Robert E. and Charles I. Jones. 1999. “Why Do Some Countries Produce so Much More
       Output per Worker than Others?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(1): 83-116.
International Country Risk Guide. (Political Risk Services, East Syracuse, NY, 1996).
Jaggers, Keith and Monty G. Marshall, 2000. “Polity IV Project” Center for International
       Development and Conflict Management, University of Maryland.
Jones, Benjamin and Benjamin Olken. 2003 “Do Leaders Matter? National Leadership and Growth
       since World War II.” Monograph, Harvard University.
Kaufmann, Daniel, Aart Kraay and Massimo Mastruzzi. 2003. “Governance Matters III: Updated
       Governance Indicators for 1996-02.” Working Paper Draft for comments. Washington,
       D.C.: World Bank.
Kaufmann, Daniel, Aart Kraay and Pablo Zoido-Lobatón. 2002. “Governance Matters II: Updated
       Governance Indicators for 2000-01” Working Paper No. 2772. World Bank Policy Research
       Department (February).
Kiszewski, Anthony, Andrew Mellinger, Pia Malaney, Andrew Spielman, Sonia Ehrlich, Jeffrey D.
       Sachs. 2004. “A Global Index of the Stability of Malaria Transmission Based on the
       Intrinsic Properties of Anopheline Mosquito Vectors.” American Journal of Tropical
       Medicine and Hygiene. Forthcoming.
Knack, Steven and Philip Keefer. 1995. “Institutions and Economic Performance: Cross-Country
       Tests Using Alternative Measures.” Economics and Politics 7(3): 207-27.




                                                                                        29
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 1997. “Legal
       Determinants of External Finance,” Journal of Finance 52(3), 1131-1150.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 1998. “Law and
       Finance,” Journal of Political Economy 106(6), 1113-1155.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 1999. “The
       Quality of Government,” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 15(1) 222-79.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Christian Pop-Eleches and Andrei Shleifer. 2004.
       “Judicial Checks and Balances.” Journal of Political Economy 112(2), 445-470.
Lindert, Peter H. 2001. “Democracy, Decentralization, and Mass Schooling before 1914” working
       paper 104. San Diego, California: University of California Agricultural History Center
       (February).
Lipset, Seymour M. 1960. Political Man: The Social Basis of Modern Politics. New York:
       Doubleday.
Lucas, Robert E. 1988. “On the Mechanics of Economic Development.” Journal of Monetary
       Economics 22(1): 3-42.
Maddison, Angus. 2003. The World Economy: Historical Statistics. Paris: OECD.
Mauro, Paolo, 1995, "Corruption and Growth," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110:
       681-712.
McEvedy, Colin and Richard Jones. 1978. Atlas of World Population History. Viking Press.
Montesquieu, Charles de Secondat. 1748. The Spirit of the Laws. Paris.
Mulligan, Casey, Ricard Gil, and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. 2004. “Do Democracies Have Different
       Public Policies than Nondemocracies?”, Journal of Economic Perspectives 18(1): 51-74.
North, Douglass C. 1981. Structure and Change in Economic History. New York: Norton & Co.
North, Douglass C. 1990. Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic Performance.
       Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
North, Douglass C. and Robert P. Thomas. 1973. The Rise of the Western World: A New Economic
       History. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini. 2003. The Economic Effects of Constitutions. Cambridge,
       Mass.: MIT Press.
Pritchett, Lant. 2000. “Where has all the education gone?” World Bank Economic Review 15(3).




                                                                                      30
Przeworski, Adam. 2004a. “The Last Instance: Are Institutions the Primary Cause of Economic
       Development?” Mimeo, New York University.
Przerworski, Adam. 2004b. “Georgraphy vs Institutions Revisited: Were Fortuntes Reversed?”.
       Mimeo, New York University.
Rodrik, Dani, Arvind Subramanian and Francesco Trebbi, 2002. “Institutions Rule: The Primacy of
       Institutions over Geography and Integration in Economic Development.” NBER Working
       Paper 9305, National Bureau of Economic Research (October).
Smith, Adam. 1976 [1776]. An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, edited
       by Edwin Canaan. Chicago, Illinois: University of Chicago Press.
World Health Organization. 1997. “World Malaria Situation in 1994, Part I,” WHO Weekly
       Epidemiological Record 36: 269-74.




                                                                                    31
                                                 Table 1
                        Volatility of political institutions and human capital
The table shows the average within-country standard deviation of various measures of political institutions and human capital.
Due to data availability, we measure human capital (years of schooling) and the Polity IV variables of political institutions in
1960, 1965, 1970, 1975, 1980, 1985, 1990, 1995 and 2000. We measure the autocracy variable from Alvarez et al. (2000) for
1960, 1965, 1970, 1975, 1980, 1985 and 1990 only because their data ends at that point. All variables were normalized to
vary between 0 and 1. All variables are defined in Appendix 1.

                        Polity IV                           Alvarez et al. (2000)
Executive constraints Democracy          Autocracy               Autocracy        Years of schooling
    (1960-2000)       (1960-2000)       (1960-2000)             (1960-1990)         (1960-2000)
                             Average within-country standard deviation
        18.53%                 17.52%                  19.36%                        18.86%                    10.33%
                                         Table 2
                Persistence of political institutions and human capital
The table shows OLS regressions for the cross-section of countries. The specifications include a constant but
we do not report the estimates in the table. Robust standard errors are shown in parentheses. All variables are
defined in Appendix 1.
                                                                 Dependent variables:
                                               Years of         Executive Autocracy --             Democracy
                                              schooling         constraints   Polity IV              (2000)
                                                (2000)            (2000)       (2000)
Years of schooling (1960)                       1.1773a
                                               (0.0885)
Executive constraints (1960)                                     0.2719b
                                                                 (0.1246)
                                                                                               c
Autocracy -- Polity IV (1960)                                                           0.1810
                                                                                       (0.0926)
Democracy (1960)                                                                                    0.3065b
                                                                                                    (0.1341)
Observations                                       50                50                  50            50
  2
R                                                 0.73              0.09                0.07          0.10
a=significant at 1 percent; b=significant at 5 percent; c=significant at 10 percent.
                                                                                         Table 3
                                                                         Correlations of measures of institutions

                                                      Log GDP per          Executive       Expropriation   Autocracy -- Government       Judicial    Constitutional   Plurality
                                                      capita (2000)        constraints         risk          Alvarez    effectiveness independence      review      (1975-2000)
                                                                          (1960-2000)      (1982-1997)     (1960-1990) (1998-2000)        (1995)        (1995)
Executive constraints (1960-2000)                         0.7119a
Expropriation risk (1982-1997)                            0.7906a            0.6378
                                                                                       a

Autocracy -- Alvarez (1960-1990)                         -0.7388a            -0.8567
                                                                                       a
                                                                                             -0.6864
                                                                                                       a

Government effectiveness (1998-2000)                      0.7860a            0.6349a         0.8297a        -0.5908a
Judicial independence (1995)                              0.0279             0.3465a         0.2629
                                                                                                      b     -0.1907       0.3006b
Constitutional review (1995)                              -0.0649            0.1904          0.1189          -0.0278      0.0482        0.2243c
Plurality (1975-2000)                                    -0.2620a            -0.3570a        -0.1918b        0.2472a      -0.2044a      -0.0992         0.0040
                                                                   a                   a              b               b            b
Proportional representation (1975-2000)                   0.2947             0.3158          0.2172         -0.2151       0.2052        -0.1684         0.1284       -0.6118a
a=significant at 1 percent; b=significant at 5 percent; c=significant at 10 percent.
                                                                Table 4
                                        Economic growth, political institutions and human capital
The table shows OLS regressions for the cross-section of countries. The dependent variable in all specifications is the growth of GDP per capita for the period 1960-
2000. The specifications include a constant but we do not report the estimates in the table. Robust standard errors are shown in parentheses. All variables are defined
in Appendix 1.
                                                              Dependent variable is growth of GDP per capita 1960-2000
Log GDP per capita (1960)                           -0.0114 -0.0136a -0.0112a -0.0122a -0.0141a -0.0130a -0.0090a
                                                                              a
                                                                                                                                                          -0.0105a
                                                     (0.0033) (0.0033) (0.0033) (0.0033) (0.0037) (0.0037) (0.0034)                                        (0.0036)
Log years of schooling (1960)                        0.0060b 0.0076a 0.0063b 0.0060b 0.0077b 0.0073b 0.0073a                                                0.0080a
                                                     (0.0025) (0.0024) (0.0024) (0.0023) (0.0032) (0.0031) (0.0025)                                        (0.0026)
                                                            a         a         a        c         a         a        a
Share of population living in temperate zone (1995) 0.0175 0.0132 0.0179 0.0104 0.0242 0.0231 0.0175                                                        0.0184a
                                                     (0.0049) (0.0041) (0.0046) (0.0055) (0.0049) (0.0047) (0.0050)                                        (0.0052)
Executive constraints (1960-2000)                    0.0021b
                                                     (0.0008)
Expropriation risk (1982-1997)                                 0.0040
                                                                      a

                                                              (0.0014)
Autocracy -- Alvarez (1960-1990)                                        -0.0060c
                                                                         (0.0032)
Government effectiveness (1998-2000)                                               0.0075a
                                                                                  (0.0024)
Judicial independence (1995)                                                                -0.0041
                                                                                            (0.0057)
Constitutional review (1995)                                                                          0.0047
                                                                                                     (0.0064)
Plurality (1975-2000)                                                                                           0.0010
                                                                                                               (0.0027)
Proportional representation (1975-2000)                                                                                                                     0.0019
                                                                                                                                                           (0.0031)
Observations                                                            71              69     71           71          54           54           71           70
  2
R                                                                      0.44            0.56   0.44         0.48        0.45         0.45         0.41         0.44
a=significant at 1 percent; b=significant at 5 percent; c=significant at 10 percent.
                                                                                                  Table 5
                                                     Economic growth, initial constraints on the executive and initial human capital
The table shows OLS regressions for the cross-section of countries. The dependent variables are the growth rates of GDP per capita for each decade between 1960 and 2000 and for the whole period. The
specifications include a constant but we do not report the estimates in the table. Robust standard errors are shown in parentheses. All variables are defined in Appendix 1.

                                           Panel A: Dependent variables are the growth rates of GDP per capita for each decade between 1960 and 2000 and for the whole period
                                                1960-70                      1970-80                     1980-90                   1990-2000                   1960-2000
Share of population living in                       0.0290a                             0.0225a                 0.0294a                         0.0085                           0.0253a
temperate zone (1995)                              (0.0076)                            (0.0070)                (0.0084)                        (0.0073)                         (0.0039)
Log initial GDP per capita                         -0.0059                             -0.0032                 -0.0079b                         0.0021                          -0.0079a
                                                   (0.0045)                            (0.0043)                (0.0036)                        (0.0037)                         (0.0025)
Initial executive constraints                       0.0008                              -0.0004                0.0027b                          0.0006                           0.0013
                                                   (0.0013)                            (0.0014)                (0.0012)                        (0.0016)                         (0.0009)
Observations                                          77                                   99                    102                              95                               72
R2                                                17%                          6%                          19%                        6%                          34%
                                           Panel B: Dependent variables are the growth rates of GDP per capita for each decade between 1960 and 2000 and for the whole period
                                                1960-70                      1970-80                     1980-90                   1990-2000                   1960-2000
Share of population living in                      0.0136b                              0.0204a                 0.0220a                         0.0123c                          0.0175a
temperate zone (1995)                              (0.0066)                            (0.0068)                (0.0082)                        (0.0073)                         (0.0049)
Log initial GDP per capita                         -0.0027                             -0.0158a                -0.0103b                        -0.0048                          -0.0092a
                                                   (0.0040)                            (0.0044)                (0.0048)                        (0.0048)                         (0.0034)
Log initial years of schooling                     0.0075b                              0.0147a                 0.0114a                         0.0102c                          0.0073a
                                                   (0.0033)                            (0.0035)                (0.0043)                        (0.0060)                         (0.0024)
Observations                                          79                                   86                      90                              82                               71
R2                                                 22%                         24%                        16%                         9%                          38%
                                           Panel C: Dependent variables are the growth rates of GDP per capita for each decade between 1960 and 2000 and for the whole period
                                                 1960-70                     1970-80                    1980-90                    1990-2000                   1960-2000
Share of population living in                       0.0270a                             0.0191a                 0.0218a                         0.0135c                          0.0255a
temperate zone (1995)                              (0.0085)                            (0.0070)                (0.0082)                        (0.0077)                         (0.0048)
Log initial GDP per capita                         -0.0141a                            -0.0130b                -0.0146a                        -0.0073                          -0.0189a
                                                   (0.0048)                            (0.0057)                (0.0045)                        (0.0055)                         (0.0034)
Initial executive constraints                       -0.0004                             -0.0017                0.0031b                          0.0014                           0.0008
                                                   (0.0012)                            (0.0016)                (0.0013)                        (0.0015)                         (0.0008)
Log initial years of schooling                      0.0116a                             0.0140a                0.0105b                          0.0104c                          0.0096a
                                                   (0.0035)                            (0.0035)                (0.0043)                        (0.0060)                         (0.0028)
Observations                                           61                                  80                     86                               81                               57
R2                                                   33%                                20%                      20%                             9%                               55%
a=significant at 1 percent; b=significant at 5 percent; c=significant at 10 percent.
                                                                            Table 6
                      Long-term economic growth, initial executive constraints and initial human capital
The table shows OLS regressions for the cross-section of countries. The dependent variables are the growth rates of GDP per capita for each period. The
specifications include a constant but we do not report the estimates in the table. Robust standard errors are shown in parentheses. All variables are defined in
Appendix 1.
                                                 Panel A: Dependent variables are the growth rates of GDP per capita for each period
                                                     1870-1950                       1890-1950                       1900-1950
Log initial GDP per capita                                0.0027                                0.0050b                                 -0.0019
                                                         (0.0022)                              (0.0022)                                (0.0038)
Initial executive constraints                             -0.0001                               0.0002                                  0.0006
                                                         (0.0005)                              (0.0004)                                (0.0006)
Observations                                                 29                                   27                                      31
R2                                                          0.06                                 0.26                                    0.02
                                                 Panel B: Dependent variables are the growth rates of GDP per capita for each period
                                                     1870-1950                       1890-1950                       1900-1950
Log initial GDP per capita                               -0.0076 a                             -0.0028                                 -0.0011
                                                         (0.0013)                              (0.0025)                                (0.0037)
Initial executive constraints                             -0.0001                              -0.0002                                  0.0002
                                                         (0.0002)                              (0.0005)                                (0.0006)
Primary school enrollment 1870                            0.0206a
                                                         (0.0030)
Primary school enrollment 1890                                                                  0.0127b
                                                                                               (0.0056)
Primary school enrollment 1900                                                                                                          0.0067
                                                                                                                                       (0.0066)
Observations                                                 16                                   23                                      27
R2                                                          0.73                                 0.21                                    0.08
a=significant at 1 percent; b=significant at 5 percent; c=significant at 10 percent.
                                                                                                Table 7
                                                                                 Political regimes and human capital
Distribution of countries by years of schooling in 1960 and political regimes. The classification of political regimes is based on the average democracy score for 1960-
2000 from the Polity IV database. We divide the sample of countries into those with low human capital (years of schooling below the sample's median value of 2.6785),
                                                                                                                                             th
intermediate human capital (years of schooling between 2.6785 and 5.0115), and high human capital (years schooling above the sample's 75 percentile value of 5.0115
years). The table shows the number of countries that fall within each group. All variables are defined in Appendix 1.


Years of schooling (1960)                                                  Democracy = 10               10 > Democracy > 7 7 ≥ Democracy > 2                                 Democracy ≤ 2               All countries

Low (yrs. schooling < 2.6785)                                                         0                                6                               8                              28                      42
Intermediate (2.6785 ≤ yrs. schooling ≤ 5.0115)                                       2                                5                              14                               3                      24
High (yrs. schooling >5.0115)                                                         17                               3                               3                               0                      23

Total                                                                                 19                              14                              25                              31                      89

Note: The two stable democracies with intermediate schooling levels are Italy and Costa Rica. The three authoritarian countries with intermediate schooling levels are Singapore, Taiwan and Paraguay.
                                                                   Table 8
                                                      Growth rates and political regimes
The table is based on the sample of countries described in Table 7. The table shows the number of observations for each group of countries, the average
within-country 10-year GDP per capita growth rates and the mean standard deviation of the 10-year GDP per capita growth rates across countries. The
democracy score is computed at the beginning of each decade using the preceding ten years of data. We measure growth at the beginnig of each decade
using the subsequent ten years. All variables are defined in Appendix 1.
Years of schooling (1960)                         Democracy = 10      10 > Democracy > 7      7 ≥ Democracy > 2       Democracy ≤ 2      All countries
                                                                                  Panel A: Number of observations
Low (yrs. schooling < 2.6785)                             6                   17                       22                   87                132
Intermediate (2.6785 ≤ yrs. schooling ≤ 5.0115)           9                   21                       26                   35                91
High (yrs. schooling > 5.0115)                           67                   10                        3                    7                87
Total                                                    82                   48                       51                   129               310
                                                                         Panel B: Average within-country 10-year growth rate
Low (yrs. schooling < 2.6785)                          0.0036               0.0292                   0.0185               0.0076            0.0120
Intermediate (2.6785 ≤ yrs. schooling ≤ 5.0115)        0.0225               0.0224                   0.0271               0.0273            0.0256
High (yrs. schooling > 5.0115)                         0.0257               0.0212                   0.0235               0.0204            0.0247
Total                                                  0.0238               0.0246                   0.0232               0.0136            0.0196
                                                             Panel C: Mean standard deviation of the 10-year growth rates across countries
Low (yrs. schooling < 2.6785)                          0.0168               0.0298                   0.0224               0.0303            0.0294
Intermediate (2.6785 ≤ yrs. schooling ≤ 5.0115)        0.0161               0.0197                   0.0206               0.0317            0.0247
High (yrs. schooling > 5.0115)                         0.0137               0.0122                   0.0078               0.0250            0.0144
Total                                                  0.0151               0.0225                   0.0210               0.0315            0.0254
                                               Table 9
                      Percentage of years spent under different political regimes
The table presents the mean percentage of years that countries spent under autocratic or democratic regimes from 1960 to 1990.
The sample only includes countries with years of schooling in 1960 below 5.0115 (low and intermediate levels of human capital).
The classification into autocracy and democracy comes from the data in Alvarez et al. (2000). For each type of political regime, we
split the sample into four groups depending on the length of the tenure of the leader. All variables are defined in Appendix 1.

                                                               Low                                 Intermediate
                                                     (yrs. schooling < 2.6785)          (2.6785 ≤ yrs. schooling ≤ 5.0115)
                                                        Percentage of years                    Percentage of years

Length of leader < 2 years
 Autocratic regime                                              1.62%                                    1.90%
 Democratic regime                                              0.52%                                    2.45%

Length of leader ≥ 2 years but < 5 years
 Autocratic regime                                             10.93%                                   10.28%
 Democratic regime                                              5.25%                                   18.30%

Length of leader ≥ 5 years but < 10 years
 Autocratic regime                                             16.32%                                   11.83%
 Democratic regime                                              7.32%                                   14.32%

Length of leader ≥ 10 years
 Autocratic regime                                             49.80%                                   32.33%
 Democratic regime                                              6.15%                                    8.58%
                                                                            Table 10
The table shows OLS regressions for the cross-section of countries. The specifications include a constant but we do not report the estimates in the table. Robust
standard errors are shown in parentheses. All definitions are in Appendix 1.

                                                                                   Dependent variables:
                                                 Executive constraints Expropriation risk Autocracy -- Alvarez Government effectiveness
                                                     (1960-2000)         (1982-1997)          (1960-1990)           (1998-2000)
                                                              b                    b                    c
Log settler mortality                                  -0.4351             -0.3543               0.0938               -0.2034b
                                                       (0.1965)            (0.1764)             (0.0507)              (0.0918)
                                                               a                   b                    a
Population at risk of malaria (1994)                   -1.5215             -0.9679               0.4397               -0.7745a
                                                       (0.5504)            (0.3731)             (0.1597)              (0.2133)
Observations                                              74                  66                    74                   77
R2                                                       0.36                0.32                  0.29                 0.43
a=significant at 1 percent; b=significant at 5 percent; c=significant at 10 percent.
                                                              Table 11
                                        Economic development, instrumental variable regressions

The table shows instrumental variables regressions for the cross-section of countries. Panel A reports the second-stage estimates from instrumental variables
regressions with first-stage estimates shown in Panel B. The dependent variable in both second-stage specifications is the log of GDP per capita in 2000. Panel B
reports the first-stage estimates for two sets of instruments. The first specification instruments executive constraints and years of schooling using the log of settler
mortality and French legal origin. The second specification instruments executive constraints and years of schooling using the log of population density in 1500
and French legal origin. The specifications in both stages include a constant but we do not report the estimates in the table. Robust standard errors are reported in
parentheses. All variables are defined in Appendix 1.

                                                                                        Panel A: Second-stage regressions
                                                                                  Dependent variable is log GDP per capita in 2000
                                                                                   (1)                                         (2)
Years of schooling (1960-2000)                                                   0.7894a                                               0.4836b
                                                                                (0.2753)                                               (0.1875)
Executive constraints (1960-2000)                                               -0.3432                                                -0.2965
                                                                                (0.2577)                                               (0.2410)
Share of population living in temperate zone                                    -1.6969                                                -0.0863
(1995)                                                                          (1.2053)                                               (0.7714)
Observations                                                                        47                                                    55
R2                                                                                 0.31                                                   0.5
                                                                                    Panel B: First-stage regressions
                                                                                           Dependent variables:
                                                           Executive constraints Years of schooling Executive constraints Years of schooling
                                                               (1960-2000)         (1960-2000)            (1960-2000)       (1960-2000)
Share of population living in temperate zone                       -0.1195                      3.4975a                  -0.0353                      2.8397a
(1995)                                                             (0.7202)                    (0.8044)                  (0.8359)                    (0.8933)
Log settler mortality                                              -0.8212a                    -1.0183a
                                                                   (0.2053)                    (0.2293)
Log population density in 1500                                                                                           -0.3737b                    -0.6140a
                                                                                                                         (0.1582)                    (0.1691)

French legal origin                                                -1.4124a                    -0.3770                   -1.1988b                    -0.5329
                                                                   (0.4258)                    (0.4757)                  (0.4538)                    (0.4850)

Observations                                                           47                        47                          55                          55
  2
R                                                                    0.53                       0.70                        0.25                        0.55
F-Test for excluded instruments                                                   17.23                                                  4.70
Correlation of predicted values of executive
constraints and years of schooling                                               0.8182                                                 0.8163

a=significant at the 1 percent; b=significant at the 5 percent; c=significant at 10 percent.
                                                                  Table 12
The table shows OLS regressions with country fixed effects for the cross-section of countries. The specifications include a
constant and country fixed effects but we do not report the estimates in the table. Errors are clustered at the country level and
reported in parentheses. All definitions are in Appendix 1.
                                         Panel A: Dependent variable is the 5-year change in years of schooling (t+5,t)
                                                      a                                             a
Years of schooling (t)                       -0.0721                       -0.0460         -0.0707                -0.0691a
                                             (0.0237)                     (0.0339)         (0.0250)               (0.0239)
                                                      a
Log GDP per capita (t)                        0.2839                       0.3978a          0.2809a                0.2825a
                                             (0.0790)                     (0.1055)         (0.0797)               (0.0793)
Executive constraints (t)                     -0.0099
                                             (0.0118)
Autocracy -- Polity IV (t)                                                 0.0373
                                                                          (0.0391)
Autocracy -- Alvarez (t)                                                                    0.0065
                                                                                           (0.0080)
Democracy (t)                                                                                                      -0.0094
                                                                                                                  (0.0074)
Observations                                    514                          420             514                     514
  2
R                                            0.24                  0.26                   0.24                   0.24
                                      Panel B: Dependent variables are the 5-year changes in political institutions (t+5,t)
                                      Change executive     Change autocracy -- Change autocracy --              Change
                                         constraints            Polity IV               Alvarez               democracy
                                                      a
Years of schooling (t)                        0.4975                      -0.9092a          -0.0958                0.7004
                                                                                                                           a

                                             (0.1191)                     (0.1790)         (0.0707)               (0.1804)
Log GDP per capita (t)                        0.0382                       0.5075           -0.2675                0.2918
                                             (0.4035)                     (0.6295)         (0.2022)               (0.6055)
                                                      a
Executive constraints (t)                    -0.5724
                                             (0.0716)
Autocracy -- Polity IV (t)                                                -0.5471a
                                                                          (0.0680)
                                                                                                    a
Autocracy -- Alvarez (t)                                                                   -0.8642
                                                                                           (0.1032)
                                                                                                                           a
Democracy (t)                                                                                                     -0.5145
                                                                                                                  (0.0650)
Observations                                    499                          499             349                     499
 2
R                                              0.33                          0.32            0.47                   0.30
a=significant at 1 percent; b=significant at 5 percent; c=significant at 10 percent.
                               Figure 1: Executive Constraints 1948-2001
                                       North versus South Korea

           8        6
Executive Constraints
2         40




                        1950       1960         1970            1980          1990   2000
                                                         Year
                                           North Korea                 South Korea
                                                                             Figure 2
                                                        Years of schooling (1960) and Log settler mortality

                                     10
Demeaned Years of schooling (1960)




                                            NZL
                                            AUS
                                                        USA
                                                         CAN
                                     5




                                                  FJI                        BRB
                                                                           URY
                                                                           ARG
                                                                           CHL
                                                        HKG
                                                        ZAF                BOL
                                                                             TTO      PAN
                                                                            CRI
                                                                  GUY      LKA
                                                                            PRY
                                                          SGP              PER
                                                                           ECU
                                                                           COL
                                                                           BRA
                                     0




                                                          MYS    MUS        VEN JAM
                                                                           MEX    DOM
                                                                                      NIC
                                                                            SLV
                                                                            HND
                                                                       IND GTM        SEN
                                                                   MMR      DZAAFG KENPNG CMR
                                                                                      IDN   UGA
                                                                    PAK    BGD
                                                                          TUN SDN HTI     ZAR     SLE GHA
                                                                                            CAF NER   TGO      MLI
                                     -5




                                             -2                            0                               2         4
                                                                          Demeaned Log Settler mortality
                                          coef = -1.3837569, (robust) se = .26166601, t = -5.29
                                                                          Figure 3
                                                Years of schooling (1960) and Log population density in 1500

                                     8


                                                AUS                          NZL

                                                            USA
                                     6




                                            CAN
Demeaned Years of schooling (1960)
                                     4




                                                              URY                          BRB
                                                              ARG                  CHL
                                                            HKG
                                     2




                                                                                         PAN
                                                                               ZAF BOL TTO
                                                                                         CRI
                                                                                          PHL
                                                                       GUY     PRY                                LKA
                                                            SGP                LSO  COL PERECU
                                                              BRA
                                     0




                                                                              VEN        DOM MEX
                                                                                       MYS            JAM
                                                                                         NIC
                                                                               SWZ MWI
                                                                                   ZMB SLV
                                                                                         HND         SEN
                                                                  BWA              ZWE   GTM
                                                                                         CMR                         IND
                                                                                         PNG KEN     IDN MMR
                                                                                                           UGA
                                                                                                            AFG
                                                                                                          DZA
                                                                                        HTI          GHA             BGD
                                     -2




                                                                                         ZAR         SLE       TUN   PAK
                                                                                         CAF
                                                                                       MOZ
                                                                                     NER             TGO         SDN
                                                                                     MLI                         NPL

                                           -4                     -2                   0                      2            4
                                                                    Demeaned Log population density in 1500
                                          coef = -.92672729, (robust) se = .15640188, t = -5.93
                                                                        Figure 4
                                                   Years of schooling (2000) and Log settler mortality

                                    10




                                                   USA
Demeaned Years of schooling(2000)




                                           NZL      CAN
                                           AUS
                                    5




                                                   HKG
                                                                         BRB
                                                                      ARG
                                                      SGP
                                                 FJI ZAF
                                                      MYS             CHLTTO    PAN
                                                                       PER
                                                                       URY
                                                                       MEX
                                                                       ECU
                                                             GUY      LKA
                                                                        CRI
                                                             MUS        PRY
                                                                        VEN
                                                                       BOL
                                                                             JAM
                                                                             DOM
                                    0




                                                                      EGY
                                                                       COL
                                                                  IND BRA
                                                                        DZA
                                                                        SLV      IDN COG
                                                                     TUN        NIC
                                                                        HND   KEN                             GHA
                                                                       GTM           ZAR
                                                                                      CMR
                                                              MMR
                                                               PAK     BGD   HTI PNG UGA                      TGO
                                                                                SEN BEN
                                                                                      CAF
                                                                                      RWA            SLE
                                                                         SDN                                        GMB
                                                                               AFG
                                                                                                  NER                     MLI
                                    -5




                                              -2                           0                              2                     4
                                                                         Demeaned Log settler mortality
                                         coef = -1.727679, (robust) se = .20195631, t = -8.55
                                                                       Figure 5
                                             Years of schooling (2000) and Log population density in 1500

                                     10




                                                          USA
Demeaned Years of schooling (2000)




                                            CAN                          NZL
                                              AUS
                                     5




                                                          HKG
                                                                                          BRB
                                                            ARG
                                                          SGP                         PAN
                                                                            ZAF CHL MYS
                                                                                     TTO
                                                                                       PHL
                                                             URY                      PER
                                                                                            MEX
                                                                                          ECU
                                                                  GUY                 CRI                         LKA
                                                                            PRY BOL
                                                                            SWZ
                                                                           VEN
                                                               BWA              ZMB DOM             JAM
                                                                                 COL                                              EGY
                                     0




                                                                                ZWE  COG           IDN DZA              IND
                                                              BRA           LSO       SLV
                                                                                      NIC
                                                                                      HND KEN      GHA     TUN
                                                                                     ZAR
                                                                                     CMR
                                                                                      GTM
                                                                                MWI HTI            TGO UGA
                                                                                      PNG          SENMMR             PAK
                                                                                                                      BGD
                                                                                     CAF           BEN
                                                                                                   SLE
                                                                                                   GMB            SDN RWA
                                                                                                                  NPL
                                                                                      MOZ                 AFG
                                                                                    NER
                                                                                    MLI
                                     -5




                                            -4                     -2                 0                       2               4
                                                                    Demeaned Log population density in 1500
                                          coef = -.98564063, (robust) se = .1677801, t = -5.87
                                                                Figure 6
                                     Log GDP per capita (2000) and Primary school enrollment (1900)

                              1
                                                                                                                       USA

                                                                                                     NORDNK
                                                                                                         CHE       CAN
                                                                                       JPN                       AUS
                                                                                               BEL   NLD
                                                                                                     AUT
                                                                                                       SWEDEU
                                                                             ITA                         GBR    FRA
                              .5




                                                                                                                 NZL
Demeaned Log GDP/POP (2000)




                                                                                   ESP
                                                           PRT
                                                                       GRC
                              0




                                                                       ARG             TTO
                                                                                         HUN
                                                          URYCHL
                                                        MEX
                              -.5




                                                      RUS
                                                   BRA

                                                                 CRI   BGR
                              -1




                                           EGY                   ROM
                                                                                       JAM
                              -1.5




                                                     BOL
                                             IND

                                     -.5                                           0                                     .5
                                                              Demeaned Primary school enrollment (1900)
                                     coef = 2.141442, (robust) se = .25222243, t = 8.49
                                                                                     Figure 7
                                                             Primary school enrollment (1900) and Log settler mortality

                                            .6

                                                                              USA
                                                                                CAN
                                                           NZL
                                                           AUS
Demeaned Primary school enrollment (1900)
                                            .4
                                            .2




                                                                                                                                 TTO
                                            -5.551e-17




                                                                                                                                           JAM



                                                                                                                           ARG

                                                                                                                           CHL CRI
                                            -.2




                                                                                                                            URY
                                                                                                                            MEX
                                                                                                                            BOL
                                                                                                                            BRA
                                                                                                                     IND
                                            -.4




                                                                                                                           EGY

                                                             -1.5              -1              -.5               0         .5          1
                                                                                         Demeaned Log settler mortality
                                                         coef = -.30105869, (robust) se = .05789886, t = -5.2
                                                                                          Figure 8
                                                             Primary school enrollment (1900) and Log population density in 1500

                                            .6

                                                                                     USA
                                                                      CAN
                                                                       AUS                     NZL
Demeaned Primary school enrollment (1900)
                                            .4
                                            .2




                                                                                                             TTO
                                            -.2 -5.551e-17




                                                                                                                         JAM


                                                                                                 CUB
                                                                                      ARG

                                                                                                       CHL CRI
                                                                                      URY
                                                                                                                   MEX
                                                                                                       BOL
                                                                                      BRA
                                                                                                                                   IND
                                            -.4




                                                                                                                                         EGY


                                                              -4                -2                0                  2              4          6
                                                                                         Demeaned Log population density in 1500
                                                              coef = -.0866499, (robust) se = .0224173, t = -3.87
                                                            Appendix 1: Variable Definitions

Variable                                                              Definition

                                                                   Measures of institutions
Executive constraints         A measure of the extent of institutionalized constraints on the decision making powers of chief executives. The variable takes
                              seven different values: (1) Unlimited authority (there are no regular limitations on the executive's actions, as distinct from
                              irregular limitations such as the threat or actuality of coups and assassinations); (2) Intermediate category; (3) Slight to moderate
                              limitation on executive authority (there are some real but limited restraints on the executive); (4) Intermediate category; (5)
                              Substantial limitations on executive authority (the executive has more effective authority than any accountability group but is
                              subject to substantial constraints by them); (6) Intermediate category; (7) Executive parity or subordination (accountability groups
                              have effective authority equal to or greater than the executive in most areas of activity). This variable ranges from one to seven
                              where higher values equal a greater extent of institutionalized constraints on the power of chief executives. This variable is
                              calculated as the average from 1960 through 2000, or for specific years as needed in the tables. Source: Jaggers and Marshall (200


Democracy                     A measure of the degree of democracy in a given country based on: (1) the competitiveness of political participation; (2) the
                              openness and competitiveness of executive recruitment; and (3) the constraints on the chief executive. The variable ranges from
                              zero to ten, where higher values equal a higher degree of institutionalized democracy. This variable is calculated as the average
                              from 1960 through 2000, or for specific years as needed in the tables. Source: Jaggers and Marshall (2000).


Autocracy -- Polity IV        A measure of the degree of autocracy in a given country based on: (1) the competitiveness of political participation; (2) the
                              regulation of political participation; (3) the openness and competitiveness of executive recruitment; and (4) constraints on the
                              chief executive. This variable ranges from zero to ten where higher values equal a higher degree of institutionalized autocracy.
                              This variable is calculated as the average from 1960 through 2000, or for specific years as needed in the tables. Source: Jaggers
                              and Marshall (2000).

Expropriation risk            Risk of “outright confiscation and forced nationalization" of property. This variable ranges from zero to ten where higher values
                              are equals a lower probability of expropriation. This variable is calculated as the average from 1982 through 1997, or for specific
                              years as needed in the tables. Source: International Country Risk Guide at http://www.countrydata.com/datasets/.


Autocracy -- Alvarez          This variable classifies regimes based on their degree of autocracy. Democracies are coded as 0, bureaucracies (dictatorships with
                              a legislature) are coded as 1 and autocracies (dictatorship without a legislature) are coded as 2. Transition years are coded as the
                              regime that emerges afterwards. This variable ranges from zero to two where higher values equal a higher degree of autocracy.
                              This variable is measured as the average from 1960 through 1990; or for specific years as needed in the tables. Source: Alvarez et
                              al. (2000).

Government effectiveness      This variable measures the quality of public service provision, the quality of the bureaucracy, the competence of civil servants,
                              the independence of the civil service from political pressures, and the credibility of the government’s commitment to policies.
                              The main focus of this index is on “inputs” required for the government to be able to produce and implement good policies and
                              deliver public goods. This variable ranges from -2.5 to 2.5 where higher values equal higher government effectiveness. This
                              variable is measured as the average from 1998 through 2000. Source: Kaufman et al. (2003).


Judicial independence         Judicial independence is computed as the sum of three variables. The first measures the tenure of Supreme Court judges (highest
                              court in any country) and takes a value of 2 - if tenure is lifelong, 1 - if tenure is more than six years but not lifelong, and 0 - if
                              tenure is less than six years. The second measures the tenure of the highest ranked judges ruling on administrative cases and
                              takes a value of 2 - if tenure is lifelong, 1 - if tenure is more than six years but not lifelong, 0 – if tenure is less than six years. The
                              third measures the existence of case law and takes a value of 1 if judicial decisions in a given country are a source of law, and 0
                              otherwise. The variable is normalized from zero to one where higher values equal a higher degree of judicial independence. This
                              variable is measured as of 1995. Source: La Porta et al. (2004).


Constitutional review         Constitutional review is computed as the sum of two variables. The first variable measures the extent to which judges (either
                              Supreme Court or constitutional court) have the power to review the constitutionality of laws in a given country. The variable
                              takes three values: 2- if there is full review of constitutionality of laws, 1 - if there is limited review of constitutionality of laws, 0 -
                              if there is no review of constitutionality of laws. The second variable measures (on a scale from 1 to 4) how hard it is to change
                              the constitution in a given country. One point each is given if the approval of the majority of the legislature, the chief of state and
                              a referendum is necessary in order to change the constitution. An additional point is given for each of the following: if a
                              supermajority in the legislature (more than 66% of votes) is needed, if both houses of the legislature have to approve, if the
                              legislature has to approve the amendment in two consecutive legislative terms or if the approval of a majority
                              of state legislature is required. This variable is normalized from zero to one where higher values equal a higher degree of
                              constitutional review by the courts. This variable is measured as of 1995. Source: La Porta et al. (2004).
Plurality                     This variable is equal to one for each year in which legislators were elected using a winner-take-all / first past the post rule; it
                              equals zero otherwise. This variable is measured as the average from 1975 through 2000. Source: Beck et al. (2001).

Proportional representation   This variable is equal to one for each year in which candidates were elected using a proportional representation system; equals
                              zero otherwise. Proportional representation means that candidates are elected based on the percentage of votes received by their
                              party. This variable is measured as the average from 1975 through 2000. Source: Beck et al. (2001).
Variable                                                             Definition

                                                                       Other variables
Share of population living in   Percentage of a country's population in Koeppen-Geiger temperate zone in 1995. Source: Center for International Development,
temperate zone                  Geography Data Sets. Found online at:
                                http://www2.cid.harvard.edu/ciddata/geographydata.htm#General%20measures%20of%20geography.
Log settler mortality           Log of the mortality rate faced by European settlers at the time of colonization. Source: Acemoglu, et al. (2001).


Population density in 1500      Total population divided by total arable land in 1500 A.D. Source: McEvedy and Jones (1978) as cited in Acemoglu, et al.
                                (2002).

Population at risk of malaria   Percentage of the population at risk of malaria transmission in 1994. Source: World Health Organization (1997).

Malaria ecology                 Malaria Ecology, pop-weighted, Sept 2003 version. This variable provides an instrument for malaria risk that controls for the fact
                                that causation may run not only from malaria to income but also from income to malaria. The basic formula for ME includes
                                temperature, species abundance, and vector type (the type of mosquito). The underlying index is measured on a highly
                                disaggregated sub-national level, and then is averaged for the entire country. Because ME is built upon climatological and vector
                                conditions on a country-by-country basis, it is exogenous to public health interventions and economic conditions. Source:
                                Kiszewski et al. (2004).

Years of schooling              Years of schooling of the total population aged over 25. This variable is constructed as the average from 1960 through 2000; or
                                for specific years as needed in the tables. Source: Barro, Robert J. and Jong-Wha Lee, International Data on Educational
                                Attainment: Updates and Implications. Source: Barro and Lee (2000) Data posted on
                                http://www.cid.harvard.edu/ciddata/ciddata.html

Primary school enrollment       This variable measures primary school enrollment as a percentage of children aged 5 through 14. Measured in 1870, 1890, and
                                1900. Source: Lindert (2001).

Legal origin                    Identifies the legal origin of the company law or commercial code of each country (English, French, Socialist, German,
                                Scandinavian). Source: La Porta et al. (1999).

GDP per capita                  Gross domestic product over population. Source: Aten et al. (2002). Data available on-line at: http://pwt.econ.upenn.edu/ (this
                                paper uses data from the 04-06-2003 version). GDP per capita for the 1870-1950 period comes from Maddison (2003).
