                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     THE ECONOMIC EFFECTS OF LIVING WAGE LAWS:
                              A PROVISIONAL REVIEW

                                              Scott Adams
                                             David Neumark

                                          Working Paper 10562
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10562


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2004




We are grateful to two anonymous referees for helpful suggestions. Any opinions expressed in this article are
those of the authors alone and do not necessarily reflect any position of the Public Policy Institute of
California. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.


©2004 by Scott Adams and David Neumark. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
The Economic Effects of Living Wage Laws: A Provisional Review
Scott Adams and David Neumark
NBER Working Paper No. 10562
June 2004
JEL No. J2, J3
                                           ABSTRACT


Nearly 100 cities and local governments in the United States passed living wage laws since the mid-

1990s. The central goal of living wages is to reduce poverty, yet they may fail to do so because of

disemployment effects. We summarize and critique the existing research on the effects of living

wages on wages, employment, and family income, emphasizing common findings, points of

disagreement, and important questions for future research. The evidence thus far points to wage

increases as well as employment losses for the least-skilled – although there is disagreement about

the employment effects – but on net some beneficial distributional effects. The evidence also points

to efficiency wage-type effects of living wage laws that may offset some of the adverse impacts on

employers.



Scott Adams
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
Milwaukee, WI 53201
sjadams@uwm.edu

David Neumark
Public Policy Institute of California
500 Washington St, Suite 800
San Francisco, CA 94111
and NBER
neumark@ppic.org
I. Introduction

        Campaigns to implement living wages in metropolitan areas across the United States have been

pursued with vigor since the nation’s first living wage law was passed in Baltimore in 1994. The total

number of living wage laws now in effect in the United States—including cities of all sizes, as well as

counties and school boards—is near 100 at the time of writing.1 Living wage laws are now on the books

in 10 of the 20 largest cities based on the 2000 Census of Population, and campaigns are under way in

additional cities. Brenner (2003) estimates that 40 percent of the population in cities larger than 100,000

resides in cities with living wage laws on the books. In our view, the success of the living wage

movement in enacting living wage laws across the nation is one of the most striking developments in

public policy in recent history.

        Living wage laws have three central features. First, they impose a wage floor that is higher—and

often much higher—than traditional federal and state minimum wages. Typical living wage levels as of

the beginning of 2002 were $7.72 (Los Angeles), $8.83 (Detroit), and $10.25 (Boston). Second, living

wage levels are often explicitly pegged to the wage level needed for a family with one full-time, year-

round worker to reach the federal poverty line. And third, coverage by living wage ordinances is

generally quite narrow. Frequently, cities impose wage floors only on companies under contract

(generally including non-profits) with the city. Other cities also impose the wage floor on companies

receiving business assistance from the city, in almost every case in addition to coverage of city

contractors. Finally, a much smaller number of cities require that city employees be paid a living wage.2

Information on the living wage laws covering cities large enough for us to analyze reliably is reported in

Table 1.

        Like minimum wages, the central goal of living wages is to raise incomes of low-wage workers in

order to reduce poverty. For example, the Economic Policy Institute argues that “the living wage is a

crucial tool in the effort to end poverty.”3 Thus, in our view, the key research question with regard to

living wages is whether they help low-wage workers and low-income families. This question has been at

the core of our research on living wages (Neumark and Adams, 2003 and forthcoming; Adams and


                                                     1
Neumark, forthcoming; Neumark, 2002), as well as other work following up on this research. In this

review, therefore, we summarize the existing research on this question, as well as outlining what we view

as the most important questions that need to be considered regarding whether living wages achieve their

main policy goal.

        A more recent but increasingly active area of research on living wages focuses on their

microeconomic effects. This research focuses less on what happens to the general population or

workforce of cities in which living wages are passed, and more on understanding how covered firms and

workers are affected. This research is less relevant to assessing the policy effects of living wages, but

more relevant to testing for behavioral responses to living wage laws. Furthermore, the two types of

evidence are complementary, and the micro-level evidence can potentially provide important

confirmation of more aggregate findings. For example, if we find wages of low-wage workers rising in

cities passing living wage laws, we should see evidence of similar effects among covered employers. On

the other hand, the converse need not hold. For example, it is conceivable that living wage laws affect too

few workers to lead to detectable changes in employment at the city level, yet a closer look at affected

firms may reveal employment declines. Such a finding would help confirm theories predicting that living

wages reduce employment, while also suggesting that the policy impact at the city level is too small to be

detected.

        This review is limited in three ways. First, it focuses on research on the economic effects of

living wages. There are other interesting issues that researchers have begun to address, including the

political and social movement aspects of living wage campaigns (Nissen, 2000; Zabin and Martin, 1999),

the incentives of actors in living wage campaigns (Neumark, 2001), and the implementation and

administration of living wage laws (Luce, 2003; Sander and Lokey, 1998).

        Second, we ignore the earlier wave of “impact” studies that tried to assess the consequences of

living wage laws before they were implemented in cities, which was quite a growth industry in the late

1990s. Ultimately, these impact studies reflect educated guesses. These studies have a role to play in

helping cities try to develop some understanding of how living wages might impact the unique


                                                      2
jurisdictions with which they are concerned. But from the perspective of public policy research that aims

to establish the effects of living wage laws, given that living wages are now on the books in many cities,

researchers should instead be turning to more sound social scientific methods of policy evaluation based

on treatment and comparison groups.4

        The third limitation is that the review is provisional. About the only thing growing faster than the

number of living wage laws is the volume of research on living wages. This is evidenced by the reference

list for this paper. Of the 25 papers on living wages referenced there, only 11 are—by our count—

published or due to be published in peer-reviewed outlets, and the first one on economic effects of the

living wage was published in 2003. Aside from this limitation regarding the existing work, the review is

provisional because our experience with living wages is, to this point, limited to a small number of years

for most cities. Clearly, then, our state of knowledge about the economic effects of living wages is far

from settled, and there is likely a great deal to be learned in the future relative to what we have learned

thus far. As a consequence, while we try to provide a thorough review of what we have learned so far, we

also emphasize along the way and in the concluding section what we see as critical questions for future

research.5

II. The Effects of Living Wages on Low-Wage Workers and Low-Income Families

        As noted above, perhaps the principal rationale for living wages is to help low-income families.

Although there is generally no single measure with which the distributional effects of a policy like living

wages can be unambiguously assessed, focusing on whether or not living wages help lift families out of

poverty strikes us as a reasonable criterion for two reasons. First, to some extent the distributional goals

of living wages (like minimum wages) are expressed in terms of fighting poverty. And second, many

cities’ living wage laws explicitly set a wage designed to ensure that “typical” families (of three or four

persons with one earner) earn a wage sufficiently high to reach or exceed the poverty line.

        While mandating higher wages for low-wage workers may at first seem a natural way to fight

poverty, there are two reasons why such mandates may not help to achieve this goal. First, standard

economic theory predicts that a mandated wage floor will discourage the use of low-skilled labor,


                                                      3
operating essentially as a tax on the use of such labor. Thus, whatever wage gains accrue to workers

whose employment is unaffected may have to be offset against potential job losses for some workers.

Second, mandated wage floors may ineffectively target low-income families (e.g., Burkhauser, et al.,

1996). Broadly speaking, low-wage workers in the United States belong to two groups. The first is very

young workers who have not yet acquired many labor market skills, but who are likely to escape low-

wage work as skills are acquired. The second is low-skilled adults who are likely to remain mired in low-

wage work (Carrington and Fallick, 2001), and who—as adults—are much more likely to be in poor

families. To the extent that the gains from mandated wage floors accrue to low-wage adults and the

employment losses fall on low-wage, non-poor teenagers, mandated wage floors may well reduce

poverty. But there is no theoretical reason to believe that this outcome is more likely than the reverse,

with concomitant adverse outcomes for low-income families. Thus, while theory predicts employment

losses and hence implies that there are likely to be both winners and losers from mandated wage floors,

whether living wages have beneficial distributional effects is a purely empirical question.6

        This ambiguity has the further implication that different types of wage floors may have different

distributional effects. Making this concrete, the text below explains that we find positive distributional

effects of living wages. Yet other research finds adverse distributional effects of minimum wages

(Neumark, et al., 2002). Because the distributional effects depend on both the magnitudes of the wage

and employment effects (and other effects), and on their incidence throughout the family income

distribution, the gains and losses from living wages may be of quite different magnitudes, and fall at

different points in the distribution of family income, than do the gains and losses from minimum wages.

This depends in part on the types of workers who are affected by these alternative mandated wage floors.

More to the point, evidence regarding the distributional effects of one type of wage floor does not carry

over to a quite different type of wage floor.7

        The preceding considerations have provided the basis for much of our research on living wages.

Broadly speaking, this research has focused first on estimating the wage gains and employment losses to




                                                     4
workers—hence identifying the gains and losses to low-wage workers—and second on estimating

whether on net living wages succeed or fail in lifting families above the poverty line.

Our Past Findings on Wage, Employment, and Poverty Effects

        Our research on living wage laws has focused on estimating the effects of these laws on wages

and employment of low-skill individuals and on poverty rates among families in the urban areas in which

living wages had been implemented, based on comparisons with a control group of cities in which living

wages were not implemented (and on comparisons of cities where living wages were raised relative to

other cities). Here we describe the most up-to-date evidence we have available, using monthly Current

Population Survey (CPS) data that extend from 1996 through 2002.

        This research begins by asking whether there is evidence that living wage laws lead to detectable

increases in wages at the lower end of the wage or skill distribution. Because living wage are presumed

to affect the lowest-skilled workers, our analysis of wage effects focuses on workers in the bottom tenth

of the wage distribution in each city-month cell. The model is specified to control for the minimum wage,

and to identify the effect of the living wage from increases in the living wage above the minimum wage,

which would otherwise be the wage floor. We include some skill-related and other control variables,

including education, age, marital status, race, and sex. We also include year and month dummy variables

to control for common changes across cities in the sample that could otherwise be confounded with living

wage effects, because living wages were typically enacted later in the sample period. City dummy

variables are included to control for the possibility that living wage laws were passed in cities that

differed systematically from other cities (e.g., with either particularly high or low wages), which would

again confound the estimation of their effects. Thus, our specification identifies an effect of the living

wage when the dependent variable changes differentially in cities that passed living wage laws (or

increased their living wage) relative to cities that did not pass living wage laws—a difference-in-

differences research design. Finally, the difference-in-differences strategy is predicated on the

assumption that absent the living wage and aside from differences captured in the other control variables,

the treatment and control groups are comparable. To relax this assumption we allow differential trends


                                                      5
for cities that do and do not pass living wage laws (and, below, for cities passing different types of living

wage laws).8 The differential trends allow for things like economic conditions that are changing

differentially between the treatment and control groups.

          Following findings in our past research, we estimate effects contemporaneously, and at six- and

12-month lags. Typically the effects show up at a lag of 12 months, so we highlight these estimates here.

Living wage effects may arise with a lag for a couple of reasons. First, in many cities there was an initial

period of ambiguity and slack implementation and enforcement between the time when a living wage law

was passed and city administrators began to implement the law in a serious way. For example, Sander

and Lokey (1998) document a period of about a year after Los Angeles passed its living wage law during

which city administrators interpreted exemptions too broadly, did not provide contractors with

information about how to comply, and did little follow-up with covered contractors. Second, living

wages are only applied as contracts are renewed.9

        As reported in the first column of Table 2, when we treat all living wages uniformly, the evidence

on wages points to an elasticity with respect to the living wage of 0.04,10 which is not statistically

significant at the ten-percent level. However, we have typically found that when we classify living wages

as belonging to one of two groups—contractor-only living wage laws and business assistance living wage

laws—the effects (on all outcomes) are considerably sharper for the living wage laws with business

assistance provisions.11 We study this question by augmenting the basic specification to allow a distinct

effect of each type of living wage law. Once we draw this distinction, the evidence on wages points to a

significant impact only of business assistance laws, with an estimated elasticity of 0.07 that is significant

at the ten-percent level. In contrast, the estimated impact of contractor-only laws is small and statistically

insignificant.12

        Of course, the potential gains from higher wages may be offset by reduced employment

opportunities. We use the same basic empirical framework to study employment, with only two

differences. First, we estimate linear probability models for individual employment status. Second, we

cannot classify non-working individuals based on their position in the wage distribution. Instead, we


                                                      6
impute wages for everyone and group individuals based on their position in the distribution of imputed

wages, or “skills.” For living wages generally, we find an estimated disemployment effect that is

significant at the five-percent level at a lag of 12 months for those in the bottom tenth of the imputed

wage distribution, paralleling the wage results. The regression coefficient of −0.053 in Table 2 is from a

regression of the employment rate on the log of the living wage. Thus, the estimate implies that a one log

unit increase in the living wage reduces employment by 5.3 percentage points. Given an employment rate

of 43.4 percent in the lowest decile of the imputed wage distribution, this represents a 12 percent

employment reduction, or a −0.12 elasticity. When we estimate separate effects of business assistance

and contractor-only living wage laws, both estimates are negative, but we find a significant

disemployment effect only for business assistance living wage laws, with an elasticity of –0.17, and a

much smaller (and insignificant) estimate for contractor-only laws.13

        The evidence on wage and employment effects sets the stage for weighing these competing

effects, in particular examining the effect of living wage laws on poverty. To examine the impact of

living wages on poverty, we estimate linear probability models for the full sample of families from March

Annual Demographic Files of the CPS covering 1995 through 2001. The dependent variable is a dummy

variable equal to one if a family’s income falls below the federal government’s threshold for poverty, and

zero otherwise. The specification includes city and year dummy variables, and differential trends for

cities with and without living wage laws (or with different types of living wage laws).

        The evidence yields negative point estimates (implying poverty reductions) for both types of

living wage laws, but only the estimated effect of business assistance living wage laws is statistically

significant (at the ten-percent level). For business assistance living wage laws, the estimated coefficient

of −0.024 in Table 2 implies that a one log unit increase in the living wage reduces the poverty rate by 2.4

percent. Relative to an 18.6 percent poverty rate, this represents a 12 percent reduction, or an elasticity of

−0.12. This seems like a large effect, given a wage elasticity for low-wage workers below 0.1. Of

course, no one is claiming that living wages can lift families from well below the poverty line to well

above it. But living wages may help nudge families over the poverty line, and these average wage effects


                                                      7
are likely manifested as much larger gains concentrated on a possibly quite small number of workers and

families. Thus, even coupled with some employment reductions, living wages can lift a detectable

number of families above the poverty line. We return to this point later, in the discussion of Brenner’s

(2003) estimates of the number of workers that experienced wage increases as a result of Boston’s living

wage law.

        It might be viewed as curious that, in Table 2, the estimate for contractor-only living wage laws,

although insignificant, is larger. Of course, the offsetting positive wage effects and negative employment

effects of business assistance living wage laws imply that these laws need not have a stronger effect on

poverty. Yet the larger estimate for contractor-only laws is puzzling in light of the absence of wage or

employment effects of these narrower laws. It may in part reflect evidence reported in Neumark (2001)

that contractor-only living wage laws boost the wages of unionized municipal employees, presumably

because these laws reduce competition from privatization and hence strengthen the bargaining position of

these workers.

        Although the analysis just described refers to the effects of living wages on poverty, the question

of the distributional effects of living wages is more general. We have carried out two related analyses

intended to provide a more in-depth analysis of the distributional effects of living wages. First, we use

the same difference-in-differences framework to estimate the impact of living wages on the “depth” of

poverty among poor families (the percentage by which the family’s total income falls short of the poverty

threshold). The estimates reveal no statistical evidence of effects of living wage laws, suggesting that the

gains from living wages lifting some families above the poverty line are not offset by income declines, on

average, among families below the poverty line.

        Second, we examine the effects of living wages on the probability that families are below a wider

range of family income thresholds—ranging from one-quarter of the official federal poverty threshold to

two times the threshold. Living wage laws may have effects above the poverty threshold either because

living wages are commonly pegged to an income level for families with one adult worker that is above

this threshold (as in, e.g., San Jose, Hartford, and Madison), or because families affected by living wages


                                                     8
have more than one worker. Consistent with the findings on the depth of poverty, we find no significant

effects of living wage laws at thresholds well below the poverty line. However, the evidence indicates

that living wages—particularly the business assistance variety—reduce the probability that families’

incomes are below three-quarters of the poverty threshold, and the estimated effects are in the same

direction and larger (and also significant) at 1.5 times the poverty threshold. Thus, this richer analysis of

the effects of living wage laws suggests that in addition to reducing the probability that families are poor,

living wages also deliver some gains for families a bit below and a bit above the poverty threshold. On

the other hand, the results could reasonably be read as suggesting that living wages do not help the

poorest families, which is not entirely surprising because such families are less likely to have workers or

may have the lowest wage workers who are most likely to bear the disemployment effects of living

wages. An important task for future research, however, is to try to get “inside the black box” of the

distributional effects of living wages, to see, for example, whether micro-level evidence confirms that

many of the gains from living wages accrue to poor families, and more generally to explore which

families (with which types of workers) gain or lose.

        Finally, research by Toikka (forthcoming) revisits the issue of the tradeoffs between higher

wages, government transfers, and taxes, cautioning that the role of living wages in helping to alleviate

poverty is diminished because of the high implicit marginal tax rates faced by low-income families once

account is taken of the consequences of payroll taxes, eligibility for social programs such as Medicaid,

etc. He uses a sample drawn from the SIPP for seven large cities, attempting to focus on those families

with at least one worker whose earnings would be affected by the living wage law in that city, and finds

that given the high marginal tax rates faced by low-income families, total income goes up by considerably

less than total earnings if we simply assume that workers are swept up to the living wage. However, there

are a couple of problems with this analysis. First, Toikka does not have the ability to study workers

affected by the living wage per se. Instead, all he can do is look at workers below a given wage floor (and

he uses a common wage floor across the seven cities he examines). To the extent that this analysis is

intended to go inside the black box and study how living wages might affect poverty, this shortcoming is


                                                       9
serious. As already pointed out, depending on which workers are covered by a particular type of living

wage floor, the distributional effects can vary widely. Second, advocates of living wages also argue that

living wages will reduce government transfers to low-income families (e.g., Pollin and Luce, 1998,

Chapter 5). This suggests that whether it is in some sense “good” if families experience a sharp increase

in the share of income coming from earnings, even if total income changes far more modestly, is a

philosophical question related to issues of the virtue of self-sufficiency, the dignity of making a living,

etc. We are not in a position to take a stand on this question. We do note, however, that Toikka’s same

argument could be used to suggest that the benefits from increased skills, education, and educational

quality among the disadvantaged would deliver far fewer gains than suggested by the (pre-tax and pre-

transfer) wage regression estimates to which we usually appeal. We doubt, though, that he (or many

others) would be led from this point to argue that such investments are not very valuable to the

individuals who would benefit from higher earnings.14

III. Business Assistance vs. Contractor-Only Living Wage Laws

        An important issue that arises in our past work is why we tend to find little evidence of effects of

contractor-only living wage laws but stronger effects of business assistance living wage laws. This has

turned into a rather contentious question and one that we still regard as unresolved.

        We have conjectured that aside from business assistance living wage laws affecting more

workers, the two types of laws may have qualitatively different effects. In particular, a few factors could

lead to stronger effects of business assistance provisions. In the case of a contractor-only law, it is

typically required that employers pay the mandated wage for work done as part of the contract. Assuming

that contractors’ employees do some other work in addition to city contracts, employers can mitigate the

costs of complying with living wage laws by reallocating their higher skilled or higher seniority (and

therefore higher wage) labor to the contract work and their lower wage labor to the non-contract work, or

even by reducing wages on non-contract work. Of course the extent to which employers can take these

steps depends on the share of their business tied up in city contracts; if contracts are a small component of

sales or labor costs, it is conceivable that the effects of a living wage law could be largely dissipated. In


                                                      10
contrast, there may be fewer avenues for mitigating the costs of living wage laws for employers covered

under business assistance provisions. For example, an establishment created with the help of business

assistance from a city would appear to have no choice but to pay all employees no less than the mandated

living wage for all of their work. In addition, although contractors can reduce the share of their business

with the city in response to a living wage (and, similarly, cities can shift business to higher wage

employers), business assistance recipients may have less leeway as they may have accepted long-term

benefits, such as bond financing or tax relief, in return for locating in the jurisdiction. In some cases, at

least, relocation costs seem likely to far outweigh costs from shifting business away from city contracts.15

        Our findings of stronger effects of business assistance living wage laws have met with some

skepticism, based on the argument that few workers have actually been affected by the business assistance

provisions of living wage laws. This argument has sometimes been stated too extremely, in our view.

For example, Brenner, et al. (2002) argued that none of the cities we studied had implemented business

assistance provisions of living wage laws during the sample period covered by some of our earlier work.

As we have noted in response to this criticism (Adams and Neumark, forthcoming), conversations with

the individuals with responsibility for implementation of living wages counter this claim, and the claim is

certainly less relevant to our more recent work that extends the sample period through 2002. A related

argument against the credibility of our findings of stronger effects of business assistance living wage laws

comes from those directly involved with living wage campaigns and living wage implementation, with

whom we have interacted in private conversations, at conferences, etc. These “activists,” typically

drawing on isolated cases, believe that business assistance living wages laws are, in fact, a very weak

tool, modestly increasing the share of workers covered by the contractor provisions of living wage laws,

and weakly enforced. All in all, though, there is not at this point a good empirical case against the

potentially stronger effects of business assistance living wage laws. Nonetheless, we acknowledge that

there is little direct evidence that business assistance living wage laws cover many more workers, or that

their economic effects are stronger. Indeed, we regard serious efforts to assess coverage by different




                                                      11
provisions of living wage laws, and to more systematically assess enforcement of these laws, as important

areas for future research.

        In our view, though, a stronger and more substantive alternative explanation of our findings is

that business assistance living wage laws are not fundamentally different or stronger in terms of the

underlying economics or the share of workers affected. Rather, business assistance living wage laws may

have arisen in cities where a constellation of forces often related to initial living wage campaigns has

resulted in stronger living wage laws generally, and perhaps more important stronger implementation and

enforcement because of both how the cities oversee the laws and how much community and other groups

remain engaged.

        To explore this hypothesis more fully, we have recently completed a study that attempts to

account in a richer way for the wide variety of living wage laws across cities, and hence to see whether

the apparently stronger effects of business assistance living wage laws are in fact reflective of other

characteristics of living wage laws that are associated with whether or not they include business

assistance provisions. Although we have thus far focused on contactor-only versus business assistance

provisions, living wage laws also differ in terms of factors such as: the extent of coverage specified; the

employers or workers exempted; enforcement; other provisions such as community hiring or labor peace

agreements; and whether living wage laws exist in nearby jurisdictions that might constrain the ability of

covered employers to shift business to work not covered by a living wage law, or to make other

adjustments, hence effectively amplifying the effects of a given law.

        Table 3 summarizes many of these features of living wage laws by city.16 First, we indicate

whether contractor coverage is narrow or broad, relative to most cities, in column (1). For example,

Portland’s living wage laws applies only to custodial and security workers and parking attendants, and is

therefore classified as “narrow,” while the laws in Los Angeles and Oakland cover some leaseholders

(and in the case of Oakland the port) and are therefore classified as “broad.” Next, column (2) classifies

business assistance coverage, with three of the cities with business assistance living wage laws coded as

having narrow assistance coverage. As an example, San Jose is coded this way because its law only


                                                     12
applies to recipients of direct financial assistance, and excludes forms of assistance that in other cities

trigger coverage. One important feature of business assistance living wage laws that was suggested to us

by a prominent living wage organizer is whether leaseholders are covered.17 This is coded in column (3)

of the table. Columns (4)-(6) indicate whether the living wage laws include community hiring provisions

and labor peace or no strike agreements, and whether the living wage is superceded by collective

bargaining agreements.

        Column (7) provides a classification of cities based on their enforcement and implementation of

the living wage law. This information comes from an unpublished book manuscript by Luce (2003, Table

5.2) that categorizes enforcement/implementation efforts by city based on a survey of living wage laws

and city staff, as well as auxiliary information.18 Based on Luce’s discussion of how and why

implementation and enforcement differ across cities, we believe that her classification comes very close

to capturing the differences—discussed earlier with reference to alternative explanations of the apparently

stronger effects of business assistance living wage laws—that arise in part from the dynamics of living

wage campaigns and the efforts of community and other groups to remain engaged.

        Finally, columns (8) and (9) of Table 3 report whether or not there is a county living wage law or

a law in nearby cities (and the first effective year). Both of these characteristics of living wage laws are

meant to capture whether a city’s living wage law is likely to have its effect strengthened by the presence

of nearby living wage laws. Part of the importance of this distinction arises from the nature of the data.

In particular, we use CPS data that classify people by where they live, not where they work. Thus, any

effect of living wage laws is likely to be amplified when there are nearby living wage laws, simply

because more workers in the particular city are in fact covered by a living wage law. But nearby living

wage laws may also amplify the effects of any city’s living wage law because of the underlying

economics, and we suspect this is the more important phenomenon. For example, consider an employer

who has business with multiple cities. If a small share of the business is covered by a living wage law,

because only one of the cities with which the employer has contracts is covered, then there will be more

scope for mitigating the effects of a living wage law. But if nearby cities have living wage laws, more of


                                                      13
the employer’s work is likely to be covered by such laws and therefore the employer would have less

scope for reducing wages on other work done by its employees, and also less scope for shifting business

away from the city that imposes the living wage law and toward cities without living wage laws.

Similarly, if covered employers attempt to adjust to living wages by shifting to a more-skilled workforce,

there will be less scope for doing this, or the cost will be higher, if similar firms in nearby cities are trying

to do the same thing. We would therefore expect less mitigation of the costs of a living wage, and larger

adjustments, when there are nearby living wage laws.

        Our analysis using the information in Table 3 addresses both a narrow and a broad question. The

narrow question is whether the contractor-only versus business assistance distinction is the core

distinction, or whether instead these two types of laws are associated with other features of living wage

laws that are the ones that really matter. The broad question, and one that we only begin to address with

this research, is how the many different features of living wage laws influence the effects these laws have

on urban labor markets. In particular, we try to identify those characteristics of living wage laws that are

most strongly associated with wage and employment effects.

        Two qualifications bear emphasis. First, as we disaggregate living wage laws by their

characteristics, we face limited observations on cities with different varieties of living wage laws, making

it difficult to draw strong statistical inferences, and instead yielding evidence that is more suggestive.

And second, while we noted the importance of accounting for a variety of features of living wage laws

and their implementation, there may also be features of living wage campaigns that are not reflected in

either the laws that result or the observable features of enforcement, but yet which affect labor market

outcomes in their aftermath. These might include, for example, changed norms of behavior affecting

wage setting. To some extent, these influences may simply be captured as common influences of all

living wage campaigns. But to the extent that they differ across campaigns, they remain an omitted

source of variation in our empirical analysis.

        The role of heterogeneity in living wage laws is examined in two ways. First, we simply try to

gauge how the wage and employment effects of each type of living wage law differ from other laws,


                                                       14
paralleling what we did earlier when considering contractor-only and business assistance living wage

laws. Whereas our contractor-only/business assistance results were based on specifications with separate

effects of these two types of living wage laws, here, instead, we draw the distinction between each of the

characteristics of living wage laws listed in Table 3, and all other laws. These specifications reveal

whether—like business assistance living wage laws—some other types of living wage laws have

particularly pronounced effects. Second, to see whether these other features can account for the

apparently stronger effects of business assistance living wage laws, we estimate models in which we

interact dummy variables for these other characteristics of living wage laws with a dummy variable

indicating a business assistance law. These specifications ask, more specifically, whether some of these

other characteristics of living wage laws actually account for what we have previously interpreted as

stronger effects of business assistance living wage laws.19 A related analysis interacts each characteristic

of living wage laws with the separate effects of contractor-only and business assistance living wage laws.

        All told, the evidence does not point unambiguously in one direction, and is not statistically

overwhelming. However, we read the evidence as pointing towards one alternative to the view that it is

the business assistance/contractor-only distinction that is critical. In particular, as Table 3 shows, cities

with business assistance living wage laws are considerably more likely to also have a living wage in

nearby cities. And the regression estimates suggest that it is this latter distinction that more sharply

delineates living wage laws with stronger positive effects on wages and negative effects on employment.

Thus, the variation in the effects of different types of living wage laws could have more to do with the

concentration of many living wage laws in contiguous or nearby labor markets, rather than with coverage

of business assistance recipients. Some may find this source of variation in the strength of living wage

effects more palatable, in part because of skepticism about the enforcement and implementation of

business assistance living wage laws, and in part because the mechanism by which “overlapping” living

wage laws enhance the effect of each living wage law is perhaps more straightforward than the

mechanism by which business assistance provisions enhance their effect. Regardless of the precise

conclusion one draws on this point, we believe this research points to the potential importance of


                                                      15
accounting for variations in living wage laws that—aside from the level of the mandated wage floor—

influence their effects on wages, employment, and other outcomes as well.

        In our view, this evidence suggests that developing a better understanding of the effects of

different types of living wage laws is a central question for future research on living wages.

Unfortunately, for the near future empirical analyses like ours are constrained by the data. As a

consequence (and, indeed, even if this were not the case), other types of evidence, including perhaps

comparative case studies of different types of living wage laws, are likely to provide important

complementary evidence.

IV. The Microeconomics of Living Wages

        The evidence discussed thus far is based in large part on our work using the CPS data. The CPS

has some disadvantages and some advantages for studying the effects of living wages. Given that the

CPS is a household-based survey with virtually no information on employers, it is not possible to identify

covered and uncovered workers. Instead, all we can identify (and therefore the only information we

exploit in the empirical analysis) is the city in which a worker lives and the type of law prevailing there.20

Obviously, CPS data are not very useful in exploring the microeconomic effects of living wages at the

firm or establishment level (i.e., questions such as whether covered firms engage in substitution away

from low-wage labor, how much wages are increased for their lowest-wage workers in their firms, how

employment responds, whether turnover falls, etc.). Such questions are best addressed using direct survey

data on covered employers and ideally a control group of uncovered or unaffected employers, as has

begun to occur in some recent research reviewed in this section.

        On the other hand, the CPS data are very useful, and are the best data available at present, for

addressing policy questions regarding the effects of living wages on low-wage workers and low-income

families, because they permit us to estimate the net effects, including indirect or perhaps “general

equilibrium” effects, of such laws on workers and families in the cities where they are passed, relative to

other cities. Ultimately, the two types of data and research are complementary and inform each other,

with firm-level data allowing researchers to test propositions about the individual-level behavioral


                                                     16
responses of employers and workers to the imposition of living wages and city-level data allowing

researchers to assess the policy consequences.21 With this point in mind, this section turns to evidence

from newer research that uses data on employers or workers known to be covered by living wage laws to

study the effects of these laws.

        This part of our review is limited in two ways. First, it focuses on studies of labor market

effects—i.e., effects on employment, wages, turnover, etc. Although there is a small set of before and

after studies of contract costs, we do not cover these here. We think it is very difficult to draw inferences

from these studies, as the nature of the services provided under contracts may change;22 another way to

state this is that while the findings may be important to cities, it is difficult to use them to draw inferences

about labor market effects.23 In addition, these studies are uniformly missing a control group (perhaps of

similar cities without living wage ordinances), to control for other factors that may have been changing

contracting behavior over time.

        Second, the reader will note that all of this work on living wages that we review is unpublished.

This reflects the recent advent of these laws and interest in them. It also suggests, however, that it would

be quite easy for us to be unaware of research that has been done but not yet published or submitted for

review. We identified the studies reviewed in this section from conference organizers and journal editors,

and from our own contacts with researchers in this area. We can only hope, however, that the review is

exhaustive.

San Francisco Airport

        Reich, et al. (2003) study the implementation beginning in 1999 of a Quality Standards Program

(QSP) at San Francisco International Airport (SFO), as part of the living wage law passed in San

Francisco that extended to workers at SFO. In addition to the higher wage, the QSP established

recruitment and training standards (including a minimum of 40 hours of training), and occurred

simultaneously with unionization of many of the airport’s workers that resulted in part from a card check

agreement. The data collected by the authors indicate substantial impacts on pay of low-wage workers,

extending beyond those bound by the QSP, as well as increases in the provision of health benefits. Not


                                                      17
surprisingly, given the wage and benefit increases, turnover fell rather dramatically. Also not

surprisingly, workers reported working harder and employers reported better performance. These latter

types of changes plausibly reflect efficiency wage-type effects, but of course that does not imply that they

pay for themselves.

        More controversial is the authors’ claim that employment did not fall. There is, unfortunately, no

control group in this study. Their estimates of employment (which come from two different sources)

indicate employment gains of about 1,150 employees from 1998 through 2001—from about 7,350 to

8,500. However, a potentially important confounding factor was the opening of a new international

terminal during this period, in the fall of 2000. The airport had originally projected an employment

increase of 11,000 associated with the new terminal. This may have been overstated, as the authors

suggest, and at any rate would not all have occurred immediately after the terminal opened. Nonetheless,

the new terminal would almost surely have generated substantial new employment over this period (and

the authors do not offer evidence to the contrary). At the same time, air travel declined during 2001

because of the recession, which biases the employment change in the opposite direction. (The September

11 terrorist attacks, by the way, play no role here, because they occurred after the survey establishing the

2001 employment figure.) Referring to the effects of the new international terminal and the recession, the

authors note that the exact magnitudes of these offsetting effects are difficult to pin down, but that

because “these two effects work in opposite directions … our conclusion—that employment did not fall

because of the QSP—remains intact” (p. 66). This conclusion does not necessarily follow, however, if

the two offsetting effects were of very different magnitudes, and it seems plausible to us that the opening

of the new international terminal would have had a far greater effect, given that airport traffic at SFO fell

by only around ten percent from 2000 to 2001 (Reich, et al., 2003, Table 6.3).24 Thus, we do not believe

that these data provide convincing evidence that employment did not fall as a result of the QSP.25

Non-Profits

        Reynolds and Vortkamp (forthcoming) conducted a survey of non-profits covered by Detroit’s

living wage law. They originally targeted the 96 non-profits that were covered by contractor


                                                     18
requirements. In the first stage, a phone survey was administered to the 64 who responded. In total, 63

percent suggested a minimal or minor impact, while 37 percent suggested a significant or major impact.

        The survey questions regarding the impact of the living wage clued the interviewees to base their

answers on the implied financial changes. After describing the interviewees’ responses to these

questions, however, the authors write, “Exactly what “significant” or “major” means, however, is unclear

from the survey data. The researchers intended these terms to refer to significant cuts in worker hours,

employment, or services provided” (p. 9). An unavoidable question is why the researchers did not ask

about these outcomes directly, since the survey is their own. Instead, the authors devote considerable

effort to arguing that respondents overstated the consequences of the living wage law.26 In particular,

they describe attempts to conduct in-depth interviews of the 26 non-profits that indicated a significant or

major impact, although they were able to complete only 15 interviews (and do not explain why the other

11 participated in the first interview but not the second). Based on the in-depth interviews, they suggest

that for five of the non-profits interviewed, “the impact was found to be much less serious than the data

provided by the phone survey would have suggested” (p. 13), while ten “faced costs to comply with the

living wage that were significant enough to merit special consideration” (p. 14).

        We see three potential shortcomings of this study. First, the two-stage interviewing procedure,

coupled with the admittedly hazy survey questions, cast doubt on the findings. One statistical

interpretation of the two-stage procedure is that the interviewers asked some simple questions, identified

outliers, and then asked a lot more questions to see if in fact some of the responses for the outliers

appeared overstated. One has to wonder whether if the outliers in the other direction were re-interviewed,

there would have been a similar process of regression to the mean (with those initially indicating little or

no impact subsequently reporting evidence of some adverse impacts). The authors did not explore this

issue, but simply assert that they did not re-interview any of those indicating minimal or minor effects

because “Further discussion was unlikely to change their self-evaluation or yield new information

relevant to the study’s core concerns” (p. 13). Second, the survey(s) were not designed to provide simple,




                                                     19
objective measures of the consequences of the living wage law, such as direct questions on employment,

hours, wages, turnover, clients served, etc.

        Finally, and most important, the survey did not use a control group in its design, to examine how

any such changes might have compared to the experiences at similar non-profits not covered by the living

wage law. It is true that the survey used employers’ perceptions of the impact of living wage laws, and in

that sense one could argue that a control group is not needed. But that makes the strong assumption that

employers correctly distinguish between the effects of the living wage law and other contemporaneous

influences on non-profits. And since the Reynolds and Vortkamp ultimately discount severely the

responses the employers provided, it is clear that we would have learned considerably more from

objective indicators elicited from a treatment and a control group of non-profits. The next two studies

reviewed improve upon the previous micro-level analyses by comparing employers affected by living

wage laws to other employers.

Boston’s Living Wage

        Brenner (2003) studies the effects of the living wage in Boston on firms with contracts with the

city. In particular, he studies the period from 1998, before the living wage was implemented, through the

fall of 2001, when the living wage had risen to $9.11. The main results are based on completed surveys

from 66 firms (fewer for some of the variables), out of universe of the 140 firms with contracts that were

surveyed. Brenner does not have non-contractor firms to use as a control group. Instead, he distinguishes

between those firms that indicate they raised wages to comply with the living wage law (treating them as

the treatment group), and those that did not so indicate (the control group). This classification appears

largely valid, as the reported share of low-wage workers declined sharply in the treatment group, while

scarcely changing in the control group, over the 1998-2001 period; in other words, the difference-in-

differences estimate of the effect of the living wage on the wage distribution points to strong wage

compression.

        Turning to employment, the data indicate that employment grew in both the treatment and control

groups, but grew faster in the control group, so that the difference-in-differences estimate indicates that


                                                     20
employment declined in relative terms in the affected firms. Of course these employment figures refer

only to the overall workforce, and not necessarily workers directly employed on city contracts;

employment change among those workers was not studied.27 The relative employment decline implied by

the estimates is 9.9 percent (that is, employment grew by 7.3 percent in the treatment group, and 17.2

percent in the control group). Over this same period, the percentage deviation between the living wage

and the minimum wage grew from zero to 35 percent. Thus, the implied employment elasticity is −0.28.

On the other hand, Brenner also finds that in terms of full-time equivalent (FTE) employment, there is no

significant difference between the changes for the treatment and control groups. Aside from the

employment effects, Brenner studies the impact of the living wage on turnover and absenteeism, and finds

no evidence that living wages reduced either.

        Brenner’s main conclusion based on these findings is that “we find no evidence that the Boston

living wage law has reduced employment for firms covered by its mandate. To the contrary, we found

that average employment expanded following the implementation of the living wage law” (p. 32). This

conclusion contradicts the difference-in-differences estimate indicating that the living wage caused a

decline in employment. It is true that the decline is only relative, but that is precisely the point of the

difference-in-differences estimator, as the non-affected firms provide the control group for changes that

were otherwise occurring; the estimate implies that employment in the treatment group would have grown

more absent the living wage.28 On the other hand, the results differ between employment and FTE

employment. The difference-in-differences estimates indicate that the living wage law caused a decline

in the first, but not the second. So taken literally there are fewer jobs as a result of the living wage, but

hours increased for some workers. That is not the same, of course, as concluding that there were no

disemployment effects. The apparent shift away from part-time and toward full-time work would be

expected if there are fixed costs of employment on which employers economize in response to higher

wage costs. So we view Brenner’s results as most consistent with employment declines, but also pointing

to other potentially beneficial offsets for some workers in the form of increased hours of work.




                                                      21
        Finally, Brenner uses his data to obtain a rough estimate of the number of workers whose wages

were directly affected by the living wage increase in this period, which is interesting to consider in light

of the poverty-reducing effects of living wages that we estimate at the city level. His admittedly crude

estimate is that 1,000 workers experienced direct positive wage effects (this excludes wage increases from

ripple effects, which Brenner suggests are weak). In Boston in 1999, Census figures indicate that there

were 17,892 poor families.29 The wage increase associated with the living wage is quite sharp. As an

upper bound, if we assume that the 1,000 families of these workers were lifted out of poverty, then the

poverty rate would have fallen by 5.6 percent, implying an elasticity of the poverty rate with respect to the

living wage of −0.16. Of course, not all living wage workers are in poor families, so this is exaggerated.

At the same time, most poor families with full-time workers affected by the living wage should be lifted

above the poverty line—given that the living wage targets the poverty threshold—unless they have large

families. And ripple effects may lift wages of more workers. Finally, if—as Brenner’s data suggest—the

living wage induced a shift to full-time employment, then the earnings gains to some workers would be

larger than simply those generated by the wage increase, although others may have been hurt by the

employment decline. Regardless of the precise magnitude, it is interesting that this elasticity is of the

same order of magnitude of the estimates we obtain from the CPS data. What this indicates is that if

living wages target poor families well, it does not take huge numbers of affected workers to generate non-

trivial changes in poverty.

Covered and Non-Covered Employers in Los Angeles

        Fairris (2003) describes an analysis of two samples: an original survey of establishments affected

by the Los Angeles living wage; and a second sample of establishments collected for a quite different

purpose, used as a control group. The samples are unfortunately not directly comparable. The author

provides a thorough discussion of the differences, and tries to do a few things to account for variations in

the ways some of the questions were asked. But two fundamental differences persist; the interviews for

the treatment sample were conducted on site, while the control sample was collected by mail with some

phone interaction; and the response rate for the control sample is very low (23 percent, versus 68 percent


                                                     22
for the treatment sample). Another limitation is that the survey design does not permit direct

measurements of employment changes, although employers in the treatment sample were asked whether

staffing levels declined as a result of the living wage ordinance. Fairris is careful, where possible, to

distinguish between effects of the living wage, and prior differences between affected and unaffected

firms.

         The results indicate that wages of low-wage workers were increased as a result of the living

wage, not surprisingly. In addition, the wage results suggest that prior to the living wage law wages were

similar at the two types of firms, so the effect appears causal. The results for the effects of the living

wage on the provision of health insurance and on turnover are potentially more problematic. Regression

estimates indicate no change in health insurance provision, and a decline in turnover associated with the

living wage (of unknown magnitude, since this is based on a categorical variable for whether turnover

rose, fell, or was unchanged). But the results also indicate sharp differences in the provision of health

insurance and in turnover prior to the living wage, suggesting that the treatment and control samples may

not be sufficiently comparable.

         Finally, while the research design does not permit the author to measure employment directly, he

does study covered employers’ responses regarding employment changes. He finds that 18 percent of

covered establishments reported declines in employment stemming from the living wage law, and

estimates an overall employment decline in the contractor firms of 1.6 percent. Given an approximate

$1.70 increase in wages for low-wage/affected workers caused by the living wage, Fairris suggests that

the estimates imply “an elasticity of low-wage worker demand of roughly −0.06” (p. 20). This

calculation comes from dividing the 1.6 percent employment decline, which is estimated for all workers,

by the approximate 27 percent increase in wages for low-wage workers. This calculation, however,

compares apples and oranges. The correct ratio to use is the ratio of the percentage employment decline

for low-wage, affected workers to their percentage wage increase. Assuming that the employment decline

is concentrated among these workers, the elasticity would be larger in absolute value. For example, if

low-wage workers were one-quarter of the workforce, the elasticity would be −0.24.30


                                                      23
        Although the data in this study are far from ideal, the study is on the right track in trying to use a

treatment and control sample to study the microeconomic effects of living wage laws. In our view, the

results are quite “neoclassical.” When wages are forced up by living wages, there is (if we take the

estimates at face value) a decline in turnover, and also a decline in employment. We have no way of

knowing whether the decline in turnover “pays for itself.”

Home Care Workers

        Howes (2003) studies the impact of a large increase in wages and provision of health insurance

and other benefits to home care workers in San Francisco, resulting from the city’s living wage ordinance,

as well as unionization. In particular, she focuses on the In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS) workforce.

This industry has some unusual characteristics that may impact some of the results Howes reports. Home

care is provided to frail elderly and disabled working-age people in the United States. As the name

suggests, it is provided in the home, often as a first stage in the transition to long-term care. The IHSS

program is supported by Medicaid, and, according to Howes’ estimates, provides care to about 265,000

individuals in California. Consumers are eligible for an IHSS worker based on having income at or

below the poverty line. In her data set, 56 percent of providers were family members; but if a spouse or

parent (in the case of a minor) is providing the care, then the cost is entirely financed by the state. Over

the period November 1997 to February 2002, wages went from near the state minimum of $5.00 to

$10.00, and the proportion receiving health, dental, and other benefits went from near zero to include

most workers, even those who work part-time.

        Howes reports that—based on individual-level data on consumers and workers—turnover (the

rate at which consumer-worker matches ended) fell sharply, in response to the increased wage and

benefits. The author argues that this reduction in turnover is good for consumers, which seems likely.31

Howes tries to draw implications from this “experiment” for other providers of home care who face issues

of high turnover, labor shortages, etc. However, an unusual feature of the IHSS workforce is that the

consumers do not pay the higher wage. Thus, even though turnover fell, and this likely made consumers




                                                      24
better off, there is no basis for concluding that the reduction in turnover paid for itself, or that other

providers would find it worthwhile to raise wages and benefits.32

Summary of Firm-Level Effects

        The studies reviewed in this section try to examine the consequences of living wage laws at the

firm level. As the difficulties encountered by these studies illustrate, this is not an easy matter. We

simply do not have much longitudinal data on firms in the United States, and when this limitation is

combined with the small number of firms covered by living wage laws, the task is even more daunting.

Thus, while we have offered some criticisms of the specifics of these studies, we genuinely commend the

authors of these first-generation studies of the microeconomic effects of living wages.

        There is quite a bit of disparity in the results—partly, we believe, as a consequence of the small

and unusual samples with which researchers are forced to contend in studying this topic. Nonetheless, we

think a couple of generalizations can be drawn. First, living wage laws do affect wages of low-wage

workers, delivering wage gains and to some extent compressing the wage structure.

        Second, some of the studies provide evidence of declines in turnover, increases in performance,

etc.33 These are the types of effects that we would expect in light of neoclassical or efficiency wage

models of the labor market. It is worth emphasizing, though, that efficiency wage-type effects cannot be

used to conclude that living wages pay for themselves. They therefore do not support a conclusion that

living wage policies are costless or even bring gains, and therefore that there is a case for policy

intervention. If that were the case, we would expect profit-maximizing employers to already engage in

this type of wage setting; thus, an important question is whether there is evidence that the types of

employers affected by living wage laws do not conform to the profit-maximizing model, or alternatively

evidence on whether living wage laws increase or decrease profitability.34 At the same time, the evidence

of efficiency wage-type effects does suggest that the costs of living wages may be mitigated relative to

calculations based on assumptions that wages do not affect productivity.35

        Third, some of the evidence points to employment declines resulting from living wage laws, and

in cases where the opposite argument is made, we have argued that the evidence is far from compelling.


                                                       25
Thus, in our view these microeconomic studies provide no basis for refuting the predicted disemployment

effects of living wages. At the same time, it is worth noting that some of the evidence of disemployment

effects (e.g., Brenner, 2003) comes from living wage laws that cover contractors only.36 In such a case,

the micro-level evidence detects disemployment effects whereas the city-level evidence does not (as the

latter evidence does not detect disemployment effects for contractor-only laws). This points to the

potential power of the micro-level evidence in testing for behavioral responses to living wage laws, even

when the city-level analysis does not reveal net effects of the policy.

V. Unanswered Policy Questions

        To this point, we have focused on what we have learned about the effects of living wages in

achieving their main policy goal of helping low-wage workers and low-income families, and on the

microeconomics of living wage laws, as well as unanswered questions about these particular analyses. In

our view, it would be rash to conclude that at this point the existing research on living wages leads to

concrete policy recommendations regarding living wages. However, by finding some evidence that living

wages do have a positive effect on wages at the bottom end of the wage distribution and also appear to

lead to modest poverty reductions (despite some employment loss), our research suggests that at least

some of the beneficial claims of living wage advocates are borne out in the data. At the same time, some

of these findings are contested, and others are insufficiently understood, so that further work will be

required to establish more decisively whether and how living wages affect low-wage workers and low-

income families.

        Moreover, while establishing these effects is in itself a tall order, the policy question is broader

still. There are a number of additional questions that are important from the perspective of assessing and

understanding living wage policies. We believe that caution is warranted with regard to taking a strong

policy stance on living wages until many of these questions are also successfully addressed.

        First, as emphasized earlier, there is far more that we do not know than that we do know

regarding the microeconomics of employer responses to living wages. Our evidence at the city level, as

well as other evidence at the employer level, indicates that—as expected—living wages lead to some


                                                     26
employment declines. But we do not know enough about the micro-level responses to living wage laws,

for example whether the employment reductions primarily take the form of existing employers

downsizing, or employers relocating outside of the city, and presumably shifting their business to avoid

being bound by living wage laws.37 In addition, because the available data cover either individuals or a

relatively small number of employers, these data are unable to answer questions of how specific

employers react to living wage laws, including questions such as whether wage spillovers occur across or

within firms. A better understanding of employer responses to living wage laws would help policymakers

better understand the consequences of living wage laws, including how their effects are distributed across

different workers, and give policymakers guidance in trying to minimize any adverse effects of living

wage laws.

        Second, we need to know more about the institutional, day-to-day workings of living wage laws.

Luce (2003) begins to address some of these issues in studying the politics of living wage

implementation, and Sander and Lokey (1998) provide a case study of enforcement and compliance

problems and solutions in the implementation of Los Angeles’ living wage law. But we also need

systematic empirical work on enforcement, covering topics such as resources devoted to enforcement,

compliance behavior, penalties for non-enforcement, etc. Such information would help to address

questions regarding the best ways to implement living wage laws. It would also provide additional

information on the effects of living wage laws; for example, evidence that these effects are stronger when

enforcement is more vigorous and penalties more severe would bolster any conclusions regarding the

causal effects of living wage laws.

        Third, aside from the wage, employment, and income tradeoffs on which most of the existing

research has focused, there are potentially important “second-round” effects of living wages that require

study. Now that the experience with living wage laws in many cities has lengthened, it may be feasible to

begin to study some of these questions. For example, because living wages are local, employers may be

able to avoid coverage by terminating contracts, grants, abatements, etc., with the city. If this occurs,

fewer firms would be left to bid on city contracts, which could lead to less competitive bidding and


                                                     27
therefore higher prices for city services. Aside from this, living wage laws may have an additional

adverse consequence if some of the affected recipients of business assistance that subsequently withdraw

or reduce services are non-profit organizations providing services to needy individuals and families. In

addition, to the extent that higher costs imposed by living wages are absorbed by the cities passing these

laws, they may result in higher city taxes or reduced services, with potentially negative consequences for

taxpayers and property values. It remains for future empirical research to assess whether these second-

round effects of living wages occur, the magnitudes of these effects, on whom they fall, and the extent to

which they offset other beneficial effects of living wages.

        And finally, a large unknown in thinking about living wages is the likely evolution of living wage

campaigns. To date the living wage movement overall has been characterized as largely seeking to

spread relatively narrow living wage laws to many cities. But in four cities in the more recent past (New

Orleans, Santa Monica, Santa Fe, and San Francisco) legislation or referenda have surfaced for what

amount to city-wide minimum wages (or, in the case of Santa Monica, a minimum wage restricted to

certain parts of the city and employers above a certain size).38 Whether living wage campaigns are an

attempt to “get the foot in the door” prior to pushing broader city-wide minimum wages, or an end in

themselves, is a political question that probably cannot be answered decisively.39 A second unknown

stems from a number of states (including Arizona, Colorado, Florida, Louisiana, Missouri, Oregon, South

Carolina, Texas, and Utah) passing laws prohibiting localities in one way or another from implementing

city-level minimum wages or living wages in excess of state minimum wages.40 To date, two states’ pre-

emption laws have been challenged, with Louisiana’s law upheld and Missouri’s struck down on a

technicality.41 How this potential struggle between state and local authorities plays out in legislatures and

courts over the next few years will likely figure significantly in whether we see growth in city-level living

wage laws moving in the direction of city-wide minimum wages. But the key point from our perspective

of assessing the policy consequences of living wage laws is that, unfortunately, the growing research on

the economic effects of living wages may provide little scope for decisive evidence on the consequences

of city-wide minimum wages, as they share elements of both minimum wages (their breadth) and living


                                                     28
wages (their restriction to urban areas), both of which engender employment losses, but have different

distributional effects. Thus, if city-wide minimum wages begin to spread, they will require independent

evaluation.




                                                   29
                                             References

Adams, Scott, and David Neumark. In progress. “The Economic Effects of Living Wage Laws: Evidence
       from Derailed Living Wage Campaigns.”

Adams, Scott, and David Neumark. “Living Wage Effects: New and Improved Evidence.” Forthcoming
       in Economic Development Quarterly.

Adams, Scott, and David Neumark. 2003. “When Do Living Wages Bite?” Unpublished manuscript,
       Public Policy Institute of California.

Bartik, Timothy J. 2002. “Thinking About Local Living Wage Requirements.” Kalamazoo, MI: Upjohn
        Institute Staff Working Paper No. 02-76.

Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2002. “How Much Should We Trust
        Differences-in-Differences Estimates?” NBER Working Paper No. 8841.

Brenner, Mark D. 2003. “The Economic Impact of the Boston Living Wage Ordinance.” Unpublished
       manuscript, Political Economy Research Institute, University of Massachusetts at Amherst.

Brenner, Mark D., Jeannette Wicks-Lim, and Robert Pollin. 2002. “Measuring the Impact of Living Wage
       Laws: A Critical Appraisal of David Neumark’s “How Living Wage Laws Affect Low-Wage
       Workers and Low-Income Families.”” Amherst, MA: Political Economy Research Institute
       Working Paper No. 43.

Burkhauser, Richard V., Kenneth A. Couch, and David C. Wittenburg. 1996. ““Who Gets What” from
       Minimum Wage Hikes: A Re-estimation of Card and Krueger's Distributional Analysis in Myth
       and Measurement: The New Economics of the Minimum Wage.” Industrial and Labor Relations
       Review, 49 (3), April, 547-552.

Carrington, William J. and Bruce D. Fallick. 2001. “Do Some Workers Have Minimum Wage Careers?”
        Monthly Labor Review, May, 17-27.

Clymer, Adam. 1999. Edward M. Kennedy: A Biography (New York: William Morrow & Co.).

Employment Policies Institute. 1998. “The Baltimore Study: Omissions, Fabrications, and Flaws.”
      Washington, D.C.: Employment Policies Institute.

Fairris, David. 2003. “The Impact of Living Wages on Employers: A Control Group Analysis of the Los
         Angeles Ordinance.” Unpublished manuscript, University of California at Riverside.

Howes, Candace. 2003. “The Impact of a Large Wage Increase on the Workforce Stability of IHSS Home
       Care Workers in San Francisco County.” Unpublished manuscript, Connecticut College.

Luce, Stephanie. 2003. Fighting for a Living Wage: The Politics of Implementation. Unpublished book
        manuscript.

Neumark, David. 2002. “How Living Wage Laws Affect Low-Wage Workers and Low-Income
      Families.” San Francisco: Public Policy Institute of California.

Neumark, David. 2001. “Living Wages: Protection For or Protection From Low-Wage Workers?”
      Cambridge, MA: NBER Working Paper No. 8393.
Neumark, David, and Scott Adams. 2003. “Detecting Effects of Living Wage Laws.” Industrial
      Relations, 42(4), 531-564..

Neumark, David, and Scott Adams. 2003. “Do Living Wage Ordinances Reduce Urban Poverty?”
      Journal of Human Resources, 38(3), Summer, 490-521.

Neumark, David, Mark Schweitzer, and William Wascher. 2002. “The Effects of Minimum Wages on the
      Distribution of Family Incomes: A Non-Parametric Analysis.” Unpublished manuscript, Public
      Policy Institute of California.

Niedt, Christopher, Greg Ruiters, Dana Wise, and Erica Schoenberger. 1999. “The Effects of the Living
        Wage in Baltimore.” Working Paper No. 119, Johns Hopkins University, Department of
        Geography and Environmental Engineering.

Nissen, Bruce. 2000. “Living Wage Campaigns from a “Social Movement” Perspective: The
        Miami Case.” Labor Studies Journal, 25(3), Fall, 29-50.

Pollin, Robert. “Evaluating Living Wage Laws in the United States: Good Intentions and Economic
         Reality in Conflict?” Forthcoming in Economic Development Quarterly.

Pollin, Robert, and Stephanie Luce. 1998. The Living Wage: Building a Fair Economy (New York: The
         New Press).

Reich, Michael. 2003. “Living Wage Ordinances in California.” Institute for Labor and Employment: The
       State of California Labor 2003.

Reich, Michael, Peter Hall, and Ken Jacobs. “Living Wage Policies at San Francisco Airport Impacts on
       Workers and Businesses.” Forthcoming in Industrial Relations.

Reich, Michael, Peter Hall, and Ken Jacobs. 2003. “Living Wages and Economic Performance: The San
       Francisco Airport Model.” Unpublished manuscript, Institute of Industrial Relations, University
       of California, Berkeley.

Reynolds, David, and Jean Vortkamp. “The Impact of Detroit’s Living Wage Law on Nonprofit
       Organizations.” Forthcoming in Economic Development Quarterly.

Roston, Eric. 2002. “How Much is a Living Wage?” Time, April 8.

Sander, Richard H., and Sean Lokey. 1998. “The Los Angeles Living Wage in Operation: A Preliminary
        Evaluation.” California Labor & Employment Quarterly, 12(4), 5-7.

Sander, Richard H., and E. Douglass Williams. “Santa Monica’s Minimum Wage: Assessing the Living
        Wage Movement’s Next Frontier.” Forthcoming in Economic Development Quarterly.

Toikka, Richard. “The “Poverty Trap” and Living Wage Laws.” Forthcoming in Economic Development
        Quarterly.

Zabin, Carol, and Isaac Martin. 1999. “Living Wage Campaigns in the Economic Policy Arena:
        Four Case Studies from California.” Unpublished manuscript, Center for Labor Research
        and Education, Institute of Industrial Relations, University of California, Berkeley.
Table 1: Information on Living Wage Laws
                                      Initial month law was       Living wage requirement as
    City                                      effective            of December 2002 ($/hr.)         Coverage
Ann Arbor, Michigan                         April 2001                         8.70                   B,C
Baltimore, Maryland                          July 1995                         8.20                    C
Bellingham, Washington                   December 2002                        10.00                    C
Boston, Massachusetts                      October 1998                       10.25                    C
Burlington, Vermont                      December 2001                         9.90                   C,M
Chicago, Illinois                          August 1998                         9.05                    C
Cleveland, Ohio                            January 2001                        9.20                  B,C,M
Dayton, Ohio                                April 1998                         7.00                    M
Denver, Colorado                            March 2000                         8.70                    C
Detroit, Michigan                        December 1998                         9.05                   B,C
Duluth, Minnesota                          August 1997                         6.50                    B
Durham, North Carolina                     January 1998                        8.45                   C,M
Gainesville, Florida                       October 2001                        8.56                    M
Hartford, Connecticut                      October 1999                        9.96                   B,C
Jersey City, New Jersey                      July 1996                         7.50                    C
Los Angeles, California                     April 1997                         8.17                   B,C
Madison, Wisconsin                          April 1999                         9.05                  B,C,M
Milwaukee, Wisconsin                     December 1995                         7.22                    C
Minneapolis, Minnesota                      April 1997                         9.05                    B
New Haven, Connecticut                       May 1997                         10.86                    C
Oakland, California                         April 1998                         8.72                   B,C
Portland, Oregon                             July 1996                         8.00                    C
Rochester, New York                        January 2001                        8.76                  B,C,M
San Antonio, Texas                         August 1998                         9.27                    B
San Francisco, California                September 2000                       10.00                    C
San Jose, California                     December 1998                        10.36                  B,C,M
Toledo, Ohio                                 June 2000                         9.96                   B,C
Tucson, Arizona                            October 1999                        8.57                    C
Note: We list the cities large enough to be identified in our CPS data and included in our analysis, along
with the first complete month in which the law was effective. Because most cities adjust their wage
requirements based upon federal poverty guidelines, inflation rates, or some other means, we list the wage
requirement as of December 2002, the last month included in our sample. Some cities impose a higher
living wage if health insurance is not provided; the table reports the lower wage floor. We classify the
coverage of laws into the following categories: B (firms receiving some form of business assistance from
the city, broadly defined), C (city contractors and subcontractors), and M (municipal employees). We
exclude cities that passed a law but do not currently enforce it for a variety of reasons (Buffalo, New
York; Omaha, Nebraska; Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; and St. Louis, Missouri). Neumark and Adams (2003
and forthcoming) provide more detail about each city’s law.
Table 2: Estimated Effects of Living Wage Laws
                             Log wages, lowest         Employment, lowest          Probability that family
 Dependent variable:              decile of             decile of predicted               income
                              wage distribution         wage distribution              below poverty

 All living wage laws:

 Log living wage,
                                     0.040                    -0.053**                    -0.035**
 lagged 12 months

 Business assistance
 living wage laws:

 Log living wage,
                                    0.067*                    -0.076**                     -0.024*
 lagged 12 months

 Contractor-only living
 wage laws :

 Log living wage,
                                    -0.006                     -0.027                      -0.038
 lagged 12 months

 N                                  46,374                    116,466                     142,421

Sources: Adams and Neumark (2003), various tables. The data on labor market outcomes and other
worker-related characteristics come from the Current Population Survey (CPS) monthly Outgoing
Rotation Group files (ORGs), from January 1996 through December 2002, and the CPS Annual
Demographic Files (ADFs), from 1996 through 2002. (The ADFs elicit information on the previous
calendar year.) Because SMSAs cannot be identified in the ORG files for a period in 1995, the sample
begins in 1996. Because family income information in 1995 is reported in the 1996 ADF for which
SMSA codes are available, information on family income and city of residence for 1995 can also be used
in the empirical analysis with the ADFs. Residents of all SMSAs, encompassing all large- and medium-
sized cities in the United States, are extracted. However, for the analysis only observations on city-
month or city-year cells with 25 or more observations are retained. The correspondence between cities
and SMSAs is imperfect, but because many suburban residents work in the city this is not necessarily
inappropriate; for expositional ease the text often refers to cities. Since January 1996, the design of the
CPS has resulted in the large- and medium-sized metropolitan areas in the sample being self-
representing (U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1997); in a small number of cases outlying counties are
excluded from the CPS sampling frame for an SMSA, in which case the data are representative of the
remainder of the SMSA. The data for the first two columns cover 1996-2002, and for the last column
covers 1995-2001. The control group is other urban workers; the regressions include controls for city,
year, month, minimum wages, and other individual-level controls in the wage and employment
specifications, and controls for city, year, and minimum wages in the poverty specification. All
specifications also allow differential linear time trends for cities passing or not passing living wage laws,
or passing different types of laws. The entries in the first row are from a specification with a single
living wage variable, and the entries in the second and third rows are from a specification interacting the
living wage variable with dummy variables for the type of living wage. The coefficients for the log
wage equation are the from log-log specifications, and hence are elasticities. The coefficients from the
employment and poverty regressions measure the change in the share employed or poor in response to a
one-unit increase in the log living wage (or a 100-percent increase). ‘**’ (‘*’) superscript indicates
estimate is statistically significant at five-percent (ten-percent) level. Reported standard errors are robust
to nonindependence (and heteroscedasticity) within city cells, following the suggestions in Bertrand, et
al. (2002).
Table 3: Coding of Living Wage Laws
                                             Assistance coverage                        Superceded by
                   Contractor   Assistance         includes         Community   Labor     collective     Enforcement /                Nearby
                   coverage     coverage     tenants/leaseholders     hiring    peace     bargaining    implementation    County       cities
                      (1)          (2)                (3)              (4)       (5)          (6)             (7)          (8)          (9)
 Contractor only
 Baltimore                                                                                                 Medium

 Boston                                                                Yes                                  Broad                      Yes
                                                                                                                                      (1999)
 Burlington                                                                                 Yes              NA
 Chicago                                                                                                   Narrow        Yes (1998)
 Denver                                                                                                    Narrow
 Durham                                                                                                    Narrow
 Jersey City                                                                                               Narrow        Yes (1999)
 Milwaukee                                                                                                 Narrow        Yes (1997)
 New Haven                                                             Yes                  Yes            Medium                       Yes
                                                                                                                                      (earliest
                                                                                                                                       1999)
 Portland           Narrow                                                                                 Narrow        Yes (1996)
 San Francisco       Broad                                                                  Yes             Broad                       Yes
                                                                                                                                      (many,
                                                                                                                                      earliest
                                                                                                                                       1998)
 Tucson                                                                                                     Broad        Yes (2002)
 Business
 assistance plus
 contractor
 Ann Arbor                                           Yes                                                     NA          Yes (2001)     Yes
                                                                                                                                      (many,
                                                                                                                                      earliest
                                                                                                                                       1998)
 Cleveland                                           Yes               Yes                                 Medium
 Detroit                                             Yes               Yes                                 Narrow                        Yes
                                                                                                                                       (many,
                                                                                                                                       earliest
                                                                                                                                        1999)
 Hartford                        Narrow                                         Yes                        Narrow                        Yes
                                                                                                                                      (earliest
                                                                                                                                        1997)
 Los Angeles         Broad                                                                  Yes             Broad        Yes (1999)      Yes
                                                                                                                                      (earliest
                                                                                                                                        1996)
 Madison                                                                                    Yes              NA          Yes (1999)
 Oakland             Broad                           Yes                                    Yes            Medium                       Yes
                                                                                                                                      (many,
                                                                                                                                      earliest
                                                                                                                                       1998)
 Rochester                                                                                                   NA
 San Jose                        Narrow                                         Yes         Yes             Broad        Yes (1995)     Yes
                                                                                                                                      (many,
                                                                                                                                      earliest
                                                                                                                                       1998)
 Toledo                                         Yes (narrow)                                                 NA

 Business
 assistance only
 Duluth                                                                Yes                  Yes            Narrow
 Minneapolis                                                           Yes      Yes                        Medium                      Yes
                                                                                                                                      (1997)
 San Antonio                     Narrow                                Yes                                 Medium           Yes
                                                                                                                           (2001)
Source: Adams and Neumark (2003, Table 1) and Luce (2003).
                                                      Endnotes
1
  For accurate and up-to-date information on current living wage laws as well as campaigns that have not yet come
   to fruition, see the web site of the Employment Policies Institute (www.epionline.org). Researchers may also find
   the web site of the Employment Policies Foundation (http://www.livingwageresearch.org/factsheets/adopted.asp)
   very useful, as this contains copies of the actual living wage ordinances adopted in most cities.
2
  Some cities also extend living wage coverage to municipal leaseholders, which might be thought of as a version of
   business assistance. As Reich (2003) points out, in cases where such provisions cover large municipal airports,
   they can extend to a large number of workers. Leaseholder living wages are not covered explicitly in this review,
   although we discuss a study by Reich, et al. (2003) on the effects of living wages at San Francisco International
   Airport.
3
  See www.epinet.org. The same goes for the minimum wage. For example, Senator Edward Kennedy, a perennial
   sponsor of legislation to increase the minimum wage, has been quoted as saying “The minimum wage was one of
   the first—and is still one of the best—anti-poverty programs we have” (quoted in Clymer, 1999, p. 449).
4
  An exception is for highly unusual living wage proposals such as Santa Monica’s (voted down in 2002). See
   Sander and Williams (forthcoming) and Pollin (2000) for competing impact studies. Reich (2003) also echoes the
   call to get beyond prospective impact studies, and “to examine the actual impact of the policies” (p. 9); Brenner
   (2003) similarly describes impact studies as limited by “lack of information on [sic] actual firm behavior following
   living wage implementation” (p. 2). Some discussion of one of the most influential impact studies (Pollin and
   Luce, 1998) is provided in Neumark and Adams (2003).
5
  Bartik (2002) provides an overview of living wages and the many issues that they raise; he includes only a brief
   review of some of the earliest evidence on the economic effects of living wages.
6
  Indeed the distributional effects can be more complicated than simply wage gains offsetting employment losses.
   While the standard theoretical model predicts overall employment declines, employment may also be redistributed
   among sub-groups.
7
  This point has clearly been misunderstood in some of the media coverage of the debate over the effects of living
   wages. For example, an April 8, 2002, article in Time, discussing our poverty findings, attributed to living wage
   advocates the view of David Neumark as “a conservative minimum-wage basher converted by the success of
   living wages” (Roston, 2002).
8
  The specifications and results are only summarized here. For the most up-to-date analysis that includes details
   regarding the econometric analysis, see Adams and Neumark (forthcoming).
9
  There are other reasons why employment might respond slowly to mandated wage increases, as employers take
   time to make the adjustments necessary to use less low-skilled labor. But these adjustment lags should not carry
   over to wage effects. Because wage responses to living wages also occur with a lag, the reasons offered in the text
   seem more important.
10
    The wage equation is a log-log specification, so the elasticity is simply the coefficient on the living wage
   variable—in this case the 12-month lag.
11
    Most, but not all living wage laws fall into one of these two categories. We restrict the business assistance
   category to laws that include these provisions, and include all others in the “contractor-only” group. In a couple of
   cases, the latter includes cities that extend the living wage to public employees as well as employees of
   contractors. Finally, we included the two cities with living wage laws only for municipal workers in the
   contractor-only group (see Table 1), although the conclusions are unchanged if these cities are simply omitted.
12
    Much of the analysis presented in our earlier papers (Neumark and Adams, 2003 and forthcoming) has recently
   been subjected to a number of criticisms by Brenner, et al. (2002). We provide a full discussion of their criticisms
   and our responses to them in Adams and Neumark (2003). However, one particular point relates to wage effects
   and is quite striking, and therefore bears discussion here. As indicated above, we estimate the wage model for
   those below a given wage cut-off—in particular below the tenth centile of the wage distribution in each city-month
   cell. Brenner, et al., argue that this truncated regression model leads to potential bias, something we have always
   acknowledged and therefore pointed out that the regression must be interpreted as informative about the
   conditional mean. Brenner, et al., then proceed to argue that a quantile regression approach should be used to
   avoid this bias. They estimate a quantile regression for the tenth centile, including the same skill-related control
   variables that we include. The difference in results is pronounced, as the quantile regression yields an estimate
   very close to zero.
             However, this quantile regression does not estimate the effect of living wages on the lowest wage
   workers, so it is perfectly natural that it fails to detect the positive wage effects that we find. Our regression
   approach looks at the wage distribution without conditioning on skill, picks out those below the tenth centile in
   each city-month cell, and then estimates the regression, asking whether living wage laws increase the wages of the
   lowest wage workers—those below the tenth centile—in the cities where they are passed. In contrast, the quantile
   regression including the skill-related control variables asks whether living wages shift the wages of those at the
   tenth centile of this conditional wage distribution. But why would we expect living wages to shift the wages of all
   workers whose wages are low relative to those with similar characteristics, even among workers with
   characteristics associated with high wages? Living wage laws impose a wage floor on absolute wages, not relative
   wages within skill groups. The evidence bears this out. When the data are aggregated up to the city-month level
   and a regression is estimated for the tenth centile (without control variables), the estimate is very close to the one
   we reported. And when the quantile regression is estimated without including the skill-related controls, the
   resulting estimate is in line with our estimates. We see, therefore, that as long as the regression model considers
   the effect of living wages on low wages in an absolute sense—which is the only sensible question, given the nature
   of living wage laws—the evidence points to positive wage effects.
13
    We note that, for the most part, wage and employment effects above the tenth centile of the wage or predicted
   wage distribution are weaker, although we sometimes find hints of evidence of positive wage or employment
   effects between the tenth and 50th centiles, consistent with substitution toward higher-skilled labor.
14
    Of course, increased skills and education would likely generate greater social gains by raising productivity.
15
    Another difference is that contractors may be able to pass through a large share, if not all, of their increased costs
   to cities, whereas this option does not exist for business assistance recipients who operate in the private sector.
   This can explain the stronger disemployment effects of business assistance living wage laws but not the stronger
   wage effects.
16
    Table 2 of Adams and Neumark (2003) gives a more complete description of these and other characteristics of
   living wage laws.
17
    (Private communication with Jen Kern of ACORN, June 2003.) As an example, if a shopping mall is built with
   financial assistance that makes the developer and builder covered, then a leaseholder provision implies that the
   employees of the establishments that eventually occupy the mall will also be covered, which should substantially
   increase the impact of the living wage law.
18
    Briefly, Luce classifies a city as having “broad” enforcement/implementation when there is at least “one full-time
   person assigned to oversee ordinance administration, who can answer questions about the law and who can be held
   accountable for problems” and the “staff actively monitors the ordinance by reviewing payroll records and
   inspecting worksites” (p. 96). In these cases, according to Luce, staff are engaged in trying to improve the
   ordinance, creating benchmarks, and making information public. In contrast, she classifies cities without full-time
   staff, in which it is difficult to find someone to answer questions, and where cities do the minimum to fulfill
   technical requirements, as having “narrow” enforcement/implementation. She also classifies some intermediate
   cases as “medium.” This information is missing for a few of the smaller cities, in which case they are dropped
   from the empirical analysis.
19
    The specifications are explained in Adams and Neumark (2003). In all cases, we consider the additional
   characteristics of living wage laws one at a time, rather than simultaneously.
20
    Another limitation of the CPS is the relatively small numbers of observations that it yields for smaller cities. This
   suggests the potential value of trying to study administrative data (such as Unemployment Insurance files) that
   cover all or most workers. However, such files typically have little or no information on demographic
   characteristics of workers, no information on the non-employed, and no information on family income.
21
    In our view, this point is often ignored by other researchers studying living wages. For example, Reich (2003)
   writes that in our work, “although attempting to study the impacts of living wage policies, [we] do not have any
   direct data on workers or employers covered by living wages” (p. 10).
22
    As Bartik (2002) puts it, “Ideally, we would like to divide a city’s total contracting costs by the real value of
   services provided in all city contracts” (p. 21). Further, he points out, limiting attention to contracts for which
   services did not change (as in Niedt, et al., 1999) may entail selection bias, since these may be the contracts whose
   costs were least affected by living wages.
23
    Pollin (forthcoming) provide the most recent discussion of these contract studies, although he omits a study by the
   Employment Policies Institute that points to contract cost increases (Employment Policies Institute, 1998) and
   takes issue with other studies.
24
    Interestingly, the study notes that passenger volume in 2001 fell sharply at SFO, but not at San Jose’s airport, even
   though the economic downturn was worse in San Jose (and San Jose’s living wage does not apply to its airport
   workers).
25
    This discussion is based on the authors’ 2003 study. A shorter paper based on this study (Reich, et al.,
   forthcoming) provides fewer details regarding the employment analysis, but reaches the same conclusion.
26
    They even include a footnote in the table giving these responses suggesting that the numbers overstate the actual
   significance of the living wage.
27
    The survey also asked some direct questions about whether staffing levels for city contracts changed, and the
   results apparently gave no indication of declines in staffing levels due to the city’s living wage policy. These
   responses, however, appear to elicit the interviewee’s interpretation of what happened, rather than observed
   behavior. Furthermore, since the data only establish slower employment growth at affected firms, rather than
   employment declines, we would not necessarily expect absolute reductions in employment on city contracts.
28
    Interestingly, the only place where Brenner casts doubt on the difference-in-differences methodology is with
   respect to these disemployment effects, suggesting that “it is not performed in a setting of independent group
   assignment … and that any measured differences between the two groups cannot conclusively be attributed to the
   ‘treatment’ ” (2003, p. 25). Of course if there was a strong concern about this issue, then none of the findings can
   be viewed as valid causal estimates.
29
    See Table DP-1, censtats.census.gov/data/MA/1602507000.pdf.
30
    The precise share of workers for whom the wage effect is estimated is not given. The firms in the living wage
   sample report an average of 39 percent of workers in four low-wage occupations that Fairris lists, but firms are
   asked about wages in their largest low-wage occupation. Table 2 indicates that the largest occupation is landscape
   laborers, who make up an average of 25 percent of employment; using this share rationalizes the calculation
   leading to the −0.24 elasticity. If we instead use the 39 percent figure (the share in the four low-wage occupations
   combined), we obtain an elasticity of −0.15.
31
    As each match is treated as an independent observation, Howes cannot determine for certain whether turnover of
   prior workers fell, or the composition of the workforce changed to lower turnover workers, but changes in
   individual behavior are perfectly plausible and indeed it would be surprising if they did not occur.
32
    A second result that Howes only mentions in passing in this paper, but on which she elaborates in an earlier longer
   version, is that the wage and benefit increases resulted in a 54 percent rise in the number of IHSS workers and a 47
   percent rise in the number of IHSS consumers. This sharp employment increase may well result from the unusual
   nature of this labor market. First, as Howes describes it, a large share of the IHSS workforce consists of family
   members, neighbors, friends, etc., who provide home care in return for a wage. Some individuals may have
   provided these services to families, friends, etc., without compensation. But when the potential remuneration (and
   benefits) for being an IHSS worker rose so sharply, many of these providers may have turned their status into that
   of an IHSS home care worker. Second, because of the nature of IHSS, this is a labor market in which demand is
   unconstrained, as consumers do not pay for the service. Instead, a wage is “posted” and as long as demand is
   unfulfilled, the number of workers employed is determined by the labor supply curve. Thus, not surprisingly,
   when the posted wage rose, employment also rose. (That is, this is more akin to an outward shift of the labor
   demand curve—which traces out the labor supply curve—than a shift along the labor demand curve.) As this
   discussion makes clear, though, this appears to be a highly idiosyncratic labor market that is of interest in its own
   right, but probably tells us little about living wages generally.
33
    We view the Howes (2003) paper as consistent with this decline in turnover, although it is not, technically, a study
   of firms.
34
    Indeed one of the findings reported by Brenner (2003) is consistent with this. In particular, he reports that
   reported turnover costs were much higher in the unaffected high-wage firms in his sample than in the affected low-
   wage firms (p. 19); that, of course, may explain why the low-wage firms pay low wages.
35
    The small literature on the effects of living wages on contract costs is meant to address the question of whether
   city services are actually delivered for less cost after living wage laws are implemented. We have already
   commented on our skepticism about what one can learn from these studies, without better information on quantity
   and quality of services provided.
36
    The evidence in Fairris (2003) comes from contractors, but they are in a city (Los Angeles) in which the living
   wage law is broader. Because our CPS data do not distinguish among employers, we cannot verify that the
   disemployment effects of broader living wage laws do not stem in part from employment adjustments among
   contractors.
37
    Note that simply relocating does not help, if a business maintains the same contracts with the city. But for some
   firms, at least, there may be locational advantages that would diminish in importance if the firm were shifting
   business away from the city. One of us has work in progress that tries to examine relocation decisions of
   employers in response to living wage laws. Reich (2003) argues that rather than leading to relocation problems,
   living wages may serve as local development policies by redistributing income toward households that save little
   and spend locally.
38
    Earlier city minimum wage proposals were defeated in Houston and Denver. Washington, D.C. has set its
   minimum at one dollar above the federal minimum since October 1993.
39
    Some living wage advocates are quite open about the goal of a national living wage policy (e.g., Pollin and Luce,
   1998, Chapter 6). An argument for more limited policies comes from the perspective that “Public money, our
   taxpayer money, should not be used to subsidize poverty jobs” (The Western PA Living Wage Campaign,
   http://trfn.clpgh.org/alliance/wage.html, viewed September 23, 2003).
40
    However, these states generally prohibit the broader city minimum wages and not narrower living wages. (This
   information came from personal communications with Jen Kern of ACORN and Paul Sonn of the Brennan Center
   for Justice at NYU, September 2003.)
41
    Cities in states with living wage ordinances “derailed” by state laws may provide a better control group with
   which to estimate the effects of living wage laws (Adams and Neumark, in progress).
