                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   WHY DOESN’T ASIA HAVE BIGGER BOND MARKETS?

                                          Barry Eichengreen
                                       Pipat Luengnaruemitchai

                                         Working Paper 10576
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10576


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2004




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2004 by Barry Eichengreen and Pipat Luengnaruemitchai. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Why Doesn’t Asia Have Bigger Bond Markets?
Barry Eichengreen and Pipat Luengnaruemitchai
NBER Working Paper No. 10576
June 2004
JEL No. I20, J24
                                      ABSTRACT

Asia's underdeveloped bond markets and dependence on bank finance have been topics of concern

since the crisis of 1997-8. In this paper we document that the slow development of Asian bond

markets is a phenomenon with multiple dimensions. Larger country size, stronger institutions, less

volatile exchange rates, and more competitive banking sectors tend to be positively associated with

bond market capitalization. Asian countries' strong fiscal balances, while admirable on other

grounds, have not been conducive to the growth of government bond markets. The results suggest

that the region's structural characteristics and macroeconomic and financial policies account fully

for differences in bond market development between Asia and the rest of the world. Once one

controls for these characteristics and policies, in other words, there is no residual "Asia effect."



Barry Eichengreen
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
549 Evans Hall, #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
eichengr@econ.berkely.edu

Pipat Luengnaruemitchai
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
549 Evans Hall, #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
lpipat@econ.berkeley.edu
                         Why Doesn’t Asia have Bigger Bond Markets?
                        Barry Eichengreen and Pipat Luengnaruemitchai1


1. Introduction

        The 1997-8 financial crisis highlighted the problem of bond market underdevelopment in

Asia. The small size and slow growth of regional bond markets, many observers noted, left

corporate borrowers excessively dependent on bank finance. Given the short tenor of bank

loans, a shock to confidence left Asian economies vulnerable to a disruptive credit crunch. Since

banks denominated many of their loans in foreign currency, exchange-rate depreciation could

result in serious balance-sheet damage and thrust highly leveraged corporations into bankruptcy.

        Analysts argued further that Asia’s heavy dependence on banks increased the weight of

political and economic connections in resource allocation. Banks and the companies to which

they lent were linked by family control. Banks were used by the authorities to extend

preferential credit to firms favored on political or developmental grounds. Financial institutions

carrying out these tasks came to be seen as too big and politically important to fail, and the

guarantees they consequently enjoyed weakened market discipline over their lending.

        The lesson drawn was that Asian countries need better diversified financial systems and

specifically deep and liquid bond markets to supplement their banking systems. Better

diversified financial markets would reduce financial fragility and enhance the efficiency of

capital allocation. The development of bond markets would lengthen the tenor of debt and

facilitate the placement of domestic-currency bonds, limiting maturity mismatches on corporate

balance sheets. Corporations would be encouraged to disclose more information and follow


1
 An earlier version was presented at the Korea University/BIS Conference on Asian Bond Market Research, Seoul,
March 21-23, 2004. We thank Nancy Brune and Geoffrey Garrett for help with data and Robert MacCauley and Ric
Deverell for helpful comments. This research was supported by a grant from the Hong Kong Institute for
Monetary Research, which is gratefully acknowledged.


                                                      2
internationally-recognized accounting practices, strengthening corporate governance. Borrowers

would be distanced from lenders, anonymous and decentralized bond markets being hard to

influence, and markets would be better insulated from governments, limiting moral hazard and

political interference.

        The problem of Asia’s underdeveloped bond markets was known to close observers, of

course, even before the 1997-8 crisis. In some cases the absence of bond markets complicated

efforts to finance large infrastructure projects, and enterprises with high minimum efficient scale

found it hard to meet their financial needs.2 In principle they could borrow from a syndicate of

banks which could securitize their loans, but securitization was costly and difficult in the absence

of a bond market. Banks therefore found it hard to diversify risk created by their acquisition of

concentrated stakes in the large enterprises that were their leading customers. And the

development of other financial instruments was limited by the absence of bond markets on which

to base forwards, futures, and more exotic derivative contracts.3 These problems were not

specific to Asia, to be sure, but they seemed to manifest themselves there in particularly dramatic

ways.

        Coincident with the Asian crisis, contributions to the theoretical literature explained how

countries benefit from well-diversified financial systems (see e.g. Boot and Thakor 1997).

Equity finance encourages risk taking, since holders of equity stakes share in super-normal

returns while their losses are truncated on the down side, whereas debt holders, who do not share

in exceptional profits, encourage risk aversion; a well diversified financial system therefore

2
  The difficulty of infrastructure finance was particularly a problem with the privatization of electricity supply,
telecommunications, and transportation services in Asian countries. More generally, securing adequate finance
might require diluting corporate control by issuing equity or giving banks representation on corporate boards. Since
owners saw the dilution of control as unattractive, dynamic enterprises sometimes found it difficult to access
external finance.
3
  Herring and Chatusripitak (2000) observe that it still may be possible, despite the absence of these markets, to
tailor forward, futures and derivative contracts to the needs of individual customers, but doing so can be costly,
limiting the use of such instruments.


                                                         3
facilitates risk management. Banks have a comparative advantage in providing external finance

to smaller, younger firms which typically operate in information-impacted segments of the

economy, while securities markets do the job most efficiently for large, well established

companies.

         Thus, as early as 1995, before the Asian crisis, the World Bank issued studies

recommending that Asian countries accelerate bond market development (see e.g. Dalla et al.

1995). The crisis then directed additional attention to the problem. The 17 Asian governments

participating in the Asia Cooperation Dialogue set up a Working Group on Financial

Cooperation to establish guidelines for the development of Asian bond markets. APEC finance

ministers agreed on a comprehensive approach to developing sound and sustainable regional

bond markets, including credit guarantees and markets in a variety of new products (bonds

denominated in a basket of Asian currencies being the most attractive candidate). ASEAN+3

established a Study Group on Capital Market Development and Cooperation under the leadership

of Thailand, Japan, Korea and Singapore.

         The most prominent of these responses was a proposal to use the international reserves of

Asian central banks to encourage the development of regional bond markets. The Asian Bond

Fund (ABF) was launched by EMEAP in June 2003, whose members committed to investing

U.S. $1 billion of the region’s international reserves in Asian sovereign and quasi-sovereign

dollar bonds.4

         The question is whether this use of central bank reserves will have the desired effect.

Perhaps, but some critics of this use of central bank reserves will object that other factors –


4
  Some of the proposal’s initiators had envisaged utilizing 1 per cent of the international reserves of Asian central
banks, which would have amounted to $12 billion, purchasing domestic-currency as well as dollar bonds, and
investing in corporate as well as government securities. At the time of writing, EMEAP is discussing an ABF-II that
might be larger in size and would invest in high-grade domestic-currency issues.


                                                         4
improved regulation, enhanced transparency, stronger investor protection, and stable

macroeconomic policies – are more important for the development of deep and liquid bond

markets.5 In their view, these fundamentals and not the allocation of some small fraction of the

reserves of regional central banks to local debt securities should be the focus of efforts to

develop Asian bond markets.

        This uncertainty about what initiatives are most urgently needed to promote Asian bond

markets reflects our incomplete understanding of why those markets are underdeveloped in the

first place.6 This paper therefore considers the historical, structural, institutional, and

macroeconomic determinants of bond market development in a cross section of developing and

developed economies. Section 2 presents an overview of bond markets in Emerging Asia with

comparisons to other regions. Sections 3 and 4 enumerate the hypotheses that have been

described to explain bond market underdevelopment. Sections 5 and 6 present our regression

analysis. Section 7 draws out the implications for the development of Asian bond markets.

        The results confirm that small size and fragmentation is part of the explanation for the

underdevelopment of Asia’s bond markets, but it is only part. In addition, corruption, poor

regulatory quality and failure to compel firms to follow internationally recognized accounting

standards have slowed the development of private debt markets. Countries with competitive,

well-capitalized banking systems also have larger bond markets (both public and private),

suggesting the existence of complementarities between banking and bond market development.

5
  See Fernandez and Klassen (2003).
6
 While earlier studies touched on the issue, none of them, so far as we know, has analyzed it systematically. Burger
and Warnock (2003, 2004) are the studies closest in spirit to our own, but they consider only long-term bonds (not
also the short-term bonds considered here) and a subset of the potential determinants of local market issuance.
Claessens, Klingebiel and Schmukler (2003) consider both domestic and foreign currency denominated issues, but
they limit their analysis to government bonds, putting aside the determinants of corporate bond market growth.
Eichengreen, Hausmann and Panizza (2002) consider corporate as well as government issues, but they too are
concerned with currency denomination, not market capitalization. Domowitz, Glen and Madhavan (200) and Hale
(2003) analyze the choice between bank and bond finance, but they analyze international bonds and bank loan
syndications, not their domestic counterparts.


                                                         5
         This suggests that, in order to promote the development of bond markets, governments

need to encourage adherence to internationally recognized accounting standards and enhance the

reliability of regulation and contract enforcement. They should distance themselves from the

lending operations of banks in order to accentuate the complementarities between banking and

bond-market development. Through this combination of policies, our results suggest, Asian

countries could acquire bond markets as liquid and well capitalized as those of other regions.



2. Overview

         Table 1 describes the stock of external finance at the end of 2001. For emerging Asia,

bond market capitalization (the sum of corporate, financial institution and public-sector issues)

was 45 per cent of GDP; this was actually higher than the average for all emerging markets, at 39

per cent, if lower than for developed countries, at 139 per cent. Note that we include here only

domestic-currency bonds issued by residents and targeted to local investors.7 At this level of

aggregation, Asia is not behind Latin America or Emerging Central Europe in terms of bond

market development, although it is considerably behind the developed countries, and in

particular the United States.8

         These regional aggregates disguise considerable variation across countries. Corporate

bond market capitalization is 50 per cent of GDP in Malaysia and 28 per cent in South Korea but

only 5 per cent in Thailand.9 Financial institutions are important for bond issuance in Hong


7
  For more discussion of our measure of bond market capitalization, see Section 4 below.
8
  The picture is not much different when we distinguish bond issues by nonfinancial corporations, financial
institutions, and governments. Public issues are slightly less important in Emerging Asia than in other emerging
markets, reflecting the traditionally strong fiscal position of Asian governments, while issues by corporations and
financial institutions are slightly more important in Emerging Asia than elsewhere.
9
  These aggregates need to be interpreted cautiously; in some cases they may tell us less about the scale and health
of the bond market than might be naively supposed. Thus, in the Korean case, a considerable fraction of bond
market capitalization is in the form of asset backed securities in which the government and its agencies have
absorbed the risky junior tranche that accounts for the majority of the outstanding stock.


                                                          6
Kong, Singapore and South Korea, but less so in China and Malaysia. They figure hardly at all

in external finance in Thailand.

         Table 2 compares the relative importance of bonds, bank loans, and equity markets in

domestic external finance outstanding at the end of year 2001.10 In terms of the composition of

external finance, Asia relies less on bond markets than other emerging regions; the share of

bonds is a bit more than half that of Latin America and Emerging Central Europe. Again, these

generalizations disguise considerable variation among countries. For well-known historical

reasons, the banking sector is particularly important for external finance in China, South Korea,

and Thailand. The stock market is important only in Hong Kong, Malaysia and Singapore,

where the authorities have aggressively promoted it. The bond market is the least important of

these three sources of finance in virtually every country (and exception being Thailand, where it

is approximately the same size as the stock market). Bonds are least important in total external

finance in Hong Kong and most important in Malaysia and South Korea.

         The preceding data are for stocks; flows may offer a clearer picture of recent trends.

According to Table 3, new domestic bank loans were 10 per cent of GDP in Emerging Asia in

2001 but only 4 per cent of GDP for the emerging markets as a whole. Domestic bond flotations,

in contrast, amounted to 12 per cent of GDP in 2001 for emerging markets as a whole but only 8

per cent in Asia.

         In sum, this overview confirms that Emerging Asia relies less on bonds and more on

banks than other emerging markets, and very much less on bonds and very much more on banks

than developed countries. Recent data suggest that these distinctive characteristics of Asian


10
  Strictly speaking, total external finance would include also credit provided by foreign sources, for which we lack
information. To avoid double counting, we exclude bonds issued by financial institutions from this comparison.
Including them makes little difference for the comparisons with which we are concerned in this paper. The main
effect is to further increase the value of bond market capitalization in the advanced economies.


                                                          7
financial systems are not growing noticeably less pronounced; in some cases the opposite may be

true.



3. Hypotheses

        Five broad hypotheses have been advanced to explain the underdevelopment of Asian

bond markets. One is the region’s history. Banks have dominated Asian financial markets for

many years. Once upon a time there may have been good reasons for their dominance.

Imperfections in the information and contracting environment gave a strong comparative

advantage to bank intermediation, while governments found banks to be a convenient vehicles

for advancing their industrial policies. But although these circumstances have now changed,

banks retain their first-mover advantage. Markets, institutions and social conventions have

adapted to the dominance of bank intermediation. Examples of that adaptation include the

importance of family connections and state involvement in financial relationships. As a result,

bonds may face an uphill battle when seeking to acquire market share.

        A second hypothesis emphasizes structural characteristics of the region’s economies.

Small countries presumably find it more difficult to develop bond markets insofar as liquid

securities markets have a certain minimum efficient scale. Endowment theories suggest that the

geographical environment shapes the long-standing institutions that influence financial

development. The strength of bondholder protections may depend on a country’s legal tradition

(see LaPorta 1998). Not all of these structural characteristics are impervious to change, but even

the most malleable of them may be difficult to change quickly.

        A third hypothesis focuses on the developmental stage of the region’s economies.

Compared to the economies of Western Europe and North America, most Asian countries have




                                                8
undergone the transition to modern economic growth relatively recently. Some Asian countries

are still poor. At the core of underdevelopment is the underdevelopment of market-supporting

institutions, including the institutions needed to support financial markets. In this view, Asian

financial markets are underdeveloped because of the unreliability of contract enforcement and

uncertainty of investor rights that are characteristic of less developed economies. These are

problems that economies presumably grow out of, though how quickly they do so depends on

country-specific circumstances.

        A fourth hypothesis focuses on the structure and management of the financial system.

This explanation considers, inter alia, the intensity of competition among financial institutions,

the quality of prudential supervision and regulation, the existence of a well-defined yield curve,

the absence of institutional investors and rating agencies, and the adequacy of trading, settlement

and clearing systems.11

        Fifth and finally are macroeconomic policies. The currency risk created by flexible

exchange rates may limit the market for domestic-currency-denominated securities. Domestic

interest rate volatility may make it unattractive to hold long-term debt securities. Such instability

may be a serious impediment to bond market development. Finally, controls on capital flows,

such as those limiting the ability of foreigners to purchase domestic capital and money market

securities or to repatriate their interest earnings and principal, may discourage foreign

participation in domestic markets and rob those markets of liquidity.




11
  Independent agencies that rate corporate issuers provide information that should help to attract a large base of
active investors into the bond market. While some Asian countries have independent rating agencies (Malaysia has
two), others do not. A large population of institutional investors is important for creating a demand for domestic
bonds (Schinasi and Smith 1998). Conversely, heavy regulation of mutual funds may prevent fund managers from
actively participating in corporate bond markets. Finally, it has been argued that the absence of well developed
clearing, settlement and trading systems have rendered some Asian bond markets illiquid and unattractive
(Trairatvorakul 2001).


                                                        9
4. Empirical implications

         We now turn from broad hypotheses to empirical implications, illustrating our points

with information for 41 countries. The data are for all countries for which the Bank for

International Settlements reports estimates of bond market capitalization.12 Hence, the sample is

not limited to Asia. But neither are questions about the development of bond markets limited to

Asia. In analyzing the determinants of bond market development we seek to take advantage of

the information content of a wide cross section of countries. The variables that we use to

operationalize our five hypotheses are shown in Table 4.13

         Economic size. Small countries may lack the minimum efficient scale needed for deep

and liquid bond markets.14 The amount of money that can be raised by issuing on the local

market may be too small to attract multinational corporations and other potential foreign issuers.

The market may be too small to justify inclusion in the global bond market indices constructed

by the leading investment banks, in which case there will be no demand to hold local securities

in order to track the index. Markets in small issues may be characterized by price volatility as


12
   The BIS collects security-level data from the Bank of England, Capital Data, Euroclear, the International
Securities Market Association, and a variety of national sources, and attempts to correct its estimates of bond market
capitalization for double counting. Capitalization is only one measure of bond market development, of course;
turnover is another obviously relevant dimension. But only capitalization is available for a broad cross section of
countries. Previous studies (e.g. MacCauley and Remolona 2000) suggest that capitalization and turnover on
domestic bond markets are strongly if imperfectly correlated.
13
   Information on data sources can be found in the appendix.
14
   Eichengreen, Hausmann and Panizza (2002) provide evidence that small size is similarly the most robust
determinant of the inability of emerging markets to borrow abroad in their own currencies (“original sin”). Here the
obvious explanation is that countries whose debt issuance is small have trouble getting international investors to add
securities denominated in “exotic” currencies to their investment portfolios. This will be the case when the increase
in management costs is constant but the diversification benefits decline with each additional currency. This is
probably an appropriate point at which to discuss how domestic bond market development relates to original sin. In
principle, domestic bond market development is a route for solving this problem. As domestic markets gain scale
and liquidity, foreign participation will be easier to attract, both because those local currency markets will become
easier to enter and exit (transactions costs will decline) and because they will constitute a greater share of the global
portfolio (diversification benefits may increase). In practice, however, this route to “redemption” appears to work
only very slowly. Data in Burger and Warnock (2004) indicate that as of 2001 U.S. residents held only $2.5 billion
bonds issued by emerging markets, whereas emerging markets had more than $1.6 trillion of local currency bonds
outstanding (and more than $2.2 trillion of total bonds outstanding). While foreign participation in local bond
markets has attracted much comment, in other words, as a quantitative phenomenon it remains inconsequential.


                                                           10
buyers and sellers enter and exit. Similarly, it may be difficult to put on and take off positions

without being noticed. There being fixed costs of learning about the performance characteristics

of an issue, investing in small issues may not be attractive for portfolio managers, who will

consequently demand a yield premium in order to do so.15 And if adverse selection is present, no

premium may create a demand. A bivariate scatter plot of bond market development (measured

as domestic bond market capitalization as a share of GDP, averaged over the 1990s) and country

size (GDP at purchasing power parity, also averaged over the 1990s) shows a weakly positive

relationship between the two variables (see Figure 1).16

         Natural openness. Entrenched interests will seek to prevent their advantaged position

from being undermined by market competition. Banks, for example, will attempt to prevent their

dominant market share from being eroded by competition from securities markets. But

entrenched interests will be less able to insist on policies that suppress competing sources of

supply when the economy is exposed to international competition. This is Rajan and Zingales’

(2001) explanation for why more open economies do less to suppress securities markets. That

said, Figure 2 does not suggest a particularly strong relationship between openness, measured

there as the ratio of exports to GDP, and bond market development.

         Legal system. Legal traditions differ in the priority they attach to protecting minority

investors. LaPorta et al. (1998) predict that common law systems in the British tradition, which

offer stronger investor protection than systems in the French civil law tradition, should promote

the development of financial markets. But the same legal traditions may not affect all aspects of

financial development equally. Where investor rights are weak, savers may prefer investing

through banks rather than bonds since politically well-connected banks are better able to enforce

15
  This phenomenon is familiar in the context of foreign bond issues; see Eichengreen and Mody (2000).
16
  All variables are similarly measured as averages for the 1990s in the scatter plots that follow, except where
expressly noted otherwise.


                                                         11
their claims (Sharma 2000). Systems with weak investor rights may also encourage creditors to

demand assets with seniority (bonds rather than stocks).17

         Geographical/disease endowments. Endowment theories suggest that environmental

factors shape long-standing institutions influencing financial development. Authors like Beck,

Demirguc-Kunt and Levine (2002) argue that countries with less favorable geographical and

disease environments should have less developed financial markets. They present evidence that

endowments (measured by settler mortality or distance from the equator) are correlated with

financial intermediary and stock market development. Figure 3 suggests the existence of a

positive relationship between distance from the equator and bond market development.

         Riskiness of the investment environment. Bonds are a way for investors to limit risk. It

follows that entities issuing bonds are generally of higher credit quality than those issuing equity

claims (Harwood 2000). In some countries, however, there may be a dearth of high quality

issuers with proven business models and records of financial probity. Consistent with this idea,

Figure 4 suggests that bond market capitalization rises as investment risk declines.

         Law and Order. Countries with more reliable law enforcement are more attractive to

investors. Figure 5 confirms the existence of a positive relationship between the size of bond

markets and International Country Risk Guide (ICRG)’s measure of law and order. To the extent

that corruption undermines law enforcement, corruption and bond market development should be

negatively correlated. Figure 6 is consistent with his hypothesis (since, on the ICRG scale

utilized here, a higher score indicates a lower level of corruption).




17
   LaPorta et al. (1998), when reporting a positive correlation between debt/GNP and common law legal tradition,
define debt as the sum of corporate bonds and bank loans. Beck, Demirguc-Kunt and Levine (2000) consider
financial intermediary credits to the private sector divided by GDP. Thus, neither set of authors address the impact
on bond markets that is our concern here.


                                                         12
        Weak corporate governance and transparency. If corporate governance is weak,

managers will be able enrich themselves at the expense of holders of debt and equity claims

(Jensen and Meckling 1976). If banks possessing long-term relationships with borrowers have a

comparative advantage in detecting and correcting insider abuses, savers may prefer to invest via

banks rather than securities markets. Lenders will also prefer banks to bond markets where

transparency is low, since banks have a comparative advantage in information impacted markets

(Diamond 1991, Hale 2003). Consistent with the hypothesis, Figure 7 shows that the quality of

accounting standards is positively associated with bond market development.

        Developmental stage of the economy. There are a number of reasons why economic

development and bond market development go hand in hand. Less developed countries have

volatile investment environments and heavy government involvement in commercial activity.

Often they have weak creditor rights, inadequate transparency, and poor corporate governance.

GDP per capita can be thought of as capturing these aspects of underdevelopment insofar as they

are not already absorbed by our other explanatory variables. Figure 8 is consistent with the

notion that economic development and bond market development are positively associated.18

        Size of the banking system. Banks and bond markets compete in providing external

finance; in some circumstances well developed banking systems may succeed in depriving bonds

of market share. At the same time, banks serve as dealers and market makers, whose presence is

needed for the development of a liquid and well-functioning bond market.19 Figure 9 suggests



18
   It suggests that bond markets are less developed than levels of per capita GDP and a broader sample of national
experiences would predict – in, inter alia, Hong Kong, Singapore and Japan – while they are rather better developed
in Malaysia.
19
   See Harwood (2000) and Hawkins (2002). In many countries, regulators require that bond business be done in a
separately capitalized subsidiary, although such firewalls may be more apparent than real. At the same time, dealers
need a diversified and active investor base with which to buy and sell; they cannot simply trade among themselves.
Without such a base, dealing will not be profitable. One suspects, therefore, that dealers are not so much a
precondition for bond market development as a corollary.


                                                        13
that the complementarities dominate – that on balance banking systems and bond markets

develop together.

         Banking concentration. Bentson (1994), Schinasi and Smith (1998), Smith (1998) and

Rajan and Zingales (2003) suggest that banks with market power may attempt to stifle the

development of securities markets by setting loan and deposit rates strategically or that they may

use moral suasion to discourage public placements by firms with which they have relationships.

That said, Figure 10, which juxtaposes banking-sector concentration against bond market

development, does not show a particularly strong relationship between the two variables.

         Absence of public sector funding needs. The development of a government securities

market “helps promote a class of dynamic, profitable fixed-income dealers” (Harwood 2000). In

addition, an active and liquid corporate bond market requires a benchmark yield curve on whose

basis risky credits can be conveniently priced.20 That yield curve is typically constructed from a

suite of outstanding treasury securities, requiring governments to issue a range of maturities on a

regular schedule. If a government has modest funding requirements, there may be little need to

develop an active and liquid bond market and little regular issuance to maintain a well-defined

yield curve.21 Figure 11 is consistent with the existence of a positive relationship between

private- and public-sector bond market capitalization.22


20
   Schinasi and Smith (1998) note other advantages of the existence of a benchmark issue: since they are liquid,
benchmark assets are widely used in repo markets and are typically usable as collateral for a wide range of other
financial contracts.
21
   It is in principle possible for governments without ongoing funding needs to circumvent this constraint by
overfunding the fiscal deficit (issuing more debt than strictly necessary, rolling it over as it matures, and depositing
the resulting cash surplus with the central bank, which allows the central bank to retire its sterilization bonds,
thereby unifying the public-sector bond market). See McCauley (2003). Thus, despite not running current budget
deficits, the Hong Kong Monetary Authority has been able to create a liquid market in Exchange Fund Paper, with a
ten-year yield curve, even in the absence of current government budget deficits. EFP was introduced in 1990 with
the issuance of 91-day bills, followed by 182 and 364 day bills in 1990 and 1991, two and three year notes in 1993,
five year notes in 1994, seven year notes in 1995 and finally ten year notes in 1996. (The ostensible rationale for
this debt issuance was the desire to fund some specific infrastructure projects). The outstanding stock of EFP is
more than HK$100 billion, or more than 8 per cent of GDP, and more than 20 per cent of total debt instruments. It
is issued through competitive tender bids, was listed on the stock exchange in 1999 to enhance liquidity, and can be


                                                          14
         Poor regulatory enforcement. Investors will be reluctant to take positions in markets

characterized by opportunistic participants and delivery risk, problems that regulation is designed

to mitigate. Elements of an adequate regulatory framework include disclosure standards,

penalties for accountants and auditors providing false information, and sanctions for insider

trading and market manipulation. Equally important is the clear and consistent implementation

of regulations. Consistent with this notion, bureaucratic quality is positively correlated with

bond market development (Figure 12).23

         Interest rate variability. Where interest rates are variable, investors will have little

appetite for long-term fixed-rate notes, since there is significant risk that the purchasing power of

fixed-rate long-term assets will be eroded. Investors’ limited appetite for long-term bonds thus

may limit the demand for securitized debt. In addition, high levels of interest-rate volatility may

be an indication of inadequate market liquidity, insofar as returns are affected by the entrance or

exit of a few buyers and sellers from the market. Figure 13 illustrates the negative relationship

between nominal interest rate volatility and bond market development.

         Level of interest rates. Since few firms can service debts when interest rates are high,

high rates tend to have a depressing impact on issuance. It follows, in Figure 14, that countries

with high interest rates show signs of having poorly capitalized bond markets.

         Exchange rate regime. It is argued (by e.g. Goldstein 1998) that pegged exchange rates

encourage foreign investors to underestimate the risks of lending to banks and corporations, and

that the resulting foreign competition may slow the development of domestic intermediation.

used as collateral for trading stock options and future. Taiwan financed a significant part of its National
Development Plan starting in 1991 through bond issuance, using a U.S. Treasury bond-type auction system (Lynch
2001). Similarly, despite limited public funding needs; the government of Singapore decided in 1998 to increase the
issuance of government securities, especially longer-term bonds of benchmark size, and introduced a repo facility
for primary dealers in May 2000.
22
   Note that the variable on the vertical axis, private market capitalization, is different than in the other figures.
23
   Domowitz et al. (2003) in simple tabulations similarly find that the share of domestic finance accounted for by
bonds in emerging markets rises with the quality of accounting standards.


                                                         15
From this point of view, greater exchange rate flexibility should encourage the development of

domestic bond markets (as argued by, inter alia, World Bank 2003). Of course, to the extent that

foreign participation is valuable for the growth and development of domestic markets,

discouraging the participation of international investors by introducing additional risk into the

market may not produce the desired result.24 In fact, countries with fixed exchange rate regimes

do not appear to have bigger bond markets (Figure 15). Figure 16, however, is consistent with

the view that stable exchange rates are conducive to bond market development.



5. Multivariate analysis

         We now test the importance of these factors using multivariate regression analysis of

annual data from 1990 through 2001. The dependent variable, as in the scatter plots, is bond

market capitalization as a share of GDP. Recall that this measure includes only domestic-

currency bonds issued by residents and targeted to local investors.25

         All equations are estimated using panel Generalized Least Squares (GLS) with

corrections for heteroskedasticity and panel-specific autocorrelation. We start in Table 5 with

preliminary regressions exploring the importance of, alternatively, historical, structural,

financial, developmental and macroeconomic factors. Definitive hypothesis tests of course

require considering all five categories of explanation simultaneously. We do so in the final

column of the table.



24
   There is also the possibility that the correlation reflects causality running in the other direction, from the existence
of a large domestic financial market to the willing of countries to countenance additional exchange rate variability
(Calvo and Reinhart 2002).
25
   Thus, a limitation of our analysis is that we do not have information on foreign-currency denominated issues or
issues by nonresidents denominated in local currency targeted to resident investors. We also do not know what
share of the domestic-currency issues we include are interest-rate or exchange-rate indexed. Note that our measure
excludes issues denominated in foreign currency, issues by nonresidents, and issues by residents targeted to
nonresidents, all of which are counted as international securities, as it presumably should.


                                                            16
         The first three columns show the effects of structural characteristics of countries.

Consistent with earlier arguments, country size and openness are positively related to bond

market development. Distance from the equator, a proxy for endowment theories, similarly

enters with its expected positive sign.26 But where previous studies have shown that English

common-law legal tradition favors equity market development and bank intermediation, the

same does not appear to be true of bond markets. It may be that stronger investor rights

encourage investors to attach less importance to seniority and to substitute equity for debt

securities.27 Overall, these results lend support to structural explanations for bond market

development.

         These regressions also include a dummy variable for Asia, which we interpret as

reflecting aspects of the region’s history not captured by other variables. The negative

coefficient on this variable supports historical explanations for the undercapitalization of the

region’s bond markets.28

         The specification in column 4 considers proxies for the developmental stage of the

economy: the safety of the investment environment (predictability of contract enforcement,

danger of expropriation), an index of the reliability of law enforcement, and per capita GDP as a

summary measure of development. While per capita GDP has its expected positive coefficient,

investment risk and rule of law (which are scaled so that higher values indicate a more stable

investment environment) enter with negative signs. We will return to these variables below.

26
   It is not possible to use settler mortality rates in an analysis of Asian bond markets, since relatively few Asian
countries were colonized by the European powers, and settler mortality estimates (and logic) are based on data for
and the experience of one-time colonies.
27
   However, the coefficient on this variable is significantly different from zero in only one of the two equations in
which it is included. Adding dummy variables for other legal origins does not alter these findings. For example,
when we add French legal origin, the new variable enters positively (and significantly), while English legal origin
continues to enter negatively and significantly. Since the French civil law tradition is associated with relatively
weak investor rights, the opposite signs on the two variables are consistent with the explanation in the text.
28
   Note that the coefficient predictably becomes smaller in absolute value terms, not surprisingly, the more other
independent variables are included in the specification.


                                                          17
Columns 5 and 6 consider governance and regulation of the corporate and financial sectors.

Column 5 shows that countries with better rankings on the International Country Risk Guide

(ICRG)’s measure of corruption and that adhere to international accounting standards (which is

likely to enhance the effectiveness of corporate governance) have larger bond markets.29

Column 6 shows that countries ranking higher in terms of bureaucratic quality have larger bond

markets, which we interpret in terms of the efficiency and reliability of regulation. Similarly,

countries with better developed banking sectors have better developed bond markets – bank and

bond-market intermediation appear to be complements rather than substitutes. On the other

hand, countries with more concentrated banking systems appear to have smaller bond markets,

consistent with arguments suggesting that banks with market power may use it to discourage

bond flotations. Again, we will return to these findings below.

         Column 7 considers macroeconomic factors. While the volatility of interest rates is not

significant, their level, as measured by the inter-bank rate minus LIBOR, suggests that higher

interest rates are associated with smaller bond markets.30 The coefficient on the volatility of

changes in exchange rates is marginally significant, although its coefficient is, surprisingly,

positive. Finally, the capital controls dummy (where a value of one indicates an open capital

account) suggests that controls slow bond market development.31 As we show below, this last

result is the one that turns out to be robust.



29
   This is consistent with results in Burger and Warnock (2004) suggesting that countries with stronger institutions
have larger domestic bond markets.
30
   Domowitz et al. (2003) similarly provide evidence that countries with higher rates of inflation issue less domestic
debt and more equity.
31
   A variety of alternative measures of capital controls point in the same direction. Thus, in addition to the binary
(“IMF-style”) open-or-closed measure, we experimented with Brune (2004) measure, which ranges from 0 to 9
depending on how many of the nine categories of capital account restrictions a country had in place. We looked
separately at capital account openness for inflows and outflows. We looked separately at controls on inflows and


                                                          18
         Column 8 considers the entire range of hypotheses.32 It suggests that no single class of

factors is wholly responsible for the underdevelopment of Asian bond markets; rather, the

present state of affairs reflects a confluence of influences. Structure and inheritance matter: the

size of the economy, its openness, its location, and the origin of its legal system all influence

bond market capitalization. Factors like these may be difficult to change, although some of

them, such as the handicap of small size, may be overcome through initiatives like the Asian

Bond Fund. In addition, adherence to internationally-recognized accounting standards and the

size and concentration of the banking sector are important for bond market capitalization. These

are policy variables: our results thus suggest that countries can accelerate the development of

their bond markets by improving the quality and reliability of regulation, requiring corporations

to adhere to internationally-recognized accounting standards, and encouraging competition in

financial intermediation. In addition there is a role for macroeconomic policy: both the level of

interest rates and the presence or absence of capital controls matter in the consolidated

specification.

         At first blush, a number of the results are anomalous or at least counterintuitive. Thus,

we appear to find that interest rate volatility is good for bond market development. At the same

time, there is little evidence of a relationship between exchange rate volatility and bond market

development. We will have more to say about these counterintuitive results below.




outflows pertaining to capital and money market securities. In virtually all cases we obtained the same positive and
statistically significant coefficient on controls when using the specification in column 7.
32
   Adding all of the explanatory variables substantially reduces the number of observations (from 475 observations
in the full sample to 284 observations in column 8). However, the observations from countries in Asia remain well
represented. Whereas they accounted for 22 per cent of the observations in the full sample, they account for 25 per
cent of the observations in column 8.


                                                         19
           Note also that when we add direct measures of institutions – such as bureaucratic quality,

corruption, law and order, the investment profile – the effect of per capita GDP washes out. This

is not inconsistent with explanations for bond market growth emphasizing the developmental

stage of the economy, but it suggests that the effects of economic development and

underdevelopment operate through the aforementioned institutional channels.

           We looked further at the robustness of the positive association of bank and bond market

development, which runs contrary to some popular arguments, which is likely to be

controversial. We also regressed nonpublic bond market capitalization on bank credit to the

private sector as a share of GDP, adding the entire vector of controls.33 Excluding public-sector

bonds and considering only bank credit to the private sector avoids the possibility that the

positive association between the two variables is simply picking up liquidity requirements and

other policies forcing the banking sector to hold government bonds – and the greater ability of

the government to compel such behavior in countries where the banking system is relatively

large. In this alternative specification the coefficient on bank credit continues to enter with a

positive coefficient and differs from zero at the 99 per cent confidence level.

           Finally, note that the dummy variable for Asia continues to matter statistically and

economically. Its effect is large: the coefficient of -17 suggests that Asian bond markets are 17

per cent smaller as a share of GDP than in countries with comparable characteristics in other

parts of the world. An interpretation is that the development of bond markets continues to be

held back by Asia’s history and current circumstances in ways that are not fully captured by the

other explanatory variables. We will want to revisit this finding below, as well.




33
     In further regressions not reported here.


                                                   20
        An eclectic set of policy implications would seem to flow from these findings. The Asian

Bond Fund and the removal of capital account restrictions may help for domestic bond market

development by relaxing the constraint of small market size, although such policies may be a

mixed blessing insofar as capital account liberalization prior to domestic market development

poses risks as well as promising rewards. But market size is far from the entire problem. In

addition, governments seeking to promote domestic bond markets must require adherence to

international accounting standards by security issuing firms and encourage growth and

competition in banking so as to maximize the complementarities between banking-system and

bond-market development. They should to follow stable macroeconomic policies to make it

attractive to hold domestic-currency-denominated debt instruments.

        Even if they take these steps, the results of this section suggest, Asian governments still

should not expect to succeed in developing bond markets with the depth and liquidity

characteristic of Continental Europe and the Anglo-Saxon economies, reflecting the extent to

which markets, institutions and social convention have adapted to the dominance of bank

intermediation. This is undoubtedly the most controversial conclusion seeming to emerge from

the present section. It is important, therefore, to subject it to further analysis.



6. Adding fiscal policy

        We consequently subjected these results to a variety of robustness checks. We dropped

influential observations. The results were robust to these changes. We limited the sample to the

period before the Asian crisis to test for structural breaks. The results were again very similar.34



34
  The main differences were that the corruption and law and order variables became significant (lower levels of
corruption and more reliable law enforcement were associated with larger bond markets), while distance from the
equator and domestic credit provided by the banking sector lost their’s.


                                                       21
The one sensitivity test that did make an important difference was adding fiscal policy.35 We

measured fiscal policy in three ways: as the public debt/GDP ratio, as the past year’s budget

balance as a percentage of GDP, and as a three year moving average of past budget balances.

The last of these alternatives is probably preferable, since the budget balance in a single year will

tend to be dominated by transient factors, while public indebtedness is likely to have a spuriously

strong coefficient given that the public debt is itself a major component of bond market

capitalization.

         The results in the first three columns of Table 6 confirm that fiscal policy is important for

overall bond market development.36 Stronger fiscal balances are negatively associated with bond

market capitalization. The coefficient in the third column reinforces our trepidation about using

the public debt ratio in that the coefficient is almost exactly unity. We do not consider this

measure further in what follows.

         Adding past budget balances has a number of other effects. We now obtain a

significantly negative coefficient on exchange rate volatility. Higher interest rates continue to be

obstacles to more rapid bond market development. An earlier anomaly, that greater interest rate

volatility is associated with faster bond market development, is now evident in only one of the

three specifications.37

         Adding past budget deficits also eliminates previously significant coefficients on the

investment profile, accounting standards, and bureaucratic quality, while strengthening at least in

some cases the effects of corruption and rule of law.38 In the case of the investment profile, this


35
   Asian governments have tended to run surpluses, with a few prominent exceptions, and this otherwise admirable
behavior may have stymied the development of bond markets (for reasons explained above).
36
   The observations here are only about half the number in the full sample. However, Asian countries are still well
represented: they account for 21 per cent of the reduced sample.
37
   As we will see momentarily, disaggregating public and private debt makes it disappear entirely.
38
   To be precise, accounting standards were significant in column 1, where the three-year average of the fiscal
balance is included, but not in column 2, where an alternative measure of fiscal policy is used.


                                                         22
is reassuring, since the previous result anomalously suggested that safer investment

environments are associated with less well developed bond markets.39 The now greater

importance of corruption and rule of law is also reassuring. The loss of significance of

bureaucratic quality and accounting standards is less reassuring; at face value this suggests that

financial transparency and the quality and reliability of regulation are not so important after all.

At a minimum, it suggests that it is hard to distinguish the effects of transparency, regulation,

and fiscal policy.

         But when one distinguishes public debt from private debt (debt issued by both

nonfinancial corporations and financial institutions), one finds that budget deficits are a

significant determinant of public debt market capitalization (columns 6 and 7) but not private

debt market capitalization (columns 4 and 5). In other words, while governments that run

deficits have significantly more public debt (as a matter of definition), public-sector deficits do

not appear to encourage private debt issuance. That there is no net effect is unsurprising given

arguments that a history of strong fiscal policies is both good and bad for private debt markets.

(It creates a more stable investment environment, but it complicates the creation of a well-

defined yield curve and slows the development of a class of dynamic fixed-income dealers.40)

         Note, further, that in the regressions for private debt the coefficients on accounting

standards regain their significance even through fiscal policy is still included.41 In contrast, they

are insignificant in the equations for public debt. The same is true for corruption and

bureaucratic quality. Thus, whereas institutional characteristics and regulatory practices like

39
   Table 4 shows that there is a positive correlation between the strength of fiscal policy and the quality/safety of the
investment environment, which may explain this result.
40
   Or, to put the point the other way, chronic deficits create an ample supply of sovereign securities from which to
construct a benchmark yield curve but at the same time crowd out private debt issues (MacCauley and Remolona
2000). Our results suggest that these two effects roughly cancel out.
41
   Corruption and bureaucratic quality are not significant in the regression for public debt, except in one case where
the coefficient on bureaucratic quality is marginally significant at the 90 per cent level, and there it
counterintuitively enters with a negative sign.


                                                           23
accounting standards, corruption and bureaucratic quality matter for private debt market

capitalization, they evidently matter less for public debt market capitalization.42

         Another difference introduced by disaggregating between public and private debt has to

do with the relationship between banking systems and bond markets. Earlier, when considering

total debt, we found evidence that both the size and concentration of the banking sector mattered

(positively and negatively respectively).43 Disaggregating reveals that the size of the banking

system matters mainly for the capitalization of private debt markets – in other words, there is

evidence of complementarities between the development of banking and the development of

private debt markets. In contrast, banking system concentration is negative associated with

public debt. Readers familiar with Asia’s economic and financial history will conjecture that in

countries with concentrated banking systems the government was able to use the banks as agents

for its industrial policy, channeling private savings toward favored industries and activities,

whereas in countries with atomistic banking systems less subject to manipulation direct

government expenditures were required for these purposes.

         We also find, upon disaggregating between public and private debt, that the earlier

evidence of a positive relationship between interest rate volatility and bond market development

disappears. In contrast, the level of interest rates and the stability of the exchange rate continue

to matter, as before, for both private and public debt.

         Finally, analyzing public and private debt separately reveals that the significance of

capital controls derives from their impact on the volume of public debt. Evidently, governments

that open the capital account are better able to fund themselves whether by selling debt to


42
   This explains the unstable pattern of coefficients when total debt is considered and measures of fiscal policy are
added or dropped.
43
   Although the evidence that the size of the banking system is important was much weaker when we included
measures of fiscal policy.


                                                          24
foreigners or owing to credibility effects. Of course, we know from the Asian crisis that it can be

risky to fund government deficits in this way before putting the other prerequisites for capital

account liberalization in place can be risky business. And the insignificance of both capital

account openness and past deficits for private bond market capitalization suggests that any

benefits of this development for corporate bond markets development are at best indirect.

         Note that adding a measure of past fiscal policies eliminates the previously negative

coefficient on the dummy variable for Asia in the equations for total debt. This is true whether

fiscal policy is measured as the past year’s deficit or as a moving average of past deficits.

Moreover, the coefficient on Asia is now positive, not negative, including in column 3 where

past fiscal policy is measured by the public debt and the coefficient is significantly different from

zero (columns 1-3). Once we control for the traditionally strong fiscal stance of Asian countries,

in other words, there is no longer support for the notion that their bond markets are smaller than

can be explained by their economic characteristics and policies.44



7. Conclusions

         Asia’s underdeveloped bond markets and dependence on bank finance attracted concern

since before the crisis of 1997-8. The result has been a host of official responses, from reports

by the multilateral financial institutions on the importance of reliable contract enforcement,

strengthened prudential regulation and improved market infrastructure to the Asian Bond Fund

funded by EMEAP central banks. But it remains uncertain whether these initiatives will succeed

in surmounting the fundamental obstacles to bond market development, since there has been



44
   Indeed, when we limit our attention to private debt (columns 4 and 5), both estimates of the Asia dummy are
significantly greater than zero. For public debt, the sign of the coefficient on the Asia dummy is sensitive to how
fiscal policy is measured, and it is never significant at the 95 per cent confidence level.


                                                         25
little systematic analysis of the nature of those obstacles. This is a gap that the present paper

seeks to fill.

         We find that the slow development of local bond markets is a phenomenon with multiple

dimensions. To some extent the problem is one of minimum efficient scale: larger countries

have better capitalized bond markets when capitalization is measured relative to GDP.45 But

market size is not the entire problem. In addition, the failure of countries to follow

internationally recognized accounting standards has slowed the development of private debt

markets. Corruption and low bureaucratic quality, which are signs of unreliable securities

market regulation, work in the same direction. Countries with competitive, well-capitalized

banking systems, on the other hand, have larger bond markets.

         Macroeconomic policy appears to have played both a supporting and impeding role. On

the one hand, Asia’s strong fiscal balances, while admirable on other grounds, have not been

conducive to the growth of government bond markets. Fortunately, there is little evidence that

the small size of public debt markets is an insurmountable obstacle to corporate bond market

development. On the other hand, the stability of exchange rates in the region appears, if

anything, to have encouraged bond market development.

         Over time, markets, institutions, and social convention have adapted to the status quo,

which in the case of Asia is the dominance of bank finance. Some may worry that, as a result of

this inheritance, Asian countries will not be able to develop bond markets as efficient and well

capitalized as those of the advanced industrial countries. In this respect our results are

reassuring: they suggest that the region’s structural characteristics and macroeconomic and

financial policies account fully for differences in bond market development between Asia and

45
  In addition to being supported by our empirical results, this fact is evident in Europe’s experience, where the
advent of the euro has relaxed the constraint of market size at the national level and greatly enhanced the liquidity of
the bond market, the corporate bond market in particular.


                                                          26
the rest of the world. Once one controls for these characteristics and policies, in other words,

there is no residual “Asia effect.”

        One obstacle that countries in the region must overcome in order to accelerate this

process is the legacy of capital controls. The evidence is strong that capital controls discourage

foreign participation in domestic bond markets and that they discourage bond market

development more generally. But we also know, not least from the Asian crisis, that capital

account liberalization is only prudent when domestic financial markets are already deep, liquid

and robust. Here obviously is a dilemma. Capital account liberalization makes sense only when

domestic market development is sufficiently advanced, but developing domestic financial

markets is harder when the capital account remains fully or partly closed. There is no easy way

of finessing this problem.46 The only solution is to work harder at strengthening market

regulation, market infrastructure and the other domestic preconditions for the development of

local bond markets before giving that process a further push by finally opening the capital

account.




46
  In particular, harmonizing market regulations and withholding tax regimes or creating a pan-Asian payment and
settlement system, with the goal of encouraging more cross-border investment in the region and thereby producing
deeper and more liquid markets, would be tantamount to encouraging more capital flows and thus equivalent to
early capital account liberalization. In other words, doing so would promote market development but also heighten
crisis risk, which is very dilemma referred to in the text (Eichengreen 2004).


                                                       27
                                        Data Appendix

The dataset covers the period 1990-2001 at an annual frequency. Sample countries are
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hong Kong, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Malaysia, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Russia, Singapore, South Africa, South Korea, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Turkey,
United Kingdom, and United States.

Domestic Debt Securities
Domestic debt securities are from Table 16A of BIS domestic and international securities
statistics, which are regularly published in the annex tables of the BIS Quarterly Review. The
series are accessible at http://www.bis.org/statistics/secstats.htm.

Inter-Bank Interest Rates
Inter-bank rates are from Global Financial Data. 12-month inter-bank rates are used wherever
they are available. When 12-month rates are not available, shorter rates are used. Where shorter
rates are not available, we use monthly average of daily overnight inter-bank rates.

Exchange Rates
Exchange rates are end-of-month (local currency per US$) from line AE in International
Financial Statistics.

Institutions Variables
Measures of government stability, Investment profile, law and order, corruption and bureaucracy
quality are from ICRG:

   Investment Profile is an assessment of factors affecting the risk to investment. The risk
   rating assigned is the sum of three subcomponents, each with a maximum score of four
   points and a minimum score of 0 points. A score of 4 points equates to Very Low Risk and a
   score of 0 points to Very High Risk. The subcomponents are:
       • Contract Viability/Expropriation
       • Profits Repatriation
       • Payment Delays

   Law and Order indexes are assessed separately, with each sub-component comprising zero
   to three points. The Law sub-component is an assessment of the strength and impartiality of
   the legal system, while the Order sub-component is an assessment of popular observance of
   the law. A higher score indicates better law and order.

   Corruption index is an assessment of corruption within the political system. The index
   ranges from 0 to 6, where a higher score means a lower degree of corruption.

   Bureaucratic Quality is the measure of institutional strength and quality of the bureaucracy.
   High points are given to countries where the bureaucracy has the strength and expertise to


                                               28
   govern without drastic changes in policy or interruptions in government services. In the low-
   risk countries, the bureaucracy tends to be somewhat autonomous from political pressure and
   to have an established mechanism for recruitment and training.

Capital Controls
Coded from IMF’s Annual Report on Exchange Arrangement and Exchange Restrictions by
Nancy Brune; see Brune (2004)

Other variables
The following series are from World Bank’s World Development Indicators:
GDP (constant 1995 US$)
GDP (current US$)
GDP per capita (constant 1995 US$)
GDP per capita, PPP (current international $)
GDP, PPP (current international $)
Interest rate spread (lending rate minus deposit rate)
Interest rate spread (lending rate minus LIBOR)
Lending interest rate (%)
Credit to private sector (% of GDP)
Deposit interest rate (%)
Domestic credit provided by banking sector (% of GDP)
Market capitalization of listed companies (% of GDP)
Market capitalization of listed companies (current US$)
Overall budget deficit, including grants (% of GDP)
Real effective exchange rate index (1995 = 100)
S&P/IFC investable index (annual % change)
Stocks traded, total value (% of GDP)
Stocks traded, turnover ratio (%)




                                              29
                                                           Table 1
                                            Total Outstanding External Finance
                                                  (in Percentages of GDP)

                       Domestic Credit                                             Outstanding Domestic Debt Securities
                        Provided by      Stock Market     Issued by Corporate Issuers     Issued by Public Sector         Issued by Financial
                                                                                                                              Institutions
                       Banking Sector    Capitalization

 Emerging Markets            90.21             56.87                    5.76                           24.96                       8.28

 Asia                       131.91             75.56                   9.27                            23.52                      12.00
   China                    140.59             45.21                   0.90                            25.04                       8.80
   Hong Kong                141.98            310.81                   3.07                            11.78                      11.90
   Malaysia                 156.23            135.92                  50.40                            36.57                       7.54
   Singapore                102.95            138.25                   6.71                            34.16                      20.61
   South Korea              110.37             54.97                  27.84                            18.32                      23.20
   Thailand                 112.03             31.67                   4.96                            26.17                       0.35

 Latin America               41.21             38.70                    1.73                           26.12                       4.53
   Argentina                 37.13             71.62                    2.71                            9.11                       2.04
   Brazil                    59.19             37.06                    0.56                           51.99                       9.40
   Chile                     76.74             89.28                    8.82                           29.76                      13.86
   Mexico                    24.69             20.49                    1.52                           12.10                       0.68

 Central Europe              42.48             16.04                    1.23                           29.32                       0.92
   Czech Republic            51.84             16.22                    4.79                           36.35                       4.61
   Hungary                   49.54             19.80                    1.53                           35.31                       0.00
   Poland                    37.34             14.85                    0.00                           25.26                       0.00

 Developed Countries        194.13            122.92                  20.55                           85.18                       33.64
   Australia                 93.99            101.55                  12.25                           17.13                       16.75
   Canada                    93.18             90.86                  10.50                           59.60                       14.33
   Japan                    308.67             92.10                  16.48                          104.45                       15.94
   New Zealand              120.00             36.82                   0.00                           28.36                        0.00
   United States            160.56            137.48                  23.90                           83.53                       43.32
   Europe                   121.30            156.25                   8.05                           44.12                       28.44

Source: WDI and BIS




                                                             30
                                            Table 2
                                Composition of External Finance
                                   (in Percentages of Total)

                        Domestic credit       Stock Market           Outstanding Domestic
                      provided by banking     Capitalization      Debt Securities by Corporate
                             sector                                Issuers and Public Sector

Emerging Markets                 50.74               31.98                       17.28

   Asia                          54.90               31.45                       13.65
     China                       66.40               21.35                       12.25
     Hong Kong                   30.36               66.46                        3.17
     Malaysia                    41.21               35.85                       22.94
     Singapore                   36.50               49.01                       14.49
     South Korea                 52.18               25.99                       21.82
     Thailand                    64.08               18.11                       17.81

   Latin America                 38.24               35.91                       25.85
     Argentina                   30.79               59.40                        9.80
     Brazil                      39.78               24.91                       35.31
     Chile                       37.51               43.64                       18.86
     Mexico                      41.99               34.85                       23.17

   Central Europe                47.69               18.01                       34.30
     Czech Republic              47.48               14.85                       37.67
     Hungary                     46.66               18.65                       34.69
     Poland                      48.21               19.18                       32.61

Developed Countries              45.92               29.08                       25.01
    Australia                    41.79               45.15                       13.06
    Canada                       36.66               35.75                       27.58
    Japan                        59.17               17.65                       23.18
    New Zealand                  64.80               19.88                       15.32
    United States                39.60               33.91                       26.50
    Europe                       42.32               38.72                       18.96

Source: See Table 1




                                                                                                 31
                               Table 3
              New External Finance in Emerging Markets
                      (as percentages of GDP)

                         1997      1998      1999     2000        2001
Emerging markets        22.47     27.03     18.69    23.20       20.28
  Domestic              18.05     24.47     15.77    19.56       17.33
     Equities            1.00      0.92      1.26     0.67        0.54
     Bonds
       Private           0.30      0.33      0.30     2.59        3.25
       Public           10.45     17.73     11.50    10.25        9.09
     Bank loans
       Private           4.55      4.49      2.25        5.29     2.72
       Public            1.74      1.00      0.46        0.76     1.72
  International          4.42      2.56      2.93        3.64     2.95
     Equities            0.50      0.16      0.46        0.84     0.25
     Bonds
       Private           1.12      0.56      0.64        0.58     0.88
       Public            1.12      0.81      1.01        0.86     0.83
     Bank loans
       Private           1.14      0.61      0.65     1.04        0.79
       Public            0.54      0.42      0.18     0.32        0.20
Asia                    12.63     15.88     16.77    19.72       22.20
  Domestic               8.46     14.38     14.57    16.21       19.03
     Equities            1.49      0.99      1.93     1.03        0.60
     Bonds
       Private           0.00      0.00      0.05        2.12     3.00
       Public            0.36      2.52      2.49        2.78     5.28
     Bank loans
       Private            6.70     7.56      8.54        9.08     7.53
       Public            -0.09     3.31      1.56        1.21     2.61
  International           4.16     1.50      2.20        3.51     3.16
     Equities             0.55     0.24      0.76        1.32     0.43
     Bonds
       Private           1.04      0.20      0.45        0.62     1.21
       Public            0.74      0.35      0.54        0.39     0.57
     Bank loans
       Private           1.18      0.27      0.26     0.81        0.80
       Public            0.65      0.43      0.21     0.37        0.16
Central Europe          20.88     30.19     24.52    24.30       33.47
  Domestic              17.52     26.81     21.49    21.67       31.08
     Equities            0.54      2.52      1.30     0.51        0.34
     Bonds
       Private           0.21      0.11      0.13     0.07        0.11
       Public           17.69     18.03     23.07    22.35       22.85
     Bank loans
       Private            1.46     4.50     -1.48         0.45    4.24
       Public            -2.38     1.66     -1.53        -1.71    3.54
  International           3.36     3.38      3.03         2.63    2.39
     Equities             1.07     0.56      0.45         0.15    0.00




                                                                         32
                         Bonds
                            Private                     0.52          0.82         0.69         0.33         0.66
                            Public                      0.52          0.96         1.05         0.50         0.78
                         Bank loans
                            Private                    0.73           0.55         0.49         1.49         0.43
                            Public                     0.52           0.50         0.35         0.17         0.52
                     Latin America                    34.52          38.45        20.20        27.59        15.35
                       Domestic                       29.63          34.89        16.31        23.60        12.55
                         Equities                      0.50           0.60         0.33         0.23         0.50
                         Bonds
                            Private                    0.67           0.72         0.68         3.61         4.17
                            Public                    21.44          33.98        21.50        18.05        11.08
                         Bank loans
                            Private                     2.46          1.19        -5.56         1.12        -3.47
                            Public                      4.56         -1.59        -0.65         0.59         0.27
                       International                    4.89          3.55         3.89         3.99         2.80
                         Equities                       0.34          0.00         0.05         0.33         0.08
                         Bonds
                            Private                     1.32          0.91         0.89         0.56         0.52
                            Public                      1.67          1.27         1.64         1.54         1.17
                         Bank loans
                            Private                     1.15          0.98         1.21         1.27         0.84
                            Public                      0.41          0.39         0.11         0.28         0.19

Notes:   - Dollar amounts are from Tables 4.2 and 4.3 in IMF's Global Financial Stability Report: Market Developments and Issues (March
            2003) GDP are from Worldbank's World Development Indicators.
         - Emerging markets include China, Hong Kong SAR, Korea, Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Mexico, Czech
            Republic, Hungary, and Poland.




                                                                                                                                    33
                                                                                                     Table 4
                                                                                     Correlations of Explanatory Variables


                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Budget
                                                     Dummy                                                                                                                                                          Balance
                                                       for     Distance                           GDP per                                        Concentration                  Interest    Interest   Exchange      (% of
                             Exports to   Dummy                           Investment    Law and                           Accounting    Bank                     Bureaucracy
                  GDP, PPP                           English    from                               capita,   Corruption                           in Banking                     Rate        Rate        Rate        GDP)
                             GDP (%)      for Asia                          Profile      Order                            Standards    Credits                     Quality
                                                      Legal    Equator                              PPP                                              Sector                    Volatility   Spread     Volatility   3-Year
                                                     Origin                                                                                                                                                         Moving
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Average
GDP, PPP             1
Exports to GDP
                   -0.2511       1
 (%)
Dummy for
                   -0.1045     0.517         1
 Asia
Dummy for
 English Legal     0.2960     0.3069      0.2452       1
 Origin
Distance from
                   0.0131     -0.4452     -0.6842    -0.3749      1
 Equator
Investment
                   0.1807     0.1415      -0.1082    0.0953    -0.0496        1
 Profile
Law and Order      0.1658     0.0917      -0.3004    0.2509    0.5557      0.0247          1
GDP per capita,
                   0.4217     -0.0032     -0.4491    0.1586    0.6141       0.171       0.7602       1
 PPP
Corruption         -0.0273    -0.0552     -0.3841    -0.0111   0.6711      -0.0405      0.6468    0.6298         1
Accounting
                   0.1402     0.3326      0.1509     0.4985    0.1489      -0.0344      0.4411    0.4720      0.4028          1
 Standards
Bank Credit        0.3339     0.0322      0.1145     0.1976    0.1700      -0.0498      0.4414    0.4301      0.2420        0.3269       1
Concentration
 in Banking        -0.5322    0.2670      -0.1784    -0.1083   0.2408      -0.0719      0.1574    0.1041      0.4159        0.2559     -0.1242        1
 Sector
Bureaucracy
                   0.2337     0.0745      -0.3017    0.2666    0.5625      0.1557       0.7582    0.8176      0.7016        0.5669     0.4373       0.1927           1
 Quality
Interest Rate
                   -0.1436    -0.1417     0.0729     -0.2013   -0.3703     -0.0713      -0.6644   -0.5824     -0.4733      -0.3767     -0.3942     -0.0222         -0.5799         1
 Volatility
Interest Rate
                   -0.1516    -0.2699     -0.0111    -0.2893   -0.2219     -0.2787      -0.6057   -0.5791      -0.295      -0.3633     -0.389      -0.0602         -0.5275      0.7165         1
 Spread
Exchange Rate
                   -0.2516    -0.0326     -0.0347    -0.2457   0.1406      -0.2046      -0.0866   -0.0696     0.0998        0.0258     0.1191       0.1883         -0.0383      0.1795      0.2693         1
 Volatility
Budget Balance
 3-Year Moving     -0.0459    0.5713      0.4628     0.3817     -0.549     0.3514       -0.087    -0.1121     -0.2364       0.1223     -0.0909     -0.0481         -0.0294      0.0907      -0.1719     -0.1969       1
 Average




                                                                                                                                                                                                               34
                                                                                Table 5
                                                                          Multivariate Analysis

                                                         (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)          (8)
GDP, PPP (current international billion $)               0.010        0.012        0.012                                                           0.012
                                                         (7.97)***    (11.72)***   (11.98)***                                                      (19.04)***
Exports to GDP (%)                                       0.209        0.237        0.351                                                           0.265
                                                         (3.53)***    (4.19)***    (8.25)***                                                       (5.02)***
Dummy for Asia                                           -32.702      -29.669      -10.674                                                         -16.899
                                                         (6.33)***    (7.23)***    (3.81)***                                                       (4.85)***
Dummy for English Legal Origin                                        -9.492       -3.587                                                          -18.426
                                                                      (4.96)***    (1.17)                                                          (3.74)***
Distance from Equator                                                              110.339                                                         65.177
                                                                                   (11.79)***                                                      (4.10)***
Investment Profile                                                                              -0.371                                             -0.542
                                                                                                (1.97)**                                           (1.71)*
Law and Order                                                                                   -0.674                                             0.808
                                                                                                (1.47)                                             (0.82)
GDP per capita, PPP (current international thousand $)                                          3.179                                              -0.291
                                                                                                (30.53)***                                         (1.26)
Corruption                                                                                                   3.383                                 0.023
                                                                                                             (4.90)***                             (0.03)
Accounting Standards (La Porta et al (1998))                                                                 0.630                                 0.775
                                                                                                             (6.66)***                             (3.47)***
Domestic credit provided by banking sector (% of GDP)                                                                    0.213                     0.090
                                                                                                                         (9.17)***                 (2.84)***
Concentration in Banking Sector                                                                                          -9.031                    -18.909
                                                                                                                         (3.47)***                 (4.60)***
Bureaucracy Quality                                                                                                      12.327                    1.554
                                                                                                                         (11.10)***                (1.17)
Standard deviation of inter-bank interest rates                                                                                       -0.222       0.605
                                                                                                                                      (0.83)       (2.19)**
Interest Rate Spread (Inter-bank rate minus LIBOR)                                                                                    -0.713       -0.484
                                                                                                                                      (5.65)***    (3.47)***
Standard deviation of change in log of exchange rates                                                                                 39.393       -5.936
                                                                                                                                      (1.87)*      (0.34)
IMF Capital Controls Dummy Variable                                                                                                   3.226        2.641
                                                                                                                                      (2.87)***    (1.85)*
Constant                                                 45.368       46.363       -3.903       13.413       7.538       2.535        52.352       -25.739
                                                         (23.25)***   (26.75)***   (0.86)       (5.24)***    (1.26)      (0.63)       (42.46)***   (2.75)***
Observations                                             475          475          421          469          395         405          400          284
Number of id                                             41           41           36           41           34          41           38           30
Absolute value of z statistics in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%



                                                                                                                                                                35
                                                                              Table 6.
                                                                        Sensitivity Analysis
                                                                              (1)           (2)         (3)           (4)              (5)         (7)              (8)
                                                                                          Total                             Private                        Public
GDP, PPP (current international billion $)                                0.011        0.011        0.005        0.006            0.005        0.006           0.010
                                                                          (13.78)***   (12.75)***   (3.95)***    (13.00)***       (13.43)***   (5.99)***       (9.09)***
Exports to GDP (%)                                                        0.176        0.159        0.113        0.130            0.106        0.131           0.236
                                                                          (2.45)**     (1.87)*      (3.58)***    (3.59)***        (3.10)***    (3.03)***       (6.05)***
Dummy for Asia                                                            7.484        5.217        13.259       8.805            7.743        8.673           -8.124
                                                                          (1.26)       (0.80)       (4.94)***    (3.90)***        (3.07)***    (1.57)          (1.71)*
Dummy for English Legal Origin                                            -4.718       -7.270       -20.759      -15.939          -14.394      9.714           4.957
                                                                          (1.16)       (1.54)       (8.35)***    (7.59)***        (7.20)***    (2.77)***       (1.55)
Distance from Equator                                                     111.762      79.264       69.202       58.224           48.715       73.631          63.661
                                                                          (6.02)***    (4.08)***    (8.02)***    (6.91)***        (6.18)***    (6.03)***       (6.03)***
Investment Profile                                                        0.357        0.111        0.187        -0.149           -0.087       0.260           -0.028
                                                                          (1.06)       (0.33)       (1.31)       (0.97)           (0.59)       (1.14)          (0.11)
Law and Order                                                             2.066        -0.097       -0.387       0.217            0.288        1.452           1.021
                                                                          (2.08)**     (0.09)       (1.07)       (0.49)           (0.65)       (1.87)*         (1.18)
GDP per capita, PPP (current international thousand $)                    -0.035       0.662        -0.372       -0.143           -0.203       -0.712          -0.745
                                                                          (0.09)       (1.65)*      (2.21)**     (0.70)           (1.09)       (2.58)***       (2.95)***
Corruption                                                                2.500        2.552        0.201        1.208            1.353        0.456           0.978
                                                                          (2.99)***    (2.73)***    (0.57)       (3.03)***        (3.58)***    (0.72)          (1.34)
Accounting Standards (La Porta et al (1998))                              0.330        -0.095       0.351        0.480            0.446        -0.134          0.102
                                                                          (1.72)*      (0.32)       (4.01)***    (5.83)***        (5.56)***    (0.69)          (0.60)
Domestic credit provided by banking sector (% of GDP)                     0.039        0.004        0.071        0.070            0.103        0.040           0.092
                                                                          (0.89)       (0.08)       (4.25)***    (3.52)***        (4.89)***    (1.29)          (3.05)***
Concentration in Banking Sector                                           -11.878      -20.028      -4.101       -2.739           -1.279       -11.415         -11.823
                                                                          (2.63)***    (3.87)***    (1.68)*      (1.12)           (0.51)       (3.30)***       (3.35)***
Bureaucracy Quality                                                       -1.397       -0.554       1.114        1.544            1.754        -1.665          -1.571
                                                                          (1.06)       (0.32)       (2.04)**     (2.68)***        (3.17)***    (1.67)*         (1.28)
Standard deviation of inter-bank interest rates                           0.509        0.295        0.159        0.084            0.110        0.218           0.191
                                                                          (2.02)**     (0.87)       (1.55)       (0.78)           (1.07)       (1.00)          (0.81)
Interest Rate Spread (Inter-bank rate minus LIBOR)                        -0.391       -0.289       -0.104       -0.116           -0.166       -0.285          -0.295
                                                                          (3.25)***    (1.85)*      (1.80)*      (1.91)*          (2.81)***    (2.81)***       (2.69)***
Standard deviation of change in log of exchange rates                     -57.932      -95.382      -17.051      -21.608          -25.153      -31.280         -38.613
                                                                          (3.07)***    (4.21)***    (2.14)**     (2.24)**         (2.51)**     (2.23)**        (2.63)***
IMF Capital Controls Dummy Variable. (1= if capital account is open)      5.740        4.859        -0.218       1.336            1.056        4.385           5.667
                                                                          (3.24)***    (2.81)***    (0.29)       (1.44)           (1.20)       (3.00)***       (4.07)***
Fiscal Balance (% of GDP) 3-Year Moving Average                           -1.357                                 0.165                         -1.204
                                                                          (5.91)***                              (1.58)                        (6.83)***
Lagged Overall Budget Balance (% of GDP)                                               -0.871                                     0.078                        -0.348
                                                                                       (5.09)***                                  (1.21)                       (2.52)**
Outstanding Domestic Debt Security issued by Public Sector (% of GDP)                               1.094
                                                                                                    (45.88)***
Constant                                                                  -41.317      9.632        -36.844      -49.076         -45.686       7.940           -8.686
                                                                          (3.93)***    (0.63)       (7.52)***    (9.93)***       (9.84)***     (0.71)          (0.91)
Observations                                                              231          235          284          231             235           231             235
Number of id                                                              28           29           30           28              29            28              29
Absolute value of z statistics in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%



                                                                                                                                                                          36
                                                                 Figure 1. Bond Markets and Country Size                                                                                                       Figure 2. Bond Markets and Exports to GDP
                                                               y = 46.9452 + 0.0127 x                                                                                                                            y = 56.9065 + -0.0462 x
                                                             t-stat: (7.70)  (3.25)                                     r-squared: 0.21                                                                        t-stat: (6.00)   (0.20)                                                r-squared: 0.00

           Outstanding Domestic Debt Security (% of GDP)




                                                                                                                                                 Outstanding Domestic Debt Security (% of GDP)
                                                    150




                                                                                                                                                                                          150
                                                                                                                      Japan                                                                                            Japan
                                     100




                                                                                                                                                                           100
                                                                 Malay sia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Malay sia
                         50




                                                                     South Korea




                                                                                                                                                               50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 South Korea
                                                                 Singapore
                                                                 Philippines
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Philippines                                                            Singapore
                                                                   India
                                                                       China
                                                                 Hong  Kong
                                                                 Thailand                                                                                                                                              India China
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Thailand                                         Hong Kong
            0




                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                             0                  2000            4000              6000                    8000
                                                                                    GDP (constant 1995 Billion US$)                                                                                            0                             50                              100                           150
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Exports to GDP (%)
         Source: WDI
                                                                                                                                                 Source: WDI


                 Figure 3. Bond Markets and Distance from Equator                                                                                                                                   Figure 4. Bond Markets and Investment Profile
                                                               y = 15.7729 + 107.3081 x                                                                                                                           y = -34.9576 + 12.6691 x
                                                             t-stat: (1.05)   (3.14)                                    r-squared: 0.23                                                                         t-stat: (0.79)   (2.05)                                               r-squared: 0.10
             Outstanding Domestic Debt Security (% of GDP)




                                                                                                                                                               Outstanding Domestic Debt Security (% of GDP)
                                                      150




                                                                                                                                                                                                        150
                                                                                                         Japan
                                       100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Japan




                                                                                                                                                                                         100
                                                                    Malay sia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Malay sia
                           50




                                                                                                          South Korea




                                                                                                                                                                             50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  South Korea
                                                                  Singapore     Philippines
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Philippines                       Singapore
                                                                                           India China
                                                                                Thailand Hong Kong                                                                                                                                           India        China
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Hong Kong
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Thailand
              0




                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                             0                     .2                   .4                .6               .8
                                                                                              Distance from Equator                                                                                                4                 5                 6             7                     8              9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Investment Profile

Source: La Porta et.al. (1999)                                                                                                                   Source: ICRG
Note:    Measured by absolute value of the latitude of a country, scaled between zero                                                            Note:   See Data Appendix
and one.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    37
                                                   Figure 5. Bond Markets and Law and Order                                                                                                                      Figure 6. Bond Markets and Corruption
                                                     y = -30.7797 + 17.3356 x                                                                                                                                 y = -16.1221 + 16.4466 x
                                                   t-stat: (1.23)   (3.52)                                         r-squared: 0.24                                                                          t-stat: (0.71)   (3.25)                                              r-squared: 0.21

   Outstanding Domestic Debt Security (% of GDP)




                                                                                                                                                           Outstanding Domestic Debt Security (% of GDP)
                                            150




                                                                                                                                                                                                    150
                                                                                                                                       Japan                                                                                                                   Japan
                             100




                                                                                                                                                                                     100
                                                                                                   Malay sia                                                                                                                                           Malay sia
                 50




                                                                                                    South Korea




                                                                                                                                                                         50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   South Korea

                                                                             Philippines                                            Singapore
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Philippines           Singapore
                                                                                  India                 China           Hong Kong
                                                                                                                   Thailand                                                                                                    India                   China
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Thailand                             Hong Kong
    0




                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                   2                3                   4                            5                    6
                                                                                   Law and Order                                                                                                            2                       3                      4                      5                6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Corruption

Source: ICRG                                                                                                                                    Source: ICRG
Note:    See Data Appendix                                                                                                                      Note:   See Data Appendix


            Figure 7. Bond Markets and Accounting Standards
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Figure 8. Bond Markets and GDP Per Capita
                                                     y = 1.2085 + 0.9394 x
                                                   t-stat: (0.03)   (1.52)                                          r-squared: 0.07                                                                          y = 22.5778 + 2.0100 x
                                                                                                                                                                                                           t-stat: (2.89)   (5.30)                                               r-squared: 0.42
 Outstanding Domestic Debt Security (% of GDP)




                                                                                                                                                Outstanding Domestic Debt Security (% of GDP)
                                          150




                                                                                                                                                                                         150
                                                                                                           Japan
                           100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Japan




                                                                                                                                                                          100
                                                                                                                              Malay sia

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Malay sia
               50




                                                                                                     South Korea




                                                                                                                                                              50
                                                                                                                                    Singapore                                                                                    South Korea
                                                                                                           Philippines
                                                                                           India
                                                                                                         Thailand Hong Kong                                                                                     Philippines                              Singapore
                                                                                                                                                                                                               India
                                                                                                                                                                                                               China                                    Hong Kong
  0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Thailand
                                                        40           50             60              70                              80
                                                                                                                                                 0


                                                                Accounting Standards (La Porta et al (1998))
                                                                                                                                                                                                           0                  10            20            30          40                           50
Source: Le Porta et. al. (1998)                                                                                                                                                                                               GDP per capita (constant 1995 Thousand US$)
Note:   A higher score means a better accounting standard.                                                                                      Source: WDI




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        38
  Figure 9. Bond Markets and Banking Sector Development                                                                                                                                      Figure 10. Bond Markets and Bank Concentration
                                                                         y = 18.7838 + 0.3957 x                                                                                                        y = 69.4894 + -23.3347 x
                                                                       t-stat: (1.56)   (3.42)                           r-squared: 0.23                                                             t-stat: (3.33)   (0.70)                                       r-squared: 0.01
   Outstanding Domestic Debt Security (% of GDP)




                                                                                                                                                   Outstanding Domestic Debt Security (% of GDP)
                                            150




                                                                                                                                                                                            150
                                                                                                                                           Japan                                                           Japan
                             100




                                                                                                                                                                             100
                                                                                                          Malay sia                                                                                                                   Malay sia
                 50




                                                                                            South Korea




                                                                                                                                                                 50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   South Korea

                                                                                              Singapore
                                                                                     Philippines                                                                                                                                                            Singapore
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Philippines
                                                                                    India         China                                                                                                                              India
                                                                                                             Hong Kong
                                                                                                       Thailand                                                                                                                                                 Hong Kong        China
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Thailand
    0




                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                       0                    100                     200                    300                                                       .2                   .4                  .6               .8                         1
                                                                               Domestic credit provided by banking sector (% of GDP)                                                                                           Concentration in Banking Sector

   Source: WDI                                                                                                                                        Source: Beck, Demirgüç-Kunt, and Levine (1999)

Figure 11. Public and Private Sector Bond Market Development                                                                                                                           Figure 12. Bond Markets and Bureaucratic Quality
            Domestic Debt Securities by Non-Public Sector (% of GDP)




                                                                         y = 6.8340 + 0.3969 x
                                                                       t-stat: (1.28)   (3.15)                           r-squared: 0.20                                                               y = -41.5786 + 30.2786 x
                                                                                                                                                                                                     t-stat: (1.99)   (4.77)                                       r-squared: 0.37
                                                           100




                                                                                                                                                     Outstanding Domestic Debt Security (% of GDP)
                                                                                                                                                                                              150
                                                   80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Japan




                                                                                                                                                                               100
                                          60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Malay sia
                                   40




                                                                                South Korea
                                                                                                      Malay sia
                                                                                                                         Japan




                                                                                                                                                                   50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            South Korea
                         20




                                                                                    Singapore                                                                                                                       Philippines                                               Singapore
                                                                            Hong Kong
                                                                                China                                                                                                                                     China                      India
                                                                               Thailand                                                                                                                                                             Hong Kong
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Thailand
                                                                                      India   Philippines
                 0




                                                                                                                                                      0

                                                                       0           20          40            60            80          100
                                                                       Outstanding Domestic Debt Security issued by Public Sector (% of GDP)                                                         1.5              2               2.5          3                    3.5               4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Bureaucracy Quality
   Source: BIS
                                                                                                                                                      Source: ICRG
                                                                                                                                                      Note:   See Data Appendix




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  39
                                  Figure 13. Bond Markets and Interest Rate Volatility                                                                                              Figure 14. Bond Markets and the Level of Interest Rates
                                                                      y = 68.5564 + -5.2745 x                                                                                                                                      y = 66.6961 + -1.1225 x
                                                                    t-stat: (10.09)   (3.34)                                    r-squared: 0.23                                                                                  t-stat: (9.00)   (2.29)                                     r-squared: 0.12
                Outstanding Domestic Debt Security (% of GDP)




                                                                                                                                                                                 Outstanding Domestic Debt Security (% of GDP)
                                                         150




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          150
                                                                        Japan
                                           100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Japan




                                                                                                                                                                                                            100
                                                                        Malay sia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Malay sia
                                50




                                                                          South Korea




                                                                                                                                                                                               50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             South Korea
                                                                        Singapore      Philippines
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Singapore Philippines
                                                                           China
                                                                         Hong Kong
                                                                            Thailand
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 India
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           China Kong
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Hong
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Thailand
                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                    0                     5                 10                15                  20                                                                                 0                      20                40               60              80
                                                                                      Standard deviation of inter-bank interest rates                                                                                                                 Interest rate spread (lending rate minus LIBOR)

            Source: Global Financial Database (GFD) and authors’ calculation                                                                                                        Source: GFD and WDI

Figure 15. Bond Markets and Fixed Exchange Rate Regime                                                                                                                                       Figure 16. Bond Markets and Exchange Rate Volatility
                                                                  y = 53.2522 + 8.0045 x                                                                                                                                           y = 71.9603 + -647.6625 x
                                                                t-stat: (6.71)   (0.44)                                         r-squared: 0.01                                                                                  t-stat: (5.34)   (1.37)                                     r-squared: 0.05
Outstanding Domestic Debt Security (% of GDP)




                                                                                                                                                                           Outstanding Domestic Debt Security (% of GDP)
                                         150




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    150
                                                                    Japan                                                                                                                                                                                                 Japan
                          100




                                                                                                                                                                                                     100
                                                                                          Malay sia                                                                                                                                                       Malay sia




                                                                                                                                                                                         50
              50




                                                                    South Korea                                                                                                                                                                                   South Korea

                                                                    Singapore       Philippines                                                                                                                                                       Singapore   Philippines
                                                                                                  India          China                                                                                                                                   India
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           China
                                                                                                                         Thailand                      Hong Kong
                                                                                                                                                                            0                                                        Hong Kong                 Thailand
 0




                                                                0                .2          .4           .6           .8                          1                                                                             0                    .02               .04               .06                  .08
                                                                            Fixed Exchange Rate Regime Dummy (Reinhart-Rogoff)                                                                                                                 Standard deviation of change in log of exchange rates

            Source: Reinhart-Rogoff (2002)                                                                                                                         Source: IFS and authors’ calculation




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     40
                                          References

Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (1999), “Compendium of Sound Practices, Guidelines to
Facilitate the Development of Domestic Bond Markets in APEC Member Economies, Report of
the Collaborative Initiative on the Development of Domestic Bond Markets, Washington, D.C.:
APEC.

Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirguc-Kunt and Ross Levine (2002), “Law, Endowments, and
Finance,” NBER Working Paper no. 9089 (August).

Benston, George J. (1994), “Universal Banking,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 8, ppp.121-
143.

Boot, Arnoud and Anjan Thakor (1997), “Financial System Architecture,” Review of Financial
Studies 10, pp.693-733.

Brune, Nancy (2004), “The Political Economy of Capital Account Liberalization in Developing
Countries,” unpublished manuscript, UCLA.

Burger, John D. and Francis E. Warnock (2003), “Diversification, Original Sin, and International
Bond Portfolios,” International Finance Discussion Paper no. 755, Washington, D.C.: Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System (January).

Burger, John D. and Francis E. Warnock (2004), “Foreign Participation in Local-Currency Bond
Markets,” International Finance Discussion Paper no. 794, Washington, D.C.: Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System (February).

Calvo, Guillermo and Carmen Reinhart (2002), “Fear of Floating,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 117, pp.379-408.

Claessens, Stijn, Daniela Klingebiel and Sergio Schmukler (2003), “Government Bonds in
Domestic and Foreign Currency: The Role of Macroeconomic and Institutional Factors,” CEPR
Discussion Paper no. 3789 (February).

Dalla, Ismail, Denna Khatdhate, D.R. Rao, Kali Kondury, Lwang Jun, and Terry Chuppe (1995),
The Emerging Asian Bond Market, Washington, D.C.: World Bank.

Ho, Tien (2003), “The Singapore Bond Market,” Deutsche Bank Global Markets Research
(June).

Diamond, Douglas (1991), “Monitoring and Reputation: The Choice Between Bank Loans and
Directly Placed Debt,” Journal of Political Economy 99, pp.689-721.

Domowitz, Ian, Jack Glen and Ananth Madhavan (2000), “International Evidence on Aggregate
Corporate Financing Decisions,” unpublished manuscript, Pennsylvania State University
(January).



                                                                                             41
Eichengreen, Barry (2004), “The Unintended Consequences of the Asian Bond Fund,”
unpublished manuscript, University of California, Berkeley (February).

Eichengreen, Barry, Ricardo Hausmann and Ugo Panizza (2002), “Original Sin: The Pain, the
Mystery, and the Road to Redemption,” unpublished manuscript, UC Berkeley, Harvard
University, and IDB.

Eichengreen, Barry and Ashoka Mody (2000), “What Explains the Changing Spreads on
Emerging Market Debt? Fundamentals or Market Sentiment?” In Sebastian Edwards (ed.),
Capital Flows and the Emerging Economies, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp.107-136.

Fernandez, David and S. Klassen (2003), “Asian Bond Fund Crawls, but should it Ever Walk?”
mimeograph, J.P. Morgan Chase, 12 June.

Goldstein, Morris (1998), The Asian Financial Crisis, Washington, D.C.: Institute of
International Economics.

Government of Japan (2003), “ASEAN Plus 3 High Level Seminar on Fostering Bond Markets
in Asia,” www.mof.go.jp/english/if/hls20030301a.htm.

Hale, Galina (2003), “Bonds or Loans? The Effects of Macroeconomic Fundamentals,” Cowles
Foundation Discussion Paper no. 1403 (February).

Harwood, Alison, ed. (2000), Building Local Currency Bond Markets: An Asian Perspective,
Washington, D.C.: International Finance Corporation.

Hawkins, John (2002), “Bond Markets and Banks in Emerging Economies,” BIS Papers no. 11
(June-July).

Herring, Richard J. and Nathporn Chatusripitak (2000), “The Case of the Missing Market: The
Bond Market and Why it Matters for Financial Development,” ADB Institute Working Paper no.
11 (July).

Kim, Yongbeom (2000), “Korea’s Bond Market Following the Onset of the Financial Crisis,” in
Alison Harwood (ed.), Building Local Bond Markets: An Asian Perspective, Washington, D.C.:
International Finance Corporation, pp.63-83.

Kim, Yun-Hwan (2001), “Developing Treasury Securities Markets in Asia,” mimeo, Asian
Development Bank (June).

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silances, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny (1999),
“The quality of government,” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 15, pp. 222-279.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silances, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny (1998),
“Law and Finance,” Journal of Political Economy 106 (6), pp. 1113-1155.



                                                                                               42
Lynch, David (2001), “Asian Bond Markets,” mimeo, International Banks and Securities
Association of Australia.

McCauley, Robert (2003), “Unifying Government Bond Markets in East Asia,” BIS Quarterly
Review (December), pp.89-98.

McCauley, Robert and E. Remolona (2000), “Size and Liquidity in Government Bond Markets,”
BIS Quarterly Review (November), pp.52-58.

Rajan, Raghu and Luigi Zingales (2003), Saving Capitalism from the Capitalists, New York:
Crown Books.

Reinhart, Carmen M. and Kenneth S. Rogoff (2002), “The Modern History of Exchange Rate
Arrangements: A Reinterpretation,” NBER Working Paper no. 8963 (May).

Schinasi, Garry J. and R. Todd Smith (1998), “Fixed-Income Markets in the United States,
Europe and Japan: Some Lessons for Emerging Markets,” IMF Working Paper WP/98/173
(December).

Sharma, Krishnan (2000), “The Underlying Constraints on Corporate Bond Market Development
in Southeast Asia,” United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs Discussion
Paper no. 14 (September).

Smith, R. Todd (1998), “Banking Competition and the Development of Securities Markets,”
unpublished manuscript, University of Alberta.

Trairatvorakul, Prasarn (2001), “Improvement of Clearing and Settlement for Sound
Development of Bond Markets,” mimeo, Securities and Exchange Commission of Thailand.

World Bank (2003), Global Development Finance, Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.




                                                                                            43
