                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  CONFLICTS OF INTEREST, INFORMATION PROVISION,
                          AND COMPETITION IN BANKING

                                             Patrick Bolton
                                             Xavier Freixas
                                              Joel Shapiro

                                         Working Paper 10571
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10571


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2004




Financial support from the Fondation Banque de France and Barcelona Economics (CREA) is gratefully
acknowledged. Shapiro also acknowledges the .nancial support from DGES under BEC 2000-1026 and
BEC2003-00412.We thank Ricardo Fuentes and Judit Montoriol for their research assistance. We also thank
Fabrizio Germano, Joseph Harrington, Edi Karni, Sjaak Hurkens, Giancarlo Spagnolo and audiences at the
Banque de France, Columbia, Johns Hopkins, UAB, the Econometric Society NASM 2003 and NAWM
2004, and European Finance Association 2003 Meetings for helpful discussions. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Patrick Bolton, Xavier Freixas, and Joel Shapiro. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Conflicts of Interest, Information Provision, and Competition in Banking
Patrick Bolton, Xavier Freixas, and Joel Shapiro
NBER Working Paper No. 10571
June 2004
JEL No. G2, L1
                                           ABSTRACT

In some markets, such as the market for drugs or for financial services, sellers have better

information than buyers regarding the matching between the buyer's needs and the good's actual

characteristics. Depending on the market structure, this may lead to conflicts of interest and/or the

under-provision of information by the seller. This paper studies this issue in the market for financial

services. The analysis presents a new model of competition between banks, as banks' price

competition influences the ensuing incentives for truthful information revelation. We compare two

different firm structures, specialized banking, where financial institutions provide a unique financial

product, and one-stop banking, where a financial institution is able to provide several financial

products which are horizontally differentiated. We show first that, although conflicts of interest may

prevent information disclosure under monopoly, competition forces full information provision for

sufficiently high reputation costs. Second, in the presence of market power, one-stop banks will use

information strategically to increase product differentiation and therefore will always provide

reliable information and charge higher prices than specialized banks, thus providing a new reason

for the creation of one-stop banks. Finally, we show that, if independent financial advisers are able

to provide reliable information, this increases product differentiation and therefore market power,

so that it is in the interest of financial intermediaries to promote external independent financial

advice.
Patrick Bolton                    Xavier Freixas                     Joel Shapiro
Princeton University              Universitat Pompeu Fabra           Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Bendheim Center for Finance       Ramon Trias Fargas, 25-27          Ramon Trias Fargas, 25-27
26 Prospect Avenue                08005 Barcelona Spain              08005 Barcelona Spain
Princeton, NJ 08540-5296          xavier.freixas@upf.edu             joel.shapiro@upf.edu
and NBER
pbolton@princeton.edu
1    Introduction
This paper is concerned with the provision of information by sellers of ﬁ-
nancial services to customers when the ﬁnancial products are horizontally
diﬀerentiated. The issue of information provision is timely, as the banking
industry is evolving from the traditional business of ﬁnancial intermediation
towards a fee-based industry where information is crucial in providing more
added value to customers. In a departure from the standard ﬁnance litera-
ture, we make the assumption that some investors are partially uninformed
in the sense that they don’t know the ﬁnancial product that best suits their
needs. This innovative assumption allows for a rich environment where diﬀer-
ent types of phenomena such as misselling of ﬁnancial products might occur.
Although information is valuable to customers, the sellers face a fundamental
conﬂict of interest problem: should a ﬁnancial intermediary tell a client that
another ﬁrm oﬀers a product that better suits the client’s needs? Our results
directly challenge the conventional wisdom that information is only credible
if it is produced from an independent institution that has no conﬂict of in-
terests. We ﬁnd that in diﬀerent environments, competition or consolidation
(into one-stop banks) can solve the apparent conﬂicts of interest.
     In addition to horizontal diﬀerentiation and customers’ imperfect infor-
mation, our setting is characterized by two additional assumptions that we
deem natural in the ﬁnancial industry: non-veriﬁable information and repu-
tation costs for misselling. In a heavily regulated environment, the disclosure
of veriﬁable information can be made compulsory and any attempt to falsify
it can be heavily penalized. This then leaves open the issue of inducing rev-
elation of non-veriﬁable information. Since ﬁnancial institutions often care
about establishing a relationship with their clients, however, some discipline
can be imposed in the revelation of non-veriﬁable information through the
reputation costs institutions bear for giving misleading advice.
     Although our research is originally motivated by the issues relevant to
the ﬁnancial industry, our ﬁndings apply to any market where buyers are
uncertain about which product is best for them and where sellers face a
reputation cost if they provide misleading information. Examples of such
markets outside the ﬁnancial industry could be the market for medicine,
where information is provided by physicians, the market for real estate, and
the market for sophisticated technical equipment. Moreover, the issue of
how informative information provision is and how it aﬀects competition is


                                      1
important to discussions of markets where advertising is used1 .
    Our main ﬁndings can be summarized as follows. Competition among
specialized ﬁnancial intermediaries leads to full credible information disclo-
sure, even for small but strictly positive reputation costs that are bounded
away from zero. The basic intuition for this result is that competition may
eliminate the potential conﬂict of interest by reducing the gains from lying
and by inducing banks to diﬀerentiate their product by providing credible
information. Banks can thus restore their margins on a smaller base of cus-
tomers that have a special need for their product. However, the size of
reputation costs limit proﬁt margins because of the need to remain credible
in giving advice to clients. As a consequence, sellers could gain from the
presence of a third party (for instance some independent ﬁnancial advisor)
that could provide information, allowing them to raise prices further.
    One-stop banks (deﬁned here as banks that sell multiple products) can
also overcome this conﬂict of interest in certain circumstances. While the
usual explanation for the creation of one-stop banks is based on an economies
of scope argument that it is more eﬃcient to sell multiple ﬁnancial products
from the same outlet, we ﬁnd that the ability to credibly provide information
may be another major motive for consolidation. One-stop banks are able to
provide reliable information and charge higher prices than specialized banks
when they have market power. Otherwise, competition with one-stop banks
results in a similar outcome as competition with specialized banks.
    The main theoretical novelty of the paper is that ﬁrms’ actions (the prices
they set) deﬁne an ensuing signaling game (the advice banks give to cus-
tomers). These actions commit the ﬁrms to credible or non-credible informa-
tion revelation by providing incentives to tell the truth or not. Most other
signaling models have payoﬀs determined by current or future actions, not
past actions as in our model. Moreover, these models have each ﬁrm signaling
its private information, such as in Mailath (1989). Here, the private infor-
mation is the information acquired by a bank about its customer’s ﬁnancial
proﬁle, which it can reveal as it wishes.
    Our model incorporates several elements from the industrial organization
literature. As all customers are uncertain of which product they prefer, there
are ﬂavors of both horizontal diﬀerentiation (Hotelling, 1929) and vertical
diﬀerentiation (Shaked and Sutton, 1983). In order to provide information to
customers, we assume that banks make unveriﬁable statements about which
  1
      See for example, Meurer and Stahl (1994).


                                            2
product is best for the customer. This is a form of information revelation
game in which talk is not cheap. In contrast, most other models that have
been considered in the literature involve agents providing information that is
either cheap talk or veriﬁable. As is well known, when private information is
veriﬁable, voluntary disclosure often leads to full information revelation (see
Grossman and Hart, 1980, Milgrom and Roberts, 1986, and Okuno-Fujiwara,
Postlewaite, and Suzumura, 1990). In our setup, we allow for lying, but make
it costly by introducing a reputation cost.
    The issue of the market provision of information prior to a sale has been
discussed in diﬀerent settings. For example, Benabou and Laroque (1992)
and Morgan and Stocken (2003) discuss a conﬂict of interest similar to the one
we look at in the context of stock recommendations. However, our analysis
focuses on direct price competition between information providers, while they
consider information providers that beneﬁt from subsequent movements in
the secondary market price of a recommended stock.
    The environment we discuss resembles in some ways the literature on
credence goods, ﬁrst discussed in Darby and Karni (1973). For such goods
or services the consumer is never able to completely ascertain the quality of
the good and must rely on the advice of experts (an example of a credence
service is automobile repairs - all one knows is whether the car functions
properly, not whether the repair was necessary or well executed). Several
papers that discuss credence goods are interested in credible revelation of
information (Pitchik and Schotter (1987), Emons (1997, 2001)) and in com-
petition among credence good providers (Wolinsky, 1993 and Pesendorfer and
Wolinsky, 2003). In our model, however, the ﬁnancial instruments are also
partially experience goods, since we allow for a reputation cost for misleading
customers. Another diﬀerence with the literature on information revelation
and credence goods is that prices are not signals in our model, but instead
provide incentives for information revelation.
    The problem we analyze is also related to the literature on referrals. In a
recent contribution Garicano and Santos (2004) discuss eﬃciency in match-
ing clients with the correct agents when referrals are possible. Since agents
may have private information about a client’s value, there is an adverse selec-
tion problem. In addition, they allow for moral hazard in eﬀort provision in
helping the client. We allow for costless referrals and focus on the potential
for price competition to provide incentives for revealing information (whereas
they abstract away from competition for customers to focus on the alloca-
tion problem). They ﬁnd that partnerships may provide incentives to allocate

                                      3
clients eﬃciently, much as we ﬁnd one-stop banks have greater incentives to
match customers correctly to products, although for diﬀerent reasons - part-
nerships create a moral hazard problem for the referrer, weakening incentives
to lie about the project.
    Finally, Demski and Sappington’s (1987) and Shavell’s (1994) contribu-
tions also deal with the issue of information acquisition and disclosure but in
a diﬀerent setting from ours. In Demski and Sappington (1987) the service
provided by the agent is a form of credence good and the agent can only be
given incentives to acquire information with an output-based compensation
scheme. In contrast, in Shavell (1994) information is veriﬁable but whether
the agent has acquired the information is not observable. To be able to limit
information disclosure ex-post the agent then has an incentive not to always
acquire the information. But the largest diﬀerence with our analysis is that
we permit Bertrand competition between sellers, while both Shavell (1984)
and Demski and Sappington (1987) focus on bilateral buyer-seller contracting
relations.
    The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 is devoted to a description of
the model. Section 3 studies the benchmark case of monopoly banks. Section
4 considers information production and competition among specialized banks
and in Section 5 we study how incentives change when one-stop banks are
present. In Section 6 we analyze market structure, while in Section 7 we
study the case where the bank investment in the production of information
is not observable. Finally, Section 8 concludes.


2     The model
We consider a model where two ﬁnancial intermediaries (FIs) compete by
oﬀering one or possibly two diﬀerent types of ﬁnancial products, which we
label simply as A and B. A working example which we will refer to in this
article is life insurance and pension funds, two substitute savings vehicles with
diﬀerent appeal for diﬀerent households depending on their tax situation,
savings horizon and idiosyncratic income shocks.




                                       4
2.1     Customers
For simplicity, we take bank customers to be risk neutral households who
buy at most one unit of a ﬁnancial product from an FI.2
    We assume that customers could be of two diﬀerent types, A and B,
reﬂecting their diﬀerent tax status, say. Type A investors matched with
product A derive a gross payoﬀ R, while when they get product B they only
get a payoﬀ r (r < R). Similarly, for type B investors, when matched with
product B they get a payoﬀ R and when mismatched they get r. We denote
by ∆ the diﬀerence R − r.
    Customers do not know which of the two products is best suited for their
needs. For example, they may be unaware of important tax advantages of
one of the products or they may not be aware of speciﬁc contractual clauses
such as foreclosure penalties. We model this lack of knowledge as incomplete
information about their true type.3 Thus, all they know is the prior proba-
bility of being of type A, which is denoted by q. In addition, we assume that
this prior probability is equal to the true proportion of type A customers,
and that q > 12 (without loss of generality). Given this information and the
prices of the ﬁnancial products posted by the FIs, customers choose which
FI to approach. This choice will depend not only on the product’s price but
also on whether the FI is expected to provide reliable information on the cus-
tomers’ types. Should a customer approaching FI A, say, obtain information
that FI B oﬀers the best deal (better matched product at competitive terms)
then she will switch to FI B. In our basic model, we assume that a ﬁrm’s in-
vestment in information provision technology is observable. We abandon this
assumption in Section 7. We also assume that the switching cost technology
is such that a customer may switch between banks only once45 .
   2
     An alternative interpretation may also be that customers are ﬁrms choosing between
alternative ﬁnancial structures.
   3
     Equivalently, we could interpret this lack of knowledge as incomplete information
about the type of the ﬁnancial product that matches each customer’s needs.
   4
     Pesendorfer and Wolinsky (2003) consider situations where uninformed customers may
seek second opinions. In their model, however, sellers can only communicate noisy infor-
mation to their customers.
   5
     In the U.S., the average number of banks with which small businesses have relation-
ships is 1.5 (60% of businesses only have relationships with 1 bank, 26% with two banks)
which indicates that businesses tend to minimize their number of relationships. If we ex-
tend this by adding all ﬁnancial institutions, the average number is 2 (42% of businesses
only have relationships with one bank or institution, 28% with two). This data is taken
from the National Survey of Small Business Finances (NSSBF) 1998.


                                           5
2.2     Financial Intermediaries
We consider two types of FIs, specialized FIs and one-stop banks. A special-
ized FI is one that oﬀers only one ﬁnancial product. A one-stop bank oﬀers
both types of ﬁnancial product6 .
    The cost of production for the two products is the same and is normalized
to zero. This means that the prices of the two products, pA and pB are to be
interpreted as spreads.
    Although customers do not know their type, FIs may know which prod-
uct best ﬁts the needs of each customer. FIs can oﬀer an advisory service
and guide customers to the relevant product but they may face a conflict of
interest problem in their dual role as ﬁnancial advisors and sellers of ﬁnancial
products. This conﬂict of interest puts them in a position where they may
not be able to credibly communicate their information about a good match
to customers since they have an incentive to peddle their own product. Cus-
tomers understand this and will only follow an FI’s recommendation if it is
in the FI’s interest to truthfully reveal its information.
    An FI’s incentive is driven in part by a concern to maintain a reputation
for honest advice and by competitive pressure, which limits the FI’s ability to
beneﬁt from its provision of information. To model this reputational concern
we assume that an FI suﬀers a reputation loss of ρ when a lie told to a
customer leads to a purchase by that customer. We interpret this as a loss
of future business from that customer or from word-of-mouth due to the
bank’s deliberately misleading or confusing advice. In the appendix (section
10.6) we examine the robustness of the model with a more general deﬁnition
of reputation7 . We also ﬁnd similar results to those of the text when the
reputation cost is endogenized8 .
   6
     The terms universal bank or financial conglomerate are also commonly used to de-
scribe a one-stop bank. We prefer the term one-stop bank since the ﬁrst term carries a
connotation of economies of scope and the second a connotation of regulatory arbitrage,
which are both absent from our framework.
   7
     In this more general deﬁnition, we allow for two reputation costs. One reputation
cost is incurred when the FI lies and misleads the customer into purchasing the wrong
product. The other reputation cost is incurred when the FI lies but doesn’t mislead the
customer. This analysis is less tractable (partially revealing equilibria are not trivial) but
yields essentially the same equilibrium as the model we analyze.
   8
     Speciﬁcally, if the reputation cost takes the form ρ̄ + θπ, where ρ̄ is an exogenous ﬁxed
cost and θπ is an endogenous cost that varies with current sales (with θ < 1), the model
maintains exactly the same structure and results (instead of a cutoﬀ of ρ for information
                           ρ̄
regimes, the cutoﬀ is 1−θ     ). It is important that some part of the reputation cost be


                                              6
    Obviously, if this reputational loss is very large then the FIs’ incentive to
peddle their products disappears. This is why we assume that:
    Assumption A1: M in(∆, r) > ρ.
    This assumption allows us to focus on the more relevant case where a
conﬂict of interest arises. If ρ is too large, then there is no choice but to
reveal full information since the ﬁrm will be strictly punished for not doing
so. Although we have placed an upper bound on ρ, we allow ρ to be as low
as zero, in which case we are analyzing a pure cheap talk game.
    We restrict the customers’ strategies with the following assumption:
    Assumption A2: There is a tiny amount of uncertainty on the part
of ﬁrms about the actual values of ρ and R, i.e. ρ ∈ [ρ̃ − ε1 , ρ̃ + ε1 ] and
R ∈ [R̃ − ε2 , R̃ + ε2 ] such that ε1 , ε2 → 0.
    For any small amount of uncertainty, however small, ﬁrms are unable to
set prices exactly at levels to make consumers indiﬀerent between choices
(or to balance the reputation eﬀect). Thus, this small uncertainty limits
customers to pure strategies and eliminates multiple equilibria.


2.3     Timing
   1. FIs decide whether to invest in information provision technology.

   2. FIs set prices. To simplify the strategic analysis we will give one of the
      FIs a price leadership role (that is, one of the FIs moves ﬁrst in setting
      prices).

   3. Investors approach an FI, which then recommends a ﬁnancial product.

   4. Investors make a decision on which product to purchase at which FI,
      based on observed prices and the FI’s recommendation.

    We begin with a brief analysis of monopoly banking.
exogenous. One possible interpretation of this exogenous part is that it represents a loss
in proﬁts on other unrelated ﬁnancial products (such as deposits) or businesses run by the
bank. Another possibility is that it represents a part of future demand growth.




                                            7
3     Monopoly Banking
3.1    A specialized monopoly
Under no information provision, a specialized monopoly FI sets the monopoly
spread at either r + q∆ for an A bank, or r + (1 − q)∆ for a B bank. Under
full information a specialized bank either serves all customers at a maximum
spread of r or it only serves well matched customers at a monopoly spread
of R. The latter policy is optimal for FI A if and only if r ≤ qR.
    It is obvious then, that either FI monopoly strictly prefers consumers to
be uninformed, as it can then sell to both types at a suﬃciently large spread.
Assuming that the specialized bank has the ability to convey information
about customer types, the above results indicate that the incentive to reveal
information is quite low. Indeed, analyzing the pricing decision and the
signaling game (where customers must purchase product i = A, B or receive
their reservation utility of zero, and the FI can say whether product i is a
good or bad match) in the appendix we prove:

Proposition 1 Under assumptions A1 and A2, a monopoly FI A reveals no
information (always recommends product A) and sets price pA = r + q∆.
A monopoly FI B reveals no information (always recommends product B) if
ρ < 1−q
     q
        ∆ and sets price pB = r + (1 − q)∆. If ρ > 1−q
                                                    q
                                                       ∆, FI B sets pB = r
and fully reveals its information.

    At an intuitive level, the rationale is the following. For any price above
r, the monopoly can’t reveal any information and get stuck with only the
customers of its type, because it would then prefer to deviate and grab all of
the customers. Given an investment in information provision, the rents from
selling to all of the market always outweigh the reputation cost of lying to
a fraction of the customers for FI A (under assumption A1) and sometimes
for FI B.
    This logic, which is present as well in comparing the no information case
to the full information case, disappears when competition is introduced, as
we will see in the following sections. The advantage of having a captive
audience that has high valuations for the product drives this reversal.




                                      8
3.2    Monopoly Pricing of a one-stop bank
The key diﬀerence between a specialized and a one-stop FI is that the latter
will ﬁnd it much easier to overcome the conﬂict of interest problem in the
provision of information. This can be explained by the fact that provision of
information need no longer result in any loss of clientele. This is an important
potential beneﬁt of one-stop banks emphasized by bankers who deal with the
marketing of ﬁnancial products.
    We now assume that one FI, which we will call FI 1, oﬀers both ﬁnancial
products A and B without competition at prices p1A and p1B , and refer to
this FI as a one-stop bank. Market power gives the FI leverage in pricing,
but it cannot fully extract consumer rents if consumers are uncertain about
their types and it is unable to provide information. In this case, the best
that the FI can do would be to set p1A equal to r + q∆, and set p1B so that
no one will purchase product B (i.e. p1B > r + (1 − q)∆). The one-stop bank
then does not even sell both products, it sells the one for which customers
have a higher ex-ante valuation. Its actions emulate those of a specialized
bank.
    In the case where the one-stop bank can provide information, product
B is sold to type B customers. The one-stop bank is able to segment the
market and extract full rents by providing full information.

Proposition 2 A monopoly one-stop bank fully reveals information, cus-
tomers purchase the product which matches their type, and prices are p1A =
p1B = R.

     The proof is in the appendix. Note that when ρ > 0, the one-stop bank
can credibly reveal the information it has about customer types. The reason
is simply that by making the prices of the two products close to each other, it
eliminates the incentive to misdirect the customer, and saves the reputation
cost ρ when it tells the truth. By setting the prices equal to R, the bank can
tell the truth and simultaneously extract all rents. When ρ = 0 the bank is
indiﬀerent and one equilibrium is for the bank to tell the truth.
     This section highlights a simple but important economic principle, which
is that monopoly one-stop banks are better able to overcome the conﬂict of
interest problem in advising their clients on what product is best for them.
We shall now see, however, that when there is competition among banks
this general principle is no longer valid. Put simply, competition induces


                                       9
information revelation whether it is between specialized banks or with a one-
stop bank.9


4       Competition among Specialized FIs
This section determines under what conditions, if any, a specialized FI has
incentives to provide information to its customers in equilibrium. As we have
already pointed out, specialized FIs have a conﬂict of interest in advising
their prospective customers to bank at the competitor FI. At the same time,
truthful revelation increases the customers’ valuations for their own products.
These diverging incentives determine the equilibrium amount of revelation.
Before analyzing the FIs’ incentives for truthful revelation it is helpful to
ﬁrst consider the extreme situations of no information revelation and full
information disclosure.

4.1     Competition with no information
In the absence of any additional information, a customer buys product A
provided by the FI specialized in A services if and only if:

                     qR + (1 − q)r − pA ≥ qr + (1 − q)R − pB                            (1)
That is, if and only if
                                 (2q − 1)∆ ≥ pA − pB
   Thus, FI A will set a price pA = (2q − 1)∆, forcing FI B to zero proﬁts10 .
For this price level the customer’s participation constraint is satisﬁed:

                    qR + (1 − q)r − (2q − 1)∆ = R − q∆ ≥ 0
    9
      We take the reputation cost per customer incurred when lying as exogenously ﬁxed
at ρ. It might be argued, however, that the reputation cost varies with market structure.
To the extent that monopolists extract larger mark-ups they may be more wary of losing
future customers. On the other hand, monopolists face a captive demand, which makes
them less concerned about losing business to competitors. How these countervailing eﬀects
play out requires a more detailed analysis, which is beyond the scope of this paper.
   10
      That is, assuming that FI A is the price leader. If FI B is the price leader, there is
a continuum of equilibria each with a diﬀerent pB that is ‘undercut’ by FI A with a best
response pA = min[(2q − 1)∆ + pB , qR + (1 − q)r] (since FI B always makes zero proﬁts it
does not care which pB it sets). Note that the equilibrium when FI A is the price leader
is included in this set.

                                            10
As is intuitive, the larger the product diﬀerentiation ∆ and the larger the
probability that customers are of type A, the larger the price diﬀerence and
A s proﬁts. The closer ∆ is to zero and/or the closer q is to 12 the more intense
the competition between FIs and the larger is the customer’s surplus, as the
two products become close substitutes from the perspective of uninformed
customers. Absent any information, FI B makes zero proﬁts due to the
ex-ante preference of customers for product A.

4.2     Competition under full information
Suppose that a customer knows her true type. All A-customers are then
likely to bank at FI A, and all B-customers to bank at FI B. In other words,
each FI is then likely to have a captive clientele. This will have the eﬀect of
dampening price competition as each FI will be reluctant to cut prices low
enough to attract mismatched customers. It is not surprising then that the
following proposition should hold:
Proposition 3 Under full information, if FI A is the price leader, the equi-
librium prices are
    i) If qR < 2∆, pA = min[(1 − q)R + ∆, R], pB = R, and profits are
π A = qpA and π B = (1 − q)R
    ii) if qR > 2∆, pA = 2−q
                          q
                             ∆, pB = 2q ∆, and profits are π A = (2 − q)∆ and
       2(1−q)
πB =      q
              ∆.
    This is proven in the appendix. Note that if FI B becomes the price
leader, the results are symmetric (switch A for B and q for 1 − q).
    The comparison with the absence of information case points out the mit-
igating eﬀect of quality uncertainty (Bester (1998)). Information production
increases eﬃciency (total surplus here is R, compared to qR + (1 − q)r in the
no information case), but it also decreases competition through higher prices
as every ﬁrm now has market power over its own type. We will now show
however that this monopoly power is impaired by the FIs’ conﬂict of interest
problem in advising its customers.

4.3     Competition under credible information produc-
        tion
When FIs must be induced to give honest advice they are in a weaker position
to exploit their local monopoly power. The reason is simply that if they

                                       11
charge high prices and also recommend their expensive product to prospective
customers, this recommendation is not credible.
    Once FIs have set their prices and customers have made their decision
on which FI to approach, an FI that has invested in information provision
can ascertain the true types of customers. We analyze the incentives of this
FI to provide information in the signaling game where the FI’s type is its
information about the customer.

4.3.1   The information revelation game for a specialized FI
An FI’s strategy can be summarized by two variables: the probability α
that a type A customer is correctly advised to choose product A and the
probability β that a type B customer is wrongly advised to take product A.
    Having received a recommendation A     to purchase product A, or B    to
purchase product B, a customer’s strategy can be described, symmetrically,
by the probability a of following the advice to take product A, and the
probability b of following the advice to take product B. Figure 1 shows the
basic information revelation game structure.
    We begin by characterizing Perfect Bayesian Equilibria in the informa-
tion revelation game of FI A, taking as given the prices quoted by the FIs
and the customers’ decisions as to which FI to approach. In a second step
we shall move back in the game tree and solve for the equilibrium prices
and customer decisions on where to bank in the full game. In a Perfect
Bayesian Equilibrium, each agent optimally chooses its strategy given equi-
librium (and out-of-equilibrium) beliefs and the other agents’ strategies. For
out-of-equilibrium beliefs we rely on the Cho-Kreps (1987) intuitive criterion
to pin down beliefs.
    FIs maximize their proﬁts net of the reputation cost of lying. So, when FI
A observes a type A customer the necessary condition for FI A to truthfully
reveal A’s type is:
                            apA ≥ (1 − b)(pA − ρ),
   or equivalently, using the notation ≡ to mean “deﬁned by”:
                  ∆π A (A) ≡ (a + b − 1)pA + (1 − b)ρ ≥ 0                 (2)
   Symmetrically, when FI A observes a type B customer, the necessary
condition for FI A to truthfully reveal B’s type is:
                    ∆π A (B) ≡ −(a + b − 1)pA + aρ ≥ 0                    (3)

                                     12
      pA, R-pA       A   says A              says B     A   pA-ρ, R-pA


       0, r-pB                               knows      B   0, r-pB
                     B
                                    q        type is
                                             A



                                  1-q         knows
                                              type is
       pA-ρ, r-pA    A                        B         A   pA, r-pA


      0, R-pB        B   says A              says B     B   0, R-pB




                    Figure 1: The Information Revelation Game

In general, FIs may play mixed strategies.
    Customers use equilibrium updated beliefs, when they receive a recom-
mendation, to compute their optimal strategies. Under assumption A2, how-
ever, customers only use pure strategies. Denote by X  the announcement a
                                 the updated belief that a customer receiv-
customer receives and by p(i | X)
ing the announcement X   is of type i (where i = A, B and X = A,
                                                                  B).
                                                                    The
necessary condition for a customer at FI A, receiving a recommendation A, 
to buy product A is then:
         + (1 − p(A | A))r
  p(A | A)R             − pA ≥ p(A | A)r
                                       + (1 − p(A | A))R
                                                         − pB

   This can be simpliﬁed to
                                    − 1)∆ ≥ pA − pB
                           (2p(A | A)

   or equivalently,
                          ≡ (2p(A | A)
                    ∆UA (A)           − 1)∆ − pA + pB ≥ 0               (4)


                                        13
    Correspondingly, the necessary condition for a customer at FI A, receiving
a recommendation B, to buy product B is:

                       = (2p(B | B)
                 ∆UA (B)           − 1)∆ − pB + pA ≥ 0                    (5)

    A Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium is then deﬁned by a set of posterior beliefs
       which are consistent with the optimal behavior of FIs and customers
p(i | X),
as inferred from the signs of ∆π A (A), ∆π A (B), ∆UA (A)  and ∆UA (B).
                                                                       The
following lemma provides a characterization of the FIs’ information revelation
in equilibrium. It is the central result of our analysis.

Lemma 4 Under assumptions A1 and A2, equilibria in the information rev-
elation game of FI A are as follows:

  1. If pA < pB − ∆, then FI A truthfully reveals the customer’s type and
     all customers purchase A.

  2. If pB − ∆ < pA < ρ, then FI A truthfully reveals the customer’s type
     and the customers purchase the good that matches their type.

  3. If max[ρ, pB − ∆] < pA < pB + (2q − 1)∆, then FI A always announces
     Â and customers purchase A.

  4. If pA > pB + (2q − 1)∆, then either

      (a) the FI A mixes its messages for both types of customers (α, β ∈
          (0, 1) × (0, 1)), or mixes its messages for one type of customer
          (α = 1, β ∈ (0, 1)) or (β = 1, α ∈ (0, 1)) within a range defined by

                                   αq                    (1 − β)(1 − q)
           pA > pB +∆ max[2                 −1, 1−2                           ]
                              αq + β(1 − q)         (1 − α)q + (1 − β)(1 − q)
            or
                                    provided the out-of-equilibrium beliefs
      (b) systematically announces A
                  satisfy
          P (B | B)
                                                              
                     pA > pB + ∆ max 2q − 1, 1 − 2P (B | B) 

           or


                                      14
                                      provided the out-of-equilibrium beliefs
        (c) systematically announces B
                    satisfy
            P (A | A)
                                                               
                                                         
                        pA > pB + ∆ max 2q − 1, 2P (A | A) − 1

            and all customers purchase B.

   5. If pA > pB + ∆, then all customers purchase B and any revelation
      strategy (including full revelation) is an equilibrium

    The proof of the lemma is in the appendix. We can now use it to determine
for a given set of parameters ρ, q, ∆, and prices pA and pB what information
revelation regime a ﬁrm is in. In one interval, pB + (2q − 1)∆ < pA < ρ,
there exist multiple equilibria: a fully revealing one where customers follow
FI A’s advice and many partially revealing equilibria in which all customers
purchase product B. However, given that pA < ρ, any partially revealing
strategy by a sender type of FI A (where sender types are “Knows customer is
type A” and “Knows customer is type B”) is weakly dominated by a strategy
of full revelation. Hence the partially revealing strategy will not survive any
tiny trembles in the customer’s decision, and we ignore it11 . Since FI A
and FI B are symmetric except for consumer’s ex-ante preferences, we can
replicate Lemma 2 for FI B by substituting in (1 − q) for q.
    In Figure 2 we ﬁx pB and display FI A’s information revelation regime
for any possible pA that it may set. We ﬁnd that when FI A has very low
prices, it has the incentives to reveal information truthfully and can capture
the whole market. In contrast, when FI A has high prices, it will not get any
customers, and will be willing to say anything. For a middle range of prices,
FI A may credibly reveal information but only capture the customers who
are good matches, or it may reveal nothing and take advantage of its ex-ante
advantage in terms of consumers’ preferences.
    At this point we have solved the subgame of information revelation given
ﬁxed prices. We can now determine how each ﬁrm sets its prices and then
determine which ﬁrm invests in information provision in equilibrium.
  11
    More formally, type “Knows customer is type A” gets a payoﬀ of either 0 or pA by
announcing Â and gets a payoﬀ of either 0 or pA − ρ by announcing B̂ . In the interval of
parameters, pA < ρ, so weak dominance is clear. Similarly type “Knows customer is type
B” gets a payoﬀ of either 0 or pA by announcing B̂ and gets a payoﬀ of either 0 or pA − ρ
by announcing Â . Therefore, any partially revealing equilibrium in this interval does not
survive the test of trembling hand perfection.

                                            15
          0 ≤ ρ < pB − ∆
                                                                                                               pA
             Fully
             Revealing, all
                                 pB − ∆       Not Revealing
                                              in A, all buy A
                                                                     p B + (2q − 1)∆          Partially
                                                                                              Revealing, all
             buy A               p                                                            buy B




           p B − ∆ ≤ ρ < p B + (2q − 1)∆
                                                                                                               pA
           Fully
           Revealing, all
                              pB − ∆   Fully
                                       Revealing,
                                                       ρ      Not Revealing
                                                              in A, all buy A
                                                                                p B + (2q − 1)∆       Partially
                                                                                                      Revealing, all
           buy A                       customers                                                      buy B
                                       follow advice



           p B + (2q − 1)∆ ≤ ρ
                                                                                                               pA
             Fully
             Revealing, all
                                 pB - ∆       Fully
                                              Revealing,
                                                                     ρ             Partially
                                                                                   Revealing, all
             buy A                            customers                            buy B
                                              follow advice




 Figure 2: The Information Revelation Regimes of FI A (holding pB ﬁxed)

4.3.2   The price competition game between specialized FIs
The previous lemma characterizes a number of scenarios where there is either
partial or no credible information disclosure, given pA and pB . This limited
information disclosure outcome is what one would expect to see in light of
our observation that monopoly specialized FIs are never able to credibly
convey information. We now show, however, that price competition among
specialized FIs is likely to bring about equilibrium outcomes where each
FI can credibly convey information. To see this, suppose for the sake of
argument that specialized FIs are never able to credibly convey information.
Then, as we showed earlier, Bertrand competition under no information will
result in an equilibrium outcome where π B = 0 and πA = (2q − 1)∆. But
note that bank B will then have a strict incentive to truthfully reveal the
customer’s type, as long as ρ > 0. This is due to the fact that bank B would
be able to raise its price pB up to ρ, credibly convey information to its well
matched customers and make higher proﬁts.
    In our formal analysis of the price competition stage game we begin by
assuming that ﬁrm A is the price leader and ﬁrm B is the price follower.


                                                                16
This means that FI A essentially deﬁnes the choice set of possible informa-
tion revelation regimes (with their accompanying proﬁts) and FI B decides
where to locate in the choice set. Clearly this gives FI B an advantage it
never had when customers did not have access to information - it can force
some information to be revealed credibly and increase its sales. Our simple
observations above lead us to conclude:
Proposition 5 1) When A invests in information and B does not, there are
two possible equilibria. If ρ > (2q − 1)∆, equilibrium is pA = ρ, pB = ρ + ∆,
all customers approach FI A and are revealed their true types. Customers
then purchase at the bank that matches their type, so proﬁts are π A = qρ,
π B = (1 − q)(ρ + ∆). If ρ < (2q − 1)∆, equilibrium is pA = (2q − 1)∆, pB
undetermined, all customers approach FI A, are all told they are type A, and
purchase at FI A. Proﬁts are π A = (2q − 1)∆, π B = 0.
    2) When B invests in information and A does not, the equilibrium is
pA = min[(1 − q)ρ + ∆, ρ + (2q − 1)∆], pB = ρ, all customers approach FI B
and are revealed their true types. Customers follow the advice of FI B and
proﬁts are π A = qpA , π B = (1 − q)ρ.
    3) When both A and B invest in information, the equilibrium is pA =
min[(1−q)ρ+∆, ρ+(2q −1)∆], pB = ρ, just as in the case of only B investing
in information. All customers approach FI B or are indiﬀerent between
approaching FI A or FI B and are revealed their true types. Customers follow
the advice of the bank they approach and proﬁts are π A = qpA , π B = (1 − q)ρ.
    The proof is in the appendix. Thus, for almost all of the cases the types of
customers are completely revealed, and prices are such that they purchase the
product which matches their type. This results from the following intuition:
FI B can almost always set its price low enough so that FI A will have
zero proﬁts. Therefore FI A must set its price such that FI B will ﬁnd it
more attractive not to undercut. This must be a regime where both FI A
and FI B make positive proﬁts. The only area where both ﬁrms may proﬁt
is where they can commit to fully revealing types and customers ﬁnd the
price diﬀerential small enough to purchase the product which matches their
type. The only case in which information is not revealed occurs when ex-ante
valuations are so biased towards product A ((2q − 1)∆ > ρ) that FI A can
extract higher rents by not revealing information. The role of reputation is
quite critical here - in order to commit to full revelation, the payoﬀ from
deviating must be non-positive, but the size of ρ strictly limits the payoﬀ for
the ﬁrm that is providing information.

                                      17
4.3.3    The information provision game between specialized FIs
We are now in a position to roll back to the ﬁrst stage of the game, where
FIs make their investment in information-provision decisions. We have so far
taken the information structure as given (which bank provides information).
Now we let banks choose whether they want to invest in an information pro-
vision technology (hire analysts, build IT systems, etc.) at some ﬁxed12 cost
f > 0. To the extent that information provision is a public good and is costly
to produce it is eﬃcient for at most one bank to provide this information.
We now show that in equilibrium no more than one bank will provide infor-
mation, and that it is the disadvantaged bank (i.e. FI B) that is likely to
provide that information. This follows from the fact that the disadvantaged
bank is the one with the strongest incentives towards truthful revelation of
information. Consequently, we are able to obtain the remarkable result that,
as long as investment in information provision is proﬁtable in equilibrium,
there always will be full information disclosure under competition between
specialized FIs.
    The basic logic leading us to this conclusion runs as follows. Under no
information provision, the unique equilibrium in proﬁts is such that π B = 0
and π A = (2q−1)∆. If bank A were to provide information and communicate
it credibly to its customers it would have to set its margin pA no higher than
ρ. Thus, bank A’s proﬁts under full credible information revelation would
be no more than qρ − f . Therefore bank A would not want to provide
information whenever (2q − 1)∆ ≥ qρ − f . Proposition 5 also states that
when (2q − 1)∆ ≥ ρ and only bank A is in a position to provide information
then there will be no credible information disclosure in equilibrium. This
appears to set a limit to the amount of credible information disclosure we
should expect to see in an equilibrium with competition among specialized
FIs.
    However, since bank B has, if anything, even more to gain from providing
information there will be full credible information disclosure in equilibrium
for a much larger set of parameter values.

  12
    If instead we assumed that there was a constant marginal cost per customer, the
results would be qualitatively the same. Examining a game where the FIs only inform
a fraction of their customers (i.e. if they randomize or have a convex cost function) is
outside the scope of the paper.



                                          18
Proposition 6 There is full credible information disclosure in pure strategy
                     f
equilibria when ρ ≥ 1−q .
                     f
   i) For ρ small ( 1−q < ρ < (2q−1)∆+f
                                    q
                                         ) there is a unique equilibrium where
FI B provides information and FI A does not.
   ii) For ρ large (ρ > (2q−1)∆+f
                            q
                                  ) three equilibria coexist, one where only FI
A provides information, one where only FI B provides information and a
mixed strategy equilibrium.
                         f
   Otherwise, for ρ < 1−q  no information will be disclosed.
   The decision to invest is derived from a two-by-two game summarized by
the following matrix13 :

                                                    FI B

                                                  No Info                Info


                FI A       No Info               (2q-1)∆, 0         qpA, (1-q)ρ-f

                       Info if ρ>(2q-1)∆     qρ-f, (1-q)(ρ+ ∆)      qpA-f, (1-q)ρ-f

                       Info if ρ<(2q-1) ∆   (2q-1)∆- (1-q)ρ -f, 0   qpA-f, (1-q)ρ-f

 Matrix for Competition among Specialized Banks (A is the price leader)
    FI B has a strong incentive to provide information since the information
gives it the market power it was lacking when all customers ex-ante preferred
product A. FI A can free ride on this information provision as its own invest-
ment in information would not change its returns. In fact, for intermediate
values of ρ, FI A has a dominant strategy not to provide information since if
FI B doesn’t provide information FI A can still enjoy its inherent advantage.
Once ρ gets larger, FI A can possibly credibly provide information, because
it receives a high enough rent to justify its provision. Lastly, notice that as ρ
approaches zero, all of FI B’s rents disappear in every scenario. The lack of
a reputation cost eliminates the ability to credibly reveal information, which
FI B used to achieve positive proﬁts.
    Total welfare is maximized in the equilibria where full information is
provided, since each customer is able to realize more utility due to the match.
  13
    For presentation purposes, we place a strict upper bound such that f < (1−q)(2q−1)∆.
This incorporates the case where the fixed cost is close to zero.

                                               19
When information is not provided, as is the case when ρ is tiny, matching
eﬃciency is not realized and welfare decreases.
   When FI B is the price leader, the qualitative results do not change
substantially. The payoﬀs are given by the following matrix (the proof is in
the appendix):

                                                  FI B


                                                No Info                       Info



          FI A        No Info              (2q-1)∆+pBNI,NI, 0          q(ρ+ ∆), (1-q)ρ-f



                  Info if ρ>(2q-1)∆      qρ-f, (1-q)(ρ-(2q-1)∆)        q(ρ+ ∆)-f, (1-q)ρ-f



                  Info if ρ<(2q-1) ∆   (2q-1)∆- (1-q)ρ +pBI,NI -f, 0   q(ρ+ ∆)-f, (1-q)ρ-f



 Matrix for Competition among Specialized Banks (B is the price leader)
    A few comments are in order regarding the case where FI B is the price
leader. First, the (No Information, No Information) and the (Information if
ρ < (2q − 1)∆, No Information) cases are now partially undetermined, since
for any pB announced by FI B, FI A will be able to grab all of the customers
and leave FI B with zero proﬁts. For the purposes of comparison, we assume
pB is the same in both cases (pNI,NI
                                  B      = pNI,I
                                             B   ). Second, the (Information,
Information) case is more complex here, since FI A’s advantage in ex-ante
preferences (q > 12 ) allows it to free ride on FI B in the sense that FI A
may keep its prices high and force FI B to inform customers of their types.
Indeed, the equilibrium has FI A partially revealing, FI B fully revealing, all
customers approaching FI B ﬁrst and then following FI B’s advice.
    Third, it is clear from the (Information, Information) case, and the (No
Information, Information) case that FI A is able to exploit its role as a price
follower to its advantage in achieving higher payoﬀs.
    Finally, we ﬁnd again that for reputation cost that is tiny or equal to zero
       f
(ρ < 1−q ), the unique equilibrium is that neither ﬁrm provides information.
For larger reputation costs, the unique equilibrium is that only FI B provides
information. All customers go to FI B, are revealed their true type, and

                                               20
purchase the product which matches their type. Thus, contrasting with the
case where A is price leader, there is no multiplicity of equilibria here for
large values of ρ.


5       Competition between a one-stop bank and
        a specialized FI
In this section we consider competition between a one-stop bank, FI 1, and
another FI that remains specialized and oﬀers, say, product B. Since both
banks now oﬀer product B, competition is tougher in a certain sense. We
begin with the case where FI 1 is the price leader.

5.1       Price leadership by FI 1
When neither FI provides any information zero proﬁts are made on product B
in equilibrium. Equilibrium proﬁts are then the same as under competition
between specialized FIs. Similarly, the equilibrium under full information
(i.e. where customers know their type) is also identical to that of competi-
tion between specialized FIs. The reason for this is that since B plays last,
it will undercut FI 1. Hence, the power of FI 1 to set a lower price for prod-
uct B brings no additional advantage - the one-stop bank does not proﬁt
strategically or directly from having product B.
    When FI B can provide information to customers, however, FI 1 can set
the price p1B strategically to force FI B into an information revelation regime
that is favorable to FI 1. This is the main diﬀerence between competition
among specialized FIs A and B, and competition between a one-stop bank FI
1 and a specialized FI B when information provision is possible. Therefore,
FI 1’ s proﬁt here is at least as high, if not higher, than the proﬁts of FI A
in the case of competition among specialized banks14 . Recall that in section
4.3.3, we found that pA = min[(1 − q)ρ + ∆, ρ + (2q − 1)∆] in the equilibrium
where FI B provides information. In this equilibrium FI A has to set pA low
enough to make sure that FI B would not lower its price in an attempt to
grab the whole market. Now, the one-stop bank can discipline FI B by setting
its price for product B appropriately and is free to set p1A = (1 − q)ρ + ∆.
Hence, FI 1 is able to generate higher proﬁts π 1 = q((1 − q)ρ + ∆) in this
 14
      As summarized in the ﬁrst payoﬀ matrix of section 4.3.3.


                                            21
case. In the cases where FI B does not provide information, though, FI B
can undercut FI A on product B, making the solutions exactly the same as
when specialized FIs compete.

5.2     Price leadership by FI B
In contrast, when FI B is the price leader, results change in the information
revelation game from when there were just two specialized banks competing.
Let’s assume that FI B chooses some price pB .
    In the environment where no information is provided, the equilibrium is
p1A = min[(2q − 1)∆ + pB , qR + (1 − q)r] and p1B > pB , with all proﬁts going
to the one-stop bank and all consumers purchasing product A. This solution
is the same as when competition is among specialized FIs.
    If instead customers know their type ex-ante, the one stop bank gets all of
the proﬁts and consumers purchase the product which matches their type15 .
Here, the one-stop bank directly steals clientele from FI B by undercutting
it on product B. This diverges from the specialized FI solution since the
one-stop bank can’t be given an incentive to split the customer base.
    When FI 1 decides whether to provide information, the signaling game
changes signiﬁcantly from section 4. First of all, the game for FI 1 can look
like the game where a one-stop bank has no competition if it undercuts FI
B, setting p1B = pB − δ (where δ is small). In this case we can apply
the results from the signaling game of Proposition 2 to ﬁnd the solution. It
is straightforward to show that if FI 1 undercuts FI B, it will set p1A =
p1B + ρ = pB − δ + ρ and achieve proﬁts of pB − δ + qρ when ρ > (2q − 1)∆,
or set p1A = p1B + (2q − 1)∆ = pB − δ + (2q − 1)∆ and achieve proﬁts of
pB −δ+(2q−1)∆−(1−q)ρ when ρ < (2q−1)∆. This gives FI 1 weakly larger
proﬁts than a specialized FI A gets when FI B does not provide information
(compare with Figure 4).
    When FI B provides information, however, it may choose pB strategically
to avoid undercutting behavior and make positive proﬁts. Basically, it can
choose p∗B such that it satisﬁes the incentive constraint of FI 1 to prefer not
to undercut on product B. Using this logic and the solution from the case
of competition among specialized banks FI A and FI B 16 , this implies that
  15
      Restricting attention to pure strategies, if pB > r, p1A = R and p1B = pB − δ (where
δ is small), while if pB < r, p1A = ∆ + pB − δ and p1B = pB − δ.
   16
      Note that in this case, one part of the no-undercutting constraint is that ρ < p1A −
(2q − 1)∆. This implies (1 − (1 − q)(2q − 1))∆ > ρ, which we assume to be true here.


                                           22
              q
p∗B = min[ρ, 1−q (∆ − ρ)] if FI 1 provides information and ρ > (2q − 1)∆, and
  ∗
pB = ρ otherwise. This yields the following payoﬀ matrix:

                                                   FI B


                                                 No Info                         Info



           FI A         No Info             (2q-1)∆+pBNI,NI, 0            q(ρ+ ∆), (1-q)ρ-f



                    Info if ρ>(2q-1)∆          pBI,NI +qρ-f, 0          q(pB*+ ∆)-f, (1-q) pB*-f



                   Info if ρ<(2q-1) ∆   (2q-1)∆- (1-q)ρ +pBI,NI -f, 0     q(ρ+ ∆)-f, (1-q)ρ-f


Matrix for Competition between a One-Stop and a Specialized FI (B is the
                             price leader)

    Despite the diﬀerences in the potential strategies, we ﬁnd equilibria that
                                              f
are similar to our previous ones17 . For ρ < 1−q , the unique solution is that
neither FI provides information. For larger values of ρ, there may either be
one equilibrium, where only FI B provides information, or three equilibria,
two pure strategy equilibria where only one FI provides information and one
mixed strategy equilibrium18 .


6      Market Structure
We are now in a position to explore the incentives for a specialized bank to
expand its activities and become a one-stop bank and to analyze the welfare
implications of such a move. The conditions under which one-stop banks
can prosper are quite interesting given current trends. The abolition of the
  17
    Also assuming that pNI,N
                          B
                               I
                                  = pI,N
                                     B
                                         I
                                           as before.
  18
    Speciﬁcally, if ρ < q∆, there is only one equilibrium in the high range (FI B provides
                                 f
information). If ρ > q∆, for 1−q    < ρ < ρ̂, there is only one equilibrium (FI B provides
information), while for ρ > ρ̂ there are three equilibria (one where only FI B provides
information, one where only FI A provides information, and one where both FIs mix their
strategies). Here we deﬁne ρ̂ = max[ (2q−1)∆+f
                                            q    , q∆−f
                                                      q ].



                                                23
Glass-Steagall act in 1999 paved the way in the United States for the creation
of one-stop banks. In Europe, such banks, called “universal banks” have
existed for many years, but are now undergoing a shake-up as mergers across
borders are seen as necessary for survival19 . The traditional explanation for
the trend towards consolidation relates to the economies of scope realized
by selling multiple ﬁnancial products from the same outlet. However, by
analyzing these banks from an information provision perspective, we open
up a richer understanding of market structure20 .
    Our analysis points out that the gains from merger are largest when rep-
utation costs are very low. For very small costs of reputation, no information
is provided when specialized banks compete, as the beneﬁts of information
disclosure do not cover the cost. However, when the market is dominated by
a one-stop bank, advice can be credibly provided even if the bank extracts
most of the customers’ value of information. For higher reputation costs this
comparative advantage of one-stop banks is eroded, as specialized banks are
also able to give advice credibly.
    A specialized bank that is competing against another specialized bank
may decide that instead of trying to merge with its competitor, it could ex-
tend its product line. Clearly, this would soften competition if the market
is already homogeneous (such as competition between two FI Bs). How-
ever, another product can also be used as a strategic buﬀer, keeping the
other ﬁrm from entering a disadvantageous information revelation regime
and therefore allowing more proﬁts (we see this when the reputation cost
is low (ρ < 2(1−q)
                 q
                    ∆) in competition between FI 1 and FI B). Lastly, a
monopoly specialized bank would gain substantially by turning itself into
a multi-product bank, since this would allow it to raise spreads even more
while resolving the fundamental conﬂict of interest problem it faces in giving
advice.
    From a welfare perspective, when customers are ex-ante fully informed,
welfare is maximized under a one-stop bank, but at the expense of con-
sumer surplus. When customers are uninformed, welfare is low as all B
types purchase product A. Endogenizing information revelation comes close
to maximizing welfare (within the cost f of information provision) at the
  19
      This is echoed in Banking Surveys by The Economist (April 4, 2002) and The Financial
Times (May 24, 2002).
   20
      We also note that the traditional use of the term “conﬂict of interest” in the context
of one-stop banks refers to the underwriting of securities to subsidize bad loans; we do not
consider this issue, instead focusing on information provision.


                                            24
expense of lower ﬁrm proﬁts due to competitive pressure. Market power due
to conglomeration restores full extraction of the maximized surplus by the
FI when information revelation is possible21 .
    Although we do not model heterogeneity among clients, it is likely that
larger and wealthier customers have more information about (or more advis-
ers to counsel them on) their speciﬁc needs. Interestingly, by being better
informed, they could be forced to pay more in terms of higher prices per
product. These types of clients may be large money-makers for banks in
terms of not only volume, but per-unit return. Indeed, there is a large focus
in the banking industry on catering to these higher end customers (‘private
banking’). We elaborate on the eﬀect that we describe here in the next
section.


7      Unobservable Investments in Information
       Provision
In the previous sections we have assumed that customers were able to verify
that the bank had made the necessary investment to provide them with
reliable information. However, these investments may be diﬃcult to verify in
reality. When that is the case, banks’ investments in information provision
are subject to moral hazard. Banks will invest in information provision if
and only if this leads to higher proﬁts, while customers will only infer the
investment has been made when the bank proﬁts from the investment. As a
consequence, the nature of the equilibrium is modiﬁed.
    A natural question that then arises is what impact the observability of
information provision services has on the industry. This question becomes
even more salient when we discuss the nature of Independent Financial Advi-
sors, advisors separate from banks who may or may not be providing “good”
information.
  21
     How realistic is the notion of market power among ﬁnancial intermediaries? “A hand-
ful of familiar names - Citigroup, J.P. Morgan Chase, Goldman Sachs, Merrill Lynch -
dominates these businesses, either because it takes a huge investment to build them, or
because only top names are trusted. Yet only Citigroup oﬀers corporate and institutional
clients the full range of services...” (The Economist, April 4th, 2002)




                                          25
7.1    Unobservable investments with competition between
       specialized FIs
The basic timing of the game remains the same, except that the investment
in stage 1 in information provision is observable only to the ﬁrm making the
investment. The values of all parameters of the game are common knowl-
edge among all participants. For brevity, we will only focus on the case of
competition between specialized banks where FI A is the price leader.
    Consider the equilibrium where FI B invests in information acquisition at
cost f and provides advice to all customers. If investment is unobservable, FI
B may ﬁnd that it is more proﬁtable to save on the cost f by not investing in
information acquisition and to just make uninformed recommendations. In
this situation, to make sure that FI B does have the right incentive to invest
in information acquisition, the following incentive constraint must hold:

                            (1 − q)pB − f > pB − qρ                             (6)

To understand this constraint, note that the highest payoﬀ FI B can get
by deviating and giving uninformed advice is to simply always recommend
product B (since the beliefs of customers are held ﬁxed). In that case it
always sells product B at price pB but also pays a reputation cost on the
fraction q of A-type customers. On the other hand, if FI B does invest in in-
formation it is able to recommend product B only to well-matched customers
and thus avoid paying a reputation cost for poor advice. This incentive con-
straint puts an upper bound on pB of ρ − fq . Notice that this is strictly lower
than the upper bound for credible information provision when investment in
information is observable (ρ). Adding the participation constraint:

                                (1 − q)pB − f > 0

and setting pB equal to its upper bound ρ − fq , then requires that:

                                          f
                                  ρ>
                                       (1 − q)q

for information provision to be credible in equilibrium. This condition on the
                                                                     f       f
reputation cost is strong. In particular, in the interval for ρ, ( (1−q) , (1−q)q ),
information would be provided when investment is observable but would not
under unobservable investment.

                                        26
   Similarly, in equilibria where FI A is providing information we can derive
an incentive constraint for FI A by substituting 1 − q for q in equation 6
                                                                     f
and set FI A’s price equal to the maximum of this interval, ρ − 1−q    . The
participation constraint for FI A is not symmetric, however, since FI A’s
payoﬀ from not investing in information is positive: (2q − 1)∆. Thus the
participation constraint reduces to:
                                                 f       (2q − 1)∆
         qpA − f > (2q − 1)∆        =⇒ ρ >             +
                                              (1 − q)q       q
As in the case of observable investment, an equilibrium that has FI A invest-
ing in information only occurs for higher reputation costs ρ. It is also clear
that the cutoﬀ for which there are equilibrium where either FI A or FI B
provide information is higher here than in the case of observable investment
(where it was fq + (2q−1)∆
                      q
                           ).
    Note also that now there is always an equilibrium where no ﬁrm invests
in information. This is clear when we look at the incentive constraint. If the
FI does not invest in information and the customers know this, it gets some
non-negative payoﬀ π̃. By deviating and investing in information, given that
customers believe it will not provide any, its payoﬀ will be π̃ −f . We call this
the “Cassandra eﬀect”, as the FI may have valuable information to reveal,
but no customer is listening.
    In sum, the set of equilibria resembles that for observable information
acquisition with two main diﬀerences. First, there is a larger interval for
which no information provision is the unique equilibrium. Second, due to
the “Cassandra eﬀect”, no information provision is always an equilibrium.

7.2    Independent Financial Advisors
In the negotiations leading up to the $1.4 billion settlement between Wall
Street investment banks and Elliot Spitzer and the SEC, an important pro-
posal for resolving conﬂicts of interest of “sell-side” analysts in investment
banks was the creation of a fully independent research entity that would
employ these analysts. Although this idea was eventually shelved, separat-
ing ﬁnancial advice from the sale of ﬁnancial products seems like a simple
and appealing remedy to address the kinds of conﬂicts of interest we have
considered so far. Two forms of separation may be envisioned: a limited
form within each bank that sets up so-called “Chinese walls” between the
analysts and the sales people, or the more radical form, which would involve

                                       27
spinning oﬀ in-house ﬁnancial analysts into full-ﬂedged independent ﬁnancial
advisors (IFAs)22 . So far, only the former type of separation is required, al-
though the “Chinese walls” that have been in place all along (but probably
had been easily circumvented by meetings in Chinese Restaurants) have now
been signiﬁcantly tightened under the Sarbanes-Oxley Act.
     Some of the key issues in the negotiations with Elliot Spitzer concerned
the quality of ﬁnancial advice under an independent entity, analysts’ incen-
tives to do the necessary research, and the form of their compensation. It
turns out that our analysis here can shed light on these core issues23 . In
particular, in our model the separation of analysts into IFAs can be strictly
beneﬁcial to the ﬁnancial intermediaries. In addition, as we now illustrate,
it is generally easier to create incentives for IFAs to acquire costly informa-
tion and to credibly provide advice than for in-house analysts. As in the
previous section, we limit our focus to the case of competition between two
diﬀerentiated specialized banks.
     The fact that ﬁnancial intermediaries will beneﬁt from credible informa-
tion provision by IFAs is easy to see. Suppose that the ﬁnancial advisor has
the correct incentives to tell the truth24 . Then customers have perfect infor-
mation before they approach the banks. As shown earlier in the paper, when
competition exists between specialized banks, proﬁts are larger under full
information than when information must be provided by the banks directly.
The banks charge lower prices when they must provide their own information
in order to credibly convey that information. In either case, total surplus is
the same, since all customers match perfectly, although consumer surplus is
clearly lower when ﬁnancial advice is delivered separately.
     To see why IFAs have better incentives for information acquisition note
  22
     We speciﬁcally deﬁne IFAs as advisory ﬁrms which don’t sell ﬁnancial products; in the
UK, IFAs may sell ﬁnancial products (their independence is deﬁned by not being owned by
a ﬁnancial product provider). Interestingly enough, a study by the UK’s Financial Service
Authority and Charles River Associates (2001) found that “There is signiﬁcant bias in the
advice” of these types of ﬁnancial advisors on some of the products they sell.
  23
     The type of conﬂict of interest in the SEC case are not exactly of the type that we
model here. We attempt to give insight into some of the similar issues that arise.
  24
     This can be easily accomplished if the independent ﬁnancial advisor charges a ﬁxed
amount for each customer, but suﬀers a positive reputation cost if she lies. Alternatively,
the advisor may be paid a ﬁxed amount irrespective of the number of customers by an FI,
but still suﬀer some reputation cost (such as ﬁring when customers complain), and the
results will go through.




                                            28
that the incentive constraint25 for IFAs is given by:
                                            f
                                    ρI >
                                           1−q
where ρI is the reputation cost of the IFA. Indeed, if the IFA does not invest
in information it saves f but it incurs a reputation cost of ρI (1 − q). If
ρI = ρ, we thus observe that the IFAs will provide information for the same
range of parameters as specialized banks with observable investments. The
IFAs will provide information in some cases when specialized banks with
                                                    f       f
unobservable investments do not, namely ρ ∈ ( (1−q)     , (1−q)q ). In this case,
IFAs help the specialized banks by revealing information where the banks
couldn’t, as well as allowing the banks to extract more rents. As a caveat,
however, the reputation cost ρI may arguably be less than ρ, due to the
fact that there is much less at stake in a continuing relationship between
an IFA and a customer. This could reduce the provision of information by
IFAs relative to specialized banks. We also note that for all parameter values
there exists a “Cassandra eﬀect” equilibrium where the IFA does not invest
in information, as before.



8      Conclusion
This paper considers several aspects of market structure from the perspec-
tive of information provision to customers. By using this alternative road
we obtain a new perspective on conﬂicts of interest and consolidation in the
banking industry. We have found that competition fosters information pro-
vision when reputation costs are present. The fact that a specialized FI has
incentives to provide information may surprise, since it will always lose to
its competitor the customers that are not of its type. Still, if we consider
as the starting point a situation where absent information a FI will get no
customers, providing information appears as an additional tool in the com-
petition for market share.
    We have also found that the gains from increasing the number of ﬁnancial
products oﬀered and becoming a one-stop bank are largest when market
power can be exerted or customers have switching costs. Without these built
  25
    In the constraint, we implicitly assume the type of ﬁxed amount per customer com-
pensation scheme mentioned in the previous footnote.

                                         29
in customer bases, competition erodes the proﬁt margins for information
revelation. Finally, ﬁnancial intermediaries may actually have an incentive
to separate advice from sales as it could allow them to diﬀerentiate their
products and receive higher margins.
    It would be interesting to extend this line of research in a dynamic di-
rection in order to quantify the potential reputation costs that banks may
incur. Another aspect that is worth further examination is allowing for het-
erogeneity in customer’s knowledge of their types. With the advent of the
internet and private banking, it is probable that certain clients have better
information about which investments best match their needs. Our results in
this context suggest that if customers have more information, market power
and rents can actually increase, making this topic quite relevant to policy
discussions.


9    References
Benabou, Roland and Laroque, Guy. (1992), “Using Privileged Information
to Manipulate Markets: Insiders, Gurus, and Credibility”, Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 107, 921-958.
    Bester, Helmut. (1998), “Quality Uncertainty Mitigates Product Diﬀer-
entiation”, RAND Journal of Economics, 29:4, 828-844.
    Cho, In-Koo and Kreps, David (1986), “Signaling Games and Stable Equi-
libria”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 102, 179-221.
    Darby, M.R. and Edi Karni (1973) “Free Competition and the Optimal
Amount of Fraud.” Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 16, pp. 67—88.
    Demski, Joel and David Sappington (1987), “Delegated Expertise.” Jour-
nal of Accounting Research, Vol. 25, pp. 68—89.
    The Economist (April 4th, 2002), “Big, Bigger, Biggest”, The Economist.
    Emons, Winand. (1997), “Credence Goods and Fraudulent Experts”,
Rand Journal of Economics 28, 107-119.
    Emons, Winand. (2001), “Credence Goods Monopolists”, International
Journal of Industrial Organization, 19, 375-389.
    Garicano, Luis and Tano Santos (2004), “Referrals”, American Economic
Review (forthcoming)
    Grossman, S. J., and O. D. Hart (1980): “Disclosure Laws and Takeover
Bids,” Journal of Finance, 35, 323-34.



                                     30
    Hotelling, Harold. (1929), “Stability in Competition”, Economic Journal,
39, 41-57.
    Judd, Kenneth L. (1985), “ Credible Spatial Preemption”, RAND Journal
of Economics, 16:2, 153-66.
    Laslett, Robert, Wilsdon, Tim, and Malcolm, Kyla. (2001) “The eﬀect
of commission based remuneration on ﬁnancial advice”, Financial Service
Authority website (http://www.fsa.gov.uk/pubs/other/pol_res1.pdf).
    Mailath, George. (1989), “Simultaneous Signaling in an Oligopoly Model”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 104:2, 417-427.
    Meurer, Michael, and Stahl, Dale O. (1994), “Informative Advertising
and Product Match”, International Journal of Industrial Organization, 12,
1-19.
    Milgrom, Paul and John Roberts. (1982), “Limit Pricing and Entry under
Incomplete Information: An Equilibrium Analysis”, Econometrica, 50:2, 443-
460.
    Milgrom, Paul and John Roberts. (1986), “Relying on the Information
of Interested Parties”, RAND Journal of Economics, 17, 18-32.
    Morgan, John and Stocken, Phillip C. (2003), “An Analysis of Stock
Recommendations”, RAND Journal of Economics, 34, 183-203.
    Okuno-Fujiwara, Masahiro, Postlewaite, Andrew and Suzumura, Kotaro.
(1990), “Strategic Information Revelation”, Review of Economic Studies,
57:1, 25-47.
    Pesendorfer, Wolfgang and Wolinsky, Asher. (2003), “Second Opinions
and Price Competition: Ineﬃciency in the Market for Expert Advice”, Re-
view of Economic Studies, forthcoming.
    Pitchik, Carolyn and Schotter, Andrew. (1987), “Honesty in a Model
of Strategic Information Transmission”, American Economic Review, 77:5,
1032-1036.
    Riley, John G. (2001), “ Silver Signals: Twenty-Five Years of Screening
and Signaling ”, Journal of Economic Literature, 39:2, 432-478.
    Saigol, Lina, and Thal Larsen, Peter. (May 24, 2002), “Banks Widen
Horizons in Search For Right Targets”, The Financial Times.
    Shaked, Avner and Sutton, John. (1983), “Natural Oligopolies”, Econo-
metrica, 51:5, 1469-1484.
    Shavell, Steven. (1994), “Acquisition and disclosure of information prior
to sale”, RAND Journal of Economics, 25:1, 20-36.
    White, Ben. (April 30, 2003), “On Wall Street, Stock Doublespeak”,
washingtonpost.com.

                                    31
    Wolinsky, Asher. ”Competition in a Market for Informed Experts’ Ser-
vices.” Rand Journal of Economics, Autumn 1993, 24(3), pp.380-398.


10       Mathematical Appendix
10.1     Monopoly Banking
10.1.1   Specialized Monopoly (Proposition 1)
We ﬁrst examine the case of a monopoly specialized in product A. If the
customer does not purchase at FI A, he receives a utility of zero and the bank
makes zero proﬁts. FI A can make two statements, “recommend product A”
(Â) and “don’t recommend product A” (∼ Â). Lying when the customer
purchases the product costs the FI ρ per customer. Note that this proof is
quite similar (though simpler) to that of the competing specialized banks,
which we analyze in detail in the next section. Hence we only sketch the proof
here. We consider only pure strategies for the customers, using assumption
A2.

   • It can never be that customers who hear Â choose ∼ A and customers
     who hear ∼ Â choose A. If pA > ρ, then the FI would announce ∼ Â
     always. By the Cho-Kreps intuitive criterion, the probability of hearing
     Â given type ∼ A (P (Â |∼ A)) equals zero. Hence, a customer who
     hears Â will always choose A and type A would deviate since pA ≤ R.
     If pA < ρ, there should be full revelation, but then upon hearing Â, the
     customer prefers A.

   • When customers who hear Â choose A and customers who hear ∼ Â
     choose ∼ A, then if pA < ρ the FI will fully reveal. However, since ρ < r
     from A1, a customer hearing ∼ Â will always choose A and there is
     no equilibrium. When pA > ρ, the equilibrium will be non-revealing,
     with the additional requirements that pA < qR + (1 − q)r and (using
     Cho-Kreps) pA > r.

   • When customers who hear Â choose A and customers who hear ∼ Â
     choose A, there is a fully revealing equilibrium when pA < r.

   • Lastly, when customers who hear Â choose ∼ A and customers who
     hear ∼ Â choose ∼ A, we have partially revealing equilibria (where

                                     32
       type A and type ∼ A mix their strategies). These are possible when
       pA > max[r + P (A | Â)∆, r + P (A |∼ Â)∆]. The minimum of this
       maximum is qR + (1 − q)r (we derive a very similar result in the proof
       of Lemma 4 below).

    The results of the signaling game give us a proﬁt function for every possi-
ble value of pA . It is easy to see that there are two possible prices that could
maximize the FI’s proﬁt: pA = r which yields π A = r and pA = qR + (1 − q)r
which yields π A = r + q∆ − (1 − q)ρ. Hence, since q > 12 , the highest proﬁts
result when FI A sets pA = qR+(1−q)r and does not reveal any information.
    The signaling game for a monopoly FI B is exactly the same, except
that 1 − q should be substituted for q. Hence, there are two possible prices
that could maximize the FI’s proﬁt: pA = r which yields π A = r and pA =
(1 − q)R + qr which yields π A = r + (1 − q)∆ − qρ. FI B chooses the latter
price when the reputation cost is not too high, ρ < 1−q  q
                                                           ∆.

10.1.2    One-stop Monopoly (Proposition 2)
When information revelation is possible, the one-stop bank engages in a
signaling game in which it can recommend product A or product B. The
reputation cost ρ is incurred when the one-stop bank lies to the customer
and the customer makes a purchase (of either product). Again, since this
proof is quite similar to the one above and to the competing specialized bank
proof (which we go over in detail), we only summarize the main points.
    First, there can never be any equilibrium where customers who hear Â
choose B and customers who hear B̂ choose A. When customers who hear
Â choose A and customers who hear B̂ choose A, there is a fully revealing
equilibrium where pA − pB < −∆. When customers who hear Â choose B
and customers who hear B̂ choose B, there is a fully revealing equilibrium
where pA − pB > ∆. Finally, when customers who hear Â choose A and
customers who hear B̂ choose B, there are two ranges of equilibria26 : when
−ρ < pA − pB < ρ the equilibrium is fully revealing and if ρ < (2q − 1)∆,
  26
    Note that there doesn’t exist an information revelation equilibrium for certain pa-
rameter values because we don’t allow for mixed strategies on the part of customers here
due to Assumption 2. If the FI set prices in these regions (−∆ < pA − pB < −ρ and
max[ρ, (2q − 1)∆] < pA − pB < ∆), it is straightforward to show that proﬁts are lower
than R. In order to get proﬁts of R (which are the maximum) the ﬁrm must tell the
truth (to save on the reputation cost) and the customers must follow the ﬁrm’s advice (to
maximize their valuations). Clearly, this is impossible in these intervals.

                                           33
then when ρ < pA − pB < (2q − 1)∆ the equilibrium is non-revealing with
both types saying Â.
    Since prices can never be larger than R without violating individual ratio-
nality, the maximum proﬁts from setting prices in the intervals pA −pB < −∆
and pA − pB > ∆ is r. Maximum proﬁts from setting prices in the interval
ρ < pA −pB < (2q −1)∆ come from setting pA = R (and pB ≥ R−(2q −1)∆),
which yields proﬁts R − (1 − q)ρ. In the interval −ρ < pA − pB < ρ setting
pA = pB = R yields proﬁts of R, which maximizes proﬁts in the interval and
overall.

10.2      Proof of Proposition 3 (Full information)
Whatever the price set by A, if B undercuts it by setting pB < pA − ∆, both
type A and type B customers prefer to purchase product B, yielding proﬁts
π A = 0 and π B = pB (and FI B should set price pB = pA − ∆). On the other
hand, if pA − ∆ < pB < min(pA + ∆, R), type A customers prefer product
A and type B customers prefer product B, yielding proﬁts π A = qpA and
π B = (1 − q)pB (and FI A should set price pB = min(pA + ∆, R)). Finally,
setting pB > pA + ∆ would yield π B = 0, so FI B will never price in this
range.
    FI A’s strategy will be to set a price such that B prefers not to undercut
A. For this to occur, B’s proﬁts have to be at least as large by choosing a
price in the (pA − ∆, min(pA + ∆, R)) range. That is,

                      (1 − q) min(pA + ∆, R) ≥ pA − ∆                      (7)
   The optimal choice of A happens to depend upon some conditions on the
parameters:

   • Case 1: qR < 2∆.
       A could choose to set a price pA < r or pA > r.

         — If FI A chooses a price such that pA ≤ r , then pA + ∆ ≤ R.
           Since qR < 2∆ we have q(pA + ∆) < 2∆ and therefore, adding pA
           to both sides and rearranging, pA − ∆ ≤ (1 − q)(pA + ∆), so (7)
           is satisﬁed and A gets proﬁts π A = qpA . FI A proﬁts are locally
           maximized for pA = min(r, 2−qq
                                           ∆). Since qR < 2∆, dividing by q
           and subtracting ∆, yields that the minimum is reached for pA = r.


                                      34
         — If pA > r, then pA + ∆ > R and pB = R. FI A will therefore
           choose the maximum price that satisﬁes (7), which is now pA =
           min[(1 − q)R + ∆, R].

       If min[(1 − q)R + ∆, R] = R, then FI A proﬁts are larger in the pA > r
       range as R > r.
       If instead, min[(1−q)R+∆, R] = (1−q)R+∆ this is also the case, since
       qR < 2∆ implies (1 − q)R + 2∆ > R and therefore (1 − q)R + ∆ > r.

   • Case 2: qR > 2∆

   Proceeding in the same way, consider the two strategies for FI A.

   •     — If FI A chooses a price such that pA ≤ r , then pA + ∆ ≤ R,
           and condition (7) becomes (1 − q)(pA + ∆) ≥ pA − ∆, which is
           equivalent to pA ≤ 2−q
                                q
                                  ∆. Since qR > 2∆ imply r > 2−qq
                                                                  ∆, the
           best strategy for FI A within pA ≤ r range of prices is to set
           pA = 2−q
                  q
                    ∆.
         — If pA > r, then because qR > 2∆ implies r > (1 − q)R + ∆, we
           have pA − ∆ > (1 − q)R and condition (7) is never satisﬁed, so it
           is never optimal for FI A to choose a price pA > r.
           Consequently the best strategy in case 2 is to choose the best price
           for pA ≤ r, that is pA = 2−q
                                     q
                                        ∆, which proves proposition 3.

10.3      Proof of Lemma 4
We will consider successively the diﬀerent possible equilibria, which can be
completely ordered by customer strategies (a = 1, b = 1; a = 0, b = 1;
a = 1, b = 0; and a = 0, b = 0) since assumption A2 allows us to disregard
equilibria with interior values for a or b.

   • Case 1 (a = 1, b = 0) Replacing these values in equations (2) and (3),
     we obtain ∆π A (A) > 0 and ∆π A (B) > 0 and there is full revelation
     with all customers buying A. The condition ∆UA (A) > 0 implies then
     pA < pB + ∆, while ∆UA (B)  < 0 implies the stronger condition pA <
     pB − ∆ . As a consequence, the necessary and suﬃcient condition for
     this equilibrium to occur is pA < pB − ∆, as stated in part 1 of the
     Lemma.

                                      35
• Case 2 (a = 1, b = 1) Replacing these values in equations (2) and (3),
  we obtain ∆π A (A) = pA and ∆π A (B) = −pA +ρ. As a consequence two
  cases are to be considered: pA < ρ and pA > ρ (equality is ruled out by
  assumption A2). In the ﬁrst case, the equilibrium is fully revealing and
                                                                 > 0 and
  the conditions for a = 1, b = 1 to be a solution is that ∆UA (A)
         > 0 is fulﬁlled, so that pB − ∆ < pA < pB + ∆. Using ∆ > ρ
  ∆UA (B)
  (from assumption A1) allows us to establish part 2 of the Lemma. On
  the other hand, if pA > ρ the sign of ∆π A (B) is negative and there is
  no equilibrium revelation as every agent is given the message A.  As a
  consequence, the conditional probability p(A | A)    = q, and, by Cho-
                                           
  Kreps p(B | B) = 1. Conditions ∆UA (A) > 0 and ∆UA (B)      > 0 imply
  ∆UA (Â) = (2q − 1)∆ − pA + pB > 0 and ∆UA (B)      = ∆ − pB + pA > 0,
  proving part 3 of the lemma.

• Case 3 (a = 0, b = 1, Zero proﬁts for FI A)
  i) Replacing these values in equations (2) and (3), we obtain ∆π A (A) =
  ∆π A (B) = 0 : These conditions permit the FI to choose any strategy.
  To begin with, the FI may play a mixed strategy, with α, β ∈ (0, 1).
  The inequalities ∆UA (Â) < 0 and ∆UA (B)    > 0 hold for these values
  of α and β if and only if pA > pB + max[(2P (A | Â) − 1)∆, −(2P (B |
  B̂) − 1)∆]. By deﬁnition, for (α, β) = (0, 0) and (α, β) = (1, 1), P (A |
            αq                           (1−β)(1−q)
  Â) = αq+β(1−q) and P (B | B̂) = (1−α)q+(1−β)(1−q)   . Deﬁne ψ(α, β) by
                        αq                   (1−β)(1−q)
  ψ(α, β) ≡ max[2 αq+β(1−q)   − 1, 1 − 2 (1−α)q+(1−β)(1−q) ]. It can be easily
                                              αq
  shown that for α > β , ψ(α, β) = 2 αq+β(1−q) − 1. This expression is
  increasing in α, implying that the minimum occurs when α = β, when
                                                                 (1−β)(1−q)
  ψ(α, α) = 2q − 1. Similarly if β > α, ψ(α, β) = 1 − 2 (1−α)q+(1−β)(1−q)    .
  This expression is increasing in β, and its minimum occurs when β = α,
  for which ψ(β, β) = 2q − 1. Finally, the maximum of ψ(α, β) is 1.
  The necessary and suﬃcient condition for an equilibrium where FI A
  uses a mixed strategy regarding revelation while customers buy B is
  pA > pB +ψ(α, β). Using the minimum and maximum values for ψ(α, β)
  establishes part 4a of the Lemma and the range of values (α, β) for
  which the mixed strategy equilibrium holds.
  ii) If, instead, the FI strategy is (α = 1, β = 1), announcing systemati-
  cally A, P (B | B)
                     is deﬁned by out-of-equilibrium beliefs, and for each
  set of out-of-equilibrium beliefs we will obtain a diﬀerent equilibria.


                                   36
       Symmetrically, if (α = 0, β = 0), it is P (A | Â) that will be deﬁned by
       out of equilibrium beliefs. Since on the equilibrium path the condition
       pA > pB + (2q − 1)∆ holds, we now have the second and third parts of
       part 4 of the Lemma.
       iii) Combining the conclusions of i) and ii) we ﬁnd that if the condition
       pA > pB +∆ holds, any FI strategy (α, β ∈ [0, 1]) will be an equilibrium
       where all customers purchase B. This is part 5 of the Lemma.

   • Case 4 (a = 0, b = 0) This is never an equilibrium. Indeed, it im-
                  < 0 and ∆UA (B)
     plies ∆UA (A)                    < 0. Equations (2) and (3), become
     ∆π A (A) = −pA + ρ and ∆π A (B) = pA > 0. Two cases are therefore to
     be considered. If ρ > pA , the equilibrium is fully revealing; if ρ < pA ,
     the FI only announces B   but the Cho-Kreps criterion allows us to infer
                  = 1 .So, whatever the case, replacing P (A | A)
     that P (A | A)                                               = 1 in ex-
                                                   
     pressions (4) and (5) leads to ∆UA (A)+ ∆UA (B) = ∆(2P (B | B))    ≥ 0,
     which is a contradiction.

10.4      Proof of Proposition 5 (Competing Specialized
          Banks, FI A is the price leader)
1) First assume that pB > ρ + ∆. Then the only region where FI B makes
positive proﬁts is pB < pA − (2q − 1)∆. In this region FI A makes zero
proﬁts, so FI A must lower pA such that pB < ρ + ∆. It can do this by
setting pA − (2q − 1)∆ < ρ + ∆, or pA < ρ + 2q∆.
    For ρ < pA < ρ + 2q∆, prices will be such that the equilibrium is non-
revealing and all customers purchase A, or partially revealing and all cus-
tomers purchase B. FI B will manipulate its price so that the second inter-
val pertains if it can, which then implies FI A should set its price such that
pA < ρ. However, if ρ < (2q − 1)∆ and FI A sets its price equal to (2q − 1)∆,
FI B is unable to maneuver its price.
    For pA < ρ, the prices will determine whether A fully reveals and everyone
purchases at A (pB > pA + ∆) or whether A fully reveals and everyone
purchases at the bank which matches their type (pB < pA + ∆). Clearly the
second has more interest for FI B, which then proves our conjecture.

   2) First consider the situation where pA > ρ + ∆. Here FI B will clearly
not choose to be in the partially revealing interval where it gets zero proﬁts


                                       37
(pB > pA − (2q − 1)∆), but the other two regions involve FI A getting zero
proﬁts, so it must be that pA < ρ + ∆.
    Now consider ρ + (2q − 1)∆ < pA < ρ + ∆. Unlike above, there is
one region where both ﬁrms make positive proﬁts: pA − ∆ < pB < ρ. Full
information is revealed and customers follow the advice. The highest proﬁts
for FI B come from setting its price at the maximum of the interval (ρ) and
earning (1 − q)ρ. However, the region above is a non-revealing one, in which
all customer purchase at FI B. Proﬁts are maximized for B by choosing the
highest price in the interval, pA − (2q − 1)∆, which yields expected proﬁts
pA − (2q − 1)∆ − qρ. These proﬁts are larger than (1 − q)ρ (taking into
account that we are in the region ρ + (2q − 1)∆ < pA < ρ + ∆), which means
that pA should be set even lower.
    Lastly, setting pA < ρ + (2q − 1)∆ can produce two possible responses
from FI B. If FI B sets pB = pA − ∆, FI B fully reveals information and
gets all of the customers. If FI B sets pB = ρ, it fully reveals and gets the
customers who are the best match at this higher price. FI A only makes
positive proﬁts in this second region, so the solution has FI A setting its
price so that FI B prefers this choice.

    3) The proof has the same ﬂavor of the proof when only FI B oﬀers
information, but we need to check at each point what information revelation
regime FI A is in, and whether customers might approach FI A ﬁrst instead.
    Consider the situation where pA > ρ + ∆. FI B will not choose to be in
its partially revealing interval (pB > pA − (2q − 1)∆) since it can be shown
that customers will always go to FI A and purchase there, leaving FI B with
zero proﬁts. FI B will choose to be in one of the other two regions, both of
which involve FI A getting zero proﬁts, so it must be that pA < ρ + ∆.
    Now consider ρ + (2q − 1)∆ < pA < ρ + ∆. Unlike the previous interval,
there is one region where FI B fully reveals and customers follow its advice,
i.e. both ﬁrms will make positive proﬁts: pA − ∆ < pB < ρ (in this region
FI A is in partial revelation regime - pB < ρ and ρ + (2q − 1)∆ < pA imply
pB +(2q−1)∆ < pA - so all customers will visit FI B ﬁrst). The highest proﬁts
for FI B come from setting its price at the maximum of the interval (ρ) and
earning (1 − q)ρ. However, the region above is a non-revealing one, in which
all customer approach FI B ﬁrst and purchase there. Proﬁts are maximized
for B by choosing the highest price in the interval, pA −(2q−1)∆, which yields
expected proﬁts pA − (2q − 1)∆ − qρ. These proﬁts are larger than (1 − q)ρ
(taking into account that we are in the region ρ + (2q − 1)∆ < pA < ρ + ∆),

                                     38
which means that pA should be set even lower.
     Lastly, we look at pA < ρ+(2q −1)∆. As before, if FI B sets pB < pA −∆,
FI B fully reveals information and gets all of the customers. For the region
pA − ∆ < pB < ρ, FI B is in a fully revealing regime where customers follow
its advice. Note that for this given range of pB it is weakly dominant for
customers to approach FI B ﬁrst (in fact the only time there is indiﬀerence
is if FI A is in a fully revealing regime as well). Therefore both FI A and FI
B make positive proﬁts in this region. FI A consequently would like to insure
that FI B prefers this region. It is possible hat FI B may want to set its
price even higher than ρ here. If it does so, it will be in a partial revelation
regime. Since it will make zero proﬁts if customers approach it ﬁrst, FI B
needs FI A to be in a full revelation following regime to make proﬁts. For FI
A to be in a full revelation regime there are two possibilities.
     The ﬁrst possibility occurs when ρ − (2q − 1)∆ < pB < ρ + ∆ and
pB − ∆ < pA < ρ. Here it is clear that FI A prefers to set pA as high
as possible (ρ) and FI B can then follow by setting pB as high as possible
(ρ + ∆). Notice here that FI B is free riding oﬀ of the information of FI A
in order to set a higher price. However, proﬁts for FI A would be less than it
would get by pricing higher and forcing FI B to be the information provider
(qρ < q min[(1 − q)ρ + ∆, ρ + (2q − 1)∆]).
     The second possibility occurs when pB < ρ − (2q − 1)∆ and pB − ∆ <
pA < pB + (2q − 1)∆. The maximum return for FI B would be setting
pB = ρ − (2q − 1)∆, in which case pA = ρ, however this is also dominated by
the above equilibrium.

10.5     Proof of the payoﬀs in Figure 4 (Competing Spe-
         cialized Banks, B is the price leader)
1) Only FI B invests in information: As long as pB > ρ, FI A has an incentive
to set its price just below pB + (2q − 1)∆, which leads to zero proﬁts for FI
B. If pB < ρ, FI must price below pB + ∆ in order to make positive proﬁts.
Therefore the equilibrium is pB = ρ, pA = ρ + ∆.
    2) Only FI A invests in information: When pB > ρ − (2q − 1)∆, the best
response for FI A is always to price slightly under pB + (2q − 1)∆ and not
reveal any information (always say Â). Since all customers then purchase A,
this yields proﬁts of zero for FI B. If ρ < (2q − 1)∆, this is what occurs
and the price of FI B is undetermined, as any price yields zero proﬁts. If


                                      39
ρ > (2q − 1)∆, then FI B will set its price below ρ − (2q − 1)∆. FI A has
two options, setting a price of pB − ∆, fully revealing, and getting all of the
customers, or setting a price of ρ, fully revealing but sharing the customers.
FI B clearly prefers the second option and must set pB such that pB −∆ < qρ
(FI A prefers the second option). Since ρ − (2q − 1)∆ < qρ + ∆, FI B sets
its price at ρ − (2q − 1)∆.
    3) Both FIs invest in information: When pB > ρ + ∆, any price that FI
A charges which gives it positive proﬁts gives FI B zero proﬁts.
    When ρ − (2q − 1)∆ < pB < ρ + ∆, we must look carefully at the possible
best response of FI A :

   • If pB − ∆ < pA < ρ, FI A will fully reveal with customers taking its
     advice. Indeed, FI B will do the same (since pA − (2q − 1)∆ < ρ), so it
     does not matter where customers go ﬁrst and the solution (restricting
     FI A to this interval) is pB = ρ + ∆ with proﬁts (1 − q)(ρ + ∆) and
     pA = ρ with proﬁts qρ.

   • If ρ < pA < pB + (2q − 1)∆, FI A reveals nothing and the only possible
     chance for both to make positive proﬁts is for FI B to be in a fully
     revealing regime. Since the interval for pA implies that pB > pA − (2q −
     1)∆, to get a fully revealing regime we must have pA − (2q − 1)∆ < ρ.
     Hence a candidate solution here is pB = ρ with proﬁts (1 − q)ρ and
     pA = ρ+ (2q − 1)∆with proﬁts q(ρ + (2q − 1)∆).

   • If pA > pB + (2q − 1)∆, FI A is partially revealing. Hence it will only
     choose this interval if FI B is fully revealing. The maximum price for
     FI B to fully reveal is ρ which limits FI A to a price of ρ + ∆ (the
     proﬁts are (1 − q)ρ and q(ρ + ∆) for FI B and FI A respectively).

   • Lastly, if pA < pB − ∆, FI A fully reveals and gets all of the customers.
     Hence its proﬁts are pB − ∆.

    The proﬁts of pB − ∆ for FI A proves that there is a proﬁtable deviation
from the pB = ρ + ∆ candidate solution. Since FI A prefers to set pA = ρ + ∆
(rather than ρ+ (2q − 1)∆) and a deviation downward as before (to ρ − ∆)
is impossible, the solution for this interval of pB is pB = ρ and pA = ρ + ∆.
    Finally, any proﬁts gained from FI B setting pB < ρ − (2q − 1)∆ will be
lower than those when pB = ρ because of the lower price and the fact that
FI A will only either share or take all of the customers.

                                      40
10.6     Robustness of the model to more general reputa-
         tion costs
In our model, a FI bears a reputation cost if i) it lies to a customer and ii) it
proﬁts from its lie because this lie leads the customer to purchase from him.
Since other deﬁnitions of reputation costs are possible, in this subsection
we check whether the model is robust to a more general speciﬁcation of
reputation costs. In order to do this we focus on the case where FI A is
the price leader and FI B is the ﬁrm which has invested in information
provision. This is the main case in our model as we have stated in Proposition
6. Previously, we saw that the ex-ante disadvantage of FI B forced it into
information revelation, which forms the basis of our main results.
    We allow for two reputation costs. One reputation cost, γ, is incurred
when the FI lies and misleads the customer into purchasing the wrong prod-
uct. This occurs when FI B tells a B-customer that he is type A and the
customer purchases A (a case that entails no reputation cost in our model)
and when it tells an A-customer that she is type B and the customer pur-
chases B (a case that we cover in our model). The other reputation cost, η,
is incurred when the FI lies but doesn’t mislead the customer. This occurs
when FI B tells a B-customer that he is type A and the customer purchases
B and when it tells an A-customer that she is type B and the customer
purchases A. We assume γ > η. This is represented in Figure 3.
    For this subsection, we abandon assumption A2. As we will see, there
is a non-trivial partially revealing equilibria which would be eliminated with
assumption A2 (and leave no equilibria for a range of possible prices).
  1. We begin by analyzing the signaling game for FI B. For brevity, when
     customers use pure strategies we only describe the equilibrium, as its
     derivation is quite similar to our previous analyses.

        • Hence, for pB ≤ pA − ∆, FI B fully reveals and all customers
          purchase B.
        • When pB ≥ pA + ∆, FI B fully reveals and all customers purchase
          A.
        • When pA − ∆ ≤ pB ≤ pA + ∆ and pB ≤ γ, FI B fully reveals and
          customers follow the advice.
        • When pA − ∆ ≤ pB ≤ pA − (2q − 1)∆ and pB ≥ γ, FI B always
          says B̂, and customers purchase B.

                                       41
       0, R-pA      A   says A              says B     A    0-η   , R-pA


     pB ,r - p B                                       B    p B - γ , r- p
                    B                       knows                          B
                                  q
                                            type is
                                            A
                                       B


                                 1-q         knows
                                             type is
      0 - γ, r-pA   A                        B         A   0, r-pA


   p B-η , R -pB                                           p B, R - p B
                    B   says A              says B     B




     Figure 3: The signaling game with general reputation costs

     • When pA − (2q − 1)∆ ≤ pB ≤ pA − ∆and pB ≥ γ there is one
       partially revealing equilibrium, where FI B is indiﬀerent between
       saying Â and B̂ to an A customer, but always says B̂ to a B
       customer. Customer’s who hear B̂ then are indiﬀerent between
       purchasing A or B. Let y equal the probability with which FI B
       says B̂ to an A customer. The customer who hears B̂ updates her
                                                1−q
       probability of being type B to equal 1−q+yq   . She is then indiﬀerent
                              1−q
       when pB = pA + (2( 1−q+yq ) − 1)∆ (since y ∈ [0, 1], pB ∈ [pA −
       (2q − 1)∆, pA + ∆]). Customer’s who hear Â know they are type
       A, and since pB ≥ pA − ∆, they purchase A. In order to make FI
       B indiﬀerent, the customer at B̂ then chooses B with probability
          η
       η+pB −γ
               (which also implies that a necessary condition is that pB ≥
       γ). Proﬁts from partially revealing are (1 − q)( η+pηB −γ )pB . Proﬁts
       are decreasing in pB (using the assumption γ > η), meaning that
       FI B has the incentive to set its price at the bottom of the interval.

2. Competition between FI A and FI B can also be analyzed in a similar
   way as before.


                                       42
     • First, we show that pA is below γ + ∆. If it were above, there
       would be four possible information regimes: fully revealing where
       all customers purchase B (pB ≤ pA −∆), non-revealing in B̂ where
       all purchase B (pA −∆ ≤ pB ≤ pA −(2q −1)∆), partially revealing
       (pA − (2q − 1)∆ ≤ pB ≤ pA + ∆), and fully revealing where all
       buy A ( pB ≥ pA + ∆). FI B will never set the price so high
       that everyone purchases A, so we can focus on the ﬁrst three
       intervals. The only interval where FI A makes positive proﬁts is
       the partially revealing one - hence we will show that FI B can
       make larger proﬁts by not pricing in that interval. We will show
       this in a proof by contradiction.
       Suppose the proﬁts from the partially revealing interval are larger
       than those of the non-revealing interval. If FI B sets its price
       in the non-revealing interval, it will choose the highest element,
       pA − (2q − 1)∆. Likewise, in the partially revealing interval, the
       price that maximizes proﬁts is pA − (2q − 1)∆. The hypothesis to
       be contradicted is then:
                                                                         η
       π non−revealing < π partially−revealing or pB −qγ < (1−q)(              )pB
                                                                    η + pB − γ

       where pB = pA − (2q − 1)∆.
       Since pB > γ, substituting γ for pB on the left hand side gives us
                                                   η
                        (1 − q)γ < (1 − q)(              )pB
                                              η + pB − γ

       Re-arranging this expression yields pB < γ, which is a contradic-
       tion and proves our result.

• Next, we show that pA won’t be in the interval (γ − (2q − 1)∆, γ + ∆].
  The information revelation regimes for this interval are the same as
  above with the exception that the interval pA −∆ ≤ pB ≤ pA −(2q−1)∆
  is broken into two parts now: there is full revelation with customers
  following advice when pA − ∆ ≤ pB ≤ γ, and the same non-revealing
  regime as above when γ ≤ pB ≤ pA − (2q − 1)∆. Once again, FI B
  won’t set its price so high that everyone purchases A, nor will it set
  its price in the partially revealing region since the above proof holds
  here as well. Lastly, it is easy to see that the non-revealing region

                                   43
      yields higher proﬁts for B than the region where FI B fully reveals and
      customers follow advice (since pB − qγ > (1 − q)γ), meaning that FI A
      would get zero proﬁts.

   • Finally we look for the equilibrium such that pA ≤ γ − (2q − 1)∆. Now
     there are four information revelation regimes: fully revealing where all
     customers purchase B (pB ≤ pA − ∆), fully revealing where customers
     follow advice (pA −∆ ≤ pB ≤ γ), partially revealing (γ ≤ pB ≤ pA +∆),
     and fully revealing where all buy A ( pB ≥ pA + ∆). The maximum
     proﬁts of FI B for both the fully revealing regime where customers
     follow advice and for the partially revealing regime comes when pB = γ
     and is equal to (1 − q)γ (for both). The maximum proﬁts of FI B in the
     fully revealing all-purchase-B regime is pA − ∆. Therefore the optimal
     price for FI A is
      pA = min[γ−(2q−1)∆, (1−q)γ+∆], where the second element prevents
      FI B from pricing low and giving FI A zero proﬁts.

    The proﬁts take the same form as our model with more restrictive repu-
tation costs, namely π A = qpA and π B = (1 − q)γ − f . There are however,
multiple equilibria which give us this same result - one fully revealing and
many partially revealing. The many partially revealing come from the cor-
ner solution that customers who hear B̂ always choose B. Since FI B gets
zero when the customer is type A, FI B is indiﬀerent about what it says
to type A, meaning that any probability y of saying B̂ must only make the
customer strictly prefer product B. Using weak dominance (as we did in the
text, see footnote 6) gets rid of all partially revealing equilibria (FI B weakly
prefers saying Â to type A when pB = γ), leaving us with essentially the
same equilibrium as in our less general reputation cost model.




                                       44
