                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    SEARCH, OBFUSCATION, AND PRICE ELASTICITIES
                                 ON THE INTERNET

                                             Glenn Ellison
                                           Sara Fisher Ellison

                                         Working Paper 10570
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10570


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2004




We would like to thank Nathan Barczi, Nada Mora, Silke Januszewski, Caroline Smith and Andrew Sweeting
for outstanding research assistance. We also thank Patrick Goebel for a valuable tip on Internet data
collection, Steve Ellison for sharing substantial industry expertise, and Drew Fudenberg for his comments.
This work was supported by NSF grants SBR-9818524 and SES- 0219205. The first author’s work was
supported by fellowships from the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences and the Institute
for Advanced Study. The second author’s work was supported by fellowships from the Hoover Institute and
the Institute for Advanced Study. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Glenn Ellison and Sara Fisher Ellison. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Search, Obfuscation, and Price Elasticities on the Internet
Glenn Ellison and Sara Fisher Ellison
NBER Working Paper No. 10570
June 2004
JEL No. L8, D4, M3
                                          ABSTRACT

We examine the competition between a group of Internet retailers that operate in an environment

where a price search engine plays a dominant role. We show that for some products in this

environment, the easy price search makes demand tremendously price-sensitive. Retailers, though,

engage in obfuscation---practices that frustrate consumer search or make it less damaging to firms---

resulting in much less price sensitivity on other products. We discuss several models of obfuscation

and examine its effects on demand and markups empirically. Observed markups are adequate to

allow efficient online retailers to survive.

Glenn Ellison
Department of Economics
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
gellison@mit.edu

Sara Fisher Ellison
Department of Economics
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
sellison@mit.edu
1        Introduction

When Internet commerce first emerged one heard a lot about the promise of “frictionless
commerce.” Internet technologies would make it easy for consumers to find the exact
product they wanted and to compare prices from competing retailers.1 The most intriguing
demonstration of this potential so far is price search engines. A consumer who knows the
exact product he or she wants need only type the name into Dealtime, mySimon, Shopper,
Pricewatch, Pricescan or Kelkoo to receive instantaneously and without charge a nicely
sorted list of the prices charged by dozens of e-retailers. Once a curiosity, these sites now
have tens of millions of users.2 Internet search is also affecting many “brick and mortar”
industries. For example, a recent J.D. Power survey indicated that about one quarter of all
new car buyers reported that Internet research had a “big impact” on their make/model
choice.3 The diffusion of Internet search technologies has been sufficiently slow, however,
so that their potential impact is much greater than the impact we have seen so far.
        The goal of this paper is to provide some insights into how online and traditonal retail
may be affected as price search technologies improve and become more popular. Our most
basic messages is that economists should think about “obfuscation” as well as search: as
search technologies improve firms will have an incentive to put some “friction” back in the
market by creating an environment in which price search is more difficult or at least less
of a threat to profitability. We explore the interaction of search, price search engines, and
obfuscation with a variety of methodologies: we present some informal descriptive evidence;
we develop some formal models; and we carry out several econometric analyses of an online
retail environment in which a search engine plays a central role.
    1
      For example, in 1999, The Wall Street Journal quoted an economist with Lehman Brothers who es-
timated that e-commerce would cut inflation by half a percentage point by 2002 because “the Internet
eliminates local monopoly power.” See “New E-conomy: If E-commerce Helps Kill Inflation, Why Did
Prices Just Spike?” The Wall Street Journal, October 18, 1999, A1.
    2
      ComScore Media Metrix reported that Dealtime was visited by 13.8 million distinct U.S. users in August
of 2003, which is about 9% of all U.S. Internet users. CNET’s 2002 annual report indicates that its shopping
sites, which include mySimon and Shopper as well as sites offering product reviews, received referral fees
from more than 100 million clickthroughs. Dealtime’s visitor total is up about 300% from 2000. See White
(2000) for more on the impact of price search engines circa 2000.
    3
      The J.D. Power survey result was announced in an October 1, 2003 press release. Another example
is airline demand, which is surely affected by the popularity of sites like Expedia, Travelocity, and Orbitz.
ComScore Media Metrix reports that each had over 10 million unique visitors per month as of October 2003.




                                                     1
       We begin with a brief theoretical discussion of price search engines. We mention some
potential paradoxes that any model of price search must resolve. For example, a price
search engine could not make any money if it induced retailers to compete prices down to
marginal cost. We argue that is is not hard to get around these problems and develop a
theory of price search engines as long as one allows the search engines to have sufficient
pricing instruments.
       We use a simple reduced-form model to illustrate why search engines will often want
to create a perfectly frictionless environment. This conflicts with the wishes of retailers,
who earn zero profits in frictionless environments. We argue that it is therefore useful to
think of search frictions as being determined in a a balance-of-power game in which search
engines’ efforts to reduce frictions are counteracted by retailers’ efforts to obfuscate. How
technological improvements affect the equilibrium level of search frictions in such a model
is clearly ambiguous.
       The theory section concludes with a sketch of two specific models illustrating ways in
which one can formalize the idea of obfuscating actions raising equilibrium profits. One
of these uses standard search theory ideas. It is a theory in which obfuscation makes
search more difficult and thereby reduces consumer learning. The other, detailed in Ellison
(2003), is a competitive price discrimination model. It is a theory in which obfuscation
doesn’t actually reduce consumer learning in equilibrium, but instead reduces the degree
to which consumer learning hurts firm profitability.
       Firms have, of course, always tried to thwart price search. We feel that the Internet
may, however, make obfuscation more important for two reasons. First, improved search
tools make firms worse off it they do not engage in obfuscation. Second, the Internet may
make obfuscation cheaper and easier in a number of ways. One is traditional retailers must
hire a substantial number of articulate salespeople if they want to offer nonstandard sales
contracts, to use legal “bait-and-switch” techniques, or to offer personalized prices, whereas
Internet retailers can easily create automated sales pitches which cheaply implement all of
these strategies.4 Another is that e-retail purchases are naturally bundled with shipping,
   4
    The high costs of hiring articulate salespeople probably accounts for why such practices are usually
restricted to retailers selling fairly expensive products like cars, appliances, and mattresses.




                                                   2
which allows products to be offered at many different prices. Another is that it is easier
for e-retailers to gather information about consumers and personalize prices. Each of these
practices can frustrate consumer price search.
   Most people are still buying most items as they did before the Internet existed. To try
to get insights into what may happen in the future if price search engines do become very
popular we have chosen to examine an environent that is now very atypical. We call it
the Pricewatch universe. Pricewatch is an Internet price search engine that is popular with
relatively savvy people shopping for computer parts. Its universe is inhabited by hundreds
of small, low-overhead retailers. They attract consumers largely just by keeping Pricewatch
informed about their (low) prices.
   Our informal evidence section describes various practices that we think of as forms of
obfuscation. Some of these are as simple as making product descriptions complicated and
creating multiple versions of products so that consumers have to examine the attributes
and prices of a large number of products to know what is being offered. We particularly call
attention to a practice that has become ubiquitous in the Pricewatch universe: firms offer
an (inefficiently) low quality product at a very low price to attract customers and then try
to talk consumers who visit the site into paying extra to get the product they really want.
For example, the retailer we study lists very low prices on Pricewatch for “bare” CPUs, and
then tries to convince consumers to instead purchase a CPU with an attached cooling fan.
We will refer to this practice as being a “loss-leader strategy” even though it sometimes
differs from the classic loss-leader strategy in two respects: it may involve getting consumers
to upgrade to a superior product rather than getting them to buy both the loss-leader and
a second physical good; and the “loss-leader” may be sold for a slight profit rather than
at a loss. The model of Ellison (2003) we mentioned discusses why the adoption of such
practices (referred to there as “add-on pricing”) can be a means of obfuscation.
   The majority of this paper is devoted to formal empirical analyses of the Pricewatch
universe. We address several questions via an analysis of demand and substitution patterns
within eight specific product categories: four categories of computer memory modules and
four categories of CPUs. We gather data from two sources. We obtained year-long hourly
price series by using Go!Zilla to repeatedly conduct price searches on Pricewatch in each


                                              3
of those eight product categories. We matched this to sales data obtained from a single
private firm that operates several computer parts websites and derives most of its sales
from Pricewatch referrals.
   Our first empirical result is a striking confirmation of the hypothesis that price search on
the Internet may dramatically reduce search frictions and lead to extremely elastic demand.
We estimate that the firm faces a demand elasticity of between -25 and -40 for its lowest
quality memory modules! These are some of the largest demand elasticities we have seen
empirically estimated. For single product retailers they would lead to a “Bertrand paradox”
where the equilibrium price would be so low as to prevent retailers from covering their fixed
costs.
   Our second main empirical result can be regarded as a contribution to the empirics of
loss leaders. We show that charging a low price for a low quality product increases our
retailer’s sales of medium- and high-quality products. The reason why this happens is that
one cannot ask a search engine to find “decent-quality memory modules sold with reasonable
shipping, return, warranty and other terms.” Hence, many consumers use Pricewatch to
do what it can do – find the websites that offer the lowest prices for any memory module
– and then search within a few of these websites to find other products that better fit
their preferences. This result (as well as our findings that website design appears to be a
critical determinant of the sucess of an e-retailer) may also be of interest to the marketing
literature, which has discussed loss leaders but does not contain clear empirical evidence of
their effectiveness.
   Our third main set of empirical results examine how it is that obfuscation affects prof-
itability. Specifically, we explore predictions of the two specific obfuscation mechanisms
discussed in our theory section. In the search theoretic model, obfuscation raises profits
by making consumers less informed. In the competitive price-discrimination model, ob-
fuscation raises profits by creating an adverse-selection effect makes firms less interested
attracting consumers via price cuts. We find evidence of the importance of both mecha-
nisms: we find that many consumers appear to have ended up with limited information;
and we find that there is an important adverse selection problem that firms would want to
consider when contemplating a price cut.


                                              4
       Finally, we examine an additional data source, cost data, for direct evidence that re-
tailers obfuscation strategies have been successful in raising markups beyond the level that
would otherwise be sustainable. Given the extreme price sensitivity of the demand for
low-quality products, a naive application of single-good markup rules would suggest that
equilibrium price-cost margins might be just 2.5% to 4%. We explain, using actual data in
an example, why this is not what one should have expected in light of our findings about the
adverse selection effect in demand. We find that the average markup on memory modules
is actually about 12%. Pets.com could never have survived with a 12% markup, but this
should be fine for our retailers. We conclude that the level of obfuscation on Pricewatch is
sufficient to enable active competition between efficient retailers.

       The most closely related study of price search engines and demand that we know of is
Brynjolfsson and Smith (2001). They use a dataset containing the click sequences of tens
of thousands of people who conducted price searches for books on Dealtime to estimate
several discrete choice models of demand.5 They note that book retailers appear to be
differentiated and identify price premia that consumers are on average willing to pay to
buy from branded retailers (Amazon, Barnes & Noble, and Borders) and from retailers
they have patronized in the past.6 The one study of e-retail we know of that reports
demand elasticities is Chevalier and Goolsbee (2003), which estimates elasticities for book
sales at Amazon and Barnes & Noble. They collected data on books’ sales ranks at the two
sites before, during, and after an Amazon pricing experiment, and then estimated demand
elasticities by inferring sales from the data on sales ranks.
       Two other studies have provided some evidence on the link between Internet search and
price levels. Brown and Goolsbee note that Internet sites comparing life insurance premia
appeared in 1996 and term life insurance premia fell 12% in 1996 and 8% in 1997, mostly
falling for those with higher predicted Internet usage. Scott Morton, Zettelmeyer and Silva-
Risso (2001, 2003) report that people who received dealer referrals from Autobytel.com
(which does not itself provide any price comparison capabilities) paid 1% or 1.5% less for
   5
     A disadvantage of their dataset is that they do not observe purchases and must use last clickthroughs
as a proxy.
   6
     They do not report price elastiticies, but they could presumably easily be derived from their estimates
and reported separately for branded and generic online bookstores.


                                                     5
their new cars than did other customers who bought comparable cars. Finally, a number
of studies have examined price dispersion at e-retailers. See, for example, Clay, Krishnan
and Wolff (2002) and Baye, Morgan and Scholten (2003).


2        Theory of price search engines; search and obfuscation

We begin this section with a high-level model that brings out a basic intuition for why
search engines may want to reduce search frictions and retailers to increase them. We then
discuss a couple ways in which one could model search and obfuscation more concretely.
        Any model of price search engines must avoid two possible contradictions. The first is
the Bertrand paradox. A price search engine that caused all retailers to go out of business
would be of little use. The second is what we will call the search engine revenue paradox. If
a price search engine creates Bertrand-like competition, then retailers cannot pay the search
engine because they are making no profits, and consumers will not pay the search engine
because if there is no price dispersion they can just go directly to any retailer. We note that
it is easy to avoid these paradoxes if the search engine has adequate pricing instruments.
        Consider a retail sector consisting of a large number of firms selling a single undiffer-
entiated product. Suppose that the only way that retailers can reach consumers is via a
monopoly price search engine. The search engine can monitor sales that are made as a
result of its searches and charge retailers a referral fee of r for each sale made.7 Suppose
that the outcome of the price competition game between the listed retailers depends on two
parameters: the wholesale price w at which retailers acquire the good and a parameter s
that we call the level of “search frictions.” Assume that aggregate sales in this equilibrium
are Q∗ (w, s) and aggregate retailer profits are π r (w, s). Assume that these functions are
                                                       ∂Q∗          ∂Q∗          ∂π r             ∂π r
differentiable and that for small s we have            ∂w    < 0,    ∂s   < 0,   ∂w     < 0 and    ∂s    > 0.8
    7
      Yahoo! Shopping, for example, charges retailers 2% of their gross revenues on any sales made during
the course of a browser session in which the consumer was referred to the website by Yahoo! Shopping.
    8
      The one condition where one would expect “for small s” to bind most quickly is the last one, but given
the elasticities we report, we feel comfortable assuming that the firms in our data would prefer somewhat less
efficient search. A main observation of Diamond’s (1971) search model is that profits can be discontinuous
and jump to the monopoly price with a positive search cost. A large subsequent literature has explored
variants of the model in which intermediate search costs lead to intermediate outcomes. See Varian (1980),
Burdett and Judd (1983) and Stahl (1989). Bakos (1997) and Janssen and Moraga (2000) examine the
effects of search costs on prices and welfare. Bakos examines a model with horizontally differentiated firms
where consumers must pay a search cost to learn a firm’s location as well as its price and notes that lower


                                                      6
Assume that prices converge to marginal cost as s goes to zero so Q∗ (w, 0) = D(w) and
π r (w, 0) = 0.
    Suppose for now that the price search engine can costlessly choose any level of search
frictions s. Write c for the cost at which retailers acquire the good that they sell. The
problem facing the search engine is now

                                        Maxr,s rQ∗ (c + r, s).

Given that Q∗ is decreasing in s the optimal choice is to eliminate all search frictions (i.e.,
set set s = 0). The search engine’s problem is then simply the standard monopoly pricing
problem,
                                          Maxp (p − c)D(p),

where p ≡ c + r. The search engine sets r = pm − c and gets the full monopoly profit.
Retailers earn zero profits. This illustrates our first observation, that search engines would
like to reduce frictions.
    Our resolution to the search engine revenue paradox is that as long as search engines
can charge per sale referral fees, firms pass the referral fees on to consumers and search
engines can collect their revenues from retailers.9 The model does have the Bertrand-
paradox problem if retailers have fixed costs. In this case a couple of solutions would be
natural: the search engine could make fixed payments to the retailers to cover their fixed
costs, or, if that is not feasible, the search engine could choose the minimal level of search
frictions that would let the retailers recover their fixed costs.
    Now consider a model in which search engines and retailers must make costly invest-
ments to increase or decrease search frictions. Search frictions will then typically not be
eliminated, and the effect of technological progress on the level of search frictions is in-
determinate. This is our second observation. For example, the simplest balance-of-power
game would have the search engine choose an investment level xse at cost g(xse ; θ) while
search costs lead to lower prices and improved match quality. Janssen and Moraga examine a Stahl-style
model with undifferentiated products and two types of consumers and emphasize that in some cases prices
may be higher with lower search costs.
   9
     As in the literature on vertical restraints, there may be many other contracts that could be used to
extract the monopoly profits. For example, the search engine could refuse to post any price below the
monopoly price and charge each retailer a fixed fee equal to its expected market share times the monopoly
profit.


                                                   7
retailers simultaneously choose xr at cost h(xr ; θ), resulting in the level of search frictions
being s0 − xse + xr . The parameter θ indexes the state of technology. Whether increases in
θ increase or decrease equilibrium search frictions in a model like this is obviously indeter-
minate: it depends on whether the technology aids search-improving or search-obfuscating
more.
   A couple variants of the model are worth mentioning. First, suppose the the search
engine could also charge fixed fees. It would then charge a fixed fee of π r (s∗ ) − h(x∗r ; θ)
to extract the retailers’ profits. As long as the fixed and referral fees were chosen in a
stage prior to when the x’s were chosen, the determination of equilibrium search frictions
would be unchanged—the only difference would be that the retailers’ efforts at obfuscation
would just help them achieve a zero profit. Second, suppose that there were multiple search
engines competing to attract consumers. In a model with differentiation between search
engines á là Hotelling, the degree of differentiation determines the utility consumers receive.
The search engines will want to provide this utility level in the most efficient way possible.
In many models this would give search engines an incentive to reduce search frictions and
also lead them to charge lower referral fees than in the monopoly model.
   The only full models of price search engines we are aware of are those of Baye and
Morgan (2001, 2003). They do not consider the possibility of charging referral fees. They
nonetheless avoid the revenue paradox. The key insight is that differences from the Bertrand
model that one might think are trivial—the presence of an outside option for retailers
and/or positive listing fees—make the standard argument that the Bertrand game has no
mixed strategy equilibria inapplicable. It turns out that the model has a symmetric mixed
strategy equilibrium in which firms randomize both over whether to list and over the prices
to choose if they do. Both retailers and consumers are willing to pay positive fixed fees to
the search engine.

2.1     Incomplete consumer search

The model above treats “search frictions” very abstractly. How might one construct more
concrete micro models in which search frictions are determined by competing investments
by search engines and retailers?


                                               8
       One way would be to build on a standard search model. Stahl (1989), for example,
considers a model with two types of consumers. A fraction µ enjoy searching for low prices
and always learn the prices offered by all retailers (of which there are a finite number).
A fraction 1 − µ incur a cost of c for every price quote they obtain. Consumers are oth-
erwise identical and have downward sloping demands. Stahl notes that this model has a
unique symmetric equilibrium: retailers randomize over prices in some interval; informed
consumers purchase from the firm offering the lowest price; and the other consumers pur-
chase from the first store they visit provided that its price is below some threshold (which it
always is in equilibrium). The solution is continuous in µ and varies in the manner assumed
above if we define s ≡ 1 − µ: retailer profits are lower and demand is higher (in a first order
stochastic dominance sense) when the fraction of informed consumers is higher, and price
converges to cost in the limit as µ goes to one.10
       Building on this model, one could provide an explicit model of search frictions by assum-
ing that consumers are heterogeneous in their ability to digest the information presented on
a webpage. The search engine’s investment xse would be an investment in collecting infor-
mation and presenting it in a manner that is easier to understand. Retailers’ investments
xr would be investments in making pricing more complicated and difficult to describe. To
fit the model above exactly, one could assume that the distribution of consumer abilities is
such that after these investments are made, a fraction µ0 + xse − xr of consumers are able
to understand the webpage fully and thereby learn all firms’ prices, whereas the rest of the
consumers cannot understand the price information at all and must resort to visiting the
listed websites sequentially (in a random order) to understand each retailer’s price.11 The
analysis of the search and obfuscation game would then follow exactly as described above.
In any interior equilibrium, the model will exhibit positive retail markups, price dispersion
across retailers, and limited knowledge of prices by some consumers.
  10
     The solution has similar comparative statics in the c parameter, so one could alternately take s ≡ c as
the measure of search frictions. There are a number of search models in the literature, but Stahl’s model
stands out for having intuitively appealing comparative statics.
  11
     Stahl’s (1996) paper extends the model to allow for heterogeneity in search costs among the consumers
with positive search costs, so that some of the partially informed consumers will learn many prices whereas
others learn just one or a few.




                                                     9
2.2      Add-ons and adverse selection

Ellison (2003) describes an alternate approach to obfuscation in which obfuscation raises
retailer profits even though consumers either observe or correctly anticipate every retailer’s
price. The model (as one would reinterpret it to fit the search and obfuscation applica-
tion) involves two retailers, which are slightly differentiated á là Hotelling. Consumers are
heterogeneous both in their preferences over the two firms and in their marginal utilities
of income. The firms are assumed to sell a standard good that provides v utils (minus
transportation costs) to each consumer. They are also able to sell a damaged good that
provides only v − w utils.12 Critically, consumers can distinguish the damaged good from
the original, but the search engine cannot. For example, if the search engine is not de-
signed to collect and display shipping details the damaged good could be an offer to sell the
standard good accompanied by fine print stating that the shipping time will be one month.
Because the search engine cannot distinguish between the damaged and the standard good,
in equilibrium all listings will be for the damaged good. Each retailers’ website will also
contain a separate higher price for the undamaged goods, and consumers will need to incur
the cost of visiting each retailer’s website to learn what these “add-on” prices are. As in
Diamond (1971), the structure of the search costs makes the price of the add-on very high:
retailers charge the monopoly price for the incremental value of the standard good over the
damaged good. Consumers with rational expectations anticipate this and in equilibrium
are fully informed: they directly observe each firm’s price for the damaged good and cor-
rectly infer the prices that are not posted. Profits earned on the add-on may therefore be
partially or completely competed away in the form of lower prices for the listed goods.
      The interesting case of the model occurs when the amount of damage w and the het-
erogeneity in consumers’ marginal utilities of income lead some consumers to upgrade to
the undamaged good while others settle for the damaged good to save money. Notably,
the firms’ profits are higher when they compete by listing damaged good prices than they
would be if the damaged good did not exist or if the search engine were able to distinguish
damaged and undamaged goods. Moreover, the equilibrium profits are increasing in the
 12
      See Deneckere and McAfee (1996) for more on damaged goods.




                                                  10
amount of damage w. An intuition for the basic result is that when the firms sell damaged
goods, they create an adverse selection problem that makes firms hesitant to undercut each
other: a price cut will disproportionately attract cheapskates who buy the damaged good
at a low price (which is sometimes below cost).
         One could provide a second explicit model of “search frictions” by defining s ≡ w
and considering a game in which the search engines invest in developing software that can
recognize and inform consumers about different forms of damage, thereby reducing w, while
retailers invest in inventing new and creative ways to damage products, thereby increasing
w. This model would not exactly fit in the general framework described above for two
reasons. First, it needs some differentiation so prices will not drop all the way to cost as
search frictions vanish. Second, the higher prices that search frictions bring do not actually
reduce the quantity sold because consumers are assumed to have unit demands up to a
choke price that is not binding in equilibrium. The first should not matter for the search
and obfuscation game. The second is important. A slight modification of the model would,
however, both make it more realistic and make it fit within the general framework: one
would just need to make the consumers’ demands downward sloping.13


3         The Pricewatch universe; memory modules and CPUs

We study a segment of e-retail largely mediated by a price search engine called Pricewatch.
The Pricewatch universe is characterized by a large number of small, undifferentiated e-
retailers selling memory upgrades, CPUs, and other computer parts. The customers include
hobbyists building computers, IT support people, gamers, and other relatively savvy users
upgrading old computers, and proprietors of small computer stores. The retailers tend to
do little or no adversiting, to have rudimentary websites, to receive no venture capital, and
to run efficient, profit-maximizing operations. We assume that they receive a large fraction
of their customers through Pricewatch.
         One can use Pricewatch to locate a product in one of two ways. One can either type a
    13
    The unit demands in Ellison’s model are primarily there for tractability and to provide a neat contrast
by making add-on pricing completely irrelevant when there is less consumer heterogeneity. The best way to
construct a tractable model without unit demands might be to build on the model around logit demands as
in Verboven (1999) rather than around the Hotelling model.



                                                    11
technical product description, such as “Kingston PC2100 512MB,” into a search box, or one
can run through a multilayered menu to select one of a number of predefined product cat-
egories, e.g., clicking on “System Memory” and then on “PC133 128MB SDRAM DIMM.”
We believe that the latter is much more common. Pricewatch returns a list of products
sorted from cheapest to most expensive in a twelve-listings-per-page format. Note that
running through the menu leads to predefined, not user-defined, product categories, and
that some of these categories contain as many as 350 listings from 100 different websites.
The categories inescapably encompass products of varying quality, often including products
made by higher and lower quality manufacturers and always including offers in which the
product is bundled with different levels of service. Typically, the first several pages of a list
would contain only low quality offerings, the higher quality products at reasonable prices
buried deep within the list of 350 products. Figure 1 contains the first page of a typical
list, that for PC100 128MB memory modules from October 12, 2000. The low prices listed
on Pricewatch are very low. For example, in the period we study, generic memory modules
are typically offered for about one-half of the price that Dell charged for a Dell-branded
product.
   People who have not seen previous studies about price dispersion might think that it
is remarkable that there are so many different prices listed for nearly identical items on
Pricewatch. In comparison with previous studies, however, we think it is remarkable that
prices are so close together. In the early part of our data when a 128MB PC100 memory
module sold for about $100, the average difference between the lowest listed price and the
12th lowest listed price was about $8. Figure 2 illustrates the range over the course of the
year.
   Prices for most computer components have declined sharply. Retail prices for memory
modules, for example, dropped from about $100 per megabyte at the start of 1990 to about
10 cents per megabyte in September of 2003. Memory prices are also volatile. In Figure 2,
for example, we see that although prices declined by about 70% over the course of the year,
there are two periods of sharp price increases. Prices rose by about 50% between late May
and early July 2000 and by about 25% in less than two weeks in November 2000. Prices
for CPUs are less volatile and decline in a more orderly fashion.


                                               12
   A fascinating aspect of the Pricewatch lists (which greatly aids our econometric analysis)
is the substantial turnover from day to day and even from hour to hour. On average, three
of the twenty-four retailers on the first two pages of the above-mentioned list will change
their prices in a given hour. Each price change typically moves several other retailers up
or down one place on the list. Some websites are clearly big players that regularly occupy
a position near the top of the Pricewatch list. From time to time one may observe a firm
sitting in the first position for a week or more, but there is no rigid hierarchy.
   Some of this turnover can be attributed to the technology used by Pricewatch and the
various websites at the time. Pricewatch is a database-based system which relies on retailers’
updating their own prices in its database. Our impression is that all (or almost all) of the
retailers were setting prices in Pricewatch manually in the time period we study. A typical
retailer has dozens or hundreds of products listed in the Pricewatch database, making it
impractical to constantly monitor one’s place in each predefined product category and the
current wholesale prices for each product. Instead, a retailer might manually examine its
position on the most important Pricewatch categories a few times a day and might look at
current wholesale prices once or twice a day.

   Our sales and cost data come from a firm that operates several websites selling computer
components in the Pricewatch environment. We will examine the pricing of and demand
for their products within eight product categories (each of which corresponds to a popular
predefined search on Pricewatch): PC100 memory modules in both 128MB and 256MB;
PC133 memory modules in both 128MB and 256MB; and AMD Athlon processors in 650
MHz, 700 MHz, 750 MHz, and 800 MHz. In each of these categories, our firm offers a
number of products with varying quality levels, typically three.
   The first part of each memory module description, PC100 vs. PC133, refers to the
speed with which the memory communicates with the CPU. PC133 memory is better and
costs about the same. Despite this, sales of the two speeds of memory are comparable,
because the speed of a memory module must match the speed of a computer’s CPU and
motherboard. In the period we study, people who were upgrading old computers more
often needed to buy PC100 memory. Hobbyists building new computers usually wanted to



                                              13
build systems around AMD Athlon CPUs that required PC133 memory. The second part
of the product description is the capacity of the memory in megabytes. Many consumers
can substitute two 128MB modules for one 256MB modules, although some with older
motherboards could not use the “high density” 256MB modules found at the top of the
Pricewatch list and some consumers would be slot constrained. The 256MB modules are
about twice as expensive. Typically, one spends about $100 on memory when building an
inexpensive computer. In the summer of 2000 when 256MB modules cost about $250 most
of the demand at Pricewatch was for 128MB modules. In the spring of 2001 when 256MB
modules cost about $60, the two were about equally popular.
   The retailer that provided us with sales data sells three different products within each
Pricewatch memory category on each of its websites, e.g., each website sells three different
PC100 128MB memory modules, differentiated by quality of the DRAM and the board as
well as by contract terms. Figure 3 illustrates how a similar quality choice is presented to
consumers on a website that copied site A’s design. Making quality comparisons within a
website is much easier than making comparisons across websites: many memory modules are
unbranded and sites often contain minimal technical specifications. In this regard shopping
for a memory module can be similar to shopping for mattresses.
   The other set of products we study are AMD Athlon processors. Since an AMD Athlon
processor is a branded product, a “bare” Athlon with a given clock speed purchased from
any website should be identical to a bare Athlon purchased from any other website. The
primary purchasers of Athlon CPUs were hobbyists (or proprietors of small computer stores)
building new computers. CPUs come in many clock speeds. In early June 2000 prices ranged
from about $120 for a 500 MHz Athlon to over $1000 for a 1000 MHz Athlon (which was
not yet widely available). A typical way to make the speed vs. price tradeoff would be to
spend one-fourth of one’s total budget for a computer on the CPU. Pricewatch’s predefined
categories recognize that one should compare prices for processors with the same clock
speed. We will examine prices and demand within four of the categories that were most
popular in the summer of 2000: the 650 Mhz, 700 MHz, 750 MHz, and 800 MHz. Typical
prices for these CPUs ranged from $140 for the 650 MHz Athlon to $280 for the 800 MHz
Athlon.


                                            14
         Despite the fact that the 650 MHz Athlon is a branded product, offerings within the
650 MHz category fail to be homogeneous for two reasons. First, different retailers offer
different levels of service. Second, CPUs are often purchased together with a retailer-
installed fan/heatsink. One can buy a decent quality fan/heatsink combination for about
$5 and an experienced installer can attach it to the CPU in less than a minute. The
attachment can be tricky for a novice, though, and entails a nontrivial chance of ruining
the CPU. Retailers may offer to attach any of several fans, and each CPU-fan combination
should be viewed as a distinct product within the same Pricewatch category. For example,
one of the websites from which we have data typically offers three products within each
category: a bare CPU, a CPU attached to an AMD-approved fan, and a CPU together
with a premium-quality fan (and also bundled with better service terms and an extended
warranty). To reiterate, Pricewatch’s categories did not distinguish between CPUs with
and without fans (or with better or worse fans), so all of these products would appear in
the same Pricewatch list.


4         Observations of obfuscation

Over the last few years Pricewatch has made a number of enhancements to combat obfus-
cation. Practices that frustrate search nonetheless remain commonplace.
         One of the most visible search-and-obfuscation battles was fought over shipping costs.
In its early days Pricewatch did not collect information on shipping costs and sorted its
lists purely on the basis of the item price. Shipping charges grew to the point that it was
not uncommon for firms to list a price of $1 for a memory module and inform consumers
of a $40 “shipping and handling” fee when they went to check out. Pricewatch fought this
with a two-pronged approach: it mandated that all firms offer UPS ground shipping for a
fee no greater than a Pricewatch-set amount ($11 for memory modules); and it added a
column to its listing pages that either displayed the shipping charge (if the retailer reported
it) or a warning that customers should be wary of stores that do not report their shipping
charges.14 Many retailers adopted an $11 shipping fee for memory modules in response, but
uncertainty about the cost of UPS ground shipping was not completely eliminated because a
    14
         Our empirical work is based on data from the period when these policies were in effect.


                                                        15
number of retailers left the column blank or (more commonly) reported a range of shipping
charges. The meaning of “UPS ground shipping” was also subject to manipulation: one
company explicity stated on its website that items ordered with the standard UPS ground
shipping were given lower priority for packing than other orders and might take two weeks to
arrive. More recently, Pricewatch mandated that retailers provide it with shipping charges
and switched to sorting low-price lists based on shipping-inclusive prices (which are based
on the maximum shipping charge if a range is given). This appears to have worked as
desired, although it only provides the desired information for customers who prefer ground
shipping: customers who wish to upgrade to 3rd-, 2nd-, or next-day air must look through
the retailers’ websites manually.
   One of the potential models of obfuscation we discussed involved firms’ trying to increase
customers’ inspection costs and/or to reduce the fraction of customers who will buy from
the firm on the top of the search engine’s list without doing any firm-by-firm searching. We
observed several practices that might serve this purpose. The most effective seems to be
bundling low-quality goods with unattractive contractual terms, like providing no warranty
and charging a 20% restocking fee on all returns. Given the variety of terms we observed,
it would seem unwise to purchase a product listed on Pricewatch without reading the fine
print. Another is making advertised prices difficult to find. In 2001 it took us quite a bit of
time to find prices listed on Pricewatch on several retailers’ sites. In a few cases, we never
found the listed prices. Several other firms were explicit that Pricewatch prices were only
available on telephone orders. Given that phone calls are more costly for the retailers, we
can only assume that firms either wanted people to waste time on hold or intended to make
them sit through sales pitches. Pricewatch has fought these practices in several ways. For
example, it added a “buy now” button, which (at least in theory) takes customers directly
to the advertised product.
   The second obfuscation mechanism we discussed is the adoption of a “loss-leader” or
“add-on” pricing scheme: damaged goods are listed on the search engine at low prices and
websites are designed to convince customers attracted by the low prices to upgrade to a
higher quality product. Such practices are now ubiquitous on Pricwatch. Figure 3 is one
example. Customers who try to order a generic memory module from Buyaib.com at the


                                              16
price advertised on Pricewatch.com are directed to this page. It illustrates several ways
in which the low priced product is inferior to other products the company sells (at higher
markups). Figure 4 is another example. A consumer who tries to order a generic module
from Tufshop.com is taken to this page, from which a number of complementary products,
upgrades, and services. The figure presents the webpage as it initially appears. To avoid
purchasing the various add-ons the consumer must read through the various options and
unclick several boxes. After completing this page, a Tufshop.com customer is taken to
another on which he or she must choose from a long list of shipping options. These include
paying $15.91 extra to upgrade from UPS ground to UPS 3-day, $30.96 extra to upgrade
to UPS 2-day, and $45.96 extra to upgrade to UPS next day.15
       Our impression is that the practices are also consistent with the add-on pricing model
in terms of the low-priced goods being of inefficiently low quality. In Pricewatch’s CPU
categories all of the listings on the first few pages were bare CPUs. We are told that most of
the “generic modules” at the top of Pricewatch’s memory lists are very low quality products
that are much more likely to have problems than are other modules that can sometimes be
purchased wholesale for just one or two dollars more. We know that the wholesale price
difference is occasionally so small as to induce the retailer from which we got our data
to ship “medium quality” generic modules to customers who ordered low quality modules
(without telling the customers) because it felt the time cost and hassle of dealing with
returns was not worth the cost savings.
       Obfuscation could presumably take many forms in addition to those we outlined in
our theory section. One is that firms could try to confuse boundedly-rational consumers.
Presumably, this would involve either tricking consumers into paying more for a product
than it is worth to them or altering their utility functions in a way that raises equilibrium
profits.16 Our impression is that many Pricewatch e-retailers sites’ are intentionally con-
fusing. For example, whereas several sites will provide consumers with product comparison
  15
    The incremental costs to Tufshop of the upgraded delivery methods are about $4, $6, and $20.
  16
    Following our work on obfuscation, Gabaix and Laibson (2004) have developed a model of consumer
confusion. They assume confused consumers behave exactly as if they had stronger idiosyncratic preferences
for one firm relative to the other in a standard horizontal differentiation model. Hence, an analysis of
pricing and incentives to invest in confusing consumers is identical to an analysis of firms that can invest
in differentiation. Welfare consequences are different, however, because the idiosyncratic factors that make
consumers prefer product A over product B are not preferences that contribute to utility.


                                                    17
lists like that in Figure 3, we did not see any that augmented such a comparison with a
description of what “CAS latency” means to help consumers think about whether they
should or shouldn’t care about it.
         As mentioned above, Pricewatch is a database-based facility that requires that retailers
enter their prices into a database. This scheme for running a price search website seems
to be gaining relative to the alternate technology of using shopbots to maintain a price
database or to search for prices in realtime whenever a consumer requests them. One
explanation for this must be that the shopbot approach can result in substantial delays
while the site searches. Another may be that the shopbot approach may be even more
prone to obfuscation. In 2001, for example, Yahoo! Shopping search engine should have
had a much easier time organizing products than a general search engine because it only
searched sites hosted by Yahoo. Yahoo collected a royalty on all sales made by merchants
through Yahoo! Shopping (as well as a monthly fee based on the number of items offered
at a Yahoo! Store), so there must have been some standardization of listing and ordering
mechanics. Nonetheless, when we typed “128MB PC100 SDRAM DIMM” into the search
box and sorted on price, the five lowest listed prices were from merchants who had figured
out how to get Yahoo! Shopping’s search engine to think the price is zero even though a
human who clicks over to the retailer can easily see the price (and see that it is 50-100%
above the Pricewatch price). The next hundred or so cheapest items on Yahoo’s search
results were also either products for which Yahoo’s search engine had misinterpreted the
price or items which were inexpensive because they were not the desired product.17


5         Data

Our price data were downloaded from Pricewatch.com. They contain information on the
twelve (sometimes twenty-four) lowest price offerings within each of the eight predefined
    17
    In 2001 it was possible to use Yahoo! Shopping’s search engine to get a well-sorted list and find low
prices if one was experienced with it. In 2003 Yahoo! Shopping’s search engine conducts a broad search
not restricted to Yahoo! Shops and affiliates. The list returned in response to a corresponding search no
longer begins with a large number of sites that Yahoo thinks have zero prices, but it does begin with a large
number of sites for which it has incorrectly parsed the HTML and inferred the price to be less than it truly
is. Most of these mistakes appear to be accidental rather than due to a plan by the retailers to fool the
Yahoo! Shopping search engine.




                                                     18
categories mentioned above.18 These data were collected at hourly frequency from May
2000 to May 2001.19 Recall that Pricewatch’s predefined categories are somewhat coarse.
The vast majority of the products for which we downloaded prices are what we could call
“low-quality” products.
       In addition to the price data for these “low-quality” products, we obtained price and
quantity data from one Internet retailer. The data contain the prices and quantities sold
for all products that fit within the eight Pricewatch categories, often three different quality
products in each category. The firm operates several different (but similar) websites, which
typically have different prices for the products studied.20 We use data from three websites,
which we will simply call A, B, and C.
       The raw data are at the level of the individual order and indicate from which website the
customer made the purchase. We currently have approximately a year of sales data starting
in May of 2000. We aggregate the individual orders to produce daily sales totals for each
product at each website.21 Our primary price variables are the average transaction prices
for sales of a given product on a given day.22 We also record the daily average position of
each website on Pricewatch’s price ranked list.
       The same Internet retailer also provided us with data on wholesale acquisition costs
for each product. The firm maintains very low inventories. Some products are purchased
from wholesalers every few days or once a week. Others are purchased almost every day.
The firm often has a “negative” inventory of the most popular memory modules, buying
them each afternoon to fill the backlog of retail orders taken that morning and the previous
  18
     We collected the twenty four lowest prices for the 128MB PC100 and 128MB PC133 memory modules
and the twelve lowest prices in each of the other six categories.
  19
     We used Go!Zilla to carry out the downloads.
  20
     Among the motivations for having several websites are that different websites may be given different
looks and consumers may have heterogeneous reactions, that it allows the websites to be more specialized
(which seems to be attractive to some consumers), that it facilitates experimentation, that it may help
promote private-label branded products, and that it lets the firm occupy multiple places on the Pricewatch
screen.
  21
     Here, a “product” includes also the quality level, e.g., a high-quality 128MB PC100 module.
  22
     Transaction prices are unavailable for products which have zero sales on a given day. If low-quality
products ever have zero sales, then we fill the prices in using the listed prices from Pricewatch, since these
prices are quite volatile. Prices for the other products change less often and can be filled in fairly completely
by just assuming that prices are constant in the gaps between times when we observe identical transaction
price observations. We also fill in a few other values by looking at when low-quality prices and prices at
other websites operated by the firm changed.




                                                       19
evening. The data provided to us contain wholesale prices whenever the firm purchased a
particular product.23
       Our analysis of memory module demand uses data from websites A and B. These two
websites have identical product lineups: they sell three products within each memory mod-
ule category, which we refer to as the low-, the medium-, and the high-quality module. Our
dataset on memory modules contains between 575 and 683 observations in each category.24
Summary statistics for each of the four categories are presented in Table 1. Note that the
data are at the level of the website-day, so the number of days covered is approximately half
of the number of observations. LowestP rice is the lowest price listed on Pricewatch (which
is presumably for a low-quality memory module.)25 Range1-12 is the difference between
the twelfth lowest listed price and the lowest listed price. Note that the price distribution is
fairly tight. P Low, P M id and P Hi are the prices for the three qualities of memory mod-
ules at the two websites. P LowRank is rank of the website’s first entry in Pricewatch’s
sorted list of prices within the category in question.26 This variable turns out to allow us to
predict sales much better than we can with simple functions of the cardinal price variables.
Note that the websites we study are consistently near the top of the Pricewatch list: the
average prices for the low-quality products they sell are within 10% of the average lowest
price on Pricewatch in all four categories. QLow, QM id and QHi are the average daily
quantities of each quality of module sold by each website. The majority of the sales are the
low-quality modules.
       We have not broken the summary statistics down by website. Website A’s prices are
usually lower than website B’s, but there is no rigid relationship. For example, in the 128MB
  23
     The only products purchased infrequently are CPU fans. This does not cause any substantial incom-
pleteness of the data because prices of CPU fans rarely change.
  24
     Data are occasionally missing due to failures of the program we used to collect data and missing data
in the files the firm provided. We left gaps in the price curves in Figure 2 to indicate the frequency with
which we were missing data. The 256MB prices are missing for most of the last six weeks, so we chose to
use mid-March rather than May as the end of the 256MB samples.
  25
     The Pricewatch data are hourly. Daily variables are constructed by taking a weighted average across
hours using weights that reflect the average hourly sales volumes of the websites we study.
  26
     We only know a sites’ Pricewatch rank if it is among the 24 lowest priced websites for 128MB modules
or the 12 lowest priced websites for 256MB modules or Athlon processors. When a site’s price is too high
and it does not appear on the lists we downloaded from Pricewatch we set P LowRank equal to one one
more than the number of firms appearing on the lists we collected, i.e. 25 for 128MB modules and 13 for the
other products. In the 128MB category this happens for fewer than 1% of the observations. In the 256MB
category this happens for 3% of the site A observations and 14% of the site B observations.



                                                    20
PC100 memory module category, website A’s low-quality price is lower on 251 days, the
same on 27 days, and higher on 60 days. In this category the price differences are usually
quite small, e.g. they are two dollars or less more than 70% of the time. In the 256MB
categories the price differences are somewhat larger: the median is five dollars. As one
would expect, Site A also has higher sales volumes. For example, it is responsible for about
70% of the sales of low-quality 128MB PC100 memory modules.
   Our analysis of demand patterns for AMD Athlon processors uses data from websites B
and C. Athlon sales drop off sharply in the fall of 2000 following AMD’s introduction of the
improved Athlon Thunderbird. Accordingly, we analyze data from a shorter period, May to
November of 2000. An additional factor complicating the analysis is that sites B and C do
not have identical product lineups. Site C offers three products within each processor-speed
category: the “low quality” product is usually a bare CPU (although the firm experimented
briefly with selling a CPU with a nonapproved fan instead); the “medium quality” product
has an AMD-approved fan/heatsink attached; and the “high quality” product is a CPU
with a premium quality dual fan. Site B offers two products in each category: the bare CPU
and the CPU with a dual fan. The fact that sites B and C have separate sets of offerings
forces us to analyze site B’s sales and site C’s sales in separate regressions. The combination
of this and the shorter time period led us to pool data from the four clock-speed categories
and restrict the coefficients to be identical across clock speeds except for additive clock-
speed dummies. Table 2 contains summary statistics for the Athlon processor data broken
down as it is used in the regressions. The first panel refers to the data on site B’s sales and
the second to site C’s sales. The unit of observation is the clock speed-day. Hence, each
panel summarizes a dataset with four observations per day, and the mean prices reported
are averages across clock speeds. The minimum price of $105.25 for P Low on site B is what
a bare 650MHz Athlon cost near the end of the sample. The maximum price of $302.45 is
what a bare 800MHz Athlon cost near the start of the sample. The mean prices for P Low
and P Hi in the website B data reflect that customers of website B would on average need
to pay about $39 more to get a CPU with a fan attached. Unit sales of CPUs are lower than
unit sales of memory modules. This will also reduce the precision of our estimates. The
fraction of consumers who buy upgraded products is a little higher than in the memory


                                              21
data: 39% of the customers of website B and 56% of the customers of website C buy a
medium- or high-quality product.


6         Demand patterns

In this section we estimate the demand elastiticies Pricewatch e-retailers face and examine
how consumers substitute between low-, medium-, and high-quality products. We do this
both to provide new descriptive evidence on the functioning of online markets and to provide
empirical evidence on the theories of obfuscation discussed above.

6.1        Methodology for demand estimation

Our primary interest is in how website w’s sales of low-, medium-, and high-quality products
depend on its prices for the three products and on its competitors’ prices. Specifically, we
suppose that within each product category c, the quantity of quality q products purchased
from website w on day t is
                                         Qwcqt = eXwct βcq +uwcqt ,

with

Xwct βcq = βcq0 + βcq1 log(1 + P LowRankwct ) + βcq2 log(P M idwct ) + βcq3 log(P Hiwct )
                                                                                        12
                                                                                        X
                   +βcq4 log(LowestP ricect ) + βcq5 W eekendt + βcq6 SiteBw +                βcq6+s T imeT rendst .
                                                                                        s=1

         In this equation P LowRankwct is the rank of website w’s low-quality offering on Price-
watch’s list of the lowest prices in category c. It is the primary variable that we use to
capture how website w’s low-quality price differs from those of the other firms listed on
Pricewatch. P M idwct and P Hiwct are the prices of website w’s medium- and high-quality
offerings.27 The T imeT rend variables allow for a piecewise linear time trend with a slope
that changes every 30 days. We think of the fourth price variable, LowestP ricect , mainly
as an additional control variable.28
    27
      Medium- and high-quality cannot be defined consistently across retailers. Accordingly, we have no data
on competitors’ prices for comparable products to include in the regressions.
   28
      We do not treat the variable as providing an estimate of the elasticity of the aggregate demand at
all Pricewatch retailers as a function of their price because we lack data on prices at traditional retailers.
Interpretation would be even more difficult in the medium- and high-quality demand regressions because
the coefficient on LowestP rice will also reflect how decisions depend on medium- and high-quality prices
relative to low-quality prices.


                                                     22
   We estimate the demand equations via GMM. Specifically, for most of our estimates we
assume that the error term uwcqt satisfies E(euwcqt |Xwct ) = 1 so that we can estimate the
models using the moment condition

                               E(Qwcqt e−Xwct βcq − 1|Xwct ) = 0

These estimates are done separately for each product category and each quality level. Stan-
dard errors were computed with a Newey-West style approach.
   The coefficients on the logs of the prices of the medium- and high-quality modules can
be directly interpreted as elasticities. To construct elasticities of demand with respect to
a website’s low-quality price, we treat log(1 + P LowRank) as a continuous variable and
compute estimated elasticities when all variables are at their means by setting the derivative
of P LowRank with respect to a change in P Low equal to the inverse of the average distance
between the twelve lowest prices.
   This approach presumes that the price variables are not endogenous. Although we
present estimates in a later section that do not assume exogeneity of prices, these non-
instrumented estimates are our preferred ones for two reasons. First and most importantly,
we think that little of the variation in our e-retailers’ prices is due to its using information
about demand. The firm appears to have little information about whether particular days
or times might be good ones to be higher or lower on Pricewatch’s lists. Most of the
changes in our e-retailer’s ranks, in fact, are not due to any decisions: the e-retailer has
limited attention to devote to each of the dozens of Pricewatch lists on which its products
appear, and most rank changes are due to other firms changing their prices.
   The person who sets prices noted in discussions with us that he would typically change
his low-quality prices for one of three reasons. First, a few times a day he checks some of
the Pricewatch lists and may raise or lower a price if a rank has drifted too far from where
he typically leaves it. Second, once a day or so he receives updated wholesale price lists
and may change a price in response to a wholesale price change. Third, he occasionally
raises prices if order-processing or shipping employees have failed to show up for work.
Less attention is paid to medium- and high-quality prices. These are typically left fixed for
several weeks at a time.


                                              23
       Second, given our assumed functional form for demand, economic theory implies that
prices should not be endogenous. In our demand model, shocks increase or decrease demand
multiplicatively. In such an environment, the profit-maximizing price of a firm with constant
marginal costs is independent of the realization of the demand shock. Hence, prices set to
maximize profits would not be endogenous even if the firm observed the demand shock
before setting its price.
       Despite these arguments, we do also estimate our model using two distinct sets of
instruments for P LowRank, P M id, and P Hi. These estimates are obtained from a GMM
estimation of the moment condition

                                E(Qwcqt e−Xwct βcq − 1|Wwct ) = 0,

where Wwct is a vector containing the instruments instead of the prices. We discuss this
estimation in section 6.5.

6.2      Basic results on demand

Table 3 presents estimates of demand from one of our product categories: 128MB PC100
memory modules. The first column of the table contains estimates of the demand equation
for low-quality 128MB PC100 modules. The second and third columns contain estimates of
the demand for medium- and high-quality 128MB PC100 modules, respectively. Coefficient
estimates are presented with t-statistics in parentheses below them.
       Our first main empirical result is that the demand for low-quality modules a website
faces is extremely price sensitive. This is due to a combination of two factors. First, a price
change of a few dollars can move a website up or down several places on the Pricewatch
list. Second, most people buying low-quality memory modules buy them from one of the
first few firms on the Pricewatch list. The coefficient estimate on the log(1 + P LowRank)
variable in the first column implies that moving from from first to second on the list reduces
a website’s sales of low-quality modules by 45% and dropping from first to seventh reduces
sales by 87%.29 This feature of demand is remarkably clear in the data—we get a t-statistic
of 15.1 in a regression with only 683 observations.
  29
    A move from first to second increases log(1 + P LowRank) from from log(2) ≈ 0.69 to log(3) ≈ 1.1,
thereby reduces log-quantity by 1.48 ∗ 0.41 ≈ 0.6.


                                                 24
   Table 4 presents demand elasticities. The upper left number in the upper left panel
indicates that the 1.48 coefficient estimate in the low-quality 128MB PC100 demand equa-
tion corresponds to an own-price elasticity of -25.0. In each of the other memory module
categories the corresponding elasticity is even larger. The estimates range from -33.0 in
the 128MB PC133 category to -41.4 in the 256MB PC133 category. These elasticities are a
powerful illustration of the potential that price search has to create a real Bertrand paradox.
The familiar Lerner index formula for equilibrium markups with competing single-product
retailers, (P − M C)/P = −1/η, implies that if retailers sold only low-quality products,
their markups over marginal cost would be 2.5% to 4%. Even efficient, non-advertising
retailers would find it difficult to survive with such markups.
   A second striking empirical result in Table 3 is that low quality memory is an effec-
tive loss leader. In the second column of the table, note that the coefficient on log(1 +
P LowRank) is negative and highly significant. This means that controlling for the prices
a website charges for medium- and high-quality memory and for the lowest price at which
low-quality memory is available, it sells more medium-quality memory if its price for low-
quality memory is lower. Ordinarily one would expect the opposite relationship because
low- and medium-quality memory are subsititutes. Apparently, however, what many con-
sumers are doing is using Pricewatch to find a set of websites offering the lowest prices
for low-quality memory, clicking through to those websites to examine their offerings fur-
ther, and then sometimes purchasing a higher quality product. The higher a firm is on the
Pricewatch list, the more such consumers it attracts. The loss leader effect is very large.
The -0.76 coefficient estimate indicates that moving from first to seventh on the Pricewatch
list for (low-quality) 128MB PC100 memory reduces a website’s sales of medium-quality
128MB PC100 memory by 65%. The first coefficient in the third column indicates that
the loss-leader benefits include sales of high-quality memory as well. The -0.41 coefficient
indicates that moving from first to seventh on the Pricewatch list for low-quality memory
would reduce high-quality memory sales by 43%.
   Although it is common in marketing to talk about loss leaders, the empirical marketing
literature on the effectiveness of loss leaders has produced mixed results (Walters, 1988;
Walters and McKenzie, 1988; Chevalier, Kashyap and Rossi, 2000). We are not aware of


                                              25
any evidence nearly as clear our results.
   A third noteworthy result is the fact that the coefficients on the site B dummy are neg-
ative and significant in all three regressions. They indicate that when the two sites charge
the same prices, site B sells substantially fewer memory modules. It is especially less suc-
cessful at selling high-quality memory modules. We find this to be a striking demonstration
of the importance and difficulty of effective website design. Website A and website B are
owned by the same firm. They were designed by the same people. They share the same
telephone operators and packing employees and hence provide exactly the same level of ser-
vice quality. A few attributes should make website B more attractive to some customers:
it had slightly lower shipping charges for part of the sample; it offers a broader variety of
additional products that may be purchased at the same time; and at the time it had a
higher customer feedback rating at ResellerRatings.com. Nonetheless, it is not as effective
at selling memory. One hypothesis the firm suggested to us is that some customers may
prefer to buy memory from a website (like site A) that specializes in memory.
   The significance levels in this table are similar to what we find in the other memory
categories. The log(1 + P LowRank), W eekend, and SiteB variables are usually highly
significant. The other variables are usually insignificant.
   The one way in which the results for the 128MB PC100 category are unusual is that
the own-price elasticities of medium- and high-quality memory are precisely estimated. A
difficulty with our estimation strategy is that prices for medium- and high-quality memory
modules change infrequently. As a result, they are highly collinear with the flexible time
trends that we have included in the model. This problem is particularly severe in the
256MB categories because the effective sample size is reduced by the fact that most of the
memory is sold toward the end of the data period.
   We report elasticity matrices for the other memory categories in Table 4, but to save
space we have not included full tables of demand estimates. The elasticity tables reveal that
we find large own-price elasticities and large loss-leader benefits consistently across cate-
gories. The finding of a negative coefficient on SiteB is consistent, although the magnitude
varies somewhat. It is larger in some of the 256MB regressions.
   Table 8 presents estimates of the demand for AMD Athlon CPUs sold through website


                                              26
C. The first column gives parameter estimates of the demand for low quality (bare) CPUs.
The second column reports on the demand for the website’s medium-quality offering: a
CPU with an AMD-approved fan attached. The third column reports on demand for the
website’s high-quality offering: a CPU with a premium quality dual fan. The demand for
low-, medium-, and high-quality CPUs is quite similar to the demand for low-, medium-,
and high-quality memory modules in a number of ways. The demand for the low-quality
product is highly dependent on the website’s position on the Pricewatch list. (Moving
from first to seventh is predicted to lower demand by about 80%. This corresponds to an
own-price elasticity of -27.7 for the low-quality product.) There is a significant loss-leader
benefit: when the firm’s price for a bare CPU puts it near the top of the Pricewatch list it
sells many more of the medium-quality CPU/fan combinations. For part of our sample the
firm sold a CPU with a non-AMD-approved fan rather than a bare CPU as its lowest-quality
product. It abandoned this experiment after just a few weeks because too many customers
were buying the low-quality product instead of upgrading. The coefficient estimate on the
LowHasF an variable in the third column indicates that there is clear statistical evidence
that the alternate product lineup led to many fewer sales of CPUs with premium-quality
fans. As in many of the product categories the own-price elasticities of medium- and high-
quality products cannot be precisely estimated.
    To save space we do not report estimates of the demand for CPUs through site B. The
estimates are qualitatively similar. The own price elasticity of site B’s low-quality offering
(a bare CPU) is estimated to be -28.3.

6.3    The mechanics of obfuscation: incomplete consumer search

The first explicit model of obfuscation we discussed in section 2 was Stahl’s model of
search with heterogeneous consumers. In Stahl’s model, consumers do not learn all prices.
We noted that any action that raised the cost of learning about each firm’s offerings or
that forced more consumers to conduct firm-by-firm searches could be regarded as a form
of obfuscation. In this section we exploit a feature of our dataset to provide additional
evidence that consumers are not fully informed about the prices charged by the Pricewatch
retailers.


                                             27
       Our data do not provide any easy way to see whether consumer learning about the
low-quality offerings is incomplete. The market share advantage of firms ranked more
highly on the Pricewatch list could reflect that some consumers have not examined the
offers by firms farther from the top of the list, but it could also be attributable purely
to price differences and idiosyncratic consumer preferences. The structure of our dataset
does, however, provides a nice opportunity to examine whether consumer learning about
higher quality products and prices is incomplete. We have data on two websites that offer
identical products. If all consumers learned about each site’s prices for medium- and high-
quality memory, then we would expect that most of consumers buying medium-quality
memory from one of the two sites would buy it from the cheaper site. Differences between
low-quality prices should not help predict which site sells more medium-quality memory.30
       To provide a straightforward analysis of how consumers medium- and high-quality mem-
ory choose between site A and site B we estimate simple logit models on the consumer-level
data using a dummy for whether each consumer chose to buy from site A (versus site B) as
the dependent variable. Formally, we assume each customer i choosing to buy a category
c quality q product from site A or site B at time t makes this choice to maximimize his
utility uiwcqt over the website w with

        uiwcqt = β1 log(1 + P LowRankwcqt ) + β2 log(Pwcqt ) + β3 T imeT rendt + ηcq + iw ,

with ηcq a quality-category fixed effect and iw a standard logit error. The first right-hand
side variable reflects a site’s position on the Pricewatch list for the category. The second is
the site’s price for the product that being purchased. Note that the estimated coefficients
for different product categories and different quality levels are constrained to be equal (for
parsimony). If consumers are fully informed, one would expect that β1 would be zero and
that β2 would be negative.
       The first column of Table 7 reports estimates from a regression run on a dataset contain-
ing observations from all four memory categories and on both medium- and high-quality
  30
    One could imagine that the coefficient on log(1 + P LowRank) was significant in the medium-quality
regressions we ran earlier, not because consumers were less than fully informed about prices, but only
because a site’s rank on the low-quality product is correlated with its rank on the medium-quality product
(which is not well-defined and, therefore, not included in the regression). This alternate interpretation is no
longer possible when we study the relative shares of the two websites with identical products sold at prices
we know.


                                                      28
modules. The coefficients on log(1 + P LowRank) and log(P ) are both significant. The
standard deviation of the difference in log(1 + P LowRank) across websites is more than
ten times larger than the standard deviation of the difference in log(P ), so the coefficient
estimates can be thought of as indicating the a firm’s position on the low-quality Price-
watch list has a slightly stronger effect than does its price for the item being purchased.
This suggests that there are a substantial number of consumers who are informed about
both sites’ prices and a substantial number who are not.
   The second and third columns report estimates from the same regressions run separately
on medium-quality and high-quality memory modules. In both cases the results indicate
clearly that the low-quality module’s position on the Pricewatch list is an important deter-
minant of sales of medium- and high-quality modules. In the medium-quality case, we are
unable to find significant evidence that the relative prices of medium-quality modules on
the two sites affects where consumers buy them. In the high-quality case, the sites’ prices
for the high-quality products appear to be playing a more important role.

6.4   The mechanics of obfuscation: add-ons and adverse selection

The second explicit model of obfuscation we discussed in Section 2 was a variant on the
rational expectations add-on pricing model of Ellison (2003). In this model the practice of
posting prices for damaged goods and requiring consumers to visit a site to learn its prices
for higher quality goods raises prices even if consumers (in equilibrium) correctly anticipate
what each retailer’s prices for the higher quality goods will be. The main reason for this
is that adopting add-on pricing creates an adverse selection problem that discourages price
cutting: a firm that cuts prices will disproportionately attract cheapskates who are less
likely than other customers to buy higher-quality products.
   In the section on basic results, we verified one implication of this model, that the low-
quality products were attracting customers who upgraded to the higher quality products, or,
in other words, that the low-quality products were effective loss leaders. This was reflected
in negative coefficients on log(1+P LowRank) in the medium- and high-quality regressions.
In this section, we examine the evidence on the theory’s more important prediction, that the
use of the add-on pricing creates an adverse selection problem (which would be expected to


                                             29
lead to higher prices). In our demand system, such an adverse selection problem would be
reflected in the coefficient on log(1 + P LowRank) being larger in the low-quality regression
than in the medium- and high-quality regressions. The larger coefficient indicates that
lowering the price of the low-quality product would lead to a larger proportional increase
in low-quality sales than in medium- or high-quality sales. Table 6 reports the coefficient
estimates on the log(1 + P LowRank) variable in the seventeen demand regressions we ran:
three quality levels in each of the four memory module categories; three quality levels in
the regression examining CPUs sold through site C; and two quality levels in the regression
examining CPUs sold through site B.
       In all cases, the pattern of the coefficient estimates is consistent with the presence of an
adverse selection effect. In every category (i.e. in every column of the table) the coefficient
estimate from the low-quality regression is larger than the coefficient estimates from the
medium- and high-quality regressions. Most of the differences are statistically significant.
To offer a sense of the magnitudes suggested by these coefficient estimates, consider the
estimates from the 128MB PC100 column. A move from first to third on the Pricewatch
list would result in 64%, 41%, and 25% decreases in unit sales of low-, medium-, and high-
quality modules, respectively. An alternative way for us to offer intuition for the magnitude
of this adverse selection effect (and a way to do so avoiding any worries about results being
driven by functional form assumptions) it to look at the firm’s quality mix using simple
sample means. For example, when site A or site B is first on one of the Pricewatch lists for
256MB memory, 63% of its unit sales are low-quality memory. On days when one of them
is in tenth place, only 35% of the unit sales are low-quality memory.31 .
       Finally, we also find Table 6 striking for the consistency of the estimates across product
catgories. We cannot reject the hypothesis that the six coefficient estimates in the first row
are identical. Nor can we reject the equality of the five estimates in the second row, nor of
the five estimates in the third row. Given that the products in the different categories differ
in price, that moving up or down one rank involves changing the item price by a different
  31
    Medium quality sales increase from 16% of total unit sales to 21% and high-quality sales from 21% to
40%. Total sales, of course, are much lower when the firm is in the tenth position so these “increases” are
decreases in unit sales of the higher quality products being offset by even larger decreases of the low-quality
product



                                                      30
number of dollars in the different categories, and that the attributes that distinguish the
quality levels differ between memory modules and CPUs, we find this regularity intriguing.

6.5      Instrumental variables estimates

We have assumed so far that variation in a website’s rank on the Pricewatch list and in its
medium- and high-quality prices is exogenous. We have argued that this is a reasonable
assumption, but in this section will investigate the robustness of our conclusions to two
instrumental variables strategies.
       We feel that there are two primary sources of exogenous variation in our websites’ prices
(relative to the prices of competing websites). First, because monitoring other firms’ prices
and changing one’s prices involves a time cost, the websites’ ranks on the Pricewatch lists
drift as other sites change prices during periods in which our firm is inattentive. Second,
the firm will raise or lower its prices in response to cost shocks. One source of such shocks
is unexpected employee absences that make it more difficult to process a normal day’s
order flow. Another is variation in the firm’s wholesale acquisition costs. The latter are
more common, but less clearly suitable for use as instruments because (1) they will not
lead to variation in a firm’s Pricewatch rank if wholesale prices for low-quality modules are
common to all firms; and (2) prices of other firms’ higher quality products are an omitted
variable that may be correlated with wholesale prices of medium- and high-quality memory
(especially in the medium- and high-quality demand regressions).
       We have constructed two sets of instruments we will use to estimate demand for 128MB
PC100 memory modules, which we call “other speed” instruments and “cost” instruments.
The “other speed” instruments are the contemporaneous values of log(1 + P LowRank),
log(P M id), and log(P Hi) for the same website but for a different product, 128MB PC133
memory. These variables may reflect both sources of exogenous variation in PC100 memory
prices: the website’s ranks in the two categories could drift in unison during periods of
inattention; and if employees do not show up for work, the firm may raise its prices in all
product categories.32 If the demands for PC100 and PC133 memory are independent (recall
  32
    Memory prices have a strong downward trend so a firm’s rank in each category will drift up during long
periods of inattention. In practice, the correlation is strong but far from perfect. In the 128MB PC100
category, for example, the R-squared of a regression of log(1 + P LowRank100 ) on log(1 + P LowRank133 ),



                                                   31
that the products are not substitutes for most consumers), then the PC133 ranks would be
exogenous. The “cost” instruments for log(1 + P LowRank), log(P M id), and log(P Hi) are
derived from our data on the firm’s acquisition costs for low-, medium-, and high-quality
128MB PC100 memory modules.33 If the wholesale prices for low-quality memory our firm
faces are not perfectly correlated with the prices other firms face, then the low-quality
wholesale price should be correlated with the firm’s Pricewatch ranks.34
    Table 8 reports estimates of the demand equations for 128MB PC100 memory modules
(comparable to those in Table 3) obtained using the two sets of instruments. In the first
low quality regression (in the first column of the table), the coefficient estimate on the
log(1 + P LowRank) variable is unchanged and the variable remains highly significant.
Again we find that the demand for low-quality products is extremely price-sensitive. The
coefficient estimates on the log(1+P LowRank) variable in the next two columns are reduced
from their values in the uninstrumented variables by about one-half. The standard errors
are substantially increased, failing to provide significant evidence either that loss leader
effects exist or that our previous estimates of the loss leader benefit were too large. We
can, however, reject the hypothesis that the coefficient estimates in the medium- and high-
quality regression are as large as the coefficient estimate from the low-quality regression.
Hence, the results confirm that the loss leader pricing creates an adverse selection problem.
The standard errors on the log(P M id) and log(P Hi) variables are also increased.
    Again, with the “cost” instruments, the log(1+P LowRank) variable remains significant
in the low-quality regression confirming our finding about extreme price-sensitivity. Again,
the other rank instruments, and the exogenous variables in the demand equation is 0.58. The coefficient on
log(1 + P LowRank133 ) has a t-statistic of 13. There is much less variation in log(P M id) and log(P Hi) and
they can be predicted almost perfectly in such regressions, e.g. we get an R-squared of 0.995 in the 128MB
PC100 data.
   33
      These data are only available on days on which the firm made wholesale purchases. Gaps of one or a
few days are common. We fill in the missing data by interpolating linearly. The instruments for log(P M id)
and log(P Hi) are simply the log of the cost of the cost of the product in question. Our instrument for
P LowRank is the log of a predicted rank obtained by adding a constant to what the firm’s rank would be
if it priced at cost.
   34
      In practice, the cost-based instrument for P LowRank has predictive power, but less than the speed-
based instrument. In the 128MB PC100 category, for example, the R-squared of a regression of log(1 +
P LowRank) on the cost-based instruments and exogenous variables has an R-squared of 0.48 with the
t-statistic on the instrument being about five. The instruments for log(P M id) and log(P Hi) again have
very strong predictive power, e.g. in the 128MB PC100 category we again get R-squareds above 0.99 in
first-stage regressions.




                                                     32
the coefficients on this variable become insignificant in the other two columns leaving us
unable to say that the IV regressions provide additional support for our loss leader results.
The standard errors on the log(P M id) and log(P Hi) variables become much larger. We
believe that this reflects that the instruments eliminate most of the true exogenous variation
in these variables (which comes from these prices gradually becoming higher relative to the
low-quality price in between adjustments and then being much smaller immediately after
adjustments).


7         Markups

This section examines price-cost margins. It has two motivations. First, the future of e-
retail depends on the balance between search and obfuscation. At one extreme, retail firms
would struggle to survive. At the other, search engines wouldn’t be worth using. Markups
provide descriptive information about how the battle is playing out in the Pricewatch
universe. Second, analyzing markups can provide a more complete understanding of the
mechanisms by which obfuscation affects prices.
         Table 9 presents our estimates of the actual markups. The table presents revenue-
weighted average percentage markups for each of the four categories of memory modules
and for CPUs sold through each of the two sites.35 The dollar markups were obtained
by adding the standard shipping and handling charge to the advertised item price, and
then subtracting the wholesale acquisition cost, credit card fees, an approximate shipping
cost, an estimate of marginal labor costs for order processing, packing, and returns, and an
allowance for losses due to fraud.36 In each category the sample period is that used in the
demand estimation, omitting observations from December 2000 (for which we do not have
cost data).
         In the two 128 MB memory categories, the markups for low-quality products are slightly
negative. Prices have not, however, been pushed far below cost by the hope of attracting
customers who can be talked into upgrading. Markups are about 16% for medium-quality
modules, and about 27% for high-quality modules. Averaging across all three quality levels,
    35
   The percentage markup is the percentage of the sale price, i.e. 100(p − mc)/p.
    36
   The labor and shipping costs were chosen after discussions with the firm, but are obviously subject to
some error.


                                                   33
markups are about 8% and 12% in the two categories. This corresponds to about five dollars
for a PC100 module and ten dollars for a PC133 module.
    The firm’s average markups in the 256MB memory categories were higher: 13% and
16% in the two categories. Part of the difference is due to the fact that a higher fraction
of consumers buy premium quality products, but the largest part comes from the markups
on low-quality memory being substantially higher.37
    Finally, the average percentage markups on Athlon CPUs are much lower: 3% at website
B and 6% at website C. The difference in markups is not as dramatic if one looks at them
in dollar terms. The average markups on CPUs at the two sites are about six and twelve
dollars, respectively. The largest part of the difference in average percentage markups is
due to markups on the upgraded CPU-fan combinations being lower than markups on high-
quality memory modules. Markups on low quality CPUs are also lower than markups on
low-quality memory modules.
    An obvious question to ask is whether the markups reported above are what one would
expect under static Nash equilibrium pricing given the strength of the adverse selection
effect we identified in the previous section. (There are, of course, many reasons for prices
to be higher or lower, such as repeated-game collusion or desire to build short-run market
share.) This, however, is something that one can not do with our demand estimates. One
reason is that we have not been able to obtain precise estimates of own-price elasticities for
medium- and high-quality products. A second is that the functional forms for demand we
are using are not well-behaved in some of the counterfactuals that must be considered when
doing a Nash equilibrium analysis. This is partially due to data limitations and partially
due to functional form choices we made in order to make the demand results easier to
interpret.38
   37
      Part is also due to the sample period being different. The revenue weighted estimates put a great deal
of weight on the latter part of the data. The 256MB data end 6 weeks before the 128MB data. Markups
on 128MB modules were relatively low in the last six weeks.
   38
      Examples of unavoidable data limitations are that it is hard to separately identify the effect of the
firm’s low quality price and its Pricewatch rank on demand since they are highly correlated and that there
is little variation in medium- or high- quality prices that is not collinear with the time trends. Examples
of choices we made include our use of a firm’s Pricewatch rank as the primary explanatory variable, which
is not appropriate if one wants to predict what would happen if the last firm on the list raised its price
toward infinity, and the specification of log(QLow) and log(QM id) as linear functions of log(P Hi), which
implies that a firm could also earn unbounded profits by setting P Low and P M id above cost and sending



                                                    34
    Although we cannot provide a structural analysis of markups, we think that we can pro-
vide evidence that the observed markups are roughly consistent with firms’ approximately
maximizing static profits. We think that our demand system accurately reflects demand
at the prices one typically observes in the data. We therefore feel comfortable computing
projected profits at prices charged in the data and can examine whether there appear to
be strong incentives to deviate from the actual prices to other prices in the same range.
    Consider, for example, the prices from October 12, 2000 in Figure 1. The markups
on this day are fairly typical. Our retailer bought low-quality modules wholesale on the
previous day for $72.39 Shipping and handling charges are about $1 below the sum of actual
shipping costs and other marginal costs, so the lowest-priced firm, listing at $68, is selling
low-quality modules at about $5 below cost and the sixth firm, listing at $74, is at about $1
above cost. Given that the low-priced firms make many more sales, the quantity-weighted
average markup for low-quality modules is probably about -2%, which is just a little below
the sample mean. Site B’s markups on medium- and high-quality memory on that day were
also typical: the wholesale prices were $77 and $94, and it charged $103.49 and $148.50.
    To illustrate the effect on a firm’s profits of moving positions on the Pricewatch list,
Table 10 contains results from a series of scenarios involving site B. In particular, it has
predicted quantities and predicted profits for site B assuming site B had occupied each of
the twelve places on the list in Figure 1. Predicted sales of low-quality memory drop sharply
from 54.5 units if site B occupies the first position to 3.4 units if it occupies the twelfth
position. Sales of high-quality modules decline much more gradually, from 2.8 units in the
first position to 1.3 units in the twelfth. The sixth column reports estimates of site B’s
expected gross profit from being in each position under the assumption that site B would
have used the wholesale prices from the previous day to calculate its costs. Site B would
most have liked to be in the fifth position, where it would have expected to earn $154. Note
that profits are fairly flat over a wide range of markups. For example, the firm’s profits in
the third and tenth positions are nearly equal. The one position that is clearly worse than
the others is the first.
P Hi toward infinity.
  39
     Given that the prices are from 9:01am Pacific time, the $72 figure is likely to be the latest information
most firms had on costs before they set the observed prices.



                                                     35
       What would an -Nash equilibrium look like? The requirement is that no firm can gain
more than  by changing its price and moving to another location on the list. If markups
are too high this will fail because everyone will want to move to the top of the list, and if
they are too low it will fail because everyone will want to move to the bottom. At some
intermediate level, the losses that the top few firms incur selling low-quality modules below
cost could roughly offset the profits they derive from their greater sales of premium-quality
modules and thus we could have an -Nash equilibrium with price dispersion.
       Although site B is not indifferent between the various places on the list (and would
find the first position quite unattractive), we think of the profit estimates in Table 10 as
suggesting that play is close to an -Nash equilibrium with a reasonable  for a few reasons.
       First, profits need not be exactly equal in equilibrium. They need only be close enough
to prevent deviations.40 Site B cannot switch its price to $74 and take the fifth spot. It
can claim this spot only by charging $73, which would result in a profit of $144 rather than
$154.
       Second, heterogeneity in website design will lead to firms’ having different preferences
over positions on the Pricewatch list. Recall that site A makes higher sales than site B
at the same prices, and is more successful in inducing customers to buy medium- and
high-quality memory. The seventh column of Table 10 reports estimates of site A’s gross
profits. The fifth position is also the most attractive for firm A, but its preferences over
the other positions are somewhat different.41 In particular, it does relatively better in
the top few slots. This is consistent with our earlier observation that site A tends to set
lower prices than site B. Sites A and B have similar designs. Other websites that employ
different tactics, e.g., requiring that consumers call on the phone and talk to salespeople,
may face quite different demand functions. It does not seem unreasonable to suppose that
such heterogeneity might be able to account for why Computer Craft is willing to occupy
the top slot.
       Third, cost heterogeneity will also contribute to firms having different preferences over
  40
      Ellison and Fudenberg (2003) provide several examples of how such “market impact effects” can create
a multiplicity of asymmetric pure strategy equilibria.
   41
      The attractiveness of the fifth slot is due to an unusual feature of the prices in Figure 1. The fifth-ranked
firm’s markup is a full four dollars above the markup of the third-ranked firm. This may be a situation
where our rank-based demand system is overestimating profits.


                                                        36
positions on the Pricewatch list. In addition to the standard cost heterogeneities, Price-
watch retailers may differ significantly in their expectations about wholesale prices. For
example, the most recent time prior to October 11th that our firm made a wholesale pur-
chase of low-quality memory was on Monday October 9th when it paid $78. Some of the
listed firms might not have checked wholesale prices since then, or might have made the
mistake of using acquisition costs rather than replacement costs when pricing inventory
acquired three days earlier. The eighth column of Table 10 lists the prices that site B
would have expected if it used the three-day-old costs. The ninth position is now the most
attractive. It is also true that many retailers would not shiporders received on the 12th
until the 13th or would wait until the 13th to replace shipped modules in inventory. It turns
out that before the end of the day on the 13th, low-quality modules could be purchased
wholesale for $68. The final column of the table lists the profits site B would have expected
if it had anticipated these lower costs. The first position is now the most attractive. An-
other potential explanation for the top-ranked firm’s behavior is thus that it might have
had different information about costs.
       Fourth, the  in -Nash equilibrium would include monitoring and decision costs and
should not be thought of as extremely small. Our retailer, for example, has just one
manager. Monitoring dozens of Pricewatch lists is just a small part of his duties and he
does not have nearly enough time to make minor adjustments to every price every hour.
Hence, we should not expect to see all firms maximizing the profits we calculated at all
times. Decision costs of some kind are necessary to account for the price inertia that is
present in the data. On October 12th, for example, the top six firms on the list in Figure
1 left their prices fixed throughout the afternoon. The first change to the top half of the
list came later in the day: Augustus Technology cut its price to $73 and took over the fifth
spot.42
       Although we think that the observed markups are roughly consistent with a static Nash
model of competition, two features of the data stand out as very hard to reconcile to such
a model. First, the markups for low-quality 256MB memory are higher than one would
  42
    There were five other changes among firms lower on the list. The eighth-place firm raised its price
and left the top 12. Two other firms cut their prices to $76 to enter the first page in the ninth and tenth
positions. Two other firms cut their prices to $77, one to enter the first page and one to stay on it.


                                                    37
predict even if one ignored the loss leader benefits. Second, there is some variation in
markups over time. The two features are not completely unrelated. The fact that average
markups for low-quality memory are positive is entirely attributable to two subperiods.
The firm sold a large number of low-quality 256MB modules at about ten dollars above
cost in September-October 2000 and a large number at about five dollars above cost in
February-March 2001. We think we understand what happened in the former period. A
small number of retailers found an obscure supplier willing to sell them 256MB modules at a
price far below the price offered by the standard wholesale distributors.43 As a result, there
were effectively six or fewer retailers competing in these two months rather than dozens.44
We do not know why higher markups prevailed in February and March of 2001. In this
period markups were relatively high in all four memory categories.


8     Conclusion

In this paper we have noted that the extent to which the Internet will reduce consumer
search costs is not clear. While the Internet clearly facilitates search, it also allows firms to
adopt a number of strategies that make search more difficult. In the Pricewatch universe,
we see that demand is sometimes remarkably elastic, but that this is not always what
happens.
    The most popular obfuscation strategy for the products we study is to intentionally
create an inferior quality good that can be offered at a very low price. Retailers could,
of course, avoid the negative impact of search engines simply by refusing to let the search
engines have access to their prices. This easy solution, however, has a free rider problem—
if other firms are listing, I will suffer from not being listed. What may help make the
   43
      The first retailer to have found the supplier appears to have found it on July 10. On that day, when the
firm that supplied us with data bought modules wholesale for $270, PC Cost cuts its retail price to $218—a
full $51 below the next lowest price. The firm remained all alone with a price at least $37 less than that of
any other firm for three weeks. We infer from this that its acquisition costs must have been very low.
   44
      We cannot provide any estimates about how the markups of the low-cost retailers varied in August as
the number of low-cost retailers increased from one to (we think) six, because the retailer from which we
got the data appears to be the last of the six to have found the low-priced supplier. At that point, in early
September, low-quality memory modules were selling for about $10 above cost. Markups remained steady
and no other retailers appear to have found the supplier for the next two months. At the end of October
wholesale prices fell dramatically, apparently eliminating the advantage. At this point several retailers that
had been absent for months jumped to the top of the Pricewatch list and margins on low-quality memory
quickly dropped to approximately zero.


                                                     38
obfuscation strategy we observe popular is that it is hard not to copy it—if a retailer tries
to advertise a decent quality product with reasonable contractual terms at a fair price it will
be buried behind dozens of lower price offers on the search engine’s list. The endogenous-
quality aspect of the practice makes it somewhat different from previous bait-and-switch
and loss-leader models, and it seems that it would be a worthwhile topic for research.45
We would also be interested to see more work integrating search engines into models with
search frictions, exploring other obfuscation techniques (such as individualized prices), and
trying to understand why adoption of price search engines has been slow.
       Large online retailers have very high expenses. Although they can avoid the expense of
setting up hundreds of retail locations, they have to handle every item they ship individually.
It is much cheaper to ship a truckload of merchandise to a store than to ship a similar
number of individual packages with UPS. It is cheaper to have a customer take packages
off the shelf and bring them to a cashier than it is to hire someone to pick packages off
shelves and put them in boxes. Large online retailers also have very high expenses of other
types: they have been very intensive users of managerial talent; they have spent a lot on
advertising; and they have enormous website development costs.46
       Given these expenses, large e-retailers cannot be competitive with Walmart’s prices.
This is not necessarily worrisome. Many people may be willing to pay a premium to avoid
going to the mall and to take advantage of superior product variety. A more serious problem
is that managerial, advertising, and website development costs seem more like fixed costs
than marginal costs. If price search engines become more popular, and better sources of
information develop on the reliability of retailers, then vigorous price competition may push
online prices below the level necessary to cover these fixed costs.
       What will happen to e-retail if price search flourishes? One thing we have seen can
happen is that demand can become incredibly elastic, so elastic that retailers could never
break even. While this is a frightening possibililty to retailers, it does not seem very likely
to us. In seems likely that retailers would make significant efforts to ensure that price search
  45
     Simester’s (1995) model seems the most similar to the practice. We would imagine, however, that what
makes the low prices on Pricewatch have advertising value is that the offerings are sufficiently attractive so
as to force a retailer to set low prices for its other offerings to avoid having everyone buy the advertised
product.
  46
     Amazon, for example, reported more than $250 million in R&D costs in 2000.


                                                     39
engines never work too well, and markups will end up at least as high as they are in the
(unbranded) Pricewatch universe. Similar markups would force large retailers to cut back
substantially on management, advertising, and website costs, but it is certainly plausible
that they could do so. Another possibility is that e-retail could end up with a very different
market structure than traditional retail. Small e-retailers without venture capital realized
long ago that the Internet allows one to operate a retail store with virtually no advertising
or website development costs. At present, small e-retailers are far more efficient than their
more famous competitors. Whether they will remain more efficient and come to dominate
price-search mediated markets or whether they will be pushed aside as larger firms copy
their model is another interesting question.




                                               40
   References
Bakos, J. Yannis (1997): “Reducing Buyer Search Costs: Implications for Electronic Mar-
ketplaces,” Management Science 43, 1976 - 1993.

Baye, Michael R., and John Morgan (2001): “Information Gatekeepers on the Internet and
the Competitiveness of Homogeneous Product Markets,” American Economic Review 91,
454-474.

Baye, Michael R., and John Morgan (2003): “Information Gatekeepers and Price Discrim-
ination on the Internet,” Economics Letters 76, 47-51.

Baye, Michael R., John Morgan, and Patrick Scholten (2003): “Price Dispersion in the
Small and the Large: Evidence from an Internet Price Comparison Site,” Journal of Indus-
trial Economics, forthcoming.

Brown, Jeffrey R., and Austan Goolsbee (2002): “Does the Internet Make Markets More
Competitive? Evidence from the Life Insurance Industry,” Journal of Political Economy
110, 481-507.

Brynjolfsson, Erik, and Michael Smith (2001): “Consumer Decision-making at an Internet
Shopbot: Brand Still Matters,” Journal of Industrial Economics XLIX, 541-558.

Burdett, Kenneth, and Kenneth L. Judd (1983): “Equilibrium Price Dispersion,” Econo-
metrica 51, 955-969.

Chevalier, Judith, and Austan Goolsbee (2003): “Measuring Prices and Price Competition
Online: Amazon vs. Barnes and Noble,” Quantitative Marketing and Economics 1, 203-222.

Chevalier, Judith, Anil Kashyap, and Peter Rossi (2000): “Why Don’t Prices Rise During
Periods of Peak Demand? Evidence from Scanner Data,” University of Chicago Graduate
School of Business, mimeo.

Clay, Karen, Ramayya Krishnan, and Eric Wolff (2001): “Prices and Price Dispersion on
the Web: Evidence from the Online Book Industry,” Journal of Industrial Economics 49,
521-540.

Deneckere, Raymond, and R. Preston McAfee (1996): “Damaged Goods,” Journal of Eco-
nomics and Management Strategy 5, 149-174.

Diamond, Peter (1971): “A Model of Price Adjustment,” Journal of Economic Theory 3,
156-168.

Ellison, Glenn (2003): “A Model of Add-on Pricing,” mimeo, MIT.

Gabaix, Xavier and David Laibson (2004): “Competition and Consumer Confusion,” mimeo,
Harvard University and MIT.

Janssen, Maarten, and Jose Luis Moraga (2000): “Pricing, Consumer Search and the Size
of Internet Markets,” Tinbergen Institute Discussion Paper 2000-0042.


                                          41
Scott Morton, Fiona, Florian Zettelmeyer, and Jorge Silva-Risso (2001): “Internet Car
Retailing,” Journal of Industrial Economics 49, 501-519.

Scott Morton, Fiona, Florian Zettelmeyer, and Jorge Silva-Risso (2003): “Cowboys or
Cowards: Why are Internet Car Prices Lower?,” mimeo.

Simester, Duncan (1995): “Signalling Price Image Using Advertised Prices,” Marketing
Science 14, 166-188.

Stahl, Dale O. (1989): “Oligopolistic Pricing with Sequential Consumer Search,” American
Economic Review 79, 700-712.

Stahl, Dale O. (1996): “Oligopolistic Pricing with Sequential Consumer Search and Het-
erogeneous Search Costs,” International Journal of Industrial Organization 14, 243268.

Varian, Hal (1980): “A Model of Sales,” American Economic Review 70, 651-659.

Walters, Rochney (1988): “Retail Promotions and Retail Store Performance: A Test of
Some Key Hypotheses,” Journal of Retailing 64, 153-180.

Walters, Rochney, and Scott McKenzie (1988): “A Structural Equation Analysis of the
Impact of Price Promotions on Store Performance,” Journal of Marketing Research 25,
51-63.

White, E. (2000): “No Comparison. Shopping ‘Bots’ Were Supposed to Unleash Brutal
Price Wars. Why Haven’t They?” The Wall Street Journal, October 23, 2000, R18.




                                          42
   PRICE WATCH® Query = System Memory PC100 128MB
                                                                 Back To - New Components Home

                                                                 Back To - "Not Exactly New" Home


     BRAND                PRODUCT                     DESCRIPTION          PRICE           SHIP        DATE/HR      DEALER/PHONE       ST       PART#
                                                                                                                 Computer Craft
             PRICE FOR ONLINE ORDERS ONLY - .- * LIMIT ONE -                                         10/12/00    Inc.
                                                                                                                                            MEM-128-
   Generic   128MB PC100 SDRAM DIMM - 8ns   Easy installation - in         $ 68    9.69 INSURED      12:40:05 AM 800-487-4910          FL
                                                                                                                                            100PCT
             Gold leads                     stock                                                    CST         727-327-7559
                                                                                                                 Online Ordering
                                                                                                                 Connect
                                                                                                     10/11/00    Computers
             ONLINE ORDERS ONLY - 128MB
   Generic                                         - * LIMIT ONE           $ 69    INSURED$9.95      10:59:56 PM 888-277-6287          CA -
             SDRAM PC100 16x64 168pin
                                                                                                     CST         949-367-0703
                                                                                                                 Online Ordering
                                                                                                                  1st Choice
                                            - * LIMIT ONE - -                                        10/11/00     Memory
             PRICE FOR ONLINE ORDER - 128MB
   Generic                                  InStock, 16x64-Gold            $ 70    10.75             2:11:00 PM   949-888-3810         CA -
             PC100 SDRAM DIMM
                                            Leads                                                    CST          -- P.O.'s accepted
                                                                                                                  Online Ordering
             PRICE FOR ONLINE ORDER - 128mb                                                                      pcboost.com
                                            - * LIMIT ONE - in                                       10/10/00
             True PC100 SDRAM EEPROM                                                                             800-382-6678
   Generic                                  stock - with Lifetime          $ 72    9.85              11:30:39 AM                       CA -
             DIMM16x64 168pin 6ns/7ns/8ns                                                                        -- P.O.'s accepted
                                            Warranty                                                 CST
             Gold Leads                                                                                          Online Ordering
             IN STOCK, 128MB PC100 3.3volt         - * LIMIT ONE Not                                 10/11/00    Memplus.com
                                                                                   10.95- UPS
   Generic   unbuffered SDRAM Gold Lead 168        compatible with E       $ 74                      12:44:00 PM 877-918-6767          CA - 880060
                                                                                   INSURED
             Pin, 7/8ns - with Lifetime warranty   Machine                                           CST         626-918-6767
             PRICE FOR ONLINE ORDERS ONLY -                                                          10/9/00      Portatech
   Generic   128MB True PC100 SDRAM DIMM - - * LIMIT ONE                   $ 74    10.25             6:53:25 PM   800-487-1327         CA -
             8ns Gold - warranty                                                                     CST          .
                                                                                                                 1st Compu
             128MB PC100 3.3volt SDRAM 168                                                           10/11/00
   House                                                                                                         Choice
             Pin, 7/8ns - with LIFITIME            - * LIMIT ONE           $ 74    10.50 FedEx       10:20:23 AM                       OH -
   Brand                                                                                                         800-345-8880
             WARRANTY                                                                                CST
                                                                                                                 800-345-8880
                                                                                                                  Sunset
                                                   DIMM16x64 168pin                                  10/11/00     Marketing, Inc.
             128MB 168Pin TRUE PC100 SDRAM
   Generic                                         6ns/7ns/8ns Gold        $ 75    $10               2:37:00 PM   800-397-5050         MD -
             - OEM 16X64
                                                   Leads                                             CST          410-626-0211 --
                                                                                                                  P.O.'s accepted
                                                                                                                  PC COST
                                                                                                     10/12/00
                                                                                                                  800-877-9442
   Generic   128MB 16x64 PC100 8ns SDRAM.          - * LIMIT ONE           $ 77    10.90             9:37:45 AM                        IL   -
                                                                                                                  847-690-0103
                                                                                                     CST
                                                                                                                  Online Ordering
                                                                                                                  Augustus
             IN STOCK, PC100, 128MB, 168pins                                                         10/9/00      Technology, Inc
                                                                                   $10.95 & UP For
   Generic   DIMM NonECC, - with Lifetime          - * LIMIT 5             $ 77                      5:11:10 PM   877-468-5181         CA -
                                                                                   UPS Ground
             warranty                                                                                CST          909-468-1883
                                                                                                                  Online Ordering
                                                                                                                  Computer Super
                                                                                                     10/11/00     Sale
             128MB PC100 8NS 16x64 SDRAM -                                         Ups Ground
   Generic                                         - * LIMIT ONE           $ 78                      5:16:36 PM   800-305-4930         IL   -
             one year warranty                                                     $10.62
                                                                                                     CST          847-640-9710
                                                                                                                  Online Ordering
             PRICE FOR ONLINE ORDERS ONLY -                                                                       Jazz Technology
                                                                                                     10/5/00
             PC100 128MB NonBuffered, NonECC - * LIMIT ONE - with                                                 USA, LLC                  ME-
   Generic                                                                 $ 78    10.95             6:29:59 PM                        CA
             16x64 SDRAM DIMM 3.3V 8ns mem lifetime warranty                                                      888-485-8872              GBP100128
                                                                                                     CST
             module                                                                                               909-869-8859


                                                                        Page 1 of 30
                                                                 1 5 10 15 20 25 30        Next


Figure 1: A sample Pricewatch search
                                  PRICElist:
                                        WATCH128MB                PC100
                                                 is a registered trademark      memory
                                                                           of Price             modules at 12:01pm
                                                                                    Watch Corporation
                                      © 1995-2000 Price Watch Corporation. All Rights Reserved
ET on October 12, 2000.              By accessing and using this page you agree to the Disclaimer


   r31



                                                                 43
                  Prices for 128MB PC100 Memory Modules

        140


        120


        100


        80
Price




        60


        40


        20


         0
         May-00   Jul-00     Sep-00      Nov-00      Jan-01       Mar-01      May-01
                                              Date




Figure 2: Prices for 128MB PC100 memory modules: the lowest and 12th lowest prices on
Pricewatch and website B’s price




                                         44
MB PC3200 400 MHz DDR <font color=red>***Free Shipping***</font>




                                        Memory Spec. Chart - PC3200 DDR 512MB (Select Your Memory Module)

                            Samsung/Micron or Major                  Industry Standard 512MB           OEM 512MB PC3200
                         512MB PC3200 [ADD $25]                   PC3200 [ADD $15]
                                                                                                       ●   CAS 3 Latency
                               ●   CAS 2.5 Latency                    ●   CAS 2.5 Latency              ●   4 Layer Module Board
                               ●   Hand Picked 5ns                    ●   Hand Picked 5ns              ●   64x4 DRAM Type
                               ●   6 Layer Low Noise Shielded         ●   6 Layer Low Noise Shielded   ●   OEM DRAM Downgrade
                                   PCB Board                              PCB Board                        Chips
                               ●   32x8 DRAM Type                     ●   32x8 DRAM Type               ●   20% Restocking Fee
                               ●   Samsung/Micron or Major            ●   Industry Standard DRAM           According to the Market Value
                                   Brands                                 Chips                        ●   Verify Compatibility with
                               ●   Return Shipping Paid                                                    Memory Configurator
                                                                      ●   7 Days No Restocking Fee
                               ●   No Restocking Fee
                                                                      ●   Return Shipping not Paid     ●   Return Shipping not Paid
                               ●   Satisfaction & Compatibility
                                                                      ●   Improved Compatibility       ●   9 Months Warranty
                                   Guaranteed
                               ●   Lifetime Warranty                  ●   Lifetime Warranty
                               ●   15 Days Full Refund                ●   Aluminum Heat Sink - Cool
                               ●   Memory Tested Before Ship              Down the Memory up to 35%
                                   Out
                               ●   Copper Heat Sink - Cool Down
                                   the Memory up to 40%




                         ¡@



                         ADD MORE HEAT SPREADER FOR MEMORY:
                              NO ADDITIONAL HEAT SINK (+$0)
                              ADD ONE MORE COPPER HEAT SINK (+$6.99)
                      FigureADD ONE
                             3: A   MOREdesigned
                                  website RAINBOWtoHEAT SINK
                                                    induce   (+$3.99)to upgrade to a higher quality memory
                                                           consumers
                      module.
                            THERMALTAKE COOLING KIT (+$8.99)



                         HEAT SINK INSTALLATION:
                              PLEASE INSTALL THE HEATSINK FOR MY MEMORY (AT NO CHARGE) (+$0)
                              NO, I WILL INSTALL IT MYSELF



                         TESTING OPTION:
                              TEST MY MEMORY BEFORE SHIP OUT (+$3.99)
                                                                             45


                         SHIPPING UPGRADE:
                              FREE Ground SHIPMENT (+$0)
                MAY WE RECOMMEND THE FOLLOWING FOR YOUR - PRICEWATCH SPECIALS --
                MEMORY - 512MB PC3200 DDR 400FSB



                                              Tufshop Price: $53.81
ory                                Price (with Selected Options): $90.36
facturer

                                     Super Buys
                                     Make processor upto 30% faster or your motherboard to run with
ones                                 maximum efficiency. You must have this awesome value package.
ete systems                          (Highly Recommended)

                          c
                          d
                          e
                          f
                          g   Memory Upgrade - Certified intel Approved specs Memory [+$23.11]

ical support              c
                          d
                          e
                          f
                          g   Memory Upgrade - Certified AMD Approved specs Memory [+$17.35]

ns
tracking
forum                                Bonus Buys
 & conditions                        Consider taking advantage of these special offers. Compare and
                                     save. Purchase everything from one location and save on shipping
y pledge

                       c
                       d
                       e
                       f
                       g    Cable Upgrades - Rounded IDE and Floppy Cables (Complete Set) [+$11.91]

                       c
                       d
                       e
                       f
                       g    Essential Equipment - Sony Floppy Disk Drive [+$16.84]

                       b
                       c
                       d
                       e
                       f
                       g    Bonus Buy - 10 pack of hand thumbscrews for Case [+$4.95]

                       c
                       d
                       e
                       f
                       g    Bonus Buy - 12-Pc Computer Tool Kit [+$16.98]

                       c
                       d
                       e
                       f
                       g    Bonus Buy - RatPadzGS Ultimate Mousepad/Gaming Surface [+$11.97]

                       c
                       d
                       e
                       f
                       g    Bonus Buy - CD-DVD Media Cleaning Kit [+$4.93]

                       c
                       d
                       e
                       f
                       g    Thermal Management - Dynatron 80mm Case Fan [+$12.87]




                                     Related Options
                                     Please take advantage of these special offers.
                          Memory Upgrade - CAS 2 Upgrade (Offers Performance Increase & Helps in
                      c
                      d
                      e
                      f
                      g   Overclocking) [+$18.25]
                          Memory Upgrade - CAS 2.5 Upgrade (Improves Performance over Cas3 & Helps
                      b
                      c
                      d
                      e
                      f
                      g   with Applications and Games) [+$6.35]




                                     Pretest
                                     Have us test your merchandise before we ship to avoid costly
                                     RMAs in the future and Maximize your time

                          j
                          k
                          l
                          m
                          n   No Pretesting

                          i
                          j
                          k
                          l
                          m
                          n   Pretest - Standard Pretest (Avoid costly RMAs) [+$6.97]




                                     Memory Performance
                                     Options to make your hardware & applications fly

                      j
                      k
                      l
                      m
                      n   No Memory Performance Enhancements

                          Memory Upgrade - 6 Layer PCB For Stablity of Memory - more layer - More =
                      i
                      j
                      k
                      l
                      m
                      n   Better Design [+$8.37]




                                     Enhancers
                                     Options to make your hardware & applications fly

                      j
                      k
                      l
                      m
                      n   No System Performance Enhancers

                      j
                      k
                      l
                      m
                      n   Memory Upgrade - Thermaltake Memory Cooling Kit (Active) [+$19.99]

                      j
                      k
                      l
                      m
                      n   Memory Cooling - Copper Passive Memory Cooling Kit [+$11.15]

                      i
                      j
                      k
                      l
                      m
                      n   Memory Cooling - Aluminium Passive Memory Cooling Kit [+$9.91]

                      j
                      k
                      l
                      m
                      n   Memory Upgrade - Thermaltake Memory Cooling Kit (Passive) [+$14.99]




                                                                                        46
Variable               Mean Stdev         Min     Max
           128MB PC100 Memory Modules
             683 website-day observations
LowestP rice           62.98 33.31      21.00    120.85
Range1-12                6.76   2.52      1.00     13.5
P Low                  66.88 34.51      21.00    123.49
P M id                 90.72 40.09      35.49    149.49
P Hi                  115.27 46.36      48.50    185.50
log(1 + P LowRank)       1.86   0.53      0.69     3.26
QLow                   12.80 17.03           0      163
QM id                    2.01   3.31         0       25
QHi                      1.86   3.45         0       47
           128MB PC133 Memory Modules
             608 website-day observations
LowestP rice           71.02 37.02      21.00    131.00
Range1-12                5.92   2.74      2.00    15.00
P Low                  73.68 36.69      21.00    131.49
P M id                 98.50 41.84      22.10    153.45
P Hi                  128.46 47.56      48.50    189.50
log(1 + P LowRank)       1.77   0.64      0.69     3.40
QLow                   10.08 12.13           0       99
QM id                    2.14   4.91         0      100
QHi                      4.79   3.93         0       35
           256MB PC100 Memory Modules
             575 website-day observations
LowestP rice          130.30 58.17      32.46    215.00
Range1-12              28.95 15.78        6.39    75.80
P Low                 143.44 67.15      47.67    283.49
P M id                205.29 85.36      77.49    372.89
P Hi                  250.09 93.14      98.49    417.18
log(1 + P LowRank)       1.90   0.55      0.69     2.91
QLow                     2.87   4.61         0       33
QM id                    1.00   1.88         0       18
QHi                      0.87   1.63         0       16
           256MB PC133 Memory Modules
             575 website-day observations
LowestP rice          143.90 71.97      32.46    269.00
Range1-12              25.49 14.01        6.60    67.00
P Low                 155.75 77.95      43.00    291.45
P M id                213.14 91.91      78.49    345.45
P Hi                  249.95 92.26 104.37        392.21
log(1 + P LowRank)       1.97   0.49      0.69     2.73
QLow                     5.29 10.24          0      136
QM id                    1.10   1.93         0       12
QHi                      3.61   3.86         0       19


Table 1: Summary statistics for memory module data



                          47
                 Variable                Mean Stdev       Min      Max
                                   Data for Website B
                            392 clock speed-day observations
                 P Low                  180.80 43.84 105.25      302.45
                 P Hi                   219.68 43.90 142.39      341.45
                 log(1 + P LowRank)       2.08   0.42     0.88     2.64
                 QLow                     0.88   1.25        0        8
                 QHi                      0.57   0.92        0        6
                 LowestP rice           173.08 42.36     97.00   298.33
                 Range1-12               11.16   5.62     3.75    36.69
                                   Data for Website C
                            392 clock speed-day observations
                 P Low                  180.83 44.17 103.59      302.25
                 P M id                 214.71 43.96 136.49      336.25
                 P Hi                   230.69 44.54 150.64      365.47
                 log(1 + P LowRank)       1.99   0.49     0.69     2.64
                 QLow                     1.07   1.54        0       12
                 QM id                    0.83   1.29        0        9
                 QHi                      0.52   0.85        0        4
                 LowestP rice           173.08 42.36     97.00   298.33
                 Range1-12               11.16   5.62     3.75    36.69


              Table 2: Summary statistics for AMD Athlon processor data




                                            Dep. var.: quantities
                     Independent             of each quality level
                     Variables             Low q Mid q High q
                     log(1 + P LowRank)    -1.48† -0.76∗ -0.41∗
                                           (15.1)    (5.8)     (3.2)
                     log(P M id)             0.43 -6.86∗       2.72∗
                                            (0.5)    (5.9)     (2.0)
                     log(P Hi)              -0.06     2.68 -5.10∗
                                            (0.1)    (1.8)     (3.9)
                     SiteB                 -0.26∗ -0.31∗ -0.59∗
                                            (3.5)    (2.9)     (5.7)
                     W eekend              -0.51∗ -0.95∗ -0.72∗
                                            (8.6)    (8.1)     (5.9)
                     log(LowestP rice)      -1.08     1.10      0.90
                                            (1.6)    (1.3)     (1.1)
                     Number of Obs.           683      683       683

Absolute value of t-statistics in parentheses. ∗ denotes significance at the 5% level. †
denotes significance at the 10−48 % level.
                 Table 3: Demand for 128MB PC100 Memory Modules



                                          48
                128MB PC100 Modules                          128MB PC133 Modules
                  Low    Mid     Hi                            Low    Mid     Hi
       P Low    -25.0∗ -12.9∗ -7.0∗                 P Low    -33.0∗ -11.5∗ -4.1∗
       P M id      0.4  -6.9∗  2.7∗                 P M id      0.2  -1.5  -0.1
       P Hi       -0.1   2.7  -5.1∗                 P Hi       -0.1  -5.5∗ -4.5∗


                256MB PC100 Modules                          256MB PC133 Modules
                  Low    Mid     Hi                            Low    Mid     Hi
       P Low    -36.8∗ -16.3∗ -5.5∗                 P Low    -41.4∗ -28.4∗ -11.5
       P M id      7.9  -3.9  -4.1∗                 P M id     -2.7   4.5   3.6
       P Hi       -3.4   2.4  -2.6                  P Hi       -1.4  -5.5  -1.0


Table 4: Price elasticities for memory modules: three qualities in each of four product
classes



                                               Dep. var.: quantities
                      Independent               of each quality level
                      Variables               Low q Mid q High q
                      log(1 + P LowRank)      -1.14∗ -0.86∗        0.10
                                               (6.1)    (4.7)     (0.3)
                      log(P M id)              -0.34    -4.81      4.14
                                               (0.1)    (0.8)     (0.4)
                      log(P Hi)                -2.70    -2.98 -21.48
                                               (0.7)    (0.5)     (1.5)
                      W eekend                -0.47∗    -0.26 -0.81∗
                                               (2.4)    (1.2)     (3.0)
                      log(LowestP rice)        -1.47     2.86      6.77
                                               (0.5)    (1.0)     (1.5)
                      T imeinDays             -0.02∗ -0.02∗       -0.01
                                               (2.3)    (2.3)     (0.7)
                      LowHasF an                0.46    -0.25 -1.14∗
                                               (1.8)    (0.9)     (2.3)
                      Speed650                -2.88∗ -2.97∗ -5.74∗
                                               (2.5)    (2.9)     (3.0)
                      Speed700                -1.66∗ -1.67∗ -3.07∗
                                               (1.9)    (2.2)     (2.1)
                      Speed750                 -0.82 -1.19∗ -2.34∗
                                               (1.5)    (2.5)     (2.5)
                      Number of Obs.             392      392       392

Absolute value of t-statistics in parentheses. ∗ denotes significance at the 1% level.

                       Table 5: Demand for Athlon CPU’s at site C



                                             49
                                         Product Category
         Dependent    128MB       128MB   256MB     256MB          Athlon   Athlon
          Variable    PC100       PC133   PC100     PC133          CPUs     CPUs
                      Memory      Memory Memory Memory             Site B   Site C

           Low           -1.47      -1.41      -1.79      -2.29     -1.28     -1.14
          Quality       (0.10)     (0.09)     (0.36)     (0.36)    (0.27)    (0.19)
           Sales

          Medium         -0.76      -0.49      -0.79      -1.57               -0.86
          Quality       (0.13)     (0.12)     (0.29)     (0.79)              (0.18)
           Sales                                                    -0.97
                                                                   (0.31)
           High          -0.41      -0.18      -0.66      -0.64               0.10
          Quality       (0.13)     (0.06)     (0.25)     (0.35)              (0.30)
           Sales

Standard errors in parentheses.

Table 6: Effect of low quality Pricewatch rank on sales of each quality level: estimates from
six datasets.




        Independent                 Dep. variable: Dummy for choice of site A
        Variables                Medium and high Medium quality High quality
        log(1 + P LowRank)                 -0.38∗          -0.68∗           -0.22∗
                                           (5.12)          (4.57)           (3.03)
        log(P )                            -3.01∗            -0.87          -5.03∗
                                           (3.18)          (0.67)           (3.53)
        Number of Obs.                     10845             4078            6757

The table presents estimates of logit models. The dependent variable is a dummy for
whether a consumer chose to buy from site A (as opposed to site B). The first column
pools the observations from all eight specific products: medium- and high-quality; 128MB
and 256MB; PC100 and PC133. The second and third are separate regressions for the
medium- and high-quality subsamples. Absolute value of z-statistics in parentheses. ∗
denotes significance at the 5% level. The regressions also included category dummies and
a linear time trend.

Table 7: Evidence of incomplete consumer learning: effects of product prices and low-quality
price rankings on where consumers buy medium- and high-quality memory modules.




                                             50
                                  Dependent variables: Quantity of 128MB PC100
                                        memory modules of each quality level
         Independent             Other speed instruments      Cost instruments
         Variables                 Low     Mid      Hi       Low      Mid     Hi
         log(1 + P LowRank)      -1.48∗   -0.45     -0.22 -1.89∗     -0.34    0.79
                                  (7.8)   (1.5)     (0.6)   (5.0)    (0.2)   (1.7)
         log(P M id)              -1.06 -7.78∗      -0.47 11.93      -9.07   -2.49
                                  (0.7)   (3.8)     (0.1)   (1.9)    (1.1)   (0.5)
         log(P Hi)                 3.58    2.84     -3.35    5.54     4.26 -5.30∗
                                  (1.9)   (1.0)     (0.9)   (1.0)    (0.5)   (1.7)
         SiteB                   -0.28∗ -0.49∗     -0.61∗   -0.40    -0.48 -1.10∗
                                  (2.9)   (3.2)     (3.3)   (1.9)    (1.2)   (4.3)
         W eekend                -0.48∗ -0.97∗     -0.67∗ -0.57∗ -0.98∗ -0.75∗
                                  (7.9)   (8.0)     (5.1)   (2.0)    (6.9)   (5.2)
         log(LowestP rice)       -1.85∗    0.71      0.80 -5.01∗      1.02    1.21
                                  (2.6)   (0.7)     (0.8)   (2.5)    (0.3)   (0.7)
         Number of Obs.             683     683       683     683      683     683

Absolute value of t-statistics in parentheses.   ∗   denotes significance at the 5% level.

   Table 8: Instrumental variables estimates of PC100 128MB Memory Demand Model




                                             Product Category
                         128 MB Memory       256 MB Memory CPU/fan combos
         Quality         PC100 PC133         PC100 PC133 Site B     Site C
         Low              -0.7%   -2.4%        4.2%     2.9% -3.4%    -4.4%
         Mid              17.0%  15.6%        16.3%    19.9%           9.3%
         Hi               27.2%  26.9%        24.3%    24.9%  9.5%   14.7%
         Overall           7.6%  11.5%        12.6%    15.8%  2.8%     6.3%
         Average in $      $5.06 $10.25      $17.63   $22.41  $5.62  $12.40

The table presents revenue-weighted mean percentage markups for products sold by web-
sites A, B, and C in each of six product categories.

                 Table 9: Mean percentage markup in six product classes




                                             51
                          Predicted site B               Predicted profits
                             quantities            Base costs     c = 78 c = 68
        Rank    Price   QLow QM id QHi           Site B Site A Site B Site B
         1       68      54.4      5.3     2.8        -5    147     -343    275
         2       69      29.9      3.9     2.3       92     229      -95    259
         3       70      19.5      3.1     2.1      122     246       -2    239
         4       72      14.1      2.6     1.9      145     264       55    235
         5       74      10.7      2.3     1.8      154     267       85    227
         6       74       8.5      2.0     1.6      141     244       85    202
         7       74       7.0      1.8     1.6      130     225       84    184
         8       75       5.9      1.7     1.5      127     218       88    175
         9       77       5.0      1.5     1.4      129     217       96    172
         10      77       4.4      1.4     1.4      121     204       92    160
         11      78       3.9      1.3     1.3      118     198       92    154
         12      78       3.4      1.3     1.3      112     188       89    145

The table presents predicted sales and profits that website B would have earned if it had
occupied each position on the Pricewatch list pictured in Figure 1 throughout the day on
October 12, 2000.

           Table 10: Predicted profits as a function of rank: October 12, 2000




                                           52
