                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   DO DIVIDEND PAYMENTS RESPOND TO TAXES?
             PRELIMINARY EVIDENCE FROM THE 2003 DIVIDEND TAX CUT

                                               Raj Chetty
                                             Emmanuel Saez

                                          Working Paper 10572
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10572


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2004




This paper offers preliminary evidence and will be extended and completed as soon as more data is available.
We thank Alan Auerbach, Martin Feldstein, Day Manoli, Francisco Perez-Gonzalez, James Poterba, and Jesse
Shapiro for very helpful comments and discussions, and Joe Rosenberg for outstanding research assistance.
Financial support from NSF Grant SES-0134946 and the Sloan Foundation is gratefully acknowledged. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2004 by Raj Chetty and Emmanuel Saez. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Do Dividend Payments Respond to Taxes? Preliminary Evidence from the 2003 Dividend Tax Cut
Raj Chetty and Emmanuel Saez
NBER Working Paper No. 10572
June 2004
JEL No. G35, H2, H3
                                       ABSTRACT

The individual income tax burden on dividends was lowered sharply in 2003 from a maximum rate
of 35% to 15%, creating a unique opportunity to analyze the effects of dividend taxes on dividend
payments by U.S. corporations. This paper uses data from the Center for Research in Security Prices
(CRSP) spanning 1980 to 2004-Q1 to analyze this issue. We find a sharp and widespread surge in
dividend distributions following the tax cut, along several dimensions. First, the fraction of publicly
traded firms paying dividends began to increase precisely in 2003 after having declined continuously
for more than two decades. Nearly 150 firms have initiated dividend payments after the tax cut,
adding more than $1.5 billion to aggregate quarterly dividends. Most of these firms initiated regular,

recurrent payments rather than one-time "special" distributions. Second, many firms that were

already paying dividends prior to the reform raised regular dividend payments significantly after the

tax cut. Third, special dividends also rose, but the magnitude of this effect is likely to be small

relative to the increases in regular distributions in the long run. All three of these effects are

significant among all company sizes, and are robust to controls for profits and other firm

characteristics. The surge in regular dividend payments after the 2003 reform is unprecedented in

recent years. The Tax Reform Act of 1986, which also reduced the top individual tax rate on

dividends significantly, led to a temporary, concentrated rise in special dividend payments.

However, the number of regular dividend payers did not rise much after the 1986 reform.

Raj Chetty                                             Emmanuel Saez
University of California                               University of California
Department of Economics                                Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall, #3880                                  549 Evans Hall, #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720                                     Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER                                               and NBER
chetty@econ.berkeley.edu                               saez@econ.berkeley.edu
1       Introduction
One of the key provisions of the Jobs and Growth Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2003
(hereafter, the “2003 tax reform”) was to reduce the individual tax on dividend income sub-
stantially.1 Historically, dividend income has been considered ordinary income for federal indi-
vidual income tax purposes and hence taxed according to the regular, progressive income tax
schedule. The 2003 tax reform introduced favored treatment for dividends, starting retroac-
tively at the beginning of 2003, whereby dividends are taxed at a rate of 15% instead of facing
the regular income tax schedule with a top rate of 35%.2 This tax change eﬀectively gave to
dividend income the same favorable tax treatment accorded to capital gains income. Conser-
vatives argued that such a change would greatly reduce the tax disadvantage of dividends and
hence induce firms to pay more dividends, ultimately fostering more investment and business
activity. Liberals countered that such a tax cut would benefit mostly wealthy taxpayers who
own a disproportionate share of total dividends paid out to individuals in non-tax favored
accounts, with little or no economic benefits for the wide majority of American families.3
     Consistent with these predictions, Microsoft, the company with the largest accumulated
cash holdings in the U.S. corporate sector, initiated a large annual dividend payment for the
first time in 2003. These payments benefited wealthy taxpayers disproportionately. For
example, Bill Gates, the founder and CEO of Microsoft, owns 10.44% of the company stock
and is the richest person in the United States. Gates received a dividend payment of $270
million from Microsoft in 2003. Without the tax favored treatment of dividends, Gates would
have paid $54 million more in income taxes.4
     The goal of this paper is to use longitudinal data on dividend distributions by U.S. corpo-
rations to examine whether Microsoft’s behavior was an anomaly unrelated to the tax change
or whether the 2003 tax change was indeed successful in inducing many companies to pay
more dividends. Since the tax change is very recent, the amount of post-reform data that is
available is limited. Hence, the conclusions of this paper should be considered preliminary,
and will be revised and extended in the near future as more data become available.
    1
     The tax reform was signed by President Bush at the end of May 2003, but was first proposed by the Bush
administration on January 7, 2003.
   2
     More precisely, taxpayers in the bottom two income tax brackets (facing a regular marginal tax rate of 10%
or 15%) face a new dividend tax rate of only 5%, while taxpayers in the top four brackets (facing marginal tax
rates of 25, 28, 33, or 35%) face a new dividend tax rate is 15%. Taxpayers on the Alternative Minimum Tax
schedule (flat rate of 28%) benefit as well from the reduced 15% tax rate on their dividend income.
   3
     The Internal Revenue Service Statistics of Income show that about two thirds of taxable dividends are
earned by the top 10% income taxpayers. More than half of American families now hold stock through pension
or college funds (401(k)s, IRAs, etc.). However, dividends paid to these tax-favored accounts (all of which
exempt accrued returns from income taxation) are not aﬀected by the 2003 tax reform. The fraction of U.S.
families owning stocks either directly or through non tax-favored mutual funds is much smaller according to
the 2001 Survey of Consumer Finances.
   4
     Gates paid a 15% tax rate instead of a 35% tax rate on his dividend income in 2003. This computation
assumes of course that the income is not donated to charitable organizations.



                                                      1
    The eﬀects of dividend taxes on dividend payments and the investment behavior of corpo-
rations has generated much interest in the public economics literature. However, the academic
debate on this topic remains controversial (see Auerbach (2003) and Allen and Michaely (2003)
for recent surveys). The “old view” on this issue, implicit among supporters of the 2003 divi-
dend tax cut, says that dividend taxes reduce the net return on investment and hence reduce
the supply of investment. Therefore, when taxes on dividends are cut, individuals are more
willing to save and invest their money in stocks, spurring business investment, profits, and div-
idend distributions. Poterba and Summers (1985), using time series evidence from the United
Kingdom found that consistent with this view, dividend payments and investment were higher
when the tax on dividends was lower. More recently, Poterba (2004) uses U.S. time series data
since 1929 and finds a negative association between dividend payments and the dividend tax
rates relative to taxes on capital gains.
    In contrast, the “new view” on dividend taxation, implicit among critics of the 2003 tax
reforms, assumes that marginal investments are entirely financed by retained earnings rather
than new share issues (Auerbach (1979), King (1977), and Bradford (1981)). Under this
assumption, the tax on dividends paid out does not aﬀect investment decisions of firms, and
profits and dividends paid out should not change either.5 In this case, the dividend tax
cut is irrelevant for corporate decisions and simply benefits individual investors by reducing
their tax burden. As dividend income is very concentrated at the top of the income and
wealth distributions, a tax cut on dividends should provide a tax break to the wealthy without
expansion of investment and business activity. Using U.S. data from 1981 to 1998, Auerbach
and Hassett (2003), show that consistent with the new view, dividend payments are sensitive
to changes in investment at the firm level, suggesting that retained earnings are indeed the
marginal source of investment funds.
    The large change in the tax treatment of dividends in 2003 oﬀers a unique opportunity to
cast light on this debate. In this paper, we use CRSP data on dividend payments available
through the first quarter of 2004 to test whether dividend payout policies changed significantly
after the 2003 tax reform. Total regular dividends have surged by nearly 20% since the
beginning of 2003, the point at which the lower tax rate was first proposed and ultimately
retroactively applied. However, since the aggregate dividends series is very volatile and
driven by outliers, it is diﬃcult to make statistically robust inferences about the eﬀects of
the tax change without disaggregating the data further. We therefore divide our analysis of
the response to the tax reform into three margins: (1) the extensive margin (initiations and
terminations of regular dividend payments); (2) the intensive margin (increases or decreases in
payment amounts by firms already paying); and (3) special dividends (one time distributions).
   5
     However, as pointed out by Auerbach and Hassett (2003), if the tax reform not only changes dividend
income taxation but also interest income taxation (as in the Tax Reform Act of 1986) or if the tax reform is
not permanent but temporary (as might be the case with the 2003 tax reform — see below), then even under
the “New View” dividend payments may change following a dividend tax change.


                                                     2
Our main findings are as follows.
     First, the fraction of firms paying regular (monthly, quarterly, semi-annual, or annual)
dividends started to increase precisely in 2003, after falling continuously for more than two
decades. The secular decline in the fraction of publicly traded firms paying dividends has
been documented by Fama and French (2001). The fraction of regular payers fell from
approximately 60% in 1980 to a low of 20% in 2002 quarter 4, but has rebounded to nearly
25% in the past year. The fact that the decline in the fraction of dividend payers stops
precisely in 2003 constitutes strong evidence that the 2003 tax reform induced more firms to
start paying regular dividends.6 Of the 3,813 firms that are listed in the 2004 CRSP, 113
initiated regular dividends in 2003, in comparison with 21 in 2002, and an average of 22 in prior
years. This surge in dividend initiations occurs among companies of all sizes. Furthermore,
most of this extensive-margin eﬀect is due to corporations starting regular, recurrent dividend
payments; the number of firms that stop paying dividends does not change significantly after
the reform. The results imply that additional initiations of dividend payments induced by
the reform have already raised aggregate quarterly dividend payments by approximately $1.7
billion (6% of aggregate dividends). Recent trends suggest that this eﬀect is likely to grow even
larger in subsequent quarters. Time series regression analysis shows that these conclusions
are robust to controlling for a variety of potential confounding factors such as levels and lags
of profits, assets, cash holdings, industry, and firm age.
     Second, there is also evidence of dividend increases on the intensive margin. Statistical
inference on the intensive margin is diﬃcult due to the extreme concentration of dividend pay-
ments, which is described in detail in DeAngelo, DeAngelo, and Skinner (2003). For example,
including or excluding a large new payer such as Microsoft makes a substantial diﬀerence
in estimating the eﬀect of the reform on total dividend amounts paid by U.S. corporations.
Hence, we argue that mean eﬀects — on which most previous studies have focused — cannot be
estimated with reasonable confidence intervals, because mean dividend amounts are driven by
a few large payers, creating a small sample problem.7 Therefore, in analogy with our approach
to analyzing the extensive margin, we examine the number of firms increasing (or decreasing)
their payments by a significant margin, such as 10% or 20%. Regardless of the cutoﬀ we
choose, we find strong, robust evidence that firms were more likely to increase their regular
payments after the reform both in means and with controls in our regression analysis. Again,
these increases are widespread, occurring across all sizes of firms.
     Third, consistent with the recent analysis of Blouin, Raedy, and Shackelford (2004), we
   6
     Of course, this conclusion is predicated on the assumption that no other determinant of dividend behavior
changed exactly in 2003. In future work, we plan to follow Perez-Gonzalez (2003) and test this identification
assumption by examining the dividend payments of firms owned largely by institutional shareholders, who
provide a “control group” that should in principle be unaﬀected by the reform.
   7
     Estimation along the extensive margin (firms initiating or terminating dividend payments) does not generate
this small sample problem because there are a large number of moderate-size dividend initiations.



                                                       3
find that special (i.e., one time, non-recurring) dividends also increased following the 2003 tax
reform. Among firms that were active in the 2004 CRSP data, 69 made special payments in
2003, compared with 35 in 2002 and an average of 66 in prior years. The total amount of
special dividends paid in 2003, $1.9 billion, greatly exceeded the $520 million paid in 2002 and
the prior years average of $696 million, but 65% of this diﬀerence is due to three large special
payments by telecommunications giant Southwestern Bell Corporation. The importance of
this outlier again underscores the diﬃculty of making inferences about the eﬀects of taxes on
mean dividend amounts. Once we control for downward time trend in special dividends, we
find a fairly large, statistically significant eﬀect of the 2003 reform on the number and amount
of special dividends. Nonetheless, since firms rarely reduce regular dividend payments, the
cumulative eﬀect of the extensive and intensive margin increases in regular dividends are likely
to render the change in special payments a second-order eﬀect in the long run.
    The large increase in regular dividend payments following the 2003 tax reform is unprece-
dented in the recent history of the U.S. corporate sector. To emphasize this point, we compare
our results to the dividend responses induced by the Tax Reform Act of 1986 (TRA-86). TRA-
86 reduced the top individual tax rate on dividends (as well as other forms of income) from
50% to 28%. We find that this reform was not followed by an increase in the number of
regular dividend payers, nor in the amounts paid. There was, however, a temporary surge in
special dividend payments concentrated among a few large firms after TRA-86. The fact that
the 2003 tax reform appears likely to have much more lasting eﬀects on dividend payments of
U.S. corporations than TRA-86 is particularly striking because the 2003 reform is legislated
to expire in 2009, while TRA-86 was a permanent change. Understanding why these two
reforms have had very diﬀerent eﬀects is left for future work.
    Our findings are in contrast to the recent study of Blouin, Raedy, and Shackelford (2004),
who examined dividend payments in the three months immediately after the tax reform was
passed (May 23 to August 22, 2003). They compared dividend payments in this post-reform
period with dividends in the same period in 2002 (May 23 to Aug. 22, 2002) and the three
month period immediately preceding enactment of the reform. Blouin et. al. concluded that
virtually all the increase in dividend payments after the tax reform was due solely to 17 firms
who paid special dividends, and find no statistically significant changes in regular dividend
amounts. Their results diﬀer from our results for three reasons. First, and most importantly,
they focus on total dividend amounts (and then separate regular and special dividends), rather
than distinguishing the extensive and intensive margins. As emphasized above, analyzing the
eﬀect of the tax cut on regular dividend amounts on the intensive margin is a diﬃcult statistical
problem because of the large outliers that drive the means. Indeed, when analyzing our data
at a monthly level, we find that the surge in the number of regular dividend initiations and
increases began precisely in the post-reform period studied by Blouin et. al. Second, they
do not look back at the historical data before 2002. Again, since aggregate regular dividends


                                               4
are a noisy time series, it is diﬃcult to assess the magnitude of the response induced by the
tax change without making further historical comparisons. Finally, two more quarters of
post-reform data have become available since their study. The additional data show that the
rapid growth in regular dividend payments that began during the period examined by Blouin
et. al. has continued in subsequent quarters.
    In summary, the data available to date strongly suggest that the 2003 tax reform has
induced a significant number of firms to initiate or raise regular dividend payments. This
result is not consistent with the tax-irrelevance prediction of a basic “new view” model insofar
as the tax is perceived as a permanent change. However, our findings do not necessarily
imply that all the predictions of the “old view” theory will be observed either. For instance,
it remains to be known whether the 2003 tax reform has spurred investment and business
activity. More generally, we should reiterate that the present study should be interpreted as
preliminary analysis because relatively little time has passed since the reform was enacted. In
addition to studying investment responses, we are currently testing our empirical approach by
examining the dividend behavior of firms controlled by non-taxpaying clientele, and analyzing
the characteristics of firms who increased dividends along other dimensions such as profitability
and corporate governance.
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data and our empirical approach.
Section 3 presents the results. Section 4 oﬀers concluding remarks and describes avenues for
future work.


2     Data
We use quarterly data from the CRSP, which reports dividend, stock price, and share infor-
mation for all companies listed on the NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ stock exchanges. The
data we use span 1980 to 2004-Q1, the last quarter for which data are currently available.8
Following Fama and French (2001) and Auerbach and Hassett (2003), we exclude all firms
whose most recent industry classification is in utilities (SIC codes between 4900 and 4949) or
the financial sector (SIC code between 6000 and 6999) because these companies are regulated
and often have legal distribution requirements. Their dividend payments may therefore be de-
termined by law rather than by shareholder decisions. In addition, we consider only dividends
declared on ordinary common shares (CRSP share codes 10 and 11). The sample of firms
that satisfy the preceding criteria constitute our “core sample.” For our regression analysis,
we merge this core sample with the Compustat database, losing some firms because not all
firms listed in CRSP are covered by Compustat, and because Compustat data is unavailable
in 2004-Q1.
   8
     CRSP quarterly data are generally available about 3 or 4 weeks after the end of a quarter. Data for 2004-Q2
should become available by the end of July 2004, etc.



                                                       5
     The left half of Table 1 gives summary statistics for the core sample between 1981-Q3
and 2004-Q1.9 All dollar amounts in this and subsequent tables and graphs are in real
2004 dollars. We define “regular” dividends as monthly, quarterly, semi-annual, and annual
taxable dividends in the CRSP data.10 As noted by Fama and French (2001), the fraction
of firms making these regular dividend payments is fairly low in the recent past: only 23.5%
of the firm-quarter pairs in the sample have positive regular dividends. It is common for
firms to increase regular dividend payments — 11% of firms in any given quarter initiated or
raised dividends in the average quarter. Decreases are much rarer (<2%), consistent with
DeAngelo and DeAngelo’s (1990) finding that only severely distressed firms lower dividend
payments. Given the extremely high degree of persistence of dividend payments within firms
over time, it is not surprising that movements along the extensive margin through initiations
and terminations are rare.11 Hence, an initiation of a regular payment (as by Microsoft in
2003) is a strong signal that the firm intends to maintain a dividend payment of equal or
greater value permanently.
     We define all other taxable dividends besides regular distributions as “special” dividends.12
In contrast to regular dividends, special dividends are usually one-time, non-recurring events.
Special payments are made by very few firms (0.8% of the sample). Special dividends are also
of minor importance in terms of amounts, averaging $110,977 per firm per quarter, in contrast
with an average of $4.62 million per quarter for regular dividends. Note that these means are
for all firms (including non-payers).
     The main feature of the data that makes statistical analysis of the relationship between
tax rates and dividend payments diﬃcult is the importance of a few firms in determining the
aggregate level of dividends. As observed by DeAngelo, DeAngelo, and Skinner (2003), the
distribution of dividend payments is highly concentrated, especially in recent years. In our core
sample, the top 5% of payers accounting for approximately 85% of total payments. There are
more than 100 instances where a single firm shifts aggregate quarterly dividends by more than
5%. Hence, idiosyncratic decisions by a few firms can be very influential, adding a substantial
amount of noise to the time series of aggregate dividend amounts.
     There are a total of 431,379 firm-quarter observations in our core sample. The number
of firms varies greatly over time, peaking in the late 90s with around 6,000 firms, as shown in
the lower half of Table 1, and falling to 3,813 in 2004-Q1. A total of 3,853 firms were delisted
(either because they stopped trading on the three exchanges or because of a merger) between
1998-Q1 and 2004-Q1. Since firms cannot be tracked after they exit the CRSP sample,
   9
     Lagged data requirements for our subsequent analysis force us to begin with 1981-Q3.
  10
     Some forms of liquidation can generate non-taxable dividend events that we ignore in this study.
  11
     Section 3.2 gives formal definitions of initiations and terminations.
  12
     More precisely, we define special dividends as the sum of special, one-time, unspecified and other frequency
dividends in the CRSP data. Virtually all payments in our broader definition of special dividends are accounted
for by CRSP’s “special dividend” category.



                                                       6
results based on the entire sample of listed firms could be biased by selective attrition in the
years around the 2003 tax reform. The attrition problem in the core sample is described in
greater detail in section 3.2 below. To address this issue, we also construct a second “selected
sample” that contains only observations on the 3,813 firms that are listed in the 2004-Q1
CRSP database, yielding a total of 180,170 firm-quarter pairs from 1981-Q3 to 2004-Q1. The
selected sample essentially reverses the direction of attrition relative to the core sample, as
only firms who survive through the last quarter are kept in the dataset, making the sample
grow over time. The advantage of this method is that we can easily show that the latter form
of attrition is inconsequential using “placebo tests” that apply our selection method to earlier
years, as described in section 3.5 below.
    The characteristics of the selected sample diﬀer from those of the core sample because this
sample includes only the successful, stable firms that have survived through 2004. As a result,
firms in the selected sample have much higher market capitalization, assets, cash reserves, and
profits than those in the core sample. The propensity to pay dividends is also somewhat
higher (31% vs 23%), as is the average dividend amount. However, all other characteristics
are fairly similar across the two samples — the distribution of payments is highly concentrated,
payments are very persistent, and movements on the extensive margin are rare.


3     Results
Our empirical analysis is organized as follows. The first subsection examines the change in
aggregate dividend amounts following the 2003 tax change. We find that statistical infer-
ences about the eﬀect of the reform at the aggregate level hinge heavily on outliers and the
specification of regression equations. Subsections 2-4 therefore examine the dividend response
at a more disaggregated level along three margins: (1) the extensive margin (initiations and
terminations of regular dividend payments); (2) the intensive margin (increases or decreases
in payment amounts by firms already paying); and (3) special dividends. Throughout this
analysis, we focus primarily on the “selected sample” described above. To show that our
conclusions are not biased by this selection procedure, we demonstrate in subsection 5 that
placebo tests using other years in the sample show no evidence of a surge in dividend payments
at the end of the sample frame. Finally, we apply similar methods to evaluate the eﬀect of
TRA-86 on dividend distributions.

3.1   Aggregate Dividends
Figure 1 plots aggregate regular dividends for the core sample between 1981 and 2004 in real
2004 dollars. Total regular dividends rose from $26 billion in 2002-Q4 to a peak of $29.5
billion in 2003-Q4, and returned to $28.3 billion in 2004-Q1. The dip from the last quarter
of 2003 to the first quarter of 2004 is caused exclusively by Microsoft’s payment of $1.7 billion

                                               7
in 2002-Q4; if Microsoft is excluded, there is a small increase of $75 million in dividends from
2002-Q4 to 2003-Q2 and a sharp spurt of $2.7 billion from 2003-Q2 to 2004-Q1. The sharper
increase beginning in the second half of 2003 is to be expected given that the tax cut was
signed into law only in July, 2003. Note, however, that increases in the first half of 2003 may
also have been motivated by the tax cut, because the bill was first proposed in early January,
and its provisions apply retroactively to the beginning of 2003.
    If the post-2003 increases in aggregate dividends are due exclusively to the tax cut, these
values suggest that the reform has raised regular aggregate dividends from the level in 2002-Q4
by an impressive 11% if Microsoft is excluded and 15% if it is included. Unfortunately, it
is diﬃcult to draw the conclusion that the tax cut was associated with increases in average
dividend amounts under conventional criteria for statistical significance. The basic reason is
that the time series of dividend amounts is very noisy, as shown by the large fluctuations in
the years preceding 2003 in Figure 1.
    To assess statistical significance, we estimate the eﬀect of the tax change using a standard
reduced-form model of dividends payments. We define two “treatment eﬀect” dummies to
capture the eﬀect of the tax change: post2003Q1, which is an indicator variable that is positive
in all quarters including and after the tax cut was oﬃcially proposed by the Bush administra-
tion (January 7, 2003), and post2003Q3, which is positive in all quarters after the tax cut was
enacted (May 30, 2003). Formally, letting i index firms and t quarters, we define
                                               (
                                                   1 if t ≥ 2003-Q1
                           post2003Q1i,t =
                                                   0 else
                                               (
                                                   1 if t ≥ 2003-Q3
                           post2003Q3i,t =
                                                   0 else

    Our statistical models of dividend payout, motivated by the partial-adjustment model
of Lintner (1956), relate the level of quarterly regular dividend payments, $Di,t , to lagged
dividends and profits, as well as other factors that may aﬀect distribution decisions. We
begin with a parsimonious specification in which the total amounts of dividends paid by firm
i in quarter t, $Di,t is modeled as linear function of (1) eight lags of quarterly dividends,
                                                                                      s that take
$Di,t−1 , $Di,t−2 , ..., $Di,t−8 ; (2) a linear time trend, t; (3) quarter dummies qtri,t
on a value of 1 in quarter s of a calendar year; and (4) the post2003Q1 and post2003Q3
dummies to capture the eﬀect of the tax change. The lagged dividend values are included in
this specification to capture the high degree autocorrelation in most firms’ dividend payments
over time, and the remaining regressors net out seasonal eﬀects and time trends in dividend




                                               8
payments. This yields the following “few controls” estimating equation:

                      3
                      X                     8
                                            X
  $Di,t = α + θt +          υ qs qtri,t
                                    s
                                        +         β s $Di,t−s + γ 1 post2003Q1i,t + γ 2 post2003Q3i,t + εi,t (1)
                      s=1                   s=1

    The orthogonality condition required to obtain an unbiased estimate of the dividend re-
sponse to the 2003 tax reform from OLS estimation of (1) is that there are no unobserved
trends in dividend payments during the reform period. Under this identification assumption,
the eﬀect of the tax cut on dividend payments is given by the coeﬃcients on the treatment
dummies, γ 1 and γ 2 . If enactment of the tax cut stimulated dividend payments, γ 2 should
be positive. In addition, if some firms adjusted their dividend policies in anticipation of the
passage of the tax cut in the first half of 2003, γ 1 should be positive as well.13 In this case, the
total eﬀect of the tax cut on quarterly regular dividend payments per firm is given by γ 1 + γ 2 .
    Column 1 in Table 2 reports OLS estimates of (1) using the core sample of firms defined
above. Though the point estimates of the treatment eﬀects (γ 1 and γ 2 ) are positive, the
coeﬃcients are estimated imprecisely, and are not statistically significant at even the 15%
level. To test whether controlling for other determinants of payout decisions can help improve
precision, we estimate a model that includes several additional firm-level covariates: (1) total
current assets, ai,t ; (2) the level and eight lags of quarterly post-tax earnings, π i,t and cash
holdings, ci,t ; and (3) First-digit SIC industry dummies, SICi,t  s that indicate whether the first

digit of firm i’s SIC code is s in 2004. This specification is motivated by Lintner’s (1956) finding
that the dividend decisions of firms are influenced heavily by current and lagged earnings. The
“full controls” estimating equation is

                              3
                              X                      8
                                                     X
       $Di,t = α + θt +             υ qs qtri,t
                                            s
                                                +          β s $Di,t−s + γ 1 post2003Q1i,t + γ 2 post2003Q3i,t
                               s=1                   s=1
                                X8                                      8
                                                                        X
                      a
                  +µ ai,t +           (µπs π i,t−s   + µcs ci,t−s ) +         υSs SICi,t
                                                                                     s
                                                                                         + εi,t                  (2)
                                s=0                                     s=0

    Column 2 in Table 2 reports OLS estimates of (2). While the standard error of the treat-
ment eﬀects does not fall, the point estimates rise, making the post2003Q3 dummy becomes
marginally significant (with a p-value of 0.12). The estimate of this coeﬃcient implies that
quarterly dividends rose by $0.20 million per firm between 2003-Q2 and 2004-Q1. Further
analysis, however, reveals that these estimates are quite fragile. The third column in Table
2 replicates specification (2), but drops the five largest firms by market capitalization in 2004
from the sample. This small perturbation cuts the point estimate of the post2003Q3 dummy
  13
    If all firms anticipated the tax reform and adjusted their policies immediately in the beginning of 2003, it
is possible that γ 2 = 0. However, the tax reform passed Congress narrowly, and adjustment to the new tax
regime presumably takes time, so γ 2 > 0 should be expected if the tax cut had an eﬀect on dividends.



                                                               9
by more than 60%, again making the estimate statistically indistinguishable from zero. The
imprecision and fragility of the estimates persists across a wide set of specification checks
with diﬀerent lag structures, covariates, and higher-order time trends. It also remains in the
“selected sample” of firms listed in the 2004 CRSP. Moreover, the standard errors in the
specifications reported in the table are understated because they do not correct for potential
autocorrelation in the error structure of dividend payments within firms, assuming instead
that cov(εi,t , εi,s ) = 0 ∀s, t. When this condition is relaxed, the standard errors become even
larger.
    The fundamental reason for the wide confidence intervals on the estimates of γ 1 and γ 2
is that changes in mean dividend amounts are driven by a handful of extreme values. For
instance, the increase in aggregate dividends falls from 15% to 6% if the 10 largest increasers
of the 3,813 firms in the sample are omitted. Since the overall means hinge on explaining the
behavior of a few firms correctly, small changes in the specification or sample definition have
large eﬀects on the estimates. Hence, even though the point estimates suggest that dividend
payments did rise relative to historical averages after the tax reform, this conclusion cannot
be made with any reasonable level of confidence. We therefore turn to more disaggregated
measures of the dividend response to obtain more credible evidence that the 2003 tax reform
caused an increase in dividend payments.

3.2     Extensive Margin
One intuitive way of reducing the influence of extreme values is to examine a firm’s decision to
pay a positive amount of dividends rather than looking at the amount paid. This subsection
analyzes this extensive (participation) margin by evaluating the eﬀect of the tax cut on the
fraction of dividend payers, the number of firms who initiated regular dividend payments, and
the number of firms who terminated dividend payments.

3.2.1    Fraction of Payers

The solid line in Figure 2 plots the fraction of dividend payers in the core sample between
1981-Q3 and 2004-Q1. As discussed in Fama and French (2001), the fraction of dividend
payers has declined steadily over the past two decades, from more than 40% in the early 1980s
to less than 20% in 2000.14 The fraction of dividend payers in the core sample rises sharply
after the tax reform of 2003, but the increase actually appears to begin in late 2000, far before
the reform was enacted. However, the increase between 2000 and 2003 is spurious; it arises
purely from the selective attrition of firms from the CRSP sample during this time period.
  14
    DeAngelo, DeAngelo, and Skinner (2003) emphasize that while the number of payers among publicly traded
firms has fallen, dividends are not “disappearing” because total aggregate dividends have actually risen (as
shown in Figure 1). This is because the distribution of dividend payments is far more concentrated now than
it was in 1980.



                                                    10
As discussed above, nearly 4,000 firms are delisted between 1998 and 2004 from the major
stock exchanges covered by the CRSP. Only 3% of the firms that were delisted during this
time period were dividend payers in the quarter before they exited, in comparison with 17.8%
for the firms who remained in the sample. It is thus not surprising that the average fraction
of payers in the sample that remains rises during this period. To make this point clearer,
Figure 2 also plots the fraction of payers for a subsample of the top 3,813 firms by market cap
in each year. Note that the 2004-Q1 sample of 3,813 firms is the smallest since 1983-Q2, so
the size of this sample is constant from 1983-Q2 onward. In this constant-size sample, the
decline in the fraction of payers continuous precisely until the last quarter of 2002, at which
point the fraction of payers begins to rise. This result provides strong evidence that attrition
bias drives the increase in the fraction of payers between 2000 and 2003, and that the secular
decline in the propensity to pay dividends actually stops only after the tax cut in 2003.
    While restricting attention to the top 3,813 firms to obtain a constant-size sample mitigates
the attrition problem, it does not eliminate it, as some firms still exit this sample before 2004.
Given the apparent correlation between delisting and dividend behavior, we focus our attention
from this point onward on a “selected” sample that completely eliminates delisted firms from
the dataset. This selected sample contains only firms that are listed in the 2004-Q1 CRSP;
by construction, no firm in this sample can leave the dataset before the sample frame ends.
The problem with the selected sample is that it creates “reverse attrition,” where the set of
firms in the sample grows over time, because firms in later years are more likely to survive
until 2004. This attrition is non-random because firms that exist early in this sample will be
more stable and successful than the average firm that exists in later years. We address this
issue in subsection 3.5 below using placebo tests to show that there is no evidence of bias in
our results from this form of attrition.
    Figure 3 replicates Figure 2 for the selected sample, which is the primary sample we analyze
in the remainder of the paper. The results are essentially the same as those obtained for the
constant-size sample, with an increase in the fraction of payers beginning precisely in 2003,
and accelerating in the second half of 2003, after the tax cut had been oﬃcially signed into
law. Figure 3 also plots the tax preference parameter computed by Poterba (2003), which
equals the net return to investors from a dollar paid in dividends instead of capital gains. As
expected, the only large, abrupt change in the tax preference parameter during the sample
period occurs at the end of 2003, after which dividend payments become start to become more
common.
    To evaluate the statistical significance of the change in the fraction of payers after the
tax cut, we estimate probit regressions for the probability of paying dividends.15 The eﬀects
of the proposal and enactment of the tax cut are captured by the two treatment dummies,
   15
      The probit specification is inconsequential for the results below; estimates of γ 01 and γ 02 from logistic and
linear probability models are similar.



                                                         11
post2003Q1 and post2003Q3, defined above. As above, we assess the robustness of our results
by estimating both a parsimonious specification with few controls and a specification that has
a rich set of controls.
     Let di,t be an indicator variable for whether firm i pays regular dividends in quarter t (i.e.,
di,t = 1 iﬀ $Di,t > 0 and 0 else). In the specification with few controls, we link di,t to the
treatment dummies and other covariates by the following equation:

                                  3
                                  X                    8
                                                       X
 Pr(di,t = 1) = F {α + θt +             υqs qtri,t
                                               s
                                                   +          β s di,t−s + γ 01 post2003Q1i,t + γ 02 post2003Q3i,t } (3)
                                  s=1                  s=1

where F (x) = Pr(N (0, 1) < x) denotes the standard normal cdf. Besides the diﬀerence in the
dependent variable, this specification diﬀers from the dividend amounts Lintner specification
given in (1) in two ways: it has lags for an indicator variable for dividend payments (d) instead
of dividend amounts ($D), and it uses a non-linear probit link function instead of a linear
specification.
    The specification with full controls adds assets, post-tax profits, cash, and industry codes
to (3):

                                        3
                                        X                     8
                                                              X
 Pr(di,t = 1) = F {α + θt +                   υ qs qtri,t
                                                      s
                                                          +         β s di,t−s + γ 01 post2003Q1i,t + γ 02 post2003Q3i,t
                                        s=1                   s=1
                            8
                            X                                         8
                                                                      X
               +µa ai,t +         (µπs π i,t−s + µcs ci,t−s ) +             υ Ss SICi,t
                                                                                    s
                                                                                        }                            (4)
                            s=0                                       s=0

    Specifications 4-6 in Table 2 report maximum likelihood estimates of the probit models
in (3) and (4).    The coeﬃcients reported in the table for these and all subsequent probit
specifications are marginal probability eﬀects evaluated at the sample means. Hence, the
                                                                            0
estimates reported for the two treatment dummies are transformations of γ 1 and γ 02 that give
the change in the probability of paying dividends induced by the tax reform. The mean
probability of paying dividends is listed at the bottom of each column to aid in interpreting
the magnitude of these probability changes. These and all subsequent specifications report
standard errors that are robust to arbitrary correlations in the error terms over time within
firms.16
    Column 4 reports estimates of equation (3) on the core sample. Despite attrition bias,
the core sample exhibits a large, highly statistically significant increase in the fraction of
payers after the tax reform. Specification (5) shows that these results become stronger in
the selected sample where delistings are eliminated. Specification (6) reports estimates of
equation (4), adding the full set of controls to the model. The estimates of the treatment
  16
    More precisely, the estimating equations in (3) and (4) are modified to permit additive error terms εi,t in
the score function where cov(εi,t , εj,s ) = 0 if i 6= j but cov(εi,t , εi,s ) is unrestricted ∀s, t.


                                                               12
eﬀects become even stronger when these controls are added. According to the point estimates
from this specification, the probability of becoming or remaining a dividend payer rose by 6.7
percentage points in the two quarters after the tax reform was announced, and a strikingly
large 11.5% including and after 2003-Q3, when the law was oﬃcially enacted. The z-statistics
for these estimates exceed 4 and 5, respectively.
    These results constitute strong evidence that the 2003 tax reform has had a large eﬀect
on the number of firms paying dividends. Of course, this conclusion is predicated on the
assumption that no other unobservable determinant of dividend payments changed contem-
poraneously with the tax reform. We are currently testing the validity of this identification
assumption using firms whose primary shareholders are institutional investors as a control
group.

3.2.2    Initiations and Terminations

We now explore the reason that the fraction of dividend payers increased sharply following the
2003 reform by examining the eﬀect of the tax cut on initiations and terminations of regular
dividend payments. Before discussing the results, “initiation” and “termination” of dividends
must be defined formally. We define a firm as initiating dividend payments in quarter t if
it pays positive regular dividends in quarter t and did not pay dividends in the previous four
quarters (t − 1, t − 2, t − 3, and t − 4). If the firm pays annual dividends in quarter t (or paid
such an annual dividend in quarter t − 5 or t − 6), we require in addition that the firm did not
pay any dividends in quarters t − 5 and t − 6 as well.17
     Similarly, we define a firm as terminating regular dividend payments in quarter t if it pays
positive regular dividends in quarter t − 1 and does not pay dividends in the next four quarters
(t, t+1, t+2, and t+3). In the case of annual payers in quarter t−1 (or quarters t+4 or t+5),
we impose in addition that the firm does not pay any dividends in quarters t + 4 and t + 5 as
well, for the same reason as above. Because our data is censored after quarter 2004-Q1, we
do not observe the full vector of future dividend payments for observations from 2003-Q2 to
2004-Q1. To describe how we handle these cases, let T denote the last quarter available in
the data (2004-Q1). In those cases where t ≥ 2003-Q2, we define a firm as terminating regular
dividends if one of the following three conditions hold: (1) the firm was a quarterly payer in
quarter t − 1 and paid dividends in all quarters t − 2, t − 3, t − 4, but does not pay in quarters
t to T ; (2) the firm was a semi-annual payer in quarter t − 1, but does not pay for at least two
consecutive quarters starting in t; or (3) the firm was an annual payer in quarter t − 1, but
does not pay for at least four consecutive quarters starting in t. This definition of termination
is the closest prediction we can obtain of actual terminations that would be observed if the
  17
    We impose this condition to accommodate cases where annual dividend payers change the quarter in which
they distribute their annual dividend payments, which can create 5 or 6 consecutive quarters with no payments
but with no materially relevant interruption in regular dividend payments.



                                                     13
data were not censored.
   Figure 4 plots the total number of initiations and terminations of dividend payments in
the selected sample. The number of initiations rose in the first two quarters of 2003, and
nearly doubled in the quarters following the enactment of the tax cut in 2003-Q3. The
average number of initiations in the quarters including and after 2003-Q3 was 38, far above
the average of 5 per quarter in 2002 and prior years. The number of terminations remained
very low in 2003 and did not change appreciably after the tax reform. These two eﬀects
combine to generate the rise in the fraction of payers documented above.
   Probit models for the probability of initiating dividends reveal that the evidence of a
surge in dividend initiations is robust and highly statistically significant. In our parsimonious
specification with limited controls, we control only for time trends and seasonal eﬀects; it is not
meaningful to include lags of dividend payments in this specification because these variables
would predict initiation perfectly. Letting Initi,t = 1 if firm i initiates dividend payments in
quarter t, the “few controls” estimating equation is

                                           3
                                           X
       Pr(Initi,t = 1) = F {α + θt +             υ qs qtri,t
                                                         s
                                                             + γ 01 post2003Q1i,t + γ 02 post2003Q3i,t }    (5)
                                           s=1

    The specification with full controls adds assets, post-tax profits, cash, and industry codes
to (5):

                                              3
                                              X
      Pr(Initi,t = 1) = F {α + θt +                 υ qs qtri,t
                                                            s
                                                                + γ 01 post2003Q1i,t + γ 02 post2003Q3i,t
                                              s=1
                                   8
                                   X                                       8
                                                                           X
                          a
                       +µ ai,t +         (µπs π i,t−s   + µcs ci,t−s ) +         υ Ss SICi,t
                                                                                         s
                                                                                             }              (6)
                                   s=0                                     s=0

    Columns 1 and 2 of Table 3 report estimates of (5) and (6). These and all subsequent
models in the paper are estimated on the entire selected sample (including both payers and non-
payers). Whether or not controls are included, the estimates reveal a very strong, statistically
significant eﬀect of post2003Q1 and post2003Q3 of the probability of initiating payments. In
the specification with controls, the tax cut is estimated to increase the probability of initiation
in a given quarter by a factor of 4 relative to the sample mean of 0.3%. Analogous probit
models for termination of dividend payments (not reported) show no change in the probability
of termination in 2003. The spike in initiations is a widespread phenomenon that occurs
across firms of all sizes. This is illustrated in Table 5, which lists net initiations (initiations
less terminations) for six diﬀerent market cap groups. Net initiations rise across all the
categories in a manner that is historically unprecedented.
    How much did the extensive margin contribute to aggregate dividends after the tax reform?
Figure 7 answers this question by plotting the cumulative amount of dividends raised through

                                                         14
initiations and lost via terminations over the sample. New dividend initiations raised more
than $1.6 billion dollars from 2002-Q4 to 2004-Q1, an extremely large value relative to past
changes, while the amount lost through terminations during this period was close to zero.
Fifty percent of the $1.6 billion increase came from an initiation by Microsoft in 2003-Q1.
To assess the statistical significance of the increase in dividend amounts from the extensive
margin, columns 1 and 2 in Table 4 report OLS estimates of linear regressions with cumulative
extensive amounts as the dependent variable. The cumulative extensive dividend amount
for firm i in quarter t is defined as the cumulated sum (from the quarter than i enters the
sample until quarter t) of dividends from initiations less the cumulated sum of dividends lost
via terminations. These specifications are identical to equations (1) and (2), except that
Microsoft is excluded from the sample here to obtain estimates that are not driven by a single
outlier.
    Irrespective of the controls that are included in the specification, the estimates of the treat-
ment eﬀects reveal an economically and statistically significant surge in dividend amounts from
the extensive margin after enactment of the tax cut. The point estimate of the post2003Q3
coeﬃcient shows that cumulative dividend amounts from the extensive margin rose by ap-
proximately 50% after the tax cut, even when Microsoft is excluded. Again, this surge occurs
across firms of all sizes, as shown in the tabulations of net extensive margin dividend amounts
(non-cumulated quarterly dividends from initiations less terminations) by market cap group
given in Table 7. Note that we are able to make precise statistical inferences about the eﬀect
of the tax cut on amounts from the extensive margin (unlike any other margin) because the
distribution of dividends from initiations is relatively dispersed. Dividend payments from
initiations are not extremely concentrated because most large firms were already paying prior
to the reform, putting them on the intensive margin.
    Our finding that regular dividend payments rose sharply after the 2003 tax cut contrasts
with the conclusions of an earlier study by Blouin, Raedy, and Shackelford (2004), who ex-
amined dividend payments in the three month period immediately after the reform (May 23
to Aug. 22, 2002). They document a surge in special dividends, but conclude that there
is no increase in regular dividends during this period because the standard errors on the tax
reform dummy in their dividend amounts regressions are too large to reject the null hypothesis
of a zero eﬀect. To identify the source of the diﬀerence in our conclusions, we examine the
data at a monthly frequency in the months around the passage of the reform.18 Figure 5
plots the number of initiations per month between 2001 and 2004. It is clear that the surge
  18
    In general, there is little to be gained by examining the data at a monthly level instead of a quarterly level,
because less than 1% of dividend paying firms pay dividends more than once per quarter. Hence, unless the
timing of dividends within a quarter matters for the analysis, quarterly data on dividends contain essentially
the same information as monthly data. However, the tax cut was enacted at the end of May 2003, which falls
in the middle of 2003-Q2 in our data, so it is informative to examine dividend payments in the months around
the passage of the reform.



                                                        15
in initiations occurred shortly after the reform was enacted, during the three month period
examined by Blouin et. al. Indeed, even when we limit ourselves to the CRSP data available
through 2003-Q3 (the data available for their study), our probit model estimates are virtually
unchanged, and remain highly statistically significant. Hence, although the addition of two
more quarters of data has made the increase in regular dividend payments after the tax cut
clearer, the primary reason that our conclusions diﬀer from those of Blouin et. al. is the dif-
ference in methodology. Changes in regular dividend amounts are diﬃcult to detect because
of the extreme values problem, but changes in the number of payers are much easier to see.

3.3    Intensive Margin
Given the extreme values problem that plagues the analysis of amounts, we begin our study
of the intensive margin by examining the eﬀect of the tax cut on the probability that a firm
increases or decreases dividend payments. We consider several diﬀerent cutoﬀs to define an
increase or decrease, ranging from a minimum of 0 percent (where all changes are counted as
either increases or decreases) to a maximum of 50%.19 It turns out that the cutoﬀs used to
define increases and decreases matter little for the results; we report results for the 20% cutoﬀ
because these changes are both relatively frequent and suﬃciently large that they are likely to
signal a substantial shift in a corporation’s distribution policy.
    We define a firm as increasing its regular dividend payment on the intensive margin by
20% in quarter t if two conditions are met: (1) the firm is not initiating payments in quarter
t by the definition given in the preceding section; (2) regular dividends in quarter t exceed
regular dividends in quarter t − 1 and quarter t − 4 by at least 20%. The requirement that
dividends in quarter t exceed dividends in quarter t − 4 ensures that annual or semi-annual
payers are not artificially classified as increasers every time they make a dividend payment.
The definition for decreasing dividends by 20% on the intensive margin is analogous. Note
that terminations are not counted as decreases to avoid double counting, given their inclusion
in the extensive analysis. Every firm is assigned a value of 0 for both the increase and decrease
dummy variables in their first four quarters in the sample, since there is inadequate historical
information to apply our definition in these cases. Firms not paying or initiating dividends
in period t are always assigned a value of 0 for both dummy variables.
    Figure 6 plots the fraction of firms in the sample that increased or decreased dividends
by 20% or more along the intensive margin. There is a sharp surge in the number of firms
that increase dividends when the tax cut is enacted in 2003-Q3.20 An average of 65 firms
  19
      Increases and decreases are defined using nominal rather than real values since we want these variables to
reflect active decisions by firms rather than changes in the inflation rate.
   20
      The downward trend in the number of increases is created by selection bias. As noted above, the average
firm in the selected sample becomes larger, more profitable, and more stable as we go further back in time.
Since these firms are more likely to increase dividends than others, the fraction of dividend increases in the
sample trends downward in the selected sample.



                                                      16
raised dividends by 20% or more in each of the quarters following enactment, much greater
than the average of 25.5 per quarter in 2002 and 31.7 in prior years. Analysis of the data
at a monthly frequency (not reported) shows that the pattern of dividend increases coincides
very closely with the pattern of dividend initiations: it began in the three month period
immediately after the reform examined by Blouin et. al., and remains strong through the end
of the sample period. Meanwhile, the frequency of dividend decreases remained small and
essentially unchanged after the tax cut.
     Columns 3 and 4 of Table 3 report estimates of probit equations for the probability of
increasing dividends on the intensive margin. The specifications are analogous to those in (5)
and (6) above, with the dependent variable replaced by a dummy for increasing dividends by
more than 20%. Whether or not controls are included, the estimates reveal a very strong,
statistically significant eﬀect of the treatment dummies of the probability of increasing div-
idends. In the specification with controls, the tax cut is estimated to almost double the
probability of an increase relative to the sample mean of 1.7%. Analogous probit models for
decreasing dividends by 20% (not reported) show a small, statistically insignificant reduction
in the probability of decreasing dividends in 2003. The spike in increases on the intensive
margin is a widespread phenomenon that occurs across firms of all sizes. This is illustrated
in Table 6, which lists net increases (increases less decreases) for the six diﬀerent market cap
groups.
     While the data permit clear statistical inferences about the number of firms making large
increases because of the tax reform, it is diﬃcult to pin down the amount of dividends these
increases brought in with any precision. Figure 7 plots total cumulated dividends from
the intensive margin, which are defined as the residual when cumulative dividends from the
extensive margin in quarter t are subtracted from aggregate dividends in quarter t. While
there is a substantial increase in the total amount of dividends from the intensive margin after
the reform, the time series is very volatile, suggesting that there is limited power to make
statistical inferences. Columns 3 and 4 in Table 4 confirm that this is the case, replicating
the dividend amounts regressions in (1) and (2) with cumulative intensive margin dividends as
the dependent variable. Although the point estimate for the total treatment eﬀect is positive
when controls are included, the standard errors are very large, and the null hypothesis of a
zero eﬀect cannot be rejected. Table 7 presents the problem at a more disaggregated level by
listing dividends from the intensive margin (non-cumulated) by market cap size group. While
the rise in total dividends is evident across all size groups, the fluctuations in the historical
series are always large relative to these changes. Thus, despite the strong evidence that the
tax cut induced many firms to raise dividends sharply, the concentration of dividend payments
makes it diﬃcult to estimate the total amount of dividends contributed by these changes with
any precision.



                                               17
3.4    Special Dividends
The preceding analysis applies only to regular, recurring dividends. We now turn to special,
one-time dividend distributions. Figure 2 plots the fraction of special dividend payers in the
core sample alongside the fraction of regular dividend payers. There is a clear uptick in the
fraction of special payers immediately after the reform. An average of 28 firms paid special
dividends in each of the quarters following enactment, significantly greater than the average
of 11 per quarter in 2002. However, there are an average of 40 special dividend payments
per quarter in the entire sample between 1981 and 2003. Hence, while the number of special
payments rose after the reform relative to the recent past, it does not exceed the level of special
payments in earlier periods such as the late 80s and early 90s.21
    To test the statistical significance of the increase in special payments, the last two columns
of Table 3 report estimates of probit equations for the probability of paying special dividends.
Once we control for a linear time trend to account for the decline in the number of special
payments over the sample period, the post2003Q3 dummy is consistently statistically signifi-
cant, irrespective of the other controls included in the model. Hence, there is strong evidence
that the frequency of special dividend payments rose after the tax cut was passed in 2003-Q3.
In the specification with controls, the estimates imply that the tax cut nearly doubled the
probability of a special payment relative to the sample mean of 0.8%. Table 6 shows that the
increase in special payments after the reform is a widespread phenomenon that occurs across
firms of all sizes.
    Assessing the total amount of dividends raised by special payments is again a challenging
statistical task. Figure 7 plots the total amount of special dividends paid by firms in the
selected sample. On average, special payments are $800 million per quarter higher in the
quarters including and after 2003-Q3 relative to the four quarters in the 2002 pre-reform
period. However, this increase is driven by a very small set of firms. More than 80% of
the increase is accounted for by eight payers who made special dividend payments in excess of
$100 million in one of the quarters after the reform was enacted. More than 30% of the $800
million increase after 2003-Q3 is driven by a single firm, Southwestern Bell Corporation (SBC),
which made two special dividend payments of approximately $335 million each in 2003-Q3 and
2003-Q4. To assess the robustness of the rise in special dividends, the last two columns of
Table 4 report OLS estimates for special dividend amounts, dropping SBC from the analysis.
In the “few controls” specification, the post2003Q3 dummy is statistically significant at the 5%
level, and implies that the enactment of the tax cut raised the average firm’s special dividend
payment by $80, 000. This estimate implies an aggregate increase of 3813∗0.08 = $305 million
per quarter. The inclusion of controls reduces the point estimate significantly, making the
coeﬃcient statistically indistinguishable from zero at conventional criteria. The fragility and
  21
    This is consistent with the findings of DeAngelo, DeAngelo, and Skinner (2000), who document a decline
in the frequency of small special dividend payments over the past two decades.


                                                   18
lack of precision in these results should not be surprising given the extreme concentration of
special dividend amounts.
    The magnitude of the increase in special dividends is likely to be dwarfed by the change
in regular dividends in the long run. To see this, note that increases in regular dividends
are very persistent over time: The coeﬃcients on lagged total dividends are very large and
statistically significant in the intensive amount specifications in Table 4, but are insignificant
in the specifications for special dividends. Hence, regular dividend increases cumulate over
time, adding up to a much larger eﬀect after a few quarters than the rise in special payments.
Figure 2 illustrates this point clearly for the number of payers. The rise in the fraction of
special payments rivals that of regular payments in 2003-Q3, immediately after the reform,
but is much smaller than the total increase in regular dividend participation by 2004-Q1.
    The same results apply when comparing regular and special dividend amounts, although
the amounts estimates must be interpreted with caution in view of our earlier discussion. By
2004-Q1, more than $1.6 billion was pulled in from the extensive margin, while the intensive
margin contributed another $1-$1.5 billion. Special dividends contributed less than $1 billion
in 2004-Q1. It should be noted that if one were examining the data up to 2003-Q3 — as
do Blouin et. al. (2004) — one would correctly conclude that special payments had a much
larger eﬀect than changes in regular dividends on total amounts until that point. The large
cumulative eﬀect of the changes in regular dividend amounts is fully evident only with the
data now available through 2004-Q1. If current trends on the intensive and extensive margins
continue and regular dividend payments remain as persistent as they have historically, special
dividend payments are likely to be a minor blip in the time series relative to the change in
regular dividend amounts induced by the 2003 tax reform.

3.5   Placebo Tests
A natural concern with our approach of selecting only firms alive in the 2004 CRSP sample
for our empirical analysis is that non-random selection into the sample over time may bias
our results. Firms that are in this selected sample in early years must be highly successful
and stable, since all firms that are closed or delisted prior to 2004 are eliminated. Hence,
the characteristics of the firms in the sample changes systematically over time. For example,
average real profits trend downward over time in our selected sample, whereas they are stable
in the core sample.
    One may worry that the changing characteristics lead to an increase in dividend payments
at the end of the sample frame, leading to spurious estimates of a treatment eﬀect related to
the 2003 tax reform. To test this hypothesis, we replicate our analysis for 1998 and check for
a (spurious) “treatment eﬀect ” at the end of this sample frame. More precisely, we discard all
the CRSP data after 1998-Q1, and construct a selected sample from 1980-1998 of only those



                                               19
firms that are listed in the 1998 CRSP database. We then run the battery of tests described
in the preceding three sections on this 1998 selected sample, to test whether regular dividend
payments increased along any margin in the final year of the sample frame. Figures 8 and
9 show that there is no evidence of a spurious treatment eﬀect. Dividend initiations and
terminations are essentially flat from 1996 to 1998, as is the cumulative amount of dividends
accrued from the extensive margin. The intensive margin also shows no evidence of an increase
in the last year.
    The results for the 1998 placebo test are not unique. We repeat our placebo analysis
for all years y ∈ {1985, 1986, ..., 2003}, selecting only those firms that were alive in the first
quarter of year y of the data. None of these placebo tests show any evidence of an increase
in regular dividends at the end of the sample frame. The mean increase in initiations in the
final year of the sample is 2.15 with a standard error of 4.5, in contrast with an increase of 92
in the 2004 selected sample. The placebo tests thus concur that the treatment eﬀect is not
spurious: The increase in initiations following the 2003 tax reform is indeed unprecedented.

3.6      Comparison to TRA-86
To demonstrate the unusual eﬃcacy of the 2003 reform in inducing dividend increases, we
replicate our analysis for the time period around the other major reform in our sample period,
the Tax Reform Act of 1986. TRA-86, which was phased in between 1986 and 1988, reduced
the top individual tax rate on dividends (as well as other forms of income) from 50% to 28%.
    To analyze the eﬀects of TRA-86, we construct a selected sample of the firms alive in
the 1990-Q1 CRSP listing.22 Figure 10 shows that the fraction of firms paying regular or
special dividends did not change appreciably after TRA-86. The number of intensive-margin
increases and decreases did not change significantly either. However, TRA-86 does appear to
have generated a temporary surge in the total amount of special dividends in the late 1980s,
as shown in Figure 11. The increase in the amount of special dividend payments following
TRA-86 was much larger than after the 2003 tax reform. These results are consistent with
the analysis of dividend payments around TRA-86 by Perez-Gonzalez (2003), and with the
large but short-term surge in dividend income reported on high income individual tax returns
just after TRA-86, as documented in Piketty and Saez (2001).
    Further research is required to determine why the 2003 reform had very diﬀerent eﬀects
than TRA-86. Three candidate explanations are: (1) average cash holdings were unusually
high before the 2003 reform relative to prior years, giving firms the resources necessary to raise
dividends; (2) highly publicized cases of corporate mismanagement such as Enron may have
raised the signal value of dividends, giving firms a strong reason to raise dividends as soon as
the cost of doing so was lowered; and (3) since TRA-86 lowered the income tax rate on all
 22
      This sample is the same as that used for the 1990 placebo test in the preceding subsection.



                                                       20
forms of income, it generated a large income eﬀect among high taxpayers that suppressed the
demand for extra dividend payments.


4    Conclusion and Future Research
Aggregate quarterly dividend payments surged by around $3 billion in 2003. Unfortunately,
the time series of dividend amounts is too noisy to conclude that this sharp increase was a
systematic change associated with the dividend tax cut of 2003 rather than a random event.
However, the time series of dividend amounts masks several systematic, detectable changes in
dividend behavior following the tax cut. The data available to date strongly suggest that the
2003 tax reform induced a large, widespread set of firms to initiate regular dividend payments
or raise the payments they were already making. The sharp rise in regular dividend payments
along both intensive and extensive margins is unprecedented in the record of publicly traded
U.S. corporations in the last three decades, and oﬀers perhaps the clearest evidence thus far
in the literature that tax policy does matter for dividend payments by corporations.
    These results are inconsistent with the basic tax-irrelevance prediction of a pure “new
view” model, insofar as the increases in regular dividends are indeed permanent changes.
Nonetheless, our findings do not necessarily imply that all the predictions of the “old view”
theory will be observed. Most importantly, it remains to be known whether the 2003 tax
spurred investment and business activity. It is possible that the tax reform induced some
firms to switch from share repurchases to dividends as a means of distributing profits, without
having any net eﬀect on investment. We plan to explore the eﬀects of the tax cut on other
outcomes such as investment and share repurchases in subsequent research.
    We also intend to complete and extend our analysis of the eﬀects of dividend tax policy
on dividend payout behavior in several ways. Our first goal is to test the key identification
assumption underlying our time series analysis — that no other unobservable factor relevant
for dividend behavior changed contemporaneously with the tax rate. This assumption can be
tested by checking if the new payers have relatively higher individual ownership who stood to
benefit from the dividend tax cut rather than institutional ownership (corporations, non-profit
organizations, pensions, or college funds) that did not benefit from the tax cut.
    Second, we also plan to examine the characteristics of firms that initiated or increased
dividends across other dimensions by linking our dataset with data on executive compensation,
insider ownership, and measures of corporate governance quality from Gompers, Ishii, and
Metrick (2003). These datasets will permit analysis of many interesting questions: Do new
payers hold large cash amounts relative to other companies? Do new payers have higher insider
ownership, suggesting that corporate governance plays an important role in the determination
of dividend payout policies?
    More generally, we hope to exploit the dividend tax cut as an experiment to explore the ex-


                                              21
tent to which agency problems cause large, cash-rich firms to undertake ineﬃcient investments
instead of returning the money to investors via dividends. A large literature in corporate
finance has shown that the interest of management is not necessarily well aligned with the
interest of stockholders when ownership is dispersed. As a result, it is possible that poorly
governed corporations are more likely to dissipate profits into non-eﬃcient investments or ex-
cessive executive compensation rather than distribute profits to stockholders (see LaPorta et.
al., 2000 for a cross-country analysis). Testing whether the quality of corporate governance,
the level and composition of executive compensation, and the reliance on stock options is sys-
tematically diﬀerent in firms that took advantage of the tax reform by increasing dividends
can shed further light on these issues. For instance, the value of outstanding stock options
increases with capital gains following share repurchases, but does not change following div-
idend payments. If agency problems are rampant, companies with substantial stock-options
outstanding among its executives or influential employees should be less likely to replace share
repurchases with dividend payments (Lambert, Lanen, and Larcker, 1989).




                                              22
References
Allen, Franklin and Roni Michaely, 2003, “Payout Policy,” in Constantinides, George, Milton
Harris and Rene Stulz eds. Handbook of the Economics of Finance (Amsterdam: North-
Holland)
Auerbach, Alan, 1979, “Wealth maximization and the cost of capital,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 93, 433-46.
Auerbach, Alan, 2003, “Taxation and Corporate Financial Policy,” in Auerbach, Alan and
Martin Feldstein eds. Handbook of Public Economics, Volume 3, (Amsterdam: North-Holland)
Auerbach, Alan and Kevin Hassett, 2003, “On the Marginal Source of Investment Funds,”
Journal of Public Economics 87(1), 205-232.
Blouin, Jennifer, Jana Raedy, and Douglas Shackelford, 2004, “Did Dividends Increase Imme-
diately after the 2003 Reduction in Tax Rates”, NBER Working Paper No. 10301
Bradford, David F., 1981, “The incidence and allocation eﬀects of a tax on corporate distrib-
utions,” Journal of Public Economics 15, 1-22.
DeAngelo, Harry, and Linda DeAngelo, 1990, “Dividend policy and financial distress: An
empirical examination of troubled NYSE firms,” Journal of Finance, 45, 1415-1431.
DeAngelo, Harry, Linda DeAngelo, and Doug Skinner, 2000, “Special Dividends and the Evo-
lution of Dividend Signaling,” Journal of Financial Economics, pp. 309-354.
DeAngelo, Harry, Linda DeAngelo, and Doug Skinner, 2003, “Are dividends disappearing?
Dividend concentration and the consolidation of earnings.” Journal of Financial Economics,
forthcoming.
Fama, Eugene and Kenneth French, 2001, “Disappearing dividends: Changing firm character-
istics or lower propensity to pay”, Journal of Financial Economics 60, 3-43.
Gompers, Paul A., Joy L. Ishii, and Andrew Metrick, 2003, “Corporate Governance and Equity
Prices”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(1), 107-155.
King, Mervin A., 1977, Public Policy and the Corporation, (Chapman and Hall, London).
Lambert, Richard, William Lanen and David Larcker, 1989, “Executive stock option plans
and corporate dividend policy,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 24, 409- 425.
LaPorta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 2000, “Agency
problems and dividend policies around the world,” Journal of Finance 55, 1-33.
Lintner, J., 1956. “Distribution of incomes of corporations among dividends, retained earnings,
and taxes,” American Economic Review 46, 97-113.
Perez-Gonzalez, Francisco, 2003, “Large shareholders and dividends: Evidence from U.S. tax
reforms”, Working paper, Columbia University.
Piketty, Thomas and Emmanuel Saez, 2001, “Income Inequality in the United States, 1913-
1998”, NBER Working Paper No. 8467.
Poterba, James, 2004, “Corporate Payout Policy”, American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Poterba, James and Lawrence Summers, 1985 “The Economic Eﬀects of Dividend Taxation”, in


                                              23
E. Altman and M. Subrahmanyam, eds., Recent Advances in Corporation Finance (Homewood,
IL: Dow Jones-Irwin), 227-284.




                                         24
                                                                     Figure 1
                                           Aggregate Regular Dividends for Core CRSP Sample 1981-2004
                                                                                               2003 Tax Reform
                                30000
     Dividends (Real 2004 $ mil)
15000     20000      25000




                                        82-Q1     86-Q1      90-Q1        94-Q1    98-Q1      02-Q1
                                                                      Quarter

                                                                Total Dividends
                                                                Dividends Excluding MSFT


                                                                      25
                                                     Figure 2
                               Fraction of CRSP Firms Paying Dividends 1981-2004
                  40
 Percent of Firms
10   20  0  30




                       82-Q1     86-Q1       90-Q1        94-Q1      98-Q1          02-Q1
                                                      Quarter

                                         Regular Dividend Payers (Full Sample)
                                         Regular Dividend Payers (Top 3813 firms)
                                         Special Dividend Payers


                                                      26
                                             Figure 3
                      Percent Dividend Payers -- Firms in 2004 CRSP Sample




                                                                                  .94
        36




                                                                                  Dividend Tax Preference
                                                                                                      .92
 Percent of Firms
               32




                                                                                                .9
      28




                                                                                    .86 .88
24




                                                                                  .84
        20




              92-Q1       94-Q1    96-Q1      98-Q1      00-Q1        02-Q1   04-Q1
                                              Quarter

                                           Percent Paying Dividends
                                           Dividend Tax Preference


                                                 27
                                            Figure 4
                                Dividend Initiation and Termination
         1.2
         1
   Percent of Firms
.2  .4   .6
         0      .8




                92-Q1   94-Q1     96-Q1      98-Q1          00-Q1     02-Q1   04-Q1
                                             Quarter

                                                   Initiations
                                                   Terminations


                                              28
                                                   Figure 5
                            Regular Dividend Initiations by Month 2001-2004
                                               Tax Cut
                                            Enacted in 2003
         20     15
No. of Initiations
     10 5
        0




                     Jan   Feb Mar   Apr May Jun               Jul   Aug Sep   Oct Nov Dec
                                                    2001                2002
                                                    2003                2004

                                                          29
                                           Figure 6
                        Intensive Margin: Dividend Increases and Decreases
         2.5      2
   Percent of Firms
.5    1  0 1.5




                92-Q1   94-Q1      96-Q1     98-Q1       00-Q1      02-Q1    04-Q1
                                             Quarter

                                    Intensive Margin Dividend Increases
                                    Intensive Margin Dividend Decreases


                                             30
Initiations, Terminations, Specials ($ mil)                              Figure 7
                                              Cumulated Intensive, Extensive, and Special Dividend Amounts
       -1000 0 1000 2000 3000




                                                                                                                                         25000
                                                                                                                     Intensive Margin ($ mil)
                                                                                                                   15000      20000
                                     92-Q1           94-Q1       96-Q1     98-Q1       00-Q1      02-Q1        04-Q1
                                                                           Quarter

                                                             Cumulative Amount of Dividends from Initiations
                                                             Cumulative Amount of Terminated Dividends
                                                             Intensive Margin Dividends
                                                             Special Dividends


                                                                              31
                                            Figure 8
                      Dividend Initiation and Termination -- 1998 Placebo Test
       1.2 1.4
Percent of Firms
.4 .6 .8 1
       .2
       0




              84-Q1   86-Q1     88-Q1     90-Q1    92-Q1          94-Q1   96-Q1   98-Q1
                                              Quarter

                                                   Initiations
                                                   Terminations


                                              32
                                                      Figure 9
                        Dividend Amounts from Initiations and Terminations -- 1998 Placebo Test
         2000    1000
   Dividends ($ mil)
-1000     0
         -2000




                  84-Q1         86-Q1     88-Q1     90-Q1    92-Q1      94-Q1      96-Q1    98-Q1
                                                        Quarter

                                          Cumulative Amount of Dividends from Initiations
                                          Cumulative Amount of Terminated Dividends


                                                         33
                                                Figure 10
                        Regular Dividend Initiation vs Special Payments around TRA 86
.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5
   Percent of Firms
         0




                       82-Q1          84-Q1          86-Q1           88-Q1          90-Q1
                                                   Quarter

                                                Initiations
                                                Terminations
                                                Special Dividend Payers


                                                  34
                                        Figure 11
                            Dividend Amounts around TRA 86
        5000




                                                                                                             .9
                                                                                     Dividend Tax Preference
Dividends ($ mil)




                                                                                                   .85
       0




                                                                                            .8
        -5000




                                                                                  .75
                    82-Q1     84-Q1         86-Q1           88-Q1             90-Q1
                                          Quarter

                            Cumulative Amount of Dividends from Initiations
                            Cumulative Amount of Terminated Dividends
                            Special Dividends
                            Dividend Tax Preference


                                             35
                                           TABLE 1
                                    SUMMARY STATISTICS

                                          Core Sample                    Selected Sample
                                        (All Firms in CRSP)           (Firms Listed in 2004 CRSP)

Variable                              Mean           St. Dev.            Mean          St. Dev.

Total Regular Dividends               4.6218         40.5972            8.3467       59.1348
Total Intensive Margin                4.6119         40.5718            8.3320       59.0995
Total Extensive Margin                0.0098          1.4675            0.0147        2.1025
Special Dividend Amounts              0.1110         10.8124            0.1208        9.9212
Fraction Paying Regular Divs          0.2345          0.4237            0.3107        0.4628
Fraction Initiations                  0.0028          0.0527            0.0033        0.0570
Fraction Increases                    0.1082          0.3106            0.1468        0.3539
Fraction Decreases                    0.0188          0.1360            0.0270        0.1620
Fraction Terminations                 0.0045          0.0672            0.0025        0.0504
Fraction Special Payers               0.0081          0.0896            0.0083        0.0907
Fraction Post-2003                    0.0454          0.2082            0.1028        0.3036
Firm Age (quarters)                   26.35           21.73             33.86         24.43
Market cap                           1131.56         8263.04           2129.01       12391.11
Assets                               1153.75         8108.62           1936.78       11634.88
Cash/liquid assets                    79.97           558.11            132.63        781.29
After-Tax Profits                      8.12           149.24            16.43         217.27


                                      CRSP        CRSP-COMP             CRSP        CRSP-COMP
Total Observations                   431,379         381,486           180,710        169,754

Number of Firms
                         Year/Qtr
                         1983-Q1       3693           3118                759            720
                         1988-Q1       4818           4207               1260           1198
                         1993-Q1       4589           4215               1734           1666
                         1998-Q1       5975           5555               2791           2703
                         2004-Q1       3813             0                3813             0

NOTE-Core sample includes all firms in CRSP that have share codes 10 and 11 and SIC
codes outside 4900-4949 and 6000-6999. Selected sample keeps firms in core sample listed
in 2004 CRSP. All dollar amounts are in real 2004 millions of dollars. All variables are from
CRSP sample except assets, cash, and profits, which are from COMPUSTAT.




                                                36
                                                        TABLE 2
                                  DIVIDEND AMOUNTS AND PERCENT PAYERS

                            (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)
                           OLS             OLS              OLS            Probit          Probit          Probit
                        Few Controls    Full Controls    Full Controls   Few Controls   Few Controls     Full Controls
                                                        Top 5 dropped    Core Samp      Selected Samp   Selected Samp

       Dependent var:     Div Amt        Div Amt          Div Amt        Div Payer       Div Payer       Div Payer
post2003Q1                 0.081           0.127            0.103           0.034          0.057            0.067
                          (0.100)         (0.095)          (0.080)         (0.008)        (0.015)          (0.016)
post2003Q3                 0.154           0.201            0.080           0.065          0.095            0.115
                          (0.125)         (0.131)          (0.111)         (0.012)        (0.019)          (0.024)
dividends (t-1)            0.412           0.377            0.386           0.606          0.698            0.688
                          (0.002)         (0.002)          (0.002)         (0.012)        (0.017)          (0.019)
dividends (t-2)            0.287           0.210            0.263           0.339          0.428            0.421
                          (0.002)         (0.002)          (0.002)         (0.012)        (0.019)          (0.020)
dividends (t-3)            0.191           0.199            0.079           0.006          -0.002           0.011
                          (0.002)         (0.002)          (0.002)         (0.008)        (0.020)          (0.022)
dividends (t-4)            0.418           0.487            0.518           0.516          0.660            0.677
                          (0.002)         (0.002)          (0.002)         (0.013)        (0.017)          (0.017)
dividends (t-5)           -0.265           -0.243          -0.231          -0.154          -0.300           -0.307
                          (0.002)         (0.002)          (0.002)         (0.004)        (0.013)          (0.014)
dividends (t-6)           -0.105           -0.080          -0.118          -0.075          -0.151           -0.167
                          (0.002)         (0.002)          (0.002)         (0.006)        (0.017)          (0.018)
dividends (t-7)           -0.193           -0.196          -0.123          -0.008          -0.012           -0.025
                          (0.002)         (0.002)          (0.002)         (0.006)        (0.015)          (0.016)
dividends (t-8)            0.263           0.238            0.223           0.198          0.305            0.296
                          (0.002)         (0.002)          (0.002)         (0.008)        (0.015)          (0.016)
year                       0.007           0.004            0.004          -0.002          -0.006           -0.009
                          (0.003)         (0.003)          (0.003)         (0.000)        (0.000)          (0.001)
age                                        -0.003          -0.001                                           0.001
                                          (0.001)          (0.001)                                         (0.000)

Mean of Dep Var            4.62           4.78             4.21            0.260           0.334           0.340
Sample size               328268         272173           271782          328268          151903          136740


NOTE-Dependent variable is total regular dividends in specs 1-3, and a dummy for paying dividends in 4-6.
Estimates reported for probit specifications are marginal probability effects evaluated at sample means.
Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered by firm ID in specifications 4-6. In specs 1-3,
dividends (t-X) is an X quarter lag of regular dividends; in specs 3-6, it is an X quarter lag of the payer dummy.
All specifications include quarter dummies. Specifications 2, 5, and 6 (full controls) also include dummies for
first-digit SIC code, assets, and levels and 8 lags of liquid cash holdings and after-tax profits. The independent
variable post2003Q1 is 0 in quarters before 2003 and 1 from 2003-Q1 until the end of the sample; post2003Q3 is
0 before 2003-Q3 and 1 in 2003-Q3 until the end of the sample.




                                                          37
                                                     TABLE 3
             PROBIT ESTIMATES - INITIATIONS, TERMINATIONS, AND SPECIAL PAYMENTS

                           (1)           (2)              (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)
                      Few Controls   Full Controls    Few Controls   Full Controls   Few Controls   Full Controls

   Dependent var:      Initiation     Initiation     Int. Increase Int. Increase      Special        Special
post2003Q1              0.0034         0.0034           0.0021         0.0022          0.0007         0.0012
                       (0.0011)       (0.0011)         (0.0018)       (0.0019)        (0.0014)       (0.0015)
post2003Q3              0.0056         0.0085           0.0140         0.0130          0.0083         0.0077
                       (0.0016)       (0.0024)         (0.0030)       (0.0035)        (0.0028)       (0.0031)

Mean of Dep Var         0.0033         0.0034          0.0166         0.0172          0.0083         0.0082
Sample size             180710         136603          180710         136603          180710         136740

NOTE-Dep. var is a dummy for initiation in 1-2, 20% increase on intensive margin in 3-4, and special payment
in 5-6. Estimates reported for all specifications are marginal probability effects evaluated at sample means.
Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered by firm ID in all specifications. All specifications
include a linear year trend and quarter dummies. Specifications 2,4, and 6 (full controls) also include
dummies for first-digit SIC code, assets, and levels and 8 lags of liquid cash holdings and after-tax profits.
All specifications are estimated on the selected sample. The independent variable post2003Q1 is 0 in
quarters before 2003 and 1 from 2003-Q1 until the end of the sample; post2003Q3 is 0 before 2003-Q3
and 1 in 2003-Q3 until the end of the sample.




                                                        38
                                                      TABLE 4
            EXTENSIVE MARGIN, INTENSIVE MARGIN, AND SPECIAL DIVIDEND AMOUNTS

                           (1)            (2)              (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)
                          OLS            OLS              OLS            OLS             OLS            OLS
                       Few Controls   Full Controls    Few Controls   Full Controls   Few Controls   Full Controls

  Dependent var:       Extensive      Extensive        Intensive      Intensive        Special        Special
                       Margin Div     Margin Div       Margin Div     Margin Div      Dividends      Dividends
post2003Q1              -0.0455        -0.0185          -0.2381         0.0423          0.0565         0.0879
                        (0.0300)       (0.0328)         (0.2004)       (0.1702)        (0.0597)       (0.0741)
post2003Q3               0.1524         0.1217          -0.0096         0.1387          0.1135         0.0244
                        (0.0305)       (0.0289)         (0.1104)       (0.2041)        (0.0543)       (0.0859)
dividends (t-1)          0.0049         0.0022           0.3153         0.3456         -0.0000         0.0000
                        (0.0022)       (0.0022)         (0.2286)       (0.0903)        (0.0007)       (0.0014)
dividends (t-2)          0.0013         0.0002           0.3208         0.1892         -0.0003         0.0026
                        (0.0012)       (0.0013)         (0.0438)       (0.0691)        (0.0009)       (0.0038)
dividends (t-3)          0.0003        -0.0014           0.2036         0.1857          0.0006        -0.0030
                        (0.0008)       (0.0012)         (0.1753)       (0.1156)        (0.0011)       (0.0046)
dividends (t-4)          0.0018         0.0001           0.4091         0.5276          0.0014         0.0012
                        (0.0012)       (0.0012)         (0.1624)       (0.1148)        (0.0011)       (0.0013)
dividends (t-5)         -0.0033        -0.0021          -0.1922        -0.2218          0.0004         0.0004
                        (0.0019)       (0.0014)         (0.1534)       (0.0714)        (0.0010)       (0.0018)
dividends (t-6)         -0.0006        -0.0007          -0.1245        -0.0724          0.0008         0.0005
                        (0.0010)       (0.0008)         (0.0762)       (0.0586)        (0.0018)       (0.0029)
dividends (t-7)         -0.0012        -0.0004          -0.1981        -0.1840         -0.0016         0.0013
                        (0.0009)       (0.0010)         (0.1028)       (0.0724)        (0.0018)       (0.0041)
dividends (t-8)         -0.0032        -0.0017           0.2748         0.2300         -0.0007        -0.0023
                        (0.0016)       (0.0016)         (0.0950)       (0.0566)        (0.0016)       (0.0024)
year                    -0.0055         0.0016           0.0032         0.0341         -0.0175        -0.0205
                        (0.0027)       (0.0039)         (0.0101)       (0.0097)        (0.0077)       (0.0086)
age                                    -0.0043                         -0.0231                         0.0007
                                       (0.0018)                        (0.0036)                       (0.0006)

Mean of Dep Var           0.23           0.22             7.89          8.07            0.12           0.12
Sample Size              151662         136676           151727        136740          151654         136678

NOTE-Dependent var is cumulative extensive margin dividend amount in 1-2, cumulative intensive margin
dividend amount in 3-4, and special dividend amount in 5-6. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are
clustered by firm ID. Dividends (t-X) is an X quarter lag of regular dividend amt. All specifications include
quarter dummies. Specifications 2, 4, and 6 (full controls) also include dummies for first-digit SIC code,
assets, and levels and 8 lags of liquid cash holdings and after-tax profits. All specifications are
estimated on the selected sample. The independent variable post2003Q1 is 0 in all quarters before
2003 and 1 from 2003-Q1 until the end of the sample; post2003Q3 is 0 before 2003-Q3 and 1 in
2003-Q3 until the end of the sample.




                                                          39
                                                        TABLE 5
                                 NET DIVIDEND INITIATIONS BY FIRM SIZE
                                                    2004 MARKET CAP RANK
Year/Qtr          1-100           100-250            250-500     500-1000                 1000-2000              2000+
           Net Init   Total   Net Init   Total   Net Init   Total   Net Init   Total   Net Init   Total   Net Init   Total
 1992-Q1     0         81       0        109       2        147        1       223       1         348       3        708
 1992-Q2     0         83       1        113       0        149        2       230       0         362       1        723
 1992-Q3     0         83       1        114       0        150        1       231       0         368       0        733
 1992-Q4     1         83       1        115       0        153        0       237       1         383      -3        755
 1993-Q1     0         84       0        116       0        157        3       243       -2        394      -3        778
 1993-Q2     0         84       2        117       1        160        0       249       1         403      -1        802
 1993-Q3     0         84       1        117       0        162       -2       254       0         415       1        830
 1993-Q4     1         84       0        119       0        165       -1       268       2         434      -3        866
 1994-Q1     0         84       1        119       0        167        0       279       -1        447       1        890
 1994-Q2     0         84       0        119       2        169        0       288       1         461       7        908
 1994-Q3     0         84       0        120       1        170        1       292       1         471      -2        927
 1994-Q4     0         85       -1       122       2        170        1       296       -1        478       5        956
 1995-Q1     0         86       0        124       0        171        6       302       2         483      -1        968
 1995-Q2     1         86       0        126       -1       172       -1       306       3         493      -3        991
 1995-Q3     0         86       0        127       0        174        2       311       -1        500       7       1015
 1995-Q4     0         86       0        129       0        184        1       318       0         526       0       1059
 1996-Q1     1         86       -1       129       0        185        0       322       3         544      -2       1086
 1996-Q2     0         88       -1       131       0        187        0       333       -3        564      -1       1131
 1996-Q3     0         88       0        132       -1       190       -1       342       1         577       1       1166
 1996-Q4     0         88       0        134       0        195        0       352       -2        602      -1       1198
 1997-Q1     0         88       1        135       -1       197       -1       358       1         616       4       1217
 1997-Q2     0         89       0        136       1        201        0       361       0         627       0       1237
 1997-Q3     0         89       0        137       3        202        0       367       1         639       0       1274
 1997-Q4     0         89       0        138       0        204        1       376       2         664       1       1305
 1998-Q1     0         89       0        139       -1       207        1       380       2         679       3       1327
 1998-Q2     -1        89       0        140       0        213        0       384       2         695       2       1368
 1998-Q3     0         90       0        140       0        215        1       387       0         711      -1       1379
 1998-Q4     0         90       1        142       -2       215        0       390       0         712      -1       1381
 1999-Q1     -1        90       -1       143       0        221        0       398       0         724       3       1398
 1999-Q2     0         90       -1       144       -1       222        0       409       0         740      -6       1432
 1999-Q3     0         91       1        145       0        225        1       417       -3        764      -4       1468
 1999-Q4     0         92       0        146       0        227       -1       423       -2        788      -2       1513
 2000-Q1     0         92       1        146       -1       230       -3       425       -1        809      -2       1556
 2000-Q2     0         92       -1       146       -1       232        0       436       -1        831       0       1598
 2000-Q3     0         93       -1       146       -1       233        0       447       -2        855      -3       1649
 2000-Q4     0         93       0        149       0        235       -1       449       -1        870      -5       1666
 2001-Q1     1         93       0        149       0        236        0       453       -1        876      -6       1677
 2001-Q2     0         94       1        149       0        236       -1       461       -2        880      -2       1686
 2001-Q3     -1        97       -3       149       0        237        0       465       -1        886      -2       1694
 2001-Q4     0         97       1        149       0        242       -2       470       -3        898      -6       1702
 2002-Q1     0         97       0        149       0        242       -1       474       -2        906      -6       1710
 2002-Q2     0         97       0        149       0        244       -1       483       -3        923       0       1719
 2002-Q3     1         97       0        149       0        244        0       484       0         928       0       1726
 2002-Q4     0         99       1        149       4        246        1       485       -3        936       5       1736
 2003-Q1     1         99       -1       149       1        247        2       488       3         941       2       1740
 2003-Q2     1         99       1        149       1        248        2       489       2         944       9       1750
 2003-Q3     0         99       2        150       8        248        7       492       8         955      11       1761
 2003-Q4     2        100       0        150       8        249       10       497       5         984       7       1787
 2004-Q1     1        100       1        150       4        250       12       500       4        1000       5       1813

                                                              40
                                                      TABLE 6
                  NET INTENSIVE INCREASES AND SPECIAL PAYMENTS BY FIRM SIZE
                                                  2004 MARKET CAP RANK
Year/Qtr          1-100          100-250           250-500     500-1000               1000-2000             2000+
           Net Incr Spec Pay Net Incr Spec Pay Net Incr Spec Pay Net Incr Spec Pay Net Incr Spec Pay Net Incr Spec Pay
 1992-Q1      1           4     4        4        2        0        5        2        4        3        6           10
 1992-Q2      5           1     4        0        3        1        9        1        2        2        8            6
 1992-Q3      2           1     1        0        3        0        3        3        6        3        5            4
 1992-Q4      0           0     1        2        0        2        3        1        5        6        6            8
 1993-Q1      1           1     4        2        4        0        8        1       13        3        5            8
 1993-Q2      3           3     2        0        2        1        2        1       13        5       10            6
 1993-Q3      2           1     2        1        0        0        5        2        6        1        3            6
 1993-Q4      2           1     4        1        3        2        4        0        6        5        9           11
 1994-Q1      3           1     2        1        6        0       13        1        9        2       13            7
 1994-Q2      7           2     5        0        2        0        6        0        8        1       12            3
 1994-Q3      6           1     2        0        0        0        4        3        9        0       13            5
 1994-Q4      1           0     2        2        4        1        5        1        8        4        8           10
 1995-Q1      3           1     6        2        4        1        9        3       13        4       11            9
 1995-Q2      5           1     8        0        7        1        3        2        5        2       14            9
 1995-Q3      5           0     0        0        0        0        7        4       13        1       14            4
 1995-Q4      0           1     5        2        5        1        6        2       10        7       12            9
 1996-Q1      5           2    -2        3        6        2       14        4       10        3       14            8
 1996-Q2      3           1     2        2        6        0        7        3       12        2        5            7
 1996-Q3      4           1     2        0        1        0        3        0       11        4        9            4
 1996-Q4      0           1     5        3        4        1        5        0        9        5       12            9
 1997-Q1      4           0     2        2        5        3        6        3       10        3       16            9
 1997-Q2      4           0     2        0        1        0        7        3        9        1       14            6
 1997-Q3      4           1     5        2        3        0        4        2        7        0        6            1
 1997-Q4      2           0     4        1        6        0        6        0        8        1       15            6
 1998-Q1      0           0     4        1        6        0        5        2        7        3       12            7
 1998-Q2      2           1     3        1        2        0       11        2        9        2        7            8
 1998-Q3      0           1     6        2        5        0        7        0       11        0        4            2
 1998-Q4      4           1     6        1        3        0        3        1        4        1        8            2
 1999-Q1      2           3     2        2        5        0        8        3        4        6        4            6
 1999-Q2      7           1     4        0        3        0        4        3       -1        1        4            9
 1999-Q3      1           1     3        0        2        0        4        2        4        1        4            4
 1999-Q4      4           1     4        2        3        0        3        1        2        3        2            5
 2000-Q1      2           1     4        1        2        2        9        2        5        3        6            8
 2000-Q2      0           0     2        0        3        0        7        2        3        3        3            5
 2000-Q3      1           0     1        0        3        1        4        1        9        2        3            4
 2000-Q4      4           2     2        1        3        0        3        0        4        4        3            3
 2001-Q1      4           1     0        2        0        0        3        1        5        1        7            4
 2001-Q2      1           1     0        1        0        0        2        3        0        0        3            6
 2001-Q3      5           1     0        0        4        0        0        1        3        2        2            3
 2001-Q4      2           1     4        0        1        1        0        0       -2        2        1            2
 2002-Q1      5           0     1        2        2        2        1        1        6        1        1            5
 2002-Q2      1           0     6        0        1        0        3        3        5        2        4            5
 2002-Q3      2           0     2        1        0        0        1        0        9        2        4            4
 2002-Q4      1           1     2        0        4        0        2        2        4        1       -1            3
 2003-Q1      7           1     4        1        5        2        7        0        8        1        5            6
 2003-Q2      2           1     1        0        5        0        8        2        7        2        7            6
 2003-Q3      3           1     2        0        9        0       10        5       11        4        6           14
 2003-Q4      4           5     9        1        7        0       16        2       13        7       18            8
 2004-Q1      6           3    15        4        8        1       20        3       13        5       14           15

                                                           41
                                                      TABLE 7
               NET EXTENSIVE AND INTENSIVE DIVIDEND AMOUNTS BY FIRM SIZE
                                                   2004 MARKET CAP RANK
Year/Qtr        1-100            100-250            250-500     500-1000                 1000-2000            2000+
           Net Ext    Inten   Net Ext    Inten   Net Ext    Inten   Net Ext    Inten   Net Ext    Inten   Net Ext    Inten
 1992-Q1       0     7165.4       0     2705.8    7.9855   766.15    0.2767   530.86    0.3365   305.54     2.895   89.774
 1992-Q2       0     7526.7    4.7565   2719.4       0     765.24    7.7196   557.46    0.0932   302.97     0.478    96.97
 1992-Q3       0     7579.6     8.858   2726.1       0     789.28    3.9208   567.77    0.3571   303.78    0.0176   94.765
 1992-Q4    20.815   7691.5     3.516   2695.8       0     781.27       0     590.92   -2.2911   292.88    7.0504   106.65
 1993-Q1       0     7305.2       0     2853.7       0     786.72    1.0188    593.1    -3.882   313.26    -0.061   96.924
 1993-Q2       0     7560.7    4.4188    2838     1.3395   834.64   -5.6166   595.79     0.31    314.71    0.0662   100.59
 1993-Q3       0     7447.2    2.2673   2883.1       0     820.51    -6.489   583.89   -0.4402   312.04   -0.6494    94.01
 1993-Q4    4.4864   7572.3       0     2898.5   -19.318   795.49   -2.7834   592.16    0.6432   304.71   -1.9374   95.214
 1994-Q1       0     7571.4    2.0053   2996.5       0     828.77       0     625.09   -11.083   325.96    0.3777   119.95
 1994-Q2       0     7949.3       0     2987.6    4.9178   865.54       0     651.25    0.0802   319.03    1.8732   100.99
 1994-Q3       0     8008.8       0     3021.8   -5.2401    843.4    0.7579   652.07    0.1137   325.01   -0.7513   100.41
 1994-Q4       0     8304.9   -4.6481   3075.7    9.0924   835.71    0.5396   660.88   -0.8567   314.49   -2.3633   97.487
 1995-Q1       0     8265.6       0     3195.6       0     913.53    26.987   696.48    4.0736   343.49    2.8892   117.41
 1995-Q2    5.1683   8623.7       0     3233.3   -19.872   896.48   -2.4218   730.88    9.9338   341.14   -0.4125    110.3
 1995-Q3       0     8801.3       0      3250        0     870.83    0.3139   728.32   -6.6049   357.38    1.8185   114.22
 1995-Q4       0     9124.1       0     3247.5       0     882.15    0.2998   736.89   -1.7932   332.64     1.245   109.19
 1996-Q1     4.366   9150.1   -14.751   3264.6       0     953.63    28.046   770.29    4.3963   382.74    -6.198   128.27
 1996-Q2       0     9621.5   -10.322   3280.6       0     956.71    0.6284   831.38   -2.0691   371.31   -1.7836   106.41
 1996-Q3       0     9817.7       0     3369.6   -6.0025   948.73   -5.2441   827.87    0.1527   370.53    1.0038   114.26
 1996-Q4       0     10203        0     3322.4       0     978.56       0     839.71   -4.3358   380.13    -1.024   110.39
 1997-Q1       0     9942.9    0.6476   3528.5    -1.456   1026.4   -4.2038   859.73    0.1509   490.67    2.0565   136.03
 1997-Q2       0     10941        0     3498.9    0.7831   1013.9       0     879.41       0     484.08    0.2928   122.44
 1997-Q3       0     10819        0     3529.6    14.695   1039.6       0     857.64    0.7352   482.43   -0.3663   118.82
 1997-Q4       0     11706        0      3484        0     1079.7    0.1676   866.17    4.5561   462.39    2.0707   121.52
 1998-Q1       0     11411        0     3610.2   -0.4062   1118.7    1.4847   912.44    0.3868   509.42     0.684   194.43
 1998-Q2   -10.574   11832        0     3536.1       0     1102.5       0     930.72   -2.9294   503.46    2.3128   138.48
 1998-Q3       0     11903        0     3631.4       0     1123.7    2.3609   922.15   -1.9089   501.11   -9.3611   126.08
 1998-Q4       0     12375     5.7179   3705.6   -7.1232   1098.1       0     903.84       0     508.19   -1.7761   123.38
 1999-Q1    -1.883   12290    -5.3915   3825.5       0     1174.9   -5.2276   937.86       0     532.51    11.612   142.69
 1999-Q2       0     12717    -3.2409   3798.8   -2.9729   1884.8       0     944.07    0.4182   537.51   -2.6015   138.49
 1999-Q3       0     12754     15.784   4021.2       0     1196.4    0.2784   966.17   -5.1477   523.68   -5.1466   126.06
 1999-Q4       0     13723        0     4042.5       0     1339.7   -13.763   932.65   -0.9552   441.58   -1.8798    125.5
 2000-Q1       0     14044     22.754   4165.3   -29.774   1261.1   -36.317   930.93    -4.849   473.22   -12.402   132.72
 2000-Q2       0     14417    -22.754   4080.6   -5.6704   1258.8    3.0256   959.95    -4.421   449.47   -0.1193    112.9
 2000-Q3       0     14029    -7.9858   4253.9   -5.5032   1242.9       0     912.83   -3.4881   447.02    -5.798   103.73
 2000-Q4       0     16890        0     4159.9       0     1228.7   -8.5758    893.3   -7.0774    435.4   -3.7247   108.11
 2001-Q1    15.614   16597        0     3515.3       0      1296    -29.942   874.95   -2.5844   437.45   -2.2955    111.1
 2001-Q2       0     16309     83.063   3343.9       0     1239.8   -0.5959   883.92   -1.7547   418.45    -3.211    92.68
 2001-Q3   -68.072   17035    -172.24   3289.1       0     1268.6       0     866.16   -11.318   407.76   -2.3692     87.9
 2001-Q4       0     18099     27.668   3357.7       0     1221.8   -21.503   770.78   -2.8836   405.29   -3.1914    91.53
 2002-Q1       0     17811        0     3201.6       0     1316.1   -6.2758   806.66    -1.287   412.41   -4.5452   85.805
 2002-Q2       0     17842        0     3225.3   -2.6641   1259.6    -5.252   828.86   -3.5051   404.34   -0.0971   79.459
 2002-Q3    14.918   17941        0     3538.8       0     1145.5       0     806.05   -1.9525   415.68   -0.1913   77.128
 2002-Q4       0     18734     6.4071   3483.7    22.907   1224.1    12.662   810.67   -7.0061    383.3    1.7945   84.107
 2003-Q1    856.11   19206    -36.636   3372.3    4.2304    1247    -16.826   818.31    3.3755   401.97    1.1536   89.295
 2003-Q2     40.46   19343     13.085   3231.9     10.22    1220     5.9118   887.34    1.6649   401.04    2.8629   84.205
 2003-Q3       0     19545     48.793   3633.3    125.25   1232.6    32.799   871.38    9.3212   405.01    6.1951   78.354
 2003-Q4    158.77   22201        0     3778.7    48.683   1472.9    40.681   999.18    9.6453    427.4    9.5098   104.06
 2004-Q1    14.951   21060     15.593   3946.8    57.892   1546.4    68.191   1035.1   -2.6866    458.2    8.6185   110.21
                                                              42
