NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EDUCATION FOR INNOVATION:
ENTREPRENEURIAL BREAKTHROUGHS VS.
CORPORATE INCREMENTAL IMPROVEMENTS
William J. Baumol
Working Paper 10578
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10578
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2004

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2004 by William J. Baumol. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

Education for Innovation: Entrepreneurial Breakthroughs vs. Corporate Incremental
Improvements
William J. Baumol
NBER Working Paper No. 10578
June 2004
JEL No. O0
ABSTRACT
This paper explores the following hypotheses on the appropriate education for innovating
entrepreneurship: a) breakthrough inventions are contributed disproportionately by independent
inventors and entrepreneurs, while large firms focus on cumulative, incremental (and often
invaluable) improvements; b) education for mastery of scientific knowledge and methods is
enormously valuable for innovation and growth, but can impede heterodox thinking and
imagination; c) large-firm R&D requires personnel who are highly educated in extant information
and analytic methods, while successful independent entrepreneurs and inventors often lack such
preparation; d) while procedures for teaching current knowledge and methods in science and
engineering are effective, we know little about training for the critical task of breakthrough
innovation.
William J. Baumol
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021

Education for Innovation:
Entrepreneurial Breakthroughs vs. Corporate Incremental Improvements
William J. Baumol1
“Procter & Gamble has a world class, global research and development
organization, with over 7,500 scientists working in 22 research centers in 12
countries around the world. This includes 1,250 Ph.D. scientists. For perspective,
this is larger than the combined science faculties at Harvard, Stanford and
MIT…. P&G holds more than 24,000 active patents worldwide, and on average,
receives about 3,800 more patents per year. This makes P&G among the world's
largest holders of U.S. and global patents, putting it on a par with Intel, Lucent
and Microsoft.”
Procter & Gamble, www.pg.com, accessed February, 2004,
as called to my attention by Melissa A. Schilling.
“Edison, Thomas Alva. Born in Milan, Ohio, he had very little schooling.”
Encyclopedia Britannica, Britannica Ready Reference, accessed
January, 2004 (Edison’s formal schooling ended by age 12).
“Steve Wozniak, who built the first Apple computer, ‘was an undistinguished
engineer at Hewlett-Packard.’ His partner, Steve Jobs, had just ‘worked part-time
at a video game company,’ and neither had graduated from college. Bill Gates
had dropped out of Harvard in his sophomore year to start Microsoft, and
Michael Dell quit the University of Texas in his freshman year to start Dell
Computers.”
Bhidé, 2000, p.36.
“In established businesses, innovation is mostly shaped through small,
incremental steps of additional features to augment basic functionalities. With
short product lifecycles, time to recoup R&D investments is limited…. Success is
relatively predictable through the execution of well-defined innovation processes
and in-depth knowledge of their markets in the respective business units.”
A. Huijser, Ph.D., executive vice president and chief technology
officer, Royal Phillips Electronics, The Hague, September 2003.

First, some preliminary observations on which the hypotheses at the heart of this
paper are founded: As should not be surprising, only a very small proportion of the
enterprising founders of business firms actually engage in the innovative activity that is a
key element in the extraordinary growth performance of the industrialized free-market
economies. In fact, it has been suggested that something on the order of only five percent
of firm-creating entrepreneurs engage in significant innovation. Rather, most private-

File: Education For InnovationNBER5.doc April 30, 2004

2
sector expenditure on research and development is attributable to very large corporations.
These corporations are prime employers of scientists and engineers, personnel
characteristically highly educated and technically erudite. But, despite this concentration
of knowledge, talent, and expenditure in these major enterprises, an examination of the
list of revolutionary technological breakthroughs since the onset of the Industrial
Revolution suggests that they were contributed in overwhelming proportion by
independent inventors and small, newly founded enterprises, not by major firms.2 Finally,
and intriguingly, a review of the biographies of the most celebrated of these innovators
shows, in a surprising share of these cases, a most remarkable absence of rigorous
technical training and, in many cases, little education at all. The obvious names of yore—
Watt, Whitney, Fulton, Morse, Edison and the Wright brothers—illustrate the point.3
The preceding observations would seem to lend support to two surmises: that the
concentration of R&D in corporate hands is a gross misallocation of social resources, and
even that education contributes little and may even be a hindrance to technical progress.
Research recently undertaken by several colleagues and myself already indicates that the
curious observations just listed are generally consistent with the facts, but that the
dubious conclusions that they would appear to imply are incorrect and misleading.
Rigorous education does play a critical role in support of technical progress, and R&D
expenditure by the giant corporations, together with the efforts of the independent
entrepreneur-innovators provide a crucial contribution to the process. However, the
corporate contribution and that of the innovative entrepreneur are characteristically very
different from one another and characteristically play complementary roles. Moreover,

File: Education for InnovationNBER5.doc April 30, 2004

3
the contribution of the two together is superadditive, that is, the combined result is greater
than the sum of their individual contributions.

I. Education as a Help, and a Hindrance, to Innovation
Historical evidence indicates that the design of the educational process has
significant consequences for two highly pertinent, but very different, capabilities of the
individuals engaged in innovative activities. On one side, education provides technical
competence and mastery of currently available analytic tools to future entrepreneurs and
others who will participate in activities related to innovation and growth. On the other
side, education can stimulate creativity and imagination and facilitate their utilization.
But it is at least a tenable hypothesis that educational methods that are effective in
providing one of these benefits may actually tend to be an obstacle to attainment of the
other. For example, the student who has mastered a large body of the received
mathematical literature, including theorems, proofs and methods of calculation, may be
led to think in conventional ways that can be an obstacle to unorthodox approaches that
favor creativity. And our preliminary evidence suggests that there is a comparable
difference between the ways of thinking of the personnel of large industrial laboratories
who focus on successive, incremental technical advances in product and process design,
and the innovative entrepreneur (the inventive individuals who are responsible for true
technological breakthroughs). This suggests two companion premises: one related to
education, and the other to the complementary activities of invention and incremental
innovation. The first premise is that education designed for technical competence and
mastery of the available body of analysis and education designed to stimulate originality

File: Education for InnovationNBER5.doc April 30, 2004

4
and heterodox thinking tend to be substitutes more than complements. The second and
more complex premise is that technical progress requires both breakthrough ideas and a
protracted follow-up process of cumulative incremental improvement of those
breakthroughs, with the combined incremental contribution of this second phase often
exceeding that of the first. Further, the industrial laboratories of the giant corporations are
ill-suited to the provision of the seminal breakthroughs but well-designed for the
subsequent development tasks, which are indispensable for achievement of the
technological breakthroughs’ full promise. The study of these ideas promises to provide a
deeper understanding of both the nature of education and that of innovative and inventive
activity. In addition, it can perhaps suggest ways in which it may be desirable to modify
the educational system in general and the preparation of future entrepreneurs in
particular.

II. Background Evidence on Inventive Entrepreneurs vs. Incremental Innovators
There are at least three strands of evidence about the differences between
inventive entrepreneurs and incremental innovators. The first is related to the types of
contributions to economic growth that are characteristic of these two types of innovative
enterprise; the second deals with the differences in the educational levels of inventive
entrepreneurs and incremental innovators; and the third focuses on the nature of the
educational process itself.
Type of Enterprise, Innovation and Growth. The evidence shows that there is a
rather sharp differentiation between the contributions to the economy’s technological
innovation that are provided by entrepreneurs and those that are offered by the large

File: Education for InnovationNBER5.doc April 30, 2004

5
internal R&D laboratories of established businesses. Large business firms, which account
for nearly three-quarters of U.S. expenditure on R&D, have tended to follow relatively
routine goals, slanted toward incremental improvements rather than revolutionary ideas.
Greater user-friendliness, increased reliability, marginal additions to application,
expansions of capacity, flexibility in design—these and many other types of improvement
have come out of the industrial R&D facilities, with impressive consistency, year after
year, and often pre-announced and pre-advertised.
In contrast, the independent innovator and the independent entrepreneur have
tended to account for most of the true, fundamentally novel innovations. In the list of the
important innovative breakthroughs of the 20th century, a substantial number, if not the
majority, turn out to be derived from these sources rather than from the laboratories of
giant business enterprises. For example, the U.S. Small Business Administration (1995)
provides a list of important 20th century innovations for which small firms were
responsible, and its menu of inventions spans an astonishing range (see Table 1 below).
Other studies come to similar conclusions. It is a plausible observation, then, that perhaps
most of the revolutionary new ideas of the past two centuries have been, and are likely to
continue to be, provided more often by these independent innovators who, essentially,
operate small business enterprises. This is not to say, however, that the routine innovative
activities have not accomplished a great deal. Though their outputs have usually been less
dramatic and less spectacular, if one takes their incremental contributions together and
sums their achievements, it becomes clear that their accomplishments of the large
corporations have been very substantial. A very clear example is the airplane. The
comfort, speed and reliability of modern passenger aircraft and complex military flying

File: Education for InnovationNBER5.doc April 30, 2004

6
machines clearly, by contrast, make the Wright brothers’ revolutionary device into a
historical curiosity. Automatic piloting, communication, location and computing
equipment were surely undreamed of in the years following the first flights. And most of
the sophistication, speed and reliability of today’s aviation equipment is probably
attributable to the combined incremental additions made by routine research activities in
corporate facilities. Other careful observers have extended such examples and have
concluded that incremental and routinized innovation activities have been responsible for
a very respectable share of the contribution of innovation to economic growth in the 20th
century.
Educational Attainment of Personnel. All of this is pertinent to study of
innovation and growth because our communications with a number of major firms with
substantial R&D activities indicate that these enterprises generally employ at least some,
and often a profusion of, persons with advanced technical training and higher academic
degrees. In contrast, a preliminary sample of successful entrepreneurs and independent
inventors indicates that they frequently have had only a basic education and that, though
at least some of them have consulted closely with more extensively trained advisors, the
core ideas were contributed by the entrepreneurs and inventors themselves.
Education for Mastery of Received Knowledge versus Education for
Innovative Ideas. I will end this recapitulation of the preliminary evidence with an
observation on a very different subject though, as will be seen below, for purposes of
study of the issues under discussion it is closely related to the preceding observations.
This is the contrast between U.S. and foreign educational performance at different levels
of education. As has been widely publicized, international comparison tests on subjects

File: Education for InnovationNBER5.doc April 30, 2004

7
such as mathematics, physics and other technical and scientific disciplines apparently
show consistently that the performance of American students at the elementary school
and high-school levels is markedly inferior to that of some European and Asian countries.
Yet, the U.S. is universally considered the superior venue for Ph.D. training, so that the
best students from the other countries in question vie to come to this country for their
graduate work. Moreover, it appears to be the American graduate students who frequently
produce the more original and more substantial dissertations. This difference in
performance at the two levels of education is a paradox, but like many paradoxes, it may
have a straightforward explanation. It may be that the educational approaches that are
most effective in providing mastery of the already extant body of intellectual materials
actually tend to handicap a student’s ability to “think outside the box” and thus
discourage unorthodox ideas and breakthrough approaches and results.
I am led, then, back to my first two premises. The exploration of these premises
may, in Benjamin Franklin’s words, constitute useful knowledge for the design of
educational procedures, for promotion of entrepreneurship, for facilitation of the
innovation process and for extension of equality of opportunity in a market economy.
Specifically, my colleagues and I are undertaking the study and testing of the following
seven hypotheses:
Hypothesis 1. A disproportionate share of breakthrough inventions is contributed
by independent inventors, entrepreneurs and small or startup firms, while the large firms
specialize in incremental improvements.
Hypothesis 2. A substantial proportion of startup enterprises involve former
employees of large firms who left their former jobs because their large employer was

File: Education for InnovationNBER5.doc April 30, 2004

8
unreceptive to heterodox ideas or offered financial or other incentives to contributors of
valuable inventions.4
Hypothesis 3. Training for mastery of currently available scientific and technical
methods and materials is of enormous value for innovation and growth. But educational
practices that encourage heterodox thinking and exercise of originality and imagination is
evidently also of very great importance for society.
Hypothesis 4. The educational approaches best suited for the first of the preceding
purposes may be quite different from those that contribute to the second. Indeed, the two
approaches may be somewhat inconsistent, with promotion of the one objective tending
to impede attainment of the other.
Hypothesis 5. The R&D division of the large firm tends primarily to require
personnel who have undergone training for mastery of extant information and analytic
methods, while the work of the independent entrepreneur and inventor may prove to be
more effectively facilitated by avoidance of that sort of preparation to the extent that it
impedes imagination and originality.
Hypothesis 6. Incremental improvement of complex products may require mastery
of far more demanding technical information and techniques than was needed for the
original ideas that resulted in the invention of those products. The technology needed to
improve the design of a Boeing-777 passenger airplane is obviously enormously more
complex than that underlying the Wright brothers’ first vehicle.
Hypothesis 7. Thus, while the two educational approaches are quite different and
to some degree inconsistent, neither can be considered irrelevant or inferior. Each is
essential for the process of innovation and growth, and it is important to investigate what

File: Education for InnovationNBER5.doc April 30, 2004

9
educational approach is most appropriate for each task that underlies invention,
development and economic expansion.
Let us, then, turn to the preliminary evidence and see what it implies about the
validity of the hypotheses.

Entrepreneurship and its Role in the Growth Process
Entrepreneurship has long been valued as a key contributor to the growth of an
economy.5 Indeed, it is widely believed that economies that are abundantly supplied with
entrepreneurs will tend to grow far more rapidly than those in which entrepreneurial
talent is scarce. Yet Joseph Schumpeter himself, indisputably the 20th century’s prime
contributor to the economic analysis of entrepreneurship and innovation, was led to
conclude that the day of the entrepreneur was waning, that the expanding role of
routinized innovation by big business was threatening to make the entrepreneur obsolete.
I will argue here that part of the pertinent mechanism has been correctly discerned both
by those who continue to have faith in the individual entrepreneur’s critical role in
economic growth but also by any who follow Schumpeter in concluding that routinized
innovation by giant enterprises is assuming a primary role. But each side here is telling
only part of the story and, as a result, overlooks much of its essence. The entrepreneur
continues to play a critical part in the growth process, and there is no reason to expect
that role to disappear. But in the modern economy the entrepreneur, working alone in the
marketplace, cannot carry out the task most effectively. Fortunately, the market
mechanism has provided the partners that the entrepreneur needs for the purpose.

File: Education for InnovationNBER5.doc April 30, 2004

10
Market Pressures for an Enhanced Large-Firm Role in Technical Progress
Free competition—that is, competition not handicapped by severe government
regulations or tightly enforced customary rules, like those of the medieval guilds that
prevented gloves-off combat among rival firms—has arguably played a critical role in the
growth of the capitalist economies. Of particular significance in the arena of innovation is
rivalry among oligopolistic firms—those large firms in markets dominated by a small
number of sellers. And crucial here is the fact that in today’s economy many rival
oligopolistic firms use innovation as their main battle weapon, with which they protect
themselves from competitors and with which they seek to beat those competitors out. The
result is precisely analogous to an arms race—to the case of two countries, each of which
fears that the other will attack it militarily and therefore feels it necessary always at least
to match the other country’s military spending. Similarly, either of two competing firms
will feel it to be foolhardy to let its competitor outspend it on the development and
acquisition of its battle weapons. Each firm is driven to conclude that its very existence
depends, at the least, on matching its rivals’ efforts and spending on the innovation
process. In an economy in which this is so, a constant stream of innovations can be
expected to appear, because the giant warring firms to whom the story pertains do not
dare relax their innovation activities.
Increasingly, at least in the United States, the funding for innovation has been
supplied by large oligopolistic enterprises, hardly the sort of firms that one associates
with the entrepreneur. Today some 70 percent of R&D expenditure in the U.S. is carried
out by private business, and the annual level of real investment by the private sector is
growing with a trajectory that seems near geometric (Figure 1). Most of this growing

File: Education for InnovationNBER5.doc April 30, 2004

11
outlay is provided by the larger firms. According to data gathered by the National
Science Foundation (National Science Board, 2000, Chapter 2, p. 24), in 2000, 46 percent
of total U.S. industrial R&D funds was spent by 167 companies, each of which employed
25,000 or more workers; 60 percent of these funds was spent by 366 companies with at
least 10,000 employees, and 80 percent was spent by 1,990 firms of 1,000 or more
employees. At the other end of the spectrum, about 15 percent of total U.S. industrial
R&D funds was spent by 32,000 companies, each of which employed fewer than 500
workers.
Figure 1
Real U.S. Private R&D Expenditures, 1953-2000
180000

160000

Millions of 1992 dollars

140000

120000

100000

80000

60000

40000

20000

0
1953

1958

1963

1968

1973

1978

1983

1988

1993

Source: National Science Board, 2002, and Economic Report of the President, 2002.
Expenditures are adjusted for inflation using GDP implicit price deflators.
In these enterprises, innovative activities are carefully designed to prevent
unwelcome surprises and to keep risks to a minimum. As a result, there is little of the
free-wheeling, imaginative, and risk-taking approach that characterizes the entrepreneur.
Instead, the large firm’s top management often keeps a tight rein on the activities of the
company’s laboratories, with budgets determined by the upper strata of control within the
File: Education for InnovationNBER5.doc April 30, 2004

1998

2000

12
firm, who also may determine how many persons and what sort of specialists at what
levels will be employed on R&D endeavors. It is not even unusual for management to
determine what new products and processes the laboratories should next seek to discover.
Sometimes, large firms try to unleash their employees engaged in innovative activity by
organizing a subsidiary operation that is more inviting to the free exercise of
entrepreneurship, but often without much success.
The natural incentive system for a bureaucratically governed enterprise is to run
research and development in accord with bureaucratic rules and procedures. All of this
leads to the conjecture, voiced by Schumpeter, that the work responsibilities the economy
assigns to the entrepreneur are narrowing and are destined to shrink even further. One can
easily surmise what prompted Schumpeter to foresee a limited future for the entrepreneur
where industry and its innovation processes are widely characterized in the manner just
described. Yet, I will argue next that this is fundamentally a mischaracterization. Rather
than being condemned to obsolescence, a vital role continues to be played by independent
entrepreneurs.

Revolutionary Breakthroughs: A Small-Firm Specialty
It is convenient here, if patently inaccurate, to divide up inventions with the aid of
two polar categories: revolutionary breakthroughs and cumulative incremental
improvements. Of course, many new products and processes fall into neither extreme
category, but are somewhere in-between. Still, it will become clear that the distinction is
useful. Moreover, there are many examples that clearly fit into one of these categories or
the other quite easily. For instance, the electric light, alternating electric current, the

File: Education for InnovationNBER5.doc April 30, 2004

13
internal combustion engine, and a host of other advances must surely be deemed
revolutionary, while successive models of washing machines and refrigerators—with
each new model a bit longer-lasting, a bit less susceptible to breakdown, and a bit easier
to use—arguably constitute a sequence of incremental improvements.
The relevance of the distinction should be evident, given what has been said about
the working and organization of R&D in the large business organization. The inherent
conservatism of the process naturally leads to the expectation that these firms will tend to
avoid the risks of the unknown that the revolutionary breakthrough entails. The latter,
rather, is left most often to the small or newly founded enterprise, guided by its
enterprising entrepreneur. Though that is to be expected, the degree of asymmetry in the
apportionment of this specialized activity between large and small firms in reality is
striking. Earlier studies, such as that by Jewkes, Sawers and Stillerman (1969), Scherer
(1980) and Acs and Audretsch (1988), have provided evidence pertinent to this
conclusion. Acs and Audretsch conclude that, “While some of the appropriability
measures such as market concentration and unionization are negatively related to
innovative activity, the extent to which an industry is composed of large firms is
positively related to the total number of innovations” (p. 679). They go on to write that,
while their results, “…do not support an unequivocal conclusion regarding the exact
differences in innovation behavior between large and small firms” (p. 688), the data
suggest, “that, ceteris paribus, the greater the extent to which an industry is composed of
large firms, the greater will be the innovative activity, but that increased innovative
activity will tend to emanate more from the small firms than from the large firms” (p.
687). Scherer remarks in a similar vein that, “…the most favorable industrial

File: Education for InnovationNBER5.doc April 30, 2004

14
environment for rapid technological progress would appear to be a firm size distribution
that includes a predominance of companies with sales below $500 million, pressed on
one side by a horde of small, technically oriented enterprises bubbling over with bright
new ideas and on the other by a few larger corporations with the capacity to undertake
exceptionally ambitious developments” (p. 422, as quoted in Acs and Audretsch).
My hypothesis here goes a little beyond these conclusions, surmising on the basis
of only preliminary evidence that small enterprises tend to produce a disproportionate
share of inventions that are the heterodox breakthroughs. Table 1 is a list, made up by the
U.S. Small Business Administration (also the source of the Acs and Audretsch data), of
small-firm innovations in the last century. Its menu of inventions literally spans the range
from A to Z, from the airplane to the zipper.

File: Education for InnovationNBER5.doc April 30, 2004

15
Table 1. Some Important Innovations by U.S. Small Firms in the Twentieth Century
Air Conditioning
Air Passenger Service
Airplane
Articulated Tractor Chassis
Cellophane Artificial Skin
Assembly Line
Audio Tape Recorder
Bakelite
Biomagnetic Imaging
Biosynthetic Insulin
Catalytic Petroleum Cracking
Computerized Blood Pressure
Controller
Continuous Casting
Cotton Picker
Defibrillator
DNA Fingerprinting
Double-Knit Fabric
Electronic Spreadsheet
Freewing Aircraft
FM Radio
Front-End Loader
Geodesic Dome
Gyrocompass

Heart Valve
Heat Sensor
Helicopter
High Resolution CAT Scanner
High Resolution Digital X-Ray
High Resolution X-Ray
Microscope
Human Growth Hormone
Hydraulic Brake
Integrated Circuit
Kidney Stone Laser
Large Computer
Link Trainer
Microprocessor
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
Scanner
Optical Scanner
Oral Contraceptives
Outboard Engine
Overnight National Delivery
Pacemaker
Personal Computer
Photo Typesetting
Polaroid Camera

Portable Computer
Prestressed Concrete
Prefabricated Housing
Pressure Sensitive
Tape
Programmable Computer
Quick-Frozen Food
Reading Machine
Rotary Oil Drilling Bit
Safety Razor
Six-Axis Robot Arm
Soft Contact Lens
Solid Fuel Rocket Engine
Stereoscopic Map Scanner
Strain Gauge
Strobe Lights
Supercomputer
Two-Armed Mobile Robot
Vacuum Tube
Variable Output Transformer
Vascular Lesion Laser
Xerography
X-Ray Telescope
Zipper

Source: U.S. Small Business Administration, 1995, p. 114.

This remarkable list includes a strikingly substantial share of the technical breakthroughs
of the twentieth century. Besides the airplane, it lists FM radio, the helicopter, the
personal computer, and the pacemaker, among a host of others, many of enormous
significance for our economy.
Two recent studies, also sponsored by the U.S. Small Business Administration
(CHI Research, 2002, 2004), provide more-systematic and powerful evidence to similar
effect.6 These reports examine technical change through patenting and define “small
firms” as “businesses with fewer than 500 employees.” Perhaps most notably, the first of
these studies finds that, “…a small firm patent is more likely than a large firm patent to
be among the top 1 percent of most frequently cited patents.” Among other conclusions,
in the words of its authors, this study reports that, “Small firms represent one-third of the
File: Education for InnovationNBER5.doc April 30, 2004

16
most prolific patenting companies that have 15 or more U.S. patents…. Small firms are
more effective in producing high-value innovations—the citation index for small firm
patents averaged 1.53 compared to 1.19 for large firms…. A small firm patent is at least
twice as likely to be found among the top 1 percent of highest-impact patents as a patent
from a large firm” (CHI Research, 2002, p. 2). Moreover, the more recent study found
that, “The technological influence of small firms is increasing. The percentage of highly
innovative U.S. firms (those with more than 15 U.S. patents in the last five years) that are
defined as small firms increased from 33 percent in the 2000 database to 40 percent in the
2002 database.” In addition, “Small companies represent 65 percent of the new
companies in the list of most highly innovative companies in 2002” (CHI Research,
2004, p. ii).
As we will see next, however, large firms have made equally important
contributions to technological progress. Though the small enterprises have specialized in
the breakthroughs, they are not alone in making critical contributions to innovation and
growth.

Revolutionary Consequences of Aggregated Incremental Improvements
The type of innovation in which the giant enterprises tend to specialize is
primarily devoted to product improvement, increased reliability and enhanced userfriendliness of products and the finding of new uses for those products. The approach
tends to be conservative, seeking results whose applicability is clear and whose markets
are relatively low in risk. As already noted, the bureaucratic control typical of innovative
activity in the large firm serves to ensure that the resulting changes will be modest,

File: Education for InnovationNBER5.doc April 30, 2004

17
predictable and incremental. These firms are not predisposed to welcome the romantic
flights of the imagination, the entrepreneurial leaps of faith and plunges into the unknown
that often lead only to disaster, but which alone are likely to open up new worlds.
However, having recognized the critical role of the smaller enterprises, one
should not go to the other extreme and undervalue the incremental contribution of the
routine activity that at least sometimes arguably adds even more to growth than do the
more revolutionary prototype innovations. Though each such small improvement may be
relatively unspectacular, added together they can become very significant indeed.
Table 1 provided a set of extreme examples of the contributions of the small,
entrepreneurial firms. But one can easily obtain equally startling examples of the
magnitude of the innovative contributions of the large companies, whose incremental
contributions can add up and compound to results of enormous magnitude. One such
illustration is the progress in computer chip manufacture by the Intel Corporation, which
is the leading manufacturer of these devices and has brought to market successive
generations of chips and transistors, on which the performance of computers is so heavily
dependent. According to a recent report,7 over the period 1971-2003, the “clock speed”
of Intel’s microprocessor chips—that is, the number of instructions each chip can carry
out per second—has increased by some 3 million percent, reaching about 3 billion
computations per second today. During the period 1968-2003, the number of transistors
embedded in a single chip has expanded more than 10 million percent, and the number of
transistors that can be purchased for a dollar has grown by five billion percent. These are
evidently no minor contributions. Added up, they surely contribute far more computing
capacity than was provided by the original revolutionary breakthrough of the invention of

File: Education for InnovationNBER5.doc April 30, 2004

18
the electronic computer. Of course, that initial invention was an indispensable necessity
for all of the later improvements. But it is only the combined work of the two together
that made possible the powerful and inexpensive apparatus that serves us so effectively
today. Yet we must not ignore a caveat here. The 2004 CHI Research study cited above
reports that in their large sample the 5.3 percent of all patent citations by large firms that
entailed patents owned by small firms was substantially smaller that the small firm’s
ownership share (6.1) percent of patents owned. “This suggests that large firms build
upon the patents of small firms at a rate 14 percent lower than expected given the number
of patents owned by small firms” (p. 11).8

III. Some Suggestive Inter-Country Comparisons
Having set the background, I can return now to the central issue of this paper and
its hypotheses: the role of educational orientation in affecting the amount and type of
innovation, here distinguishing once more between “breakthrough” and “incremental”
innovations. Since there is no easy way of dividing innovations between these two
categories, one cannot expect to find any systematic body of data that permits any formal
test of the hypotheses. However, we can glean some suggestive observations from the
available statistics on patenting, patent license revenues, and R&D spending and
personnel.
Recall that one of the conjectures at least implicit in my earlier discussion is that
the U.S. educational system is less effectively designed than that of most other
industrialized countries to inculcate full mastery of currently available bodies of scientific
and technological knowledge, but that this country’s educational process is better adapted

File: Education for InnovationNBER5.doc April 30, 2004

19
to stimulation of heterodox and imaginative thinking. The implication is that the U.S.
system is better suited to the creation of breakthrough innovation but less well adapted to
incremental innovation. Let us see what the data suggest about these conjectures.
The following four figures include the nine countries that are the highest
performers in the whatever measure is at issue in each graph. Where the data are
available, the graphs also include the Russian Federation, for a reason that will be
brought out presently, though that country is generally far from the top performer in
terms of each variable studied.9 Figure 2 shows the number of patents per million
inhabitants granted by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office in 2001. It is clear that the
U.S. itself is in the leading position.,

Figure 2
Number of Patents Granted per Million Inhabitants
by U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, 2001
350
322

U.S. Patents Granted per Million Inhabitants

300
265
250
214
200

147

150

100

83

93

98

Belgium

Netherlands

156

106

50

0
Austria

Denmark

Germany

Source: European Commission, 2004.

File: Education for InnovationNBER5.doc April 30, 2004

Finland

Sweden

Japan

United States

20
Figure 3 shows receipts of royalties and license fees, in U.S. dollars per person in
2001. First, we observe that, in this case, Japan ranks third from the bottom, indicating
either a marked unwillingness to license or, instead, that its large number of patents have
relatively little market value, a possibility consistent with its “first to file” patent system,
which promotes rapid filing of a large number of patent applications that can be prepared
quickly, are narrow in scope, and often represent incremental advances. We see that the
U.S. is not the leader in terms of license royalties per capita, but is second only to
Sweden. In contrast, as shown in Figure 4, the U.S. is very much in the middle in terms
of its R&D spending as percent of GDP (1996-2000), as well as in number of scientists
and engineers in R&D, per million people (Figure 5).10
Figure 3
License Royalties, Dollars per Person, 2001
180
161
160

136

140

135

120

113

108

100

90

86

82

80
68
60

40

20
0.4
0
Sweden

U.S.

UK

Finland

Holland

Ireland

Belgium

Source: United Nations Development Programme, 2003.

File: Education for InnovationNBER5.doc April 30, 2004

Japan

Israel

Russia

21

Figure 4
Research and Development as a Percentage of GDP, 1996-2000
4

3.8
3.6
3.4

3.5

3

3

2.7

2.6

Percentage

2.5

2.5
2.2

2.1

2

1.5
1

1

0.5

0
Sweden

Israel

Finland

Japan

U.S.

Switzerland

Germany

France

Denmark

Russia

Source: United Nations Development Programme, 2003.
Figure 5
R&D Scientists and Engineers per Million Population, 1996-2000
6

5.1

5.1

5
4.5
4.1

4.1

4.1

4
3.6

3.5

3.5

Russia

Denmark

3.4

3

2

1

0
Japan

Finland

Sweden

Norway

U.S.

Singapore

Switzerland

Source: United Nations Development Programme, 2003.

File: Education for InnovationNBER5.doc April 30, 2004

Australia

22
While nothing can be inferred categorically from this set of observations, they do
at least appear to be consistent with the conjecture that superior performance in the
number and economic significance of the inventions that are produced in the U.S. place it
in or near the lead, despite the relatively mediocre levels of its per-capita expenditure on
R&D and the size of the body of persons with advanced formal education who are
employed in this arena. This surely is not inconsistent with our conjectures on U.S.
education, though one cannot claim any more.
A word should be added about the performance of the Russian Federation, which
is close to the other end of the spectrum, at least in the number of scientists and engineers
devoted to R&D, as contrasted with its near-zero licensing royalties. It is suggestive here
that technical training in the sciences and engineering in Russia has for many years been
quite rigorous, satisfying exceedingly high standards. But the Russian data are even more
to the point for an issue I have discussed elsewhere (see Baumol, 2002, p. 67). I have
argued that the Soviet Union’s poor performance in terms of innovation (including
putting inventions to actual use), despite its fine body of scientists and engineers, was
ascribable in good part to the absence of incentives for rapid and effective utilization like
those provided in the free market economies. The data described above seem to confirm
that the Russian economy still has far to go before it achieves the full free-market
stimulus to innovation and growth.

IV. Trends in the Required Education of the Entrepreneur
I have argued earlier that, by the nature of his task, the entrepreneur-innovator
has required less advanced education than the industrial scientist and engineer who focus

File: Education for InnovationNBER5.doc April 30, 2004

23
on cumulative incremental improvement. More than that, I have suggested that such
limited education has been helpful to the former, and indeed almost essential, as a way of
liberation from the rigidities and standardized ways of thinking that current practice in
higher education is apt to impose. Yet it is arguable that the advantages of limited
education may be subject to diminishing returns. As time passes, the cumulative character
of technological information makes it increasingly complex and this imposes an ever
more severe handicap upon relatively unaided intuition. Even ill-educated entrepreneurs,
with Steve Wozniak and Bill Gates apparently prime examples, cannot usually get along
without at least some limited knowledge of physics, chemistry, computer technology, or
some other body of analysis and information. This complicates to some degree our
hypothesis about the ideal education of the innovative entrepreneur. That hypothesis must
apparently be modified to assert that while over-rigorous education is an impediment to
exercise of the imagination (which is an entrepreneur’s prime professional instrument),
nevertheless the minimum educational attainment characteristically needed for the task is
growing. No carpenter such as John Harrison, who solved the longitude problem, no mere
bicycle repairmen such as the Wright brothers, can any longer hope to contribute, for
example, today’s mind-boggling medical breakthroughs. An illustration is (the already
extant and workable) equipment that makes it possible for surgery to be carried out by
computer-guided robots, with immediate and automatic restocking (without reordering or
human intervention) of surgical equipment and medication (which is partly already in
use), and remote surgery in which the operating surgeon (who controls the computer)
may be thousands of miles from the patient during the procedure, as has already been
done successfully (American Philosophical Society, 2003).

File: Education for InnovationNBER5.doc April 30, 2004

24

V. The University’s Role in Innovator Education
I have so far omitted two other key players in the innovation process, the
universities and the pertinent government agencies, which, of course, have also made
major contributions to technological progress. I do not mean to undervalue their role—
one need only mention once again the development of the electronic computer, or the
creation of the internet, to illustrate their important contributions. But these institutions
have also tended to carry out a rather specialized and different function from those
discussed above. It is to these not-for-profit players that we must look primarily for the
results provided by basic research as distinguished from applied research.
The reasons for this division of labor with private industry are well understood, so
that only a few words (but taking a viewpoint that is not quite standard), need be said on
the subject here. I have argued earlier that the market mechanism is a powerful enforcer
of corporate innovative effort, making mandatory its growing participation in applied
innovative research. But the same market mechanism also inhibits investment in basic
research, that mainstay of long-run innovative output. From the point of view of the
unthinking market mechanism, investment in basic research is largely a “wasteful”
expenditure, because the outlay offers no dependable promise of addition to the profits of
the firm.11 By its very nature, it is nearly impossible to predict whether basic research
will yield any financial benefit at all and, if so, who will ultimately be the beneficiary.
Certainly, it need not be the enterprise that was so improvident as to have carried it out.
That is why governments and universities have had to step in, if truly basic research of
any magnitude was to be carried out in the market economies.

File: Education for InnovationNBER5.doc April 30, 2004

25
The importance for technological progress of this contribution of academia and
the public sector need hardly be argued. The focus here, however, is not upon innovation
itself, but on the education of the innovator. Obviously, the institutions of higher
education are at the heart of this process. And university research activity is directly
pertinent to this subject. For as the universities themselves frequently point out, one of
the major purposes of research in the academy is the training of the researchers of the
future. The participation of graduate students in the investigations of senior faculty
members, as well as the research the students carry out themselves under faculty
supervision, is clearly an effective way, perhaps even the most effective way, to equip the
next generation to carry on the tasks of discovery and innovation.
Though their work at institutions of higher learning leans toward basic research,
many of these students will, of course, go on to jobs in the industrial laboratories of
private enterprise, swelling the number of employees with advanced academic degrees.
Moreover, such research activity of the postgraduate students can help to prepare them
for participation in either camp. It can offer them both of the two types of education that
have been stressed here: mastery of the currently available body of analysis that arguably
is of primary importance in the industrial laboratories, and more free-wheeling exercise
of the imagination in the unorthodox directions from which the technical breakthroughs
are more likely to emerge. But there is also a danger here. As in any activity, many
university teachers understandably succumb to the temptation to direct students to follow
all too closely in their own footsteps, thereby leading to mastery of the already available
research paths but weakening their ability to proceed in unexplored directions. There is
no obvious way to eliminate this arguably widespread problem, but it may at least be

File: Education for InnovationNBER5.doc April 30, 2004

26
possible to contain it to some degree if the evidence supports the educational hypotheses
that have been offered here and the results are appropriately disseminated.

VI. Appropriate Educational Programs for Innovative Entrepreneurship
I have already argued that at least some limited amount of technical training,
presumably at the university level, is growing increasingly indispensable even for the
most independent of innovating entrepreneurs. Though there presumably remains a
marked difference between this sort of education and that needed for cumulativelyincremental product development, the implication is that it is increasingly appropriate for
the universities to provide a place for these prospective entrepreneurs, but to design for
them a program that avoids the inculcation of standardized and unimaginative ways of
thinking. That, in essence, is the difficult task—but the critical assignment—that faces
those who would provide a better program for educational preparation of the innovating
entrepreneur of the future. It is not something that need significantly concern the training
of prospective entrepreneurs as defined in a broader sense, in other words, the process of
equipping those who hope to create new firms that are likely to be of some standard type,
with products and procedures that are largely conventional and replicative. But it is an
issue that pertains to the education of the entrepreneur with innovative propensities.
Of course, there are also more humdrum educational activities that can be helpful
both to the nascent innovating entrepreneur and the prospective entrepreneur in the more
general sense. As we know, it has generally proven convenient, if not essential, even for
innovating entrepreneurs to establish new business firms as their vehicle for economic
exploitation of their ideas. But the inexperienced founder of any new company is apt to

File: Education for InnovationNBER5.doc April 30, 2004

27
be handicapped, sometimes fatally, by lack of types of rather elementary knowledge that
are particularly critical for successful and innovative firms. This includes things like
guidance on the different sources of funding, their relative advantages and perils. It can
also encompass steps that can be adopted to reduce the dangers raised by the financing
process, pitfalls stemming from the tax system, safety requirements to protect the labor
force, and environmental regulations. Inventors need guidance through the morass of the
patent laws and the complications with which they threaten inventive activities, as well as
the difficulties that can be introduced by institutions that deal with patents, such as patent
pools and standard setting organizations. The founders of new enterprises need help in
dealing with regulations, from the tax laws to the fire laws, in avoiding difficulties
entailed in construction of their facilities, in the requirements of record keeping, and so
on. It follows that nothing said in this paper should be taken as an effort to induce
prospective entrepreneurs to avoid education. Rather, the purpose here is to suggest what
differences in the contents of the entrepreneur’s education are most promising.

VII. Conclusion
This paper offers two relatively novel observations that may contribute to our
understanding of the growth process. The first asserts that our economy derives its
innovations from two sources: from the routine activities of giant firms and from
independent inventors and their entrepreneur partners. The second observation is that the
education that is best adapted to the requirements of the one of these activities is very
different from that most suitable for the other.

File: Education for InnovationNBER5.doc April 30, 2004

28
These two types of inventive effort are not as inherently substitute activities as
they may appear to be. Rather, there has been a predictable tendency toward
specialization, with the entrepreneurs providing the more heterodox, breakthrough
innovations, and the R&D establishments of the larger firms creating the enhancements
to those breakthroughs that contribute considerably to their usefulness. These “Goliath”
innovators have not eliminated the role of the entrepreneurial “Davids.” Instead, the two
have tended to specialize and, together, they have enhanced the process beyond what
either type of innovator might have been able to achieve by itself. Thus, there is a critical
complementarity between the roles of the two types of innovating enterprise, and growth
is arguably enhanced by this division of their labor.
Routine innovation processes—those guided by standard-business decision
principles—are of great and probably of growing importance. But the entrepreneurial
independent innovator in his small business enterprise continues to play a critical role.
Revolutionary breakthroughs continue to be provided to a considerable degree by small
enterprises that can avoid the conservative propensities of the giant firm. Without their
revolutionary entrepreneurial contributions there would be much less for the large firms
to develop further.
It is fortunate for the U.S. economy that its institutions and arrangements are such
as to facilitate and stimulate profuse formation of small firms and to encourage their
more-radical innovative contributions. And the American educational system seems to be
less rigid and demanding than those in the other industrialized countries, thereby enabling
it to serve more effectively the needs of innovative entrepreneurship. If further
investigation indicates that these two observations are valid, they can perhaps offer some

File: Education for InnovationNBER5.doc April 30, 2004

29
useful guidance for design of better-adapted educational procedures, particularly those
that are intended as preparation for entrepreneurship.

File: Education for InnovationNBER5.doc April 30, 2004

30
References
Acs, Zoltan J., and David B. Audretsch, “Innovation in Large and Small Firms: An
Empirical Analysis,” American Economic Review, Vol. 78, September 1988, pp.
678-690.
American Philosophical Society Meetings, April 24-26, 2003, Session on “Biomedical
Advances, Experienced and Projected, During One Surgeon’s Seven Decade
Career: In Honor of Jonathan E. Rhodes, MD, DSc (1907-2002; APS 1958),”
(Speakers: J.C. Thompson, University of Texas at Galveston, T.E. Starzl,
University of Pittsburgh, and R.M. Satava, University of Washington),
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, April 25, 2003 (proceedings volume forthcoming).
Baumol, William J., The Free-Market Innovation Machine: Analyzing the Growth
Miracle of Capitalism, Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 2002.
_______________ and Sue Anne Batey Blackman, Perfect Markets and Easy Virtue:
Business Ethics and the Invisible Hand, Cambridge, Massachusetts, and Oxford,
U.K.: Blackwell Publishers, 1991.
Bhidé, Amar, The Origins and Evolution of New Businesses, Oxford, U.K. and New
York: Oxford University Press, 2000.
CHI Research, Inc., “Small Serial Innovators: The Small Firm Contribution to Technical
Change,” (written under U.S. Small Business Administration contract no.
SBAHQ-01-C-0149), 2002, available at www.chiresearch.com .
________________ “Small Firms and Technology: Acquisitions, Inventor Movement
and Technology Transfer” (written under U.S. Small Business Administration
contract no. SBAHQ-02-M-0491), 2004, available at http://www.sba.gov .

File: Education for InnovationNBER5.doc April 30, 2004

31
Economic Report of the President, 2002, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing
Office, February 2002.
European Commission, Eurostat, http://europa.eu.int/comm/eurostat, accessed April
2004.
Jewkes, John, David Sawers and Richard Stillerman, The Sources of Invention, New
York: W.W. Norton & Company, 2nd edition, 1969.
National Science Board, Science and Engineering Indicators—2002, Arlington, Virginia:
National Science Foundation, 2002.
Scherer, Frederic M., Industrial Market Structure and Economic Performance, Chicago,
Illinois: Rand McNally Publishing, 1980.
Schumpeter, Joseph A., Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy, New York: Harper and
Brothers, 2nd ed. 1947.
United Nations Development Programme, Human Development Report 2003, Oxford,
U.K. and New York: Oxford University Press, 2003.
U.S. Federal Trade Commission, “Statement of Peter N. Detkin,” Session on “Business
Perspectives on Patents: Hardware and Semiconductors,” FTC Hearings on
“Competition and Intellectual Property Law and Policy in a Knowledge-Based
Economy,” February 28, 2002, p. 667, available at
http://www.ftc.gov/opp/intellect.
U.S. Small Business Administration, The State of Small Business: A Report of the
President,1994, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1995.

File: Education for InnovationNBER5.doc April 30, 2004

32
Endnotes
1

Professor of economics, New York University, and professor emeritus and senior

research economist, Princeton University. This paper is an early report on a research
project at New York University and is made possible by the generous support of the
Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation. I am also grateful to Joshua Lerner and Scott Stern
for their encouraging and helpful comments on an earlier draft of this paper, and to my
colleagues Melissa A. Schilling, Edward N. Wolff and Sue Anne Batey Blackman for
their contributions to the research and to this article. Many of the ideas in this paper are
based on Baumol (2002).

2

There are, of course, significant exceptions, notably the invention of the transistor at

Bell Laboratories. But in that particular case, the parent firm was in a special situation
that was arguably highly relevant. Most notably, at that time AT&T was a regulated
monopoly protected from competitors who might otherwise have benefited from the
spillovers generated by the innovative breakthrough, and regulation virtually guaranteed
AT&T recoupment of the R&D outlays that other, less-protected firms might have
considered a wild gamble on a harebrained project.

3

Samuel Morse did attend Yale but, like Fulton, was trained as an artist. More recently,

the jet airplane engine was invented by Frank Whittle, who came up with the idea while
he was a pilot in the Royal Air Force, years before he attended Cambridge University.

File: Education for InnovationNBER5.doc April 30, 2004

33

4

If the firm offers little or no added reward to successful employee inventors but

provides all R&D staff members with wages sufficiently above market levels, this can be
interpreted simply as a transfer of the risk of the invention process from the employee to
the firm. But it must be noted that it reduces the prospective incremental payoff for
successful contribution to the individual employees and can thereby reduce the effort they
devote to the process.

5

Here, I will emphasize Joseph Schumpeter’s conception of the entrepreneur as a partner

of the inventor—as a businessperson who recognizes the value of an invention,
determines how to adapt it to the preferences of prospective users, and brings the
invention to market and promotes its utilization.

6

Quoting the press release describing the study, “A total of 1,071 firms with 15 or more

patents issued between 1996 and 2000 were examined. A total of 193,976 patents were
analyzed. CHI [the firm that carried out the study] created a data-base of these firms and
their patents. This list excluded foreign-owned firms, universities, government
laboratories, and nonprofit institutions” (p. 2). The 2004 study expanded the sample to
1,270 firms and dealt with the period 1995-99, and a total of 1777,899 patents.

7

John Markoff, “Technology; Is There Life After Silicon Valley’s Fast Lane?,” New

York Times, Business/Financial Desk, Section C, April 9, 2003, p. 1.

File: Education for InnovationNBER5.doc April 30, 2004

34

8

However, “There are a number of individual industries in which large firms cite a

higher than expected number of small firm patents, suggesting that they are building
extensively on small firms’ technology. These industries include high-tech areas such as
biotechnology, medical electronics, semiconductors and telecommunications” (CHI
Research, 2004, p. iii).

9

I have omitted Luxemburg and Iceland from the graphs, as special cases that limit their

interest for the discussion here.

10

Here, it should be observed that, because of the absolute size of its economy, the total

figures for the U.S. tell a different story. The U.S. accounts for 44 percent of total R&D
expenditures in all OECD countries combined. And U.S. R&D investments outdistance,
by 150 percent, the R&D investments made by the second largest R&D performer, Japan.
Thus, the fact that Sweden spends 3.8 percent of its GDP as opposed to the U.S. spending
2.5 percent pales somewhat in light of these numbers.
11

For a fuller discussion of the market’s propensity to interpret a variety of socially

beneficial investments as wasteful, see Baumol and Blackman (1991).

File: Education for InnovationNBER5.doc April 30, 2004

