                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  THE TIMING, INTENSITY, AND COMPOSITION
                        OF INTEREST GROUP LOBBYING:
          AN ANALYSIS OF STRUCTURAL POLICY WINDOWS IN THE STATES

                                          John M. de Figueiredo

                                           Working Paper 10588
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w10588


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        June 2004




A previous version of this paper was entitled, “The Structure of Legislatures and the Timing of Interest Group
Lobbying.” I would like to thank Jim Alt, Steve Ansolabehere, Rob Lowry, David Primo, Jim Snyder, Jesper
Sorensen, and Ezra Zuckerman for useful discussions. In addition, seminar participants at MIT, Wharton,
Rochester, the ALEA, and APSA have provided helpful comments. I would also like to thank officials at the
state ethics commissions and other lobbying disclosure agencies for providing me with the data for this paper.
All errors, however, remain my own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by John M. de Figueiredo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Timing, Intensity, and Composition of Interest Group Lobbying: An Analysis of Structural
Policy Windows in the States
John M. de Figueiredo
NBER Working Paper No. 10588
June 2004
JEL No. H1, H7, K0
                                        ABSTRACT

This is the first paper to statistically examine the timing of interest group lobbying. It introduces a

theoretical framework based on recurring “structural policy windows” and argues that these types

of windows should have a large effect on the intensity and timing of interest group activity. Using

a new database of all lobbying expenditures in the U.S. states ranging up to 25 years, the paper

shows interest group lobbying increases substantially during one of these structural windows in

particular--the budgeting process. Spikes in lobbying during budgeting are driven primarily by

business groups. Moreover, even groups relatively unaffected by budgets lobby more intensely

during legislative budgeting, consistent with the theory that these interests are attempting to have

legislators attach (de)regulatory riders to the budget bills. Overall, the paper demonstrates that these

structural policy windows largely determine lobbying expenditures.

John M. de Figueiredo
Sloan School of Management
MIT, E52-545
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
jdefig@mit.edu
                The Timing, Intensity, and Composition of Interest Group Lobbying:
                      An Analysis of Structural Policy Windows in the States

                                          John M. de Figueiredo
                                              14 May 2004


I. INTRODUCTION

        One of the primary instruments interest groups use to influence policy is the lobbying of

legislators. Lobbying is the direct and private transfer of information to politicians in the

legislature. In this sense, lobbying is meant to include reports, arguments, messages, and

information that interest groups provide directly and privately to legislators and their staffs. It

excludes campaign contributions made to a legislators, public advertising, and grassroots

organization of employees or members. Given the importance of lobbying to policy outcomes,

groups must decide not only how much effort to exert in the lobbying process, but they must also

decide when to lobby to influence the legislature. This then poses interesting questions for

scholars: when do interest groups lobby, and what determines the intensity of that lobbying?

        We can find some initial traction on this question with an examination of the

retrospective voting literature. An oft-documented fact in this literature is that voters return

legislators to office who have delivered favorable policy to constituents during their previous

term. These backward looking voters are heavy discounters, valuing recent policy-delivery by

legislators more highly than those policies passed farther in the past (Fiorina 1981, Downs 1957).

Legislators, recognizing this voter behavior, have an incentive and desire to pass legislation for

which they can credit-claim close to their impending re-election (Levitt and Snyder 1997, Stein

and Bickers 1994, Muthoo and Shepsle 2003).1 This model would then suggest that interest

groups should attempt to influence legislators when these legislators are ready to pass legislation.

1
  This is sometimes called the retrospective voting theory or the WHYDFML (what-have-you-done-for-me-lately)
theory.


                                                      1
That is, interest groups increase their lobbying efforts close to elections because this is the time

when politicians are trying to credit-claim for legislation that voters will attribute to the

legislators.

        We can examine this hypothesis by turning to the primary archival dataset that scholars

of interest group lobbying have employed—the federal lobbying data. Since 1996, federal law

has required lobbyists and clients to report the amount of money they spend on lobbying at the

federal level (see Baumgartner and Leech 2000 for a detailed description of the data).2 In Figure

1, Panel A, we present a time series of aggregate total lobbying using this data. Because this

data is only available for a small number of years, it is not possible to conduct a reliable

statistical analysis of the results. However, a casual examination of Panel A exhibits a pattern

that is consistent with this retrospective voting model. In the 1998 and 2000 election years, there

is a jump in lobbying expenditures, preceded by a leveling out in the off-election year. This

hypothesis, therefore, seems to find some empirical, if not large-sample statistical, evidence in

the most commonly used dataset of lobbying expenditures at the federal level.



                             ****INSERT FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE****



        However, suppose we wish to expand this analysis beyond the five data points and single

time series of the federal level. Lobbying expenditures in the states would seem to be a

reasonable candidate to for more data. In Figure 1, Panel B, we illustrate total aggregate

lobbying expenditures over time in Maryland. Unlike the federal data, we do not see particularly



2
 The data come from the Center for Responsive Politics (www.opensecrets.org) and from Professor Frank
Baumgartner’s website (lobby.la.psu.edu). The 1996 data have been estimated from Professor’s Baumgartner’s site,
using Baumgartner and Leech (2001) as a guide.


                                                       2
large increases in interest group lobbying expenditures during election years. Rather, there is a

steady increase in lobbying expenditures throughout the ten years of data.

       We can contrast the timing of lobbying effort in Maryland to Maine. Figure 1, Panel C

presents the Maine data, which exhibits a very different pattern of lobbying expenditures over

time. Not only is there a “saw tooth” pattern of lobbying effort, the pattern is precisely the

opposite of the maintained hypothesis-- there are troughs during elections, but peaks in the off-

election year.

       This then leads us to revisit the core research question: what drives the intensity and

timing of interest group lobbying? Moreover, are particular types of interest groups causing the

peaks and troughs in the data observed in Figure 1, Panel C? To answer these questions, this

paper develops a theoretical framework based on policy windows and argues that interest groups

become active when policy windows arise. Some policy windows emerge endogenously through

the work of political entrepreneurs and interest group to create a favorable climate for policy

change. Other policy windows open exogenously, because of environmental factors and outside

events that bring issues to the attention of voters and legislators, creating a desire for policy

change. Finally, we argue that policy windows can also arise because of the structure of the

legislature and the legislative process. Many of these “structural policy windows,” such as the

budgeting process, will recur periodically, drawing interest groups to the process. We will argue

it is these structural policy windows that, on the margin, drive interest groups to lobby.

       The largest challenge to examining the patterns observed in Figure 1, and the theoretical

framework proposed, is that the forum in which scholars have empirically examined lobbying—

the federal government—is a single legislative institution (n = 1) with a very short time series of

lobbying data. There is not a sufficient cross-section or time-series of data to statistically




                                                   3
examine variation in lobbying expenditures as they relate to the structure of legislatures. To

remedy this problem, this paper introduces a dataset of lobbying in each of the states. The paper

offers aggregate level data on 33 states, and fine-grained data on nine of those states, covering an

average of nine years per state. These states have different legislative features, different electoral

features, and different characteristics that allow us to compare the timing and intensity of

lobbying by interest groups.

        Thus the paper makes a number of empirical contributions. First, it is the first paper to

examine lobbying expenditures at the state level. Second, this is also the first paper to conduct a

comparative study of lobbying effort across states. Third, this is the first study to examine

statistically the timing of legislative lobbying.3 The panel nature of the dataset enables us to

pursue this goal. Finally, the paper refocuses our interest group lens on budgeting, the

importance of which we discuss throughout the paper.4 Building upon a well-documented

literature that has examined the micro-foundations of lobbying, this paper examines the sources

of institutional variation and features that drive the lobbying effort.

        The paper demonstrates that structural policy windows, and the budgeting process in

particular, are a magnet for special interests, causing these groups to substantially increase their

lobbying effort. Contrary to the initial hypothesis, lobbying actually decreases in election years,

relative to off-election years. We find that business groups, which account for 86% of the

lobbying expenditures in the nine states for which we have detailed data, are the prime drivers

behind the increased lobbying during legislative budgeting. However, business groups have

much lower variation in lobbying effort from year to year than any other category of special


3
  There has been one recent statistical study examining the timing of lobbying in administrative agencies (de
Figueiredo and Kim, 2004). Stratmann (1998) and Snyder (1992) have examined the timing of PAC contributions.
4
  Baumgartner and Leech (2000), in an unpublished paper, have recognized the importance of budgetary interest
group behavior in a cross-section of the federal data.


                                                      4
interests. These latter two results combined suggest that small changes in business group

lobbying can have big effects on overall lobbying expenditures. In addition, groups substantially

influenced by the state budget and groups substantially influenced by regulation both increase

lobbying during budget years. This result is consistent with the view that non-budget groups

may be encouraging legislators to attach non-budgetary riders to the budget bill that have higher

probability of passage than stand-alone legislation would. Finally, we note that laws governing

disclosure of interest group activities show no measurable effect on the total amount of lobbying

activity disclosed. Taken together, the statistics demonstrate that the structural features of

political institutions that create recurring policy windows, and budgets in particular, have a large

effect on the timing and intensity of interest group lobbying, and that businesses drive these

patterns.

        In the next section, the paper outlines a theoretical framework and discusses why current

empirical papers have not yet explored the timing of interest group lobbying. Section III

describes the core data, methods, and empirical results. Sections IV examines what types of

groups are driving the variation in lobbying effort. The paper concludes in Section V.



II. THEORETICAL AND EMPIRICAL UNDERPINNINGS

        A. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK: TYPES OF POLICY WINDOWS

        We begin by developing a framework for understanding the timing of interest group

lobbying. Although there are a number of theories of interest group activity, there are no formal

or informal theories (of which we are aware) on the timing of interest lobbying 5 There is,

however, a common thread in the literature that argues interest groups become active when


5
 Austen-Smith (1993) has developed a model of lobbying for agenda setting and then for votes, however, this is
usually considered within the same bill.


                                                        5
policy windows open (Price 1978). Policy windows are those time periods when there exists a

favorable climate for changes to legislation. Legislators focus more of their attention on the

issue at hand, and are disposed to consider whether and how the policy should be changed

(Baumgartner and Jones 1993, Grossman and Helpman 1999, 2001).

       In the literature, policy windows arise through two main processes. First, policy

windows arise through the political entrepreneurship of legislators and the “offensive” activity of

interest groups in creating these policy windows (Wilson 1980, Lowi 1964). Individual

legislators are constantly seeking issues with which they can be identified to enhance their re-

electability. Interest groups support legislators in these pursuits, creating and disseminating

information to create a climate for an opening of the window (Hall and Wayman 1990, Fenno

1973). Through this mechanism, policy windows are created endogenously, through the

planning of interest groups and legislators (Kollman 1997). Tax policy, telecommunications

bills, and banking deregulation all usually have these types of characteristics. We call these

policy windows endogenous policy windows.

       A second method by which policy windows arise is through exogenous and or

environmental events which refocus legislator attention on a given policy area (Price 1978). For

example, the September 11 attacks upon the World Trade Centers created a policy window for

the airlines and homeland security, the Enron and MCI accounting scandals created a policy

window for “good governance” interest groups, and the eastern seaboard electrical grid failure

created a policy window for both the energy industry and environmentalists. In this approach to

policy windows, special interests are largely viewed as opportunists, targeting their lobbying

efforts when these exogenous events happen (Arnold 1990, Walker 1991). We call these policy

windows exogenous policy windows.




                                                 6
         However, a third mechanism by which recurring policy windows arise is through

structural, legislated, or procedural mechanisms. That is, features of political institutions

determine the creation of policy windows, and thus the timing of interest group activities. These

policy windows may be micro-structural policy windows, usually created legislatively, that

pertain to a given piece of legislation or issue area. For example, in the 1990s, the granting of

most-favored-nation (MFN) trade status to China required annual renewal, creating a recurring

policy window for legislators to act. Likewise, before the advent of automatic cost-of-living-

adjustments to Social Security, Congress visited the benefit levels annually choosing how large

of a benefit increase to authorize Social Security recipients—creating another particularized

structural policy windows. Alternatively, these recurring policy windows may be macro-

structural windows, usually determined constitutionally or procedurally, that affect a large

number of issues before the legislature. One structural feature of government that create these

policy windows is the convening of the legislature. It is not surprising that when the legislature is

in session a rise in interest group activity occurs. However, another institutional feature that has

received attention in the literature on congressional budgeting, but has been largely overlooked

in the interest group literature, is the timing and process of budgeting in legislatures.6 Special

interests can extract favors from the government in the budgeting process through the actual

budget itself or the attachment of regulatory and other riders to the budget bill. This suggests

that the budgeting process should be particularly susceptible to special interest lobbying

(Wildavsky 1979, Wander et al 1984) in a periodic and recurring manner. It is during these

times that interest groups will become active. We call these recurring policy windows structural

policy windows.


6
 There is an extensive literature on budgeting and the determinants of fiscal responsibility in the states. See Alt and
Lowry (1993) and Lowry et al (1998) for an example.


                                                           7
       B. THE EMPIRICAL LITERATURE AND DATA LIMITATIONS

       The empirical studies of interest groups have been centered on an examination of interest

group activity at the federal level. Papers that have examined congressional lobbying have

focused, generally, on three types of analyses. First, papers have statistically and descriptively

examined individual issues to describe how competing interest groups position themselves to

lobby over a given issue (Rothenberg 1992, Derthick and Quirk 1985; for an excellent summary,

see Smith 1995, Baumgartner and Leech 1998). These studies, however, have a number of

limitations because they are generally on single issues and one cannot compare lobbying

behavior across issues.

       This has led to a second set of papers covering lobbying expenditures at the federal level

(Baumgartner and Leech 2001, Ansolabehere et al 2003, de Figueiredo and Silverman 2002).

The Lobbying Disclosure Act of 1995 provided data to scholars on annual lobbying expenditures

at the federal level. While these papers yield results on the make-up of lobbying expenditures,

the degree of access accorded to interest groups, and the effectiveness of lobbying effort, the

analysis is almost always cross-sectional, based on one year of data. Moreover, because the data

is only at the federal level where budgeting, for example, occurs annually, it is difficult to

identify any structural, comparative, or timing issues that can be analyzed.

       A final important literature this paper speaks to is the literature on lobbying at the state

level. Lowery and Gray (2000) have extensively examined the number of lobbyist registrations

across the states. Taking registrations at periodic intervals (usually 5-years apart), the authors

have developed a theory of interest representation based upon the population ecology variables

of competition and legitimation. This data has been used to explore a number of factors affecting




                                                  8
the prevalence of interest groups in states. Complementing their work is a host of case studies

that have examined similar issues (Hrebenar and Thomas 1992, 1993). While these papers have

extended our comparative work in the area of interest groups, they have generally limited their

analysis to the number of lobbying groups, and from that, sometimes make inference about the

intensity interest group activity. Whether this latter step is valid is an open question. This paper

addresses these three shortcomings.



III. CORE EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS

           A. DATA

           The panel dataset employed in this section comprises state-year aggregate lobbying

expenditures across all states where available. The total aggregate lobbying expenditure by state

by year was obtained from each state (either the Ethics Commission or the relevant office).

Thirty-three states provided us with the data. The remaining states either did not collect the data

or collected but did not keep the data. The range of time periods is 3 years to 25 years of data for

each state. All data are converted to 2000 real dollars, deflated by the consumer price index

(CPI-U). To create our dependent variable for the statistical analyses, we take the log of the

state’s per capita lobbying expenditure in a given year.7 A full description of all the data and the

data sources is provided in the Appendix.

           There are three sets of independent variables. The first set measures the electoral factors

that might affect interest group activity. This includes variables on whether there is an election

in the current time period for legislative seats, whether there is unified government, whether

there is Democratic unified government (Wiggins et al 1992), and the size of the majorities in the

House and Senate of each state.
7
    This further reduces the effect of outliers and other potential anomalies in the data.


                                                              9
       A second set of variables includes characteristics of the institutional design and

legislative process of each state. These variables measure whether the legislature is required to

meet in regular session, whether the legislature is required to meet in special session, and

whether the state is required to engage in creating a new budget in a particular year. These are

the variables that underlie the structural policy windows we are interested in. We code these as

dummy variables with a one if the state is in a regular session in a special session, or in a budget

year, and zero otherwise, for the three separate variables.

       A third set of independent variables provides controls for the state characteristics that

move over time. This includes data on the state’s per capita income. We also include variables

for the year and the year-squared.



       B. DESCRIPTIVE DATA

       To capture the variation in the timing of lobbying effort, we analyze three representative

states: New York, Wisconsin, and Oregon. These have been chosen because they represent

three different institutional structures of the legislative process. New York has annual regular

sessions and annual budgeting; Wisconsin has annual regular sessions and biennial budgeting

and Oregon has biennial regular sessions and biennial budgeting. We provide the data in Figure

2. What is striking about these three graphs is their responsiveness to the budgeting process.

While New York sees a steady increase in real lobbying expenditures, Oregon’s and Wisconsin’s

lobbying expenditures increase substantially in budget years, and drop in off-budget years. In

addition, comparing Oregon to Wisconsin, we seem to see a regular session effect as well. This

descriptive data provides initial support to the fact that institutional design may affect interest

group effort, and in particular, budgeting may be the focal point for interest groups. However, to




                                                  10
more thoroughly examine the structural windows hypothesis in the paper, we turn to a

multivariate statistical analysis.



                           ****INSERT FIGURE 2 ABOUT HERE****



        C. METHOD

        In order to examine the empirical validity of the theoretical framework, we conduct an

OLS regression on panel data. One concern that naturally arises in this kind of panel study is

that states differ widely in their lobbying disclosure rules. What is considered lobbying in one

state is not necessarily considered lobbying in another state, and thus need not be reported. To

control for this, we use state fixed-effects in our statistical analyses. The fixed effects estimation

method controls for differences across states, and allows us to measure within state variation

over time with panel data methods (Hsiao 2002). With state fixed effects, we include a dummy

variable for each state. later specifications, we explore random-effects models as well



        D. RESULTS

        Table 1 provides initial results. The dependent variable is the log of annual, per capita

interest group lobbying expenditures. Model 1 includes the control variables (Ln(Per Capita

Income), Year, and Year2) with the electoral variables (Election Year, Size of House Majority,

Size of Senate Majority, Unified Government, and Democratic Unified). Model 2 includes the

control variables with the legislative structure variables (Budget Year, Regular Session, and

Special Session). Model 3 includes all three sets of variables. Model 4 includes interaction

effects. All models include state fixed effects for the 33 states considered. A positive coefficient




                                                 11
on a variable means an increase in the variable increases the amount of lobbying within a state

relative to mean level of lobbying for that state; a negative coefficient means an increase in the

variable of interest decreases the amount of lobbying. Standard errors of the coefficients are

listed in parenthesis below the coefficient estimates. Statistical significance at the 99%, 95%,

and 90% level are noted.



                            ****INSERT TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE****



        We begin by discussing the income variable. Per capita income has a large effect on

expected lobbying expenditures in all the models. A 1% increase in a given state’s per capita

income results in an approximately 7.3% increase in lobbying. This result is similar in sign, but

greater in magnitude, to a result found for PAC contributions in earlier work (Ansolabehere et al

2003), where per capita income has substantial power in explaining the levels of campaign

contributions in gubernatorial campaigns.

        We turn now to electoral variables. In Model 1, the coefficients on Election Year and the

Size of Senate Majority are statistically significant and negative. In this model, an Election Year

causes lobbying to decrease by 18%, while each percentage increase in the size of the majority

by the majority party in the state senate causes lobbying to decrease by 1.3%. Though the

former result is not robust once we include legislative structure variables in Model 3, we will see

in Model 4 that this result reappears as statistically significant. The latter result persists in its

statistical significance across all models. No other electoral variables are statistically significant

in this model.




                                                   12
       We then add the institutional structure variables in Models 2 and 3; here we obtain some

interesting effects. We discuss the results of Model 3, as it is similar to Model 2. First, when a

legislature is in regular session, lobbying skyrockets about 190% over what it would be

otherwise. While this is expected, it is interesting to note that this effect holds even when we

control for special sessions. In fact, special sessions do not result in more lobbying. In addition,

we see a 20% increase in lobbying if during those sessions, the budget is under consideration.

That is, lobbying interests increase their efforts substantially during budget years in response to

the budgeting process. This is one of the main findings of this paper. Both of these effects,

which are statistically significant, cannot be observed in the federal lobbying data because

Congress meets and budgets on an annual basis. The budgeting process, a recurring structural

policy window, attracts interest groups and results in substantially higher lobbying effort by

these groups.

       Model 4 includes an interaction term of regular session with election year. Inclusion of

this term leaves most coefficient estimates close to their former magnitudes and statistical

significance. The interaction term, however, is positive and statistically significant. The results

show that while lobbying increases 77% during regular sessions, it increases an additional 145%

(total of 222%) during election years if there is a regular session. The coefficient on Election

Year is also now negative and statistically significant. It means that lobbying declines

substantially (40%) during election years, unless there is a regular session held. If this latter

condition holds, however, the total marginal effect of Election Year (the sum of the marginal

effects of Election Year and Regular Session*Election Year, holding Regular Session at 1) is

almost zero, allowing us to interpret the negative direct effect of elections on lobbying as almost

exactly canceling out the positive effect of having a legislature in session during elections.




                                                 13
        Taken together, these results suggest that the timing of sessions and budgeting bring out

interest group activity in the legislature. While most electoral factors seem to have little effect

on the timing of lobbying, there are two exceptions. First, the size of the senate majority has a

persistent and statistically significant negative effect on lobbying. In addition, elections tend to

decrease lobbying (relative to off-election years) unless the legislature is in session, in which

case, the total electoral effect is substantively close to zero.



        E. ROBUSTNESS AND EXTENSIONS

        In order to check the robustness of the results presented in Table 1, we conduct a number

of tests whose results we present in Table 2. First, we explore the possibility that the size of the

budget is what drives aggregate lobbying expenditures. To this end, we construct a variable that

represents the amount of the budget under consideration in each year.8 We present the results in

Model 5 of Table 2 with caution, only as a robustness check, because the size of the budget may

be endogenous to lobbying effort. With that caveat, we note that a 1% increase in the budget

results in an 8% increase in lobbying expenditures. This is consistent with results in the earlier

models. The effect of Regular Session is slightly less than in previous models. The only

electoral variables which have statistically significant coefficients are the Size of Majority

variables. The Election Year variable and the interactive variable are not statistically significant,

but their magnitudes are almost the same as before.




8
  We take the amount of the budget in any given year. For those with biennial budgets, a problem arises. In the off-
years, the budget is zero. We could model this, but then if we take logs, these observations disappear. Moreover the
results, if we just use budget levels, are similar to the dummy variable specification. To address this concern, we
use 90% of the two-year budget in the budgeted year, and 10% of the budget in the second year. The rationale is
that in any given off-year, up to 10% of the budget can be re-budgeted during special session to accommodate fiscal
needs. Thus, the amount of budget up for grabs is about 10% of the entire budget. We then adjust the budget for per
capita spending then take logs.


                                                        14
                           ****INSERT TABLE 2 ABOUT HERE****



         Second, there may be other institutional features that affect lobbying that have been

missed in the main analysis. We have catalogued six types of institutional structures that might

affect the intensity and timing of lobbying: the presence of budget caps (Primo 2003), legislative

term limits (Primo and Milyo 2004), the degree of professionalization of the legislature (Fiorina

1994; Maestas 2000), the number of seats in the state house and senate chambers, the size of the

veto-proof majority (Holburn and Vanden Bergh 2004), and the ease with which the legislature

can overturn administrative agencies (Weingast and Moran 1983). We measure these variables

as noted in the Appendix. One problem with including them in the statistical analysis, however,

is that these do not change within state over time. Therefore one cannot used state fixed effects

in a regression if one hopes to include these variables. However, one can use a random effects

model.

         To test the robustness of the random effects model, Model 6 replicates Model 4 using

random effects. The coefficient estimates and the statistical significance of those coefficients are

very close across the models. A Hausman specification test indicates that we cannot reject the

hypothesis that the coefficients of the fixed effects and random effects models are the same at the

95% level of confidence. Having established the comparability of the random effects and fixed

effects model, we then include in Model 7 the variables measuring the additional institutional

features using random effects. None of the additional institutional structure variables have

statistically significant coefficients, suggesting we can reject the hypothesis that they influence

total lobbying expenditures at the 95% level of confidence.




                                                 15
       A fourth issue is whether lobbying disclosure regulations are driving the result. Some

authors have suggested that tighter lobbying disclosure regulations result in less lobbying

because disclosure can tarnish the reputation of the lobbyists and the lobbying profession

(Brinig et al 1994). Other authors have argued that lobbying regulations have little effect on

lobbying firms (Lowery and Gray 1997). These papers cite as evidence for these points of view

the number of lobbyists registered. In conducting this robustness check, we also hope to settle

this argument by employing, as the dependent variable, actual lobbying expenditures.

       There are two general types of lobbying disclosure rules. The first are the types that

expand the definition of lobbying. These include new rules that include small gifts to legislators

as lobbying expenditures, rules that include certain types of events as lobbying expenditures, and

rules that expand the definition of lobbying activities (such as to include any meetings with

legislators rather than just those to discuss a specific bill). These types of changes in lobbying

rules should result in an increase in lobbying expenditures disclosed. A second type of

disclosure rule is one that does not expand the definition of lobbying, but requires groups to

disclose their lobbying expenditures in a more detailed and refined way. For example, rules that

require interest groups to categorize their lobbying expenditures and rules that require lobbying

groups disclose their source of funding should not increase disclosed lobbying expenditures per

se, but should offer the public more disclosure on the current expenditures.

       In Model 8, we replicate the base Model 4 using these variables. Neither type of

disclosure law has an effect on the reported amount of lobbying activity by interest groups.

This result is consistent with Lowery and Gray (1997) who show that tougher lobbyist

registration rules in the state have no effect on the number of lobbying registration, but

inconsistent with (Brinig et al 1994). We can make a similar statement about the effect of




                                                 16
disclosure laws on the reported amount of lobbying. On the whole, these sets of laws lead to no

change in the disclosed aggregate lobbying expenditures. This, however, does not mean that

there is no change in lobbyist behavior (as has been argued in earlier work), only that whatever

changes there are do not show up in disclosed aggregate lobbying expenditures.

       Overall, this section supports the previous results that structural policy windows, as

determined by the frequency of sessions and the budgeting process, are the primary drivers of

changes in total aggregate lobbying expenditures. Moreover, other factors, such as budget caps,

term limits, professionalization of legislatures, and lobbying disclosure rules have little impact

on disclosed lobbying expenditures.



IV. UNDERSTANDING THE GROUPS THAT CREATE THIS PATTERN

       Having established the empirical fact that budgets draw interest groups to lobby

legislatures, we now want to understand which groups create this pattern in the data. To do this,

we rely on very fine-grained data for nine states who agreed to provide us with data. These nine

states’ Ethics Commission keep time-series data on each individual interest group’s lobby

expenditure each year (for four to ten years). There are over 35,000 interest group-state-year

observations of expenditures, covering more than 5,000 separate state-level interest groups.



       A. SIMILARITIES TO POLITICAL ACTION COMMITTEES

       In order to benchmark the aggregate lobbying data, we begin by comparing the lobbying

efforts of interest groups to campaign finance contributions of interest groups. We use the

classification system used by scholars of political action committee (PAC) contributions (e.g.

Ansolabehere et al 2002) and the Federal Election Commission (2001) that categorizes each of




                                                 17
the interest groups into one of four areas: businesses, trade associations, membership/ideological

groups, and unions. We have added a “government” category as well because lobbying by state

agencies or city governments is required to be reported in many states. This categorization of

lobbying expenditures allows us to compare our results to the PAC literature.

         First we describe the lobbying data. Reported per capita lobbying expenditures differ

vastly by state from $.01 to $18.32, with a mean of $2.44. A variety of reasons exist for this

variation, not the least of which is the laws regarding disclosure. Within states, however, there

can still be substantial variation in lobbying across different categories of interest groups and

across years. Table 3 uses our preliminary categorization of groups to identify the expenditures

for each group for all years’ data available for the nine states for which we have this data. While

one must be careful when comparing amounts across states (because of different disclosure

rules), comparisons within state do provide a snapshot of lobbying effort. Here we see that in

every state, firms and trade associations account for no less than 80% (86% average) of lobbying

expenditure. Unions spend less than 4.2% of total lobbying expenditures in each state.

Membership groups account for 3%-15% of total lobbying expenditures.9



                              ****INSERT FIGURE 3 ABOUT HERE****



         In Table 4, we contrast the distribution of lobbying expenditures with PAC contributions.

The data sources are listed in the table.10 At the federal level, business (corporations and trade


9
  Whether this means that business interests exert more influence in lobbying than do labor and issue groups is
unclear. Only future study will allow us to understand this question. Moreover, this preliminary finding helps to
explain the findings of earlier studies that document business interests having far more lobbyist registrations than
labor and membership groups. This higher number of registrations is manifested in more lobbying expenditures.
10
   The data on state PAC/Special Interest money is approximate. The Institute of Money in State Politics (IMSP)
hires contractors to collect data from the states on all state campaign finance contributions. We have checked their
data against state records (collected by the state election commissions) against Jensen and Beyle (2003) and find that


                                                         18
associations) comprise 67% of PAC giving, while they comprise 84% of lobbying expenditures.

At the state level, these business groups comprise 62% of special interest contributions, but 86%

of lobbying expenditures. Labor groups comprise 9% of federal PAC contributions, and 6% of

federal lobbying, while at the state level, labor groups comprise 16% of special interest

contributions to campaigns and only 2% of lobbying expenditures. Finally, although

membership and ideological groups make up a roughly equivalent percentage of campaign

finance contributions at the federal and state level (22%-23%), they represent 7% of lobbying

expenditures at the state level and only 2% at the federal level. Overall, these results suggest that

lobbying is largely a business phenomenon at both the state and federal level, but the business

community focuses more on lobbying and less on campaign finance at the state level than the

federal level.



                              ****INSERT FIGURE 4 ABOUT HERE****



        B. GROUP TYPE AND LOBBYING TIMING

        Taking the categorization given above, we examine whether different types of groups

time their lobbying in systematically discernible ways. To analyze this question, we sum each

category of groups’ expenditures, so that we know how much unions are spending in each state

by year; how much membership groups are spending in each state by year, etc. From this, we

create a set of new dependent variables for the next set of regressions to try to identify the

underlying patterns of lobbying. We aggregate the lobbying expenditures by interest group


they are somewhat close—approximately within 5-10% of each other. We then used the classification system from
the IMSP to classify the state PAC data. Ideological and Party Groups were classified as Ideological/Membership.
Unions and Civil Service/Retirement groups were classified as Unions. All others were classified as corporations
and trade associations collectively. The data in Tables 4 provide the detailed data on the state level for the nine
states listed in Table 3.


                                                        19
category by state on a per capita basis and take logs. We now take this as our dependent variable

and re-run Model 4 to see if certain groups are driving the aggregate pattern of lobbying

observed. In this section, each observation is a state, year, interest-group-type aggregate

lobbying expenditure. Again, we use OLS with state fixed effects in the regressions.

       Because only nine states are reported here, there are only 53 observations. With 13

explanatory variables and nine fixed effects, there are not many degrees of freedom, meaning

that the standard errors are likely to be large. With this caveat, we present our results in Table 5



                          ****INSERT FIGURE 5 ABOUT HERE****



       Model 9 includes lobbying by firms, Model 10 includes lobbying by trade associations,

Model 11 uses lobbying by unions, Model 12 uses lobbying by government agencies, and Model

13 uses lobbying by membership groups. In all the models the coefficients on Budget Year and

Regular Session are positive. In Models 9 and 10 (collectively business), per capita lobbying

expenditures are 40% higher for firms and 28% higher for trade associations in budget years than

non-budget years. These results are statistically significant at the 95% level of confidence. In

Models 11, 12, and 13, we see that per capita lobbying expenditures are 38% higher, 50% higher,

and 84% higher for unions, governments, and membership groups, respectively, in budget years

relative to non-budget years. These coefficients, however, do not reach the standard levels of

statistical significance, perhaps because of the few degrees of freedom. Although a handful of

other coefficients are statistically significant, there is no systematic pattern. However, it is

worthwhile noting that unions are the only type of interest group that has a positive coefficient




                                                  20
on Election Year and negative coefficient on the interaction term. In addition, government

interest groups increase their lobbying substantially during periods of unified government.

       Taken together, these results lead us to a number of interpretations of the data. First, all

groups lobby at substantially higher levels when the legislature is in regular session, but none of

the coefficients are statistically significant at the 95% level. Second, the increase in lobbying

expenditures during budget years seems to be driven by business, and not by unions or

government agencies. Third, given the relative magnitude of the budget coefficients of the five

models, businesses exhibit lower variation in lobbying expenditures from year to year than other

organizations. This fact, combined with the fact that business accounts for over 80% of lobbying

expenditures (noted in the previous section), suggests that businesses maintain a continued

presence in state capitals, lobbying on a regular basis, while other groups maintain a more

sporadic lobbying effort. Moreover, when budgets arise, businesses raise their lobbying

expenditures somewhat. However, because businesses represent such a large percentage of total

lobbying expenditures, the 30-35% increase in lobbying expenditures they engage in during

budget years means they create a large increase in aggregate state lobbying expenditures.

Fundamentally, the spikes seen in the biennial budgeting states shown in Figures 1 and 2 are

generated by business interest groups.



       C. ISSUE AREAS AND LOBBYING TIMING

       Although businesses are driving the spikes and troughs in lobbying, in a final empirical

extension, we examine the extent to which groups affected by different policies of government

time their lobbying differentially. We do this by examining the timing of lobbying by issue area.

We classify each interest group in these nine states as primarily concerned with one of thirty-two




                                                 21
issue areas. We then create two main “types” of interest group categories: groups which are

affected by both budgetary and regulatory rules of the state, and those groups which are affected

primarily by regulatory rules.

       To implement this, we use a classification system developed by Wolak et al (2004).

Wolak et al obtained the names of every interest group that lobbied at the state level in 1997

(over 34,000 in total). They then categorized each group by topic area they identified. We have

taken the Wolak et al coding and merged it into our file, adding eight additional categories to

obtain more fine-grained detail. However we have panel data, and new interest groups enter

every year into each state. We conducted web searches until every interest group was identified

using this classification system. Table 6 presents the classification.



                          ****INSERT FIGURE 6 ABOUT HERE****



       In addition to the two broad categories we identified above, we also examine issue areas

where the lobbying efforts by interest groups which most legislators might like to “hide” from

their constituents. These issue areas, such as tobacco firm lobbying, pharmaceutical lobbying,

real estate developer lobbying, alcohol lobbying, and gambling industry lobbying, may be

particularly problematic for legislators, and we examine this is more detail.

       We recognize this classification is somewhat stylized and rough. In reality, there is a

continuum between how much an interest group is affected by budgets and how much an interest

group is affected by regulation. We do believe to a first approximation, however, that these

budget categories reflect where the preponderance of state’s influence is on the special interest’s

business (e.g. education is both budgetary and regulatory, while insurance is primarily




                                                 22
regulatory). That said, we have experimented with a number of reasonable reclassifications and

find the results discussed below are robust to these reclassifications.

       As before, we sum each topic area’s expenditures, so that we know how much agriculture

is spending in each state by year; how much health groups are spending in each state by year, etc.

for the nine states. We aggregate the lobbying expenditures by issue by state by year on a per

capita basis and take logs to create the final dependent variables, and run models similar to the

previous section, using OLS with both state and issue area fixed effects.

       Given that budgetary issues can only be handled within the budget framework, one would

expect that these issues would result in more lobbying within the legislature during budget years

than non-budget years. Regulatory issues, on the other hand, do not result in the direct transfer

of money from the government to the interest groups in contracts or spending, but are molded by

government policies and regulatory power to create the competitive environment. Because these

regulations can be passed at any time, there are two factors that affect the timing of regulatory

lobbying expenditures. On one hand, it is less costly to pass policy proposals that are attached as

riders to the budget, rather than stand-alone bills, because the budget must pass annually, and the

process of amending the budget in committee (or on the floor) is generally less onerous than

passing a regulation as a stand-alone feature (Oleszek 1996, Krutz 2001). Thus, from a cost

perspective, interest groups are more likely to have success passing regulatory rules during

budgeting, and therefore we should see an increase in regulatory lobbying during budget years.

On the other hand, in a retrospective voting model with heavy discounting, legislators may get

more credit for passing legislation close to the election rather than in previous time periods. If

this is the case, then legislators benefit more passing legislation close to the election rather than

earlier. In a biennial budgeting state, higher benefit would be conveyed in the off-budget year




                                                  23
(or the election year). This would lead to higher incentive to pass bills in the off-budget year.

Which effect dominates is an empirical matter. If we see regulatory groups lobbying more

heavily in budget years, we assume that the “rider” effect dominates. However, if we see

regulatory groups lobbying more heavily in election years, then the “retrospective voting” effect

dominates.

         Table 7 presents the results. Model 14 presents the results for budgetary and regulatory

issues, Model 15 presents the results for primarily regulatory issues, and Model 16 presents the

results for “hidden groups.” 11 In Model 14, the coefficient on Budget Year is positive and

statistically significant. There is, not surprisingly, a 39% increase in lobbying by groups

concerned with budgetary issues during budget years. There is a 50% decrease in lobbying by

these same groups during election years, though a session during an election year leads to

slightly more lobbying on net (through the interactive effect). Unified government of either

party leads to 46% more lobbying than during spells of divided government.



                               ****INSERT FIGURE 7 ABOUT HERE****



         Many of the results in Model 15 are similar. Groups that are concerned primarily about

regulatory issues lobby even more in budget years, on the margin, than those concerned about

budgets. There is 49% increase in lobbying for these groups during budget years, an increase

which is statistically significant at the 99% level. Special sessions also result in more regulatory

lobbying. The Election Year coefficients are not statistically significant. Republican unified

government results in 30% additional lobbying than non-unified government, while Democratic

11
  One concern that may arise is that budget years sometimes have longer sessions than non-budget years. To
control for this, we replaced the session year variable with short session and long session variables and re-run the
regressions. The results are nearly identical.


                                                          24
unified government results in 9% less lobbying than non-unified government. This latter result

actually points to groups affected by regulation may be lobbying heavily for deregulation rather

than regulation. In sum, despite having fewer budgetary concerns, groups primarily affected by

regulations do more lobbying during budgetary years and during Republican unified government.

       Finally, Model 16 includes regressions for “hidden groups,” those groups that legislators

likely wish to hide from the voters. These groups show no discernible pattern of lobbying, as no

variable has a coefficient that is statistically significant. These groups seem to spread their

lobbying effort evenly across time, political and electoral factors, and institutional structures,

which may be a sensible strategy if groups wish to remain hidden.

       Overall, these final results paint an interesting picture of the composition of the lobbying

effort by interest groups. While groups affected by the budget do increase their lobbying

expenditures during budget years, groups not affected by the budget also increase their lobbying

expenditures during budget years. One reason for this may be that these latter groups are

attempting to create or prevent riders from being attached to the budget that will affect the

regulations that govern them. Indeed, given the budget bill must pass on an annual basis,

attaching riders to the budget is a less costly mechanism for passing regulations than is passing

the bill in stand-alone form. The fact that regulatory lobbying picks up when there is Republican

unified government is yet another indication that groups seeking lower hurdles for regulation

may be lobbying during this opportune moment—when friends in office are passing must-pass

budgetary legislation—offering a good time for attaching riders to the budget bill. Note that

controversial groups, whose lobbying efforts legislators might want to hide from the voters, seem

to blend into other lobbying efforts, demonstrating no discernible statistical pattern in lobbying.




                                                  25
V.     CONCLUSION

       This paper complements the extensive micro-oriented (or single vote or single-issue)

literature on interest groups by examining the macro-determinants and timing of interest group

lobby. In doing so, it has argued that there are three types of policy windows that arise for

interest groups: endogenous windows, exogenous windows, and structural windows. The paper

argues that structural windows can have a significant effect on the timing of interest group

lobbying. Employing a new dataset of lobbying at the state level, the paper exploits cross-state

and time-series variation to determine how features of government affect lobbying expenditures.

The paper demonstrates that interest groups increase their activities substantially when the

legislature is in regular session and when the legislature is engaged in budgeting. It also

demonstrates that much of this budget year effect can be explained by business and trade groups

expanding lobbying efforts during budget years. Unions and government agencies do not

increase lobbying efforts during this time.

       Moreover, businesses, which comprise on average 86% of all lobbying expenditures

within a given state, have much lower variance in lobbying than other groups. This is consistent

with the idea that businesses maintain a steady and continued presence in legislatures, while

other types of interest groups expand and contract their lobbying as their resources and the issues

that interest them, rise and decline in the legislature. Additionally, interest groups largely

unaffected by the budget numbers also lobby during budgetary time periods. One reason for this

is that they may be encouraging legislators to use the budget as a vehicle on which to attach non-

budgetary riders.

       One final result from the paper is that elections have a negative or no (in the interaction

term) effect on timing of lobbying, contrary to some received wisdom. It is clear that the




                                                 26
variation in institutional structure of state governments allows us to see structural policy

windows that might not otherwise be discernible. Moreover, the data presented here will allow

us to explore in more depth the determinants of interest group lobbying effort.




                                                 27
                                       REFERENCES


Alt, James, and Robert Lowry (1993) “Divided Government, Fiscal Institutions, and Budget
Deficits: Evidence from the States,” The American Political Science Review, Vol. 88, No. 4.
(Dec), pp. 811-828.

Ansolabehere, Steven, John M. de Figueiredo, and James Snyder (2003). “Why Is There So
Little Money in U.S. Politics?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 17(1): 93-120.

Ansolabehere, Steven, James Snyder, and Suhas Tripathi (2000). “Are Campaign Contributions
and Lobbying Expenditures Linked?” Business and Politics 4(2).

Arnold, R. Douglas (1979) Congress and the Bureaucracy. New Haven: Yale University Press.

Austen-Smith, David (1993). “Information and Influence: Lobbying for Agendas and Votes.”
American Journal of Political Science 37: 799-834

Baumgartner, Frank, and Bryan D. Jones (1993). Agendas and Instability in American Politics.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Baumgartner, Frank, and Beth Leech (1998). Basic Interests. Princeton University Press:
Princeton.

Baumgartner, Frank, and Beth Leech (2000). “Lobbying Alone or in a Crowd,” Paper Presented
at the Midwest Political Science Association Meetings.

Baumgartner, Frank R., and Beth L. Leech. (2001). Issue Niches and Policy Bandwagons:
Patterns of Interest Group Involvement in National Politics. Journal of Politics 63, 4
(November): 1191-1213.

Brinig, M. F., R. G. Holcombe, and L. Schwartzstein (1993). “The Regulation of Lobbyists,”
Public Choice 77: 377-384.

de Figueiredo, John M., and James K. Kim (2004). “When Do Firms Hire Lobbyists? The
Organization of Lobbying at the Federal Communications Commission,” Industrial and
Corporate Change, forthcoming.

de Figueiredo, John M., and Brian S. Silverman (2002). “Academic Earmarks and the Returns to
Lobbying,” NBER Working Paper #9064.

Derthick, Martha, and Paul J. Quirk (1985). The Politics of Deregulation. Washington, DC:
Brookings Institution.

Downs, Anthony (1957). An Economic Theory of Democracy. New York: Harper and Row.




                                              28
Federal Election Commission (2001). “PAC Activity Increases in 20002 Election Cycle,” Press
Release of the FEC and Accompanying Data.

Fenno, Richard F. (1973). Congressmen and Committees. Boston: Little Brown.

Fiorina, Morris P. (1981). Retrospective Voting in American National Elections. Yale
University Press: New Haven.

Fiorina, Morris P. (1994). “Divided Government in the American States: A Byproduct of
Legislative Professionalism?” The American Political Science Review, Vol. 88, No. 2. (Jun.), pp.
304-316

Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman (1999). “Competing for Endorsements,” American
Economic Review 89(3): 501-524.

Grossman, Gene M., and Elhanan Helpman (2001). Special Interest Politics. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.

Hall, Richard, and Frank Wayman (1990). “Buying Time: Moneyed Interests and the
Mobilization of Bias in Congressional Committees,” American Political Science Review, 84
(Sep): 797-820.

Holburn and Vanden Bergh (2004). “Influencing Agencies through Pivotal Political
Institutions: Evidence from the U.S. Accounting Industry,” Journal of Law, Economics, and
Organization, forthcoming.

Hrebenar, Ronald J., and Clive S. Thomas (1992). Interest Group Politics in the Southern States.
Tuscaloosa, AL: University of Alabama Press.

Hrebenar, Ronald J., and Clive S. Thomas (1993). Interest Group Politics in the Northeastern
States. University Park, PA: Penn State Press.

Hsiao, Cheng (2002). Panel Data Analysis (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press: Cambridge.

Institute on Money in State Politics (2004). http://www.followthemoney.org/

Jensen, Jennifer M. and Thad Beyle (2003). “Of Footnotes, Missing Data, and Lessons for 50-
State Data Collection: The Gubernatorial Campaign Finance Project, 1977-2001.” State Politics
and Policy Quarterly 3:203-214.

Kollman, Ken (1997). “Inviting Friends to Lobby: Interest Groups, Ideological Bias, and
Congressional Committees,” American Journal of Political Science 41(2): 519-544.

Krutz, Glen S. (2001). “Tactical Maneuvering on Omnibus Bills in Congress,” American Journal
of Political Science 45(1): 210-223.




                                              29
Levitt, Steven D., and James M. Snyder (1997). “The Impact of Federal Spending on House
Election Outcomes,” The Journal of Political Economy 105(1): 30-53.

Lowery, David, and Virginia Gray (1997). “How Some Rules Just Don’t Matter: The
Regulation of Lobbyists,” Public Choice 91: 139-147.

Lowery, David, and Virginia Gray (2000). The Population Ecology of Interest Representation.
Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

Lowi, Theodore J. (1964). “American Business, Public Policy, Case Studies, and Political
Theory,” World Politics 16: 677-693.

Lowry, Robert, James Alt, and Karen Feree (1998). “Fiscal Policy Outcomes and Electoral
Accountability in the States,” The American Political Science Review, Vol. 92, No. 4. (Dec.),
pp. 759-774.

Maestas, Cherie (2000). “Professional Legislatures and Ambitious Politicians: Policy
Responsiveness of State Institutions,” Legislative Studies Quarterly 15(4): 663-690.

Mayhew, David (1974). Congress: The Electoral Connection. New Haven: Yale University
Press.

Muthoo, Abhinay, and Kenneth A. Shepsle (2003). “Agenda-Setting Power in Organizations
with Overlapping Generations of Players,” Harvard University Department of Government
Working Paper.

Oleszek, Walter J. (1996). Congressional Procedures and the Policy Process. Washington, DC:
CQ Press.

Price, David E. (1978). “Policy Making in Congressional Committees: The Impact of
‘Environmental’ Factors,” American Political Science Review 72(2): 548-574.

Primo, David (2003). "Stop Us Before We Spend Again: Institutional Constraints on U.S. State
Spending." University of Rochester, Department of Political Science Working Paper.

Primo, David, and Jeff Milyo (2004). “Campaign Finance and Political Efficacy: Evidence
from the States,” University of Chicago, Harris School Working Paper.

Rothenberg, Lawrence (1992). Linking Citizens to Government: Interest Group Politics and
Common Cause. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Smith, Richard A. (1995). “Interest Group Influence in the U.S. Congress,” Legislative Studies
Quarterly 20(1): 89-139.

Stein, Robert M., and Kenneth N. Bickers (1994). “Congressional Elections and the Pork
Barrel,” Journal of Politics 56(2): 377-399.



                                               30
Snyder, James M. (1992). “Long-Term Investing in Politicians; Or, Give Early, Give Often”
Journal of Law & Economics 35: 15-43.

Stratmann, Thomas (1998). “The market for congressional votes: Is timing of contributions
everything?” Journal of Law & Economics, 41:85-113.

Walker, Jack L. (1991). Mobilizing Interest Groups in America: Patrons, Professions, and
Social Movements. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

Wander, W. Thomas, F. Ted Hebert, and Gary W. Copeland (1984). Congressional Budgeting.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.

Weingast, Barry, and M. Moran (1983). “Bureaucratic Discretion or Congressional Control?
Regulatory Policymaking by the Federal Trade Commission,” Journal of Political Economy, 91
(October): 765-800.

Wiggins, Charles W., Keith E. Hamm, and Charles G. Bell (1992). “Interest Group and Party
Influence Agents in the Legislative Process: A Comparative Static Analysis,” The Journal of
Politics 54: 82-100.

Wildavsky, Aaron (1979). The Politics of the Budgetary Process, 3ed. Little Brown: New
York.

Wilson, James Q. (1980). The Politics of Regulation. New York: Basic Books.

Wolak, Jennifer, Adam Newmark, Todd McNolty, David Lowery, and Virginia Gray (2004).
“Much of Politics is Still Local: Multi-State Lobbying in State Interest Communities,”
Legislative Studies Quarterly, forthcoming.




                                              31
                                                                 Figure 1
                               Panel A: Federal Lobbying Expenditures

                        1.6
Lobbying (Billions $)



                        1.5

                        1.4

                        1.3

                        1.2

                        1.1
                             1995      1996      1997         1998      1999       2000       2001

                                 Panel B: Maryland Lobbying Expenditures
                        24

                        20
Lobbying (Millions $)




                        16

                        12

                         8

                         4
                         1986       1988      1990     1992    1994     1996     1998     2000       2002


                                 Panel C: Maine Lobbying Expenditures
                        4
Lobbying (Millions $)




                        3



                        2



                        1
                         1988        1990       1992      1994        1996      1998       2000       2002

                             Legislative Election Year           * All dollar values are in 2000 dollars.
                                                           Figure 2: Aggregate Lobbying Expenditures
                                              80


                                              70


                                              60
                     Lobbying (Millions $)




                                              50
                                                                                                                      New York
                                              40                                                           (Annual Sessions; Annual Budgets)

                                              30


                                              20


                                              10
                                                    1978     1982      1986     1990       1994          1998       2002
                                                    1978     1982      1986     1990
                                                                                 Year      1994          1998       2002
                                              32
                                              28
                                              28


                                               26
                                              24
      Lobbying (Millions $)
                      Lobbying (Millions $)




                                              20
                                              24

                                              16
                                              22
                                              12


                                              20
                                              8
                                                                                                                            Wisconsin
                                                                                                                (Annual Sessions; Biennial Budgets)
                                               4
                                              18
                                                    1990                 1994                     1998                       2002
                                              32    1990                1994        Year      1998                         2002
                                                                                   Year

                                              28


                                              24
      Lobbying (Millions $)




                                              20


                                              16


                                              12


                                               8
                                                                                                                          Oregon
                                               4
                                                                                                           (Biennial Sessions; Biennial Budgets)
                                                                1990              1994                   1998                 2002
                                                                                    Year

* All dollar values are in 2000 dollars.
            Table 1: Electoral and Institutional Determinants of Aggregate Lobbying Expenditures
                Dependent Variable: Log of Total Per Capita Lobbying Expenditures for each state for each year



                 Variable                           Model 1                  Model 2                  Model 3                Model 4
                                                                                                                         Full Model with
                                                Electoral Model         Legislative Model           Base Model         Interactive Effects


               Budget Year                                                   0.215***                  0.197**              0.231***
                                                                             (0.067)                   (0.080)              (0.081)

            Regular Session                                                  1.057***                 1.063***                  0.575**
                                                                             (0.128)                  (0.128)                   (0.267)

             Special Session                                                   0.051                    0.067                    0.070
                                                                              (0.046)                  (0.047)                  (0.046)

              Election Year                         -0.188***                                          -0.023               -0.581**
                                                     (0.046)                                           (0.048)               (0.273)

         Size of House Majority                       0.840                                            0.960*                   0.984*
                                                     (0.688)                                           (0.572)                  (0.568)

        Size of Senate Majority                     -1.289**                                          -1.427***             -1.407***
                                                     (0.620)                                           (0.518)               (0.515)

          Unified Government                         -0.009                                            -0.018                   -0.020
                                                     (0.117)                                           (0.097)                  (0.096)

           Democratic Unified                        -0.028                                            -0.039                   -0.029
                                                     (0.143)                                           (0.119)                  (0.118)

         Ln(Per Capita Income)                      2.019***                 2.355***                 1.997***              1.999***
                                                    (0.505)                  (0.404)                  (0.419)               (0.416)

                   Year                            16.608***                16.354***                16.424***              16.507***
                                                    (2.488)                  (2.071)                  (2.064)                (2.052)

                   Year2                            -0.004***                -0.004***                -0.004***             -0.004***
                                                     (0.001)                  (0.001)                  (0.001)               (0.001)

   Regular Session * Election Year                                                                                              0.595**
                                                                                                                                (0.287)

                 Constant                        -16,641.48***            -16,392.22***            -16,460.94***         -16,543.26***
                                                   (2,475.84)               (2,061.20)               (2,054.56)            (2,042.67)

           State Fixed Effects                         FE                       FE                          FE                    FE

                R-squared                             0.713                    0.798                    0.805                    0.808
                F-statistic                           86.54                   184.54                   103.35                    96.24
                    n                                  319                      319                      319                      319

Two-sided t-tests with robust standard errors: *** 99% significance level; ** 95% significance level; *90% significance level

Note: Thirty-three states are included in the analysis, state fixed effects (FE) are used for all Models.
      Table 2: Robustness of Determinants of Aggregate Lobbying Expenditures
   Dependent Variable: Log of Total Per Capita Lobbying Expenditures for each state for each year



       Variable                    Model 5             Model 6          Model 7              Model 8
                                                                       Structural         Lobby Reporting
                               Budget Amount     Full Model with RE Measures with RE          Rules


     Budget Year                                      0.230***            0.229***            0.229***
                                                      (0.080)             (0.081)             (0.081)
   Budget Amount                   0.082*
                                   (0.044)
   Regular Session                 0.811**             0.568**             0.565**            0.580**
                                   (0.391)             (0.264)             (0.266)            (0.268)
   Special Session                  0.066               0.071               0.070              0.070
                                   (0.060)             (0.046)             (0.046)            (0.047)
    Budget Caps                                                            -0.301
                                                                           (0.735)
     Term Limits                                                           -0.029
                                                                           (0.133)
  Professional Staff                                                       -0.092
                                                                           (1.222)
     Senate Size                                                           -0.002
                                                                           (0.041)
     House Size                                                             0.001
                                                                           (0.010)
    Veto Override                                                           3.409
                                                                           (6.583)
  Admin Review Std                                                          0.290
                                                                           (0.798)
    Election Year                  -0.276             -0.586**            -0.588**            -0.576**
                                   (0.393)             (0.270)             (0.272)             (0.274)
Size of House Majority             1.398*              0.949*              0.939*             0.961*
                                   (0.751)             (0.560)             (0.570)            (0.572)
Size of Senate Majority            -1.475**           -1.378***           -1.379***          -1.410***
                                    (0.656)            (0.508)             (0.512)            (0.519)
 Unified Government                 0.054              -0.044              -0.044             -0.023
                                   (0.121)             (0.095)             (0.095)            (0.096)
  Democratic Unified               -0.127              -0.001              -0.002             -0.029
                                   (0.155)             (0.116)             (0.117)            (0.118)
Ln(Per Capita Income)              1.815***           2.073***            2.037***            1.924***
                                   (0.504)            (0.405)             (0.410)             (0.449)
         Year                     15.184***           16.649***          16.554***           15.993***
                                   (3.422)             (2.036)            (2.075)             (2.397)
             2
        Year                      -0.004***           -0.004***           -0.004***          -0.004***
                                   (0.001)             (0.001)             (0.001)            (0.001)
   Regular Session * Election Year                  0.252                 0.599**                0.601**                0.588**
                                                   (0.409)                (0.284)                (0.286)                (0.288)
        Definitional Refinement                                                                                          0.012
                                                                                                                        (0.116)
         Definitional Expansion                                                                                          0.036
                                                                                                                        (0.095)
                Constant                       -15,042.65***          -16,648.32***          -16,592.71***          -16,030.81***
                                                 (3,402.43)             (2,026.30)             (2,064.77)             (2,387.84)

     State Fixed/Random Effects                      FE                     RE                     RE                     FE

                R-squared                           0.809                    .                      .                    0.808
                F-statistic                         64.04                    .                      .                    81.98
                    n                                224                    319                    319                    319

Two-sided t-tests with robust standard errors: *** 99% significance level; ** 95% significance level; *90% significance level

Note: Thirty-three states are included in the analysis, state fixed effects (FE) or random effects (RE) are used for all Models, as
noted.
                     TABLE 3: Total Lobbying Expenditures By Interest Group Category


                                Firm               Trade               Union          Government          Membership

         Idaho               $633,994           $1,485,494           $44,107              $5,801            $199,406
                             254.30%             595.83%             17.69%               2.33%              79.98%

        Indiana            $22,010,043         $16,029,121         $1,191,370          $2,101,832          $1,430,810
                            465.92%             339.31%             25.22%              44.49%              30.29%

      Kentucky             $15,278,490         $14,228,288          $939,042            $721,506           $1,031,886
                            567.46%             528.45%              34.88%              26.80%             38.33%

      Maryland             $81,621,524         $59,099,302         $1,798,775          $1,688,856          $9,423,215
                            632.19%             457.75%             13.93%              13.08%              72.99%

       Montana              $3,370,952          $4,989,198          $309,407            $664,689           $1,045,513
                             166.91%             247.04%             15.32%              32.91%             51.77%

        Oregon             $41,586,521         $55,454,477         $4,954,661         $10,083,137          $8,154,618
                            179.31%             239.11%             21.36%              43.48%              35.16%

        Virginia           $28,298,970         $30,452,100          $785,144           $6,821,487          $6,138,544
                            205.88%             221.55%              5.71%              49.63%              44.66%

       Vermont             $10,361,286          $9,758,959          $360,064             $44,806           $3,648,474
                            255.62%              240.76%             8.88%                1.11%             90.01%

      Wisconsin            $71,416,329        $102,315,604         $7,814,127         $10,613,263         $14,008,523
                            220.18%             315.44%             24.09%              32.72%              43.19%



Note: Data is for all available years for each state. Firms and trade associations comprise on average 86% of lobbying
expenditures in every state, and no less than 80% of lobbying expenditures in any state.
 Table 4: Distribution of Total Lobbying Expenditures and Special Interest/PAC Expenditures at the
                                       Federal and State Level


                                                      Federal                                             State

                                         Lobbying                   PAC                    Lobbying           PAC/Special Interest

Corporations                               55%                      40%                       40%
                                                                                                                       62%
Trade Associations                         29%                      27%                       46%

Labor                                       6%                       9%                       2%                       16%

Issue/Ideology/Membership                   2%                      23%                       7%                       22%

Other                                       7%                       0%                       4%                        0%


Source: FEC (2001); Ansolabahere et al (2002); Author (2004), The Institute on Money in State Politics (2004)



Note: All federal lobbying data is for 1997-98 (average) lobbying expenditures. All federal PAC data is for 1996 and 1998 election
cycle PAC contributions. State lobbying data is for nine states as described in paper for all years available. All state special
interest/PAC data is for the same nine states in the paper for all years available. Totals may not add to 100% because of rounding.
                                  Table 5: State Level Lobby Expenditure by Group Category
         Dependent Variable: Log of Total Per Capita Lobbying Expenditures for each grouping for each state for each year


               Variable                       Model 9              Model 10              Model 11             Model 12           Model 13
                                                                    Trade                                                       Membership
                                               Firms             Associations              Union             Government           Groups


            Budget Year                       0.356**               0.251**                 0.325                0.409            0.612*
                                              (0.133)               (0.119)                (0.324)              (0.466)           (0.333)

          Regular Session                      0.122                 0.431*                 1.588                0.300             0.088
                                              (0.225)                (0.238)               (1.242)              (1.008)           (0.661)

          Special Session                      0.098                  0.233                 0.235                -0.062            0.057
                                              (0.150)                (0.160)               (0.212)              (0.203)           (0.187)

            Election Year                      -0.446                 -0.251                1.266                -0.636            -0.793
                                              (0.407)                (0.423)               (1.101)              (0.722)           (0.579)

      Size of House Majority                   -0.655                 -0.645                -1.732               0.471             -0.908
                                              (1.464)                (1.428)               (2.883)              (5.651)           (2.790)

      Size of Senate Majority                  -1.256                 -0.102                -0.505               1.571             -2.962
                                              (1.240)                (1.356)               (1.961)              (2.781)           (2.667)

        Unified Government                     0.157                  0.224                 0.265              0.810***            0.234
                                              (0.217)                (0.196)               (0.258)             (0.226)            (0.316)

        Democratic Unified                     -0.274               -0.387*                 -0.051               -0.626            -0.405
                                              (0.242)               (0.225)                (0.647)              (0.657)           (0.349)

      Ln(Per Capita Income)                    6.131                  1.236                 -2.377               -2.548            9.250
                                              (4.874)                (4.570)               (8.253)              (8.643)           (8.398)

                 Year                          16.282                -20.508              -119.605              -9.621            -25.853
                                              (34.535)              (34.841)              (79.870)             (95.724)          (56.078)

                Year2                          -0.004                 0.005                  0.03                0.002             0.006
                                              (0.009)                (0.009)               (0.020)              (0.024)           (0.014)

   Session Year * Election Year                0.476                  0.263                 -1.161               0.747             1.005
                                              (0.424)                (0.441)               (1.224)              (1.073)           (0.768)

              Constant                       -16,266.07            20,435.98            119,343.70            9,501.36           25,817.80
                                            (34,502.95)           (34,819.60)           (79,732.60)          (95,595.75)        (56,019.44)

        State Fixed Effects                      FE                    FE                    FE                   FE                FE

              R-squared                        0.932                  0.905                 0.876                0.938             0.883
                  n                              53                     53                    53                   53                53



Two-sided t-tests with robust standard errors: *** 99% significance level; ** 95% significance level; *90% significance level

Note: Nine states are included in the analysis; state fixed effects (FE) are used in all models.
               TABLE 6: Classification of Issue Areas

        Budgetary and Regulatory                       Primarily Regulatory

                 Agriculture                                Banking
                Construction                               Civil Rights
                 Education                              Communications
                Environment                                  Energy
                    Health                                 Gambling*
                   Indians                              Good Government
                  Pharma*                                     Guns
               Police and Fire                                Hotel
               Transportation                              Insurance
                   Welfare                                     Law
                                                         Manufacturing
                                                          Real Estate*
                                                            Religion
                                                           Resources
                                                            Services
                                                         Small Business
                                                            Smokes*
                                                             Spirits*
                                                             Sports
                                                             Utilities
                                                            Women


* indicates also a "hidden" issue (see text for full explanation)
                                      Table 7: State Level Lobby Expenditure by Issue Area
         Dependent Variable: Log of Total Per Capita Lobbying Expenditures for each issue area for each state for each year


                    Variable                                  Model 14                          Model 15                          Model 16
                                                       Budget and Regulatory
                                                              Issues                 Primarily Regulatory Issues                Hidden Groups


                  Budget Year                                  0.331**                          0.409***                              0.386
                                                               (0.149)                          (0.110)                              (0.265)

               Regular Session                                   0.325                            0.421                               0.055
                                                                (0.391)                          (0.258)                             (0.521)

                Special Session                                  0.145                           0.154**                              0.037
                                                                (0.103)                          (0.069)                             (0.135)

                 Election Year                                  -0.683*                           -0.301                              -0.086
                                                                (0.377)                          (0.224)                             (0.379)

            Size of House Majority                               -0.409                           -0.714                              -2.578
                                                                (1.218)                          (0.963)                             (2.350)

            Size of Senate Majority                              -1.483                           0.104                               -1.199
                                                                (1.084)                          (0.874)                             (1.568)

             Unified Government                                0.382***                         0.265***                              0.161
                                                               (0.147)                          (0.089)                              (0.196)

              Democratic Unified                                 -0.398                         -0.350**                              -0.524
                                                                (0.252)                          (0.165)                             (0.337)

            Ln(Per Capita Income)                               6.637*                            0.570                               4.572
                                                                (3.767)                          (2.714)                             (6.182)

                      Year                                    -60.883**                          -1.692                               14.654
                                                               (28.655)                         (21.012)                             (44.034)

                      Year2                                    0.015**                            0.001                               -0.004
                                                               (0.007)                           (0.005)                             (0.011)

        Session Year * Election Year                            0.749*                            0.383                               0.173
                                                                (0.434)                          (0.273)                             (0.522)

                    Constant                                 60,789.12**                        1,616.30                          -14,700.10
                                                             (28,622.71)                       (20,981.02)                       (43,984.64)

         State or Issue Fixed Effects                    State and Issue FE               State and Issue FE               State and Issue FE

                   R-squared                                     0.74                             0.80                                 0.63
                       n                                         528                              1074                                 261

Two-sided t-tests with robust standard errors: *** 99% significance level; ** 95% significance level; *90% significance level

Note: Nine states are included in the analysis; state fixed effects (FE) and issue area fixed effects (FE) are used in all models.
                                          APPENDIX: Variable Definitions and Sources

                                 Equal to the Log of Annual Per Capita State Aggregate Lobbying Expenditures (Ethics Commission of Each
Ln(State Lobby Exp Per Capita)
                                 State where data is available; includes 33 states. Most data is obtain from official disclosures provided.)


                                 Categorization of each interest group into each of five categories: corporate, trade association, membership
         Categories
                                 organization, union, and government; for each state for each year. (Ethics Commission of Each State where
                                 data is available; includes 9 states. Most data is obtain from official disclosures provided. N > 35,000)


                                 Categorization of each interest group into 24 issue areas as defined by Wolak et al (2004). We create eight
                                 additional categories which more finely define the issues. For interest groups with missing data, we conduct a
         Issue Areas
                                 web search to determine to which category the group belongs. (Ethics Commission of Each State where data is
                                 available; includes 9 states. Most data is obtain from official disclosures provided. N > 35,000. Professor David
                                 Lowery provided the categorization data from this website; used in Wolak et al (2004))

                                 Equal to 1 if the state budget is legally mandated to be created in the year; 0 otherwise. (National Council of
         Budget Year
                                 State Legislatures (NCSL))


       Budget Amount             Equal to Log of the Per Capita amount of budget in years that Budget Year = 1; Equal to 10% of budget in years
                                 that Budget Year = 0. See Footnote 9 for a precise definition. (Statistical Abstract of the United States)

       Regular Session           Equal to 1 if the legislature is in regular session that year; = 0 otherwise. (NCSL)


       Special Session
                                 Equal to 1 if the legislature meets in special session in that year; = 0 otherwise (Book of the States and NCSL)

                                 Equal to 1 if the legislature meets in long (short) session in that year; = 0 otherwise (Book of the States and
    Long (Short) Session
                                 NCSL)

        Election Year            Equal to 1 if the legislature holds regularly scheduled election in that year; = 0 otherwise (NCSL)

        Budget Caps              Equal to 1 if the state has budget caps; = 0 otherwise (Professor David Primo, data used in Primo, 2003)

                                 Equal to 1 if the state has legislative term limits; = 0 otherwise (Professor Jeff Milyo, data used in Primo and
         Term Limits             Milyo 2004)

                                 Equal to 1 if the legislators in the state have full time professional committee staff; = 0 otherwise (Book of the
      Professional Staff
                                 States)

     Senate (House) Size         The number of seats in the state senate (house) (ICPSR and updated by Book of the States)

                                 The percentage of legislators that must vote for an override of the governor's veto in a given state (Book of the
        Veto Override
                                 States)

                                 Equal to 1 if the a statute must be passed to override a regulatory agency in a state; = 0 otherwise (Book of the
      Admin Review Std
                                 States)

                                 Equal to 1 if the House, Senate and Governorship is held by the same party in a state; = 0 otherwise (Book of
     Unified Government
                                 the States)

                                 Equal to 1 when the Unified Government variable = 1 AND the it is a Democratic Party unification; = 0 otherwise
     Democratic Unified
                                 (Book of the States)

                                 Log of Per Capita Personal Income of the State in a given year (Bureau of Economic Analysis, Department of
    Ln(Per Capita Income)
                                 Commerce (BEA))

        Ln(Population)           Log of Population of the State (Census and BEA)

            Year                 Year


         Expansion               Equal to 1 if the lobbying disclosure law in the state in a given year includes gifts to legislators, non-campaign
                                 contributions to legislators, or broad definitions of legislative influence; = 0 otherwise (Book of the States)

                                 Equal to 1 if the lobbying disclosure law in the state in a give year includes disclosure of source of funds, source
         Refinement
                                 of compensation, or categorization of lobbying activities; = 0 otherwise (Book of the States)
