                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             THE COSTS OF ENTRENCHED BOARDS

                                             Lucian Bebchuk
                                              Alma Cohen

                                          Working Paper 10587
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10587


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2004




We are grateful to Rajesh Aggarwal, John Coates, Rob Daines, Allen Ferrell, Julian Franks, Jack Jacobs,
Guhan Subramanian, Manuel Trajtenberg, Belen Villalonga, David Yermack, and participants in seminars
and conferences at Harvard, London Business School, Yale School of Management, Fordham, Virginia, and
the American Law and economics Annual meeting, for their valuable suggestions. We also wish to thank
Andrew Metrick for providing us with data. We benefited from the financial support of the NBER, the
Harvard John M. Olin Center for Law, Economics, and Business, the BSI-Gamma Foundation, and the
Nathan Cummins Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Lucian Bebchuk and Alma Cohen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
The Costs of Entrenched Boards
Lucian Bebchuk and Alma Cohen
NBER Working Paper No. 10587
June 2004
JEL No. G30, G34, K22
                                           ABSTRACT

This paper investigates empirically how the value of publicly traded firms is overall affected by

arrangements protecting management from removal. A majority of U.S. public companies have

staggered boards that substantially insulate the board from removal via a hostile takeover or a proxy

contest. We find that staggered boards are associated with an economically significant reduction in

firm value (as measured by Tobin’s Q). We also find evidence consistent with staggered boards’

bringing about, and not merely reflecting, a lower firm value. Finally, the correlation with reduced

firm value is stronger for staggered boards established in the corporate charter (which shareholders

cannot amend) than for staggered boards established in the company’s bylaws (which can be

amended by shareholders).




Lucian Bebchuk                             Alma Cohen
Harvard Law School                         Analysis Group and
1557 Massachusetts Avenue                  Harvard Law School
Cambridge, MA 02138                        John M. Olin Center for Law, Economics, and Business
and NBER                                   acohen@analysisgroup.com
bebchuk@law.harvard.edu




                                                 3
1. Introduction
         The desirability of protecting the boards of publicly traded companies from
removal by shareholders has long been the subject of much debate. Does the threat of
removal benefit shareholders by discouraging incumbents from shirking, engaging in
empire-building, extracting private benefits, and rejecting attractive acquisition offers?
Or does the threat of removal reduce shareholder value by distracting management,
distorting its decisions by introducing a short-term bias, and weakening incumbents’
bargaining position in negotiated sales? These questions are undoubtedly among the
most important in corporate governance. The debate in the 1950s about proxy contests,
the debates during the 1980s and 1990s about takeover defenses, and the current debate
on shareholder access to the corporate ballot have all focused to a large extent on this
issue.
         The extent to which the boards of US public firms are insulated from removal
critically depends on whether they have, as a majority of them do, a staggered board. A
staggered board can prevent shareholders from replacing a majority of the board of
directors without the passage of at least two annual elections. It thus makes it much
more difficult to gain control of a company either in a stand-alone proxy contest or in a
hostile takeover.
         Staggered boards have been encountering growing resistance from institutional
investors during the past decade (Bebchuk (2003), Klausner (2003)). Since the early
1990s, shareholders of existing public companies have been reluctant to approve
charter amendments (that would establish a staggered board (IRRC (2002)).
Furthermore, shareholders have increasingly been voting in favor of advisory
resolutions that recommend dismantling existing staggered boards. Such resolutions
regularly obtain support from a majority of the shareholders (Georgeson Shareholder
(2002)).
         But staggered boards also continue to have many defenders (e.g., Koppes,
Ganske, and Haag (1999)). Boards commonly elect not to follow precatory shareholder
resolutions against charter provisions establishing a staggered board. Defenders of




                                            1
staggered boards stress that staggered boards provide boards with stability and
insulation from short-term pressures that are necessary for them to operate well.
       Participants in the long-standing debate over protecting boards from removal
have identified many ways in which such protection can affect firm value. Such
protection can affect the probability of an acquisition, the expected premium in the
event of an acquisition, and, most importantly perhaps, the ex ante behavior of
management. The overall desirability of such protection depends on the aggregate
impact of all of these effects on expected shareholder value. Thus, to shed light on the
desirability of defenses, one strategy that empirical work can pursue is to investigate
separately each of these effects. An alternative strategy, which we pursue in this paper,
is to study how firms’ market value is overall affected by protection from removal.
       We study the association between staggered boards and market value during the
period 1995-2002. By 1995, the legal rules that give staggered boards their protective
powers were firmly in place. Our data set is based on the companies followed by the
Investor Responsibility Research Center (IRRC), which publishes data about the
governance provisions of all the companies in the S&P 500, as well as many other
companies of significance.
       We find that, controlling for firm characteristics including other governance
provisions, staggered boards are associated with a reduced firm value. The association
between staggered boards and firm value is not only statistically significant but also
economically meaningful.
       As is often the case with respect to identified correlations between governance
arrangements and firm value, simultaneity issues complicate the interpretation of our
findings. One possible interpretation is that staggered boards lead to a reduction in firm
value. But there are two other interpretations that do not involve such a causal link:
First, the association might have been produced by the selection of staggered boards by
firms that have a low value and seek to protect themselves from a takeover. Second, the
association might have been produced by the selection of such arrangements by
managements with characteristics that also lead to lower value; for example, self-




                                            2
serving incumbents might both seek protection from removal and produce lower share
value.1
          We investigate below the question whether the association between staggered
boards and firm value reflects at least partly a negative effect that such staggered
boards have on firm value. In exploring this question, we use the fact that, since the
beginning of the 1990s, shareholders of existing public companies have generally been
unwilling to approve charter amendments that establish a staggered board in companies
where one did not exist already. As a result, whether pre-1990 firms had a staggered
board at the end of the studied period depended substantially on whether they already
had one in 1990.
          Focusing on firms that went public prior to 1990 (which constitute a majority of
the firms in our database), we find a negative correlation between their market values
during 1995-2002 and whether they had a staggered board in 1990. Furthermore, and
importantly, such correlation remains (though with weaker magnitude) when we
control for firm value in 1990. This correlation is consistent with staggered boards
having a negative effect on firm value.
          In addition to identifying the association between staggered boards and market
values, our research provides an insight into the features that drive the correlation
between low firm value and a broad index of management-favoring provisions
followed by the IRRC. In a recent important study, Gompers, Ishii and Metrick (2003)
constructed an index based on twenty-four management-favoring provisions followed
by the IRRC. This study found a correlation between a larger number of such
provisions and a lower firm value, but it did not identify which provisions were
especially responsible for the identified correlation. We extend this work by finding,
controlling for other governance provisions, that staggered boards have a strong effect
on market value and that their effect is several times larger than the average effect of
other provisions in the constructed index. Thus, staggered boards are an important
driver of the identified correlation between firm value and a broad governance index.
1
  To be sure, these two interpretations hardly imply a favorable view of staggered boards. But to
the extent that they account for the association between staggered boards and firm value, this
association cannot serve as evidence that staggered boards harm shareholders.


                                               3
       Finally, we find some evidence that the extent to which staggered boards are
associated with negative firm value depends on whether they are established in the
corporate charter or in the company bylaws. While most staggered boards are
established in the firm’s charter, which shareholders cannot amend, about 10% of
staggered boards are established in the firm’s bylaws. Because shareholders may
amend their company’s bylaws, bylaws-based staggered boards do not provide boards
with the same protection from removal by determined shareholders that is provided by
charter-based staggered boards. Separating between charter-based staggered boards and
bylaws-based staggered boards, we find evidence that the latter are not negatively
correlated with firm value in the same way as the former.
       Our analysis is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the legal and
institutional background, the questions we seek to examine, and the prior work on our
subject. Section 3 describes our data, and Section 4 describes our results. Section 5
concludes.

2. Background, Motivation, and Prior Work


2.1 The Key Role of Staggered Boards in Entrenching Incumbents
       There are two ways in which boards may be removed. One is a stand-alone
proxy fight in which a rival team seeks to replace the current incumbents but continues
to run the firm as a stand-alone entity. Alternatively, a board may be removed as a
result of a hostile takeover in which an outside buyer purchases a controlling block.
Either way, the ease with which directors can be removed greatly depends on whether
the company has a staggered board.
       U.S. companies can have either a unitary board or a staggered board. In firms
with a unitary board, all directors stand for election each year. In firms with a staggered
board, directors are grouped into classes, with one class of directors standing for
election at each annual meeting of shareholders. Typically, a staggered board has three
classes of directors, which in most states of incorporation is the largest number of
classes permitted by state corporate law.



                                            4
        Staggered boards make winning control via a stand-alone proxy contest more
difficult because they require a rival team to win two elections to gain control.
Challengers considering running a stand-alone proxy contest already face considerable
impediments (Bebchuk and Hart (2002)), and having to win two elections one-year
apart makes the task more difficult. The need to win two such elections requires more
resources and willingness to wait on the part of the challengers. Furthermore, it could
also make shareholders more reluctant to vote for a dissident group the first time
around, knowing that election of its slate would lead to a divided board for the next
year and that the dissident group would not be able to gain control for another year, by
which time some of the issues raised by the dissidents might be moot.
        Staggered boards also have a major impact on the prospect of a hostile takeover
because of the way in which the law of defensive tactics has developed. Prior to the
development and adoption of the poison pill defense, staggered boards were considered
a mild takeover defense because they did not impede the acquisition of a control block.
The development and acceptance of the poison pill, however, transformed the market
for control. As long as a poison pill is in place, it practically prevents a hostile bidder
from purchasing a majority of the target’s shares.2
        In the late 1980’s and early 1990’s, court decisions in Delaware and pill
endorsement statutes in other states provided incumbents with substantial freedom to
maintain a pill indefinitely and thus block a hostile offer as long as they are in office. In
Delaware, the 1990 Time decision by the Delaware Supreme Court signaled
willingness to permit managers to “just say no,” and the 1995 Unitrin decision by the
Delaware Supreme Court substantially solidified managers power to do so indefinitely.
Applying Delaware law, a 1995 decision in Walace Computer permitted incumbents


2
   Pills consist of stock warrants or rights that allow the holder to buy an acquirer’s stock, the
target’s stock, or both, at a substantial discount from the market price. These rights only become
exercisable in the event that an acquirer buys more than a certain percentage of the target’s stock
(typically 10 or 15%) without the target board’s approval. These rights are explicitly not
exercisable by the acquiring person, so the resulting dilution in his voting power and economic
stake may make the acquisition of the target too expensive to pursue. The terms of poison pill
rights make the acquisition of control, and suffering the resulting dilution, a losing proposition for
the bidder as a practical matter.


                                                  5
protected by a staggered board to continue saying no even after the hostile bidder won
an election contest over one-third of the board seats. In other states, pill endorsement
statutes were adopted in the late 1980s and the early 1990s.
       Once the latitude to maintain pills indefinitely was firmly in place, a hostile
bidder’s main hope of acquiring the target over the objection of incumbents lay in the
possibility of replacing the incumbent directors. By placing an attractive offer on the
table, a hostile bidder can attempt to induce shareholders to replace the board with a
team of directors (usually nominated by the hostile bidder itself) that announce their
willingness to accept the offer. Thus, the extent to which incumbents are now protected
from a hostile takeover critically depends on how long and how difficult it would be to
replace the incumbents, and thus on whether a staggered board exists.
       In particular, by preventing a majority of directors from being replaced before
the passage of two annual elections, staggered boards impede hostile bidders in two
ways. First, the bidder cannot be assured of gaining control, no matter how attractive
the bidder’s offer is, without waiting a period that is at least a year and might exceed
two years; waiting so long might be rather costly for bidders that seek the target for
synergy reasons or to engage in long-range planning. Furthermore, making an
irrevocable offer that would be open for such a long period is quite costly to the bidder,
and without making such an offer shareholders would be reluctant to vote for the
bidder in the first election (Bebchuk and Hart (2002)). Indeed, there is evidence that, at
least since 1996 and probably also prior to it, no hostile bidder has ever persisted long
enough to win two elections (Bebchuk, Coates, and Subramanian (2003)).
       It should be noted that some staggered boards provide a weaker impediment to
replacement of the whole board at the next annual meeting than others. A minority of
staggered boards is not fully “effective” (Bebchuk, Coates, and Subramanian (2003)).
In this minority of cases, shareholders that are sufficiently determined to replace the
whole board may be able to do so for one of three reasons: (1) the staggered board is
established in the firm’s bylaws, which shareholders can typically amend, and not in
the charter, which shareholders cannot amend without board initiative; (2) the firm’s
charter does not prevent shareholders from “packing” the board by increasing the



                                            6
number of board seats and filling them; and (3) the firm’s charter and the law of the
firm’s state of incorporation do not take away from the shareholders the power to
remove directors “without cause.” Because we have data on whether staggered boards
are established in the bylaws or in the charter, we can separate from the set of
companies with staggered boards a subset of firms whose staggered boards provide a
less effective protection against removal by determined shareholders. This will enable
us to test whether more and less effective staggered boards exhibit different
correlations with lower firm value.
          Finally, the above analysis of the significance of staggered boards is supported
by recent evidence (Bebchuk, Coates, and Subramanian (2002, 2003)). This evidence
indicates that effective staggered boards are indeed a key factor that determines the
outcome of hostile bids. Such staggered boards are found to increase the odds of the
target’s remaining independent 12 months after a hostile bid from 31% to 64%, and it
has similarly dramatic effects on the odds of a target’s still remaining independent 30
months after receiving a hostile bid. Other defenses, such as pre-bid poison pills,
supermajority voting provisions, and fair price provisions, have much less significance
for the outcome of hostile bids.

2.2 The Question and the Research Strategy
          The above discussion indicates that, on both theoretical and empirical grounds,
the strength of directors’ protection from removal critically depends on whether the
firm has an effective staggered board. The question, however, is whether the protection
from removal provided by effective staggered boards overall has a positive or a
negative impact on firm value. The debate on the subject has been going on for the last
twenty-five years, with participants identifying many ways in which protection from
removal can affect value. 3




3
    For a recent survey of the work on this subject, see Bebchuk (2002).


                                                  7
        Simply put, the expected value of a given firm’s shares at a given point in time
is defined by:


                                                                        The expected value                                                  The expected      
                                                                                                                                 
                                         The probabilit y
            The firm' s
                                        that the firm will
                                                                         of the firm in the
                                                                                                              The prbability
                                                                                                                                                permium in
                                                                                                                                                                   
EV =       cash flow in
                               +                                  ×
                                                                       
                                                                           next period in the
                                                                                                     +       that the firm will
                                                                                                                                        ×
                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                 the event that
                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                             
                                         remain

                                                                                                                              
            the current                                                    event that it                       be acquired in                    the firm will
            period
                                    
                                         independen t
                                                                        remains independen t               the next period                  be acquired in    
                                                                                                                                                                
                                         in the next period
                                                                           in that period                                                        the next period



        Protecting incumbents from removal can affect each of the terms on the right
hand side of the above formula. Among other things, such protection has the following
effects:
        (i) Management behavior and incentives: Most importantly, protection from
removal can affect how incumbents run the firm, which in turn affects the current and
future profitability of the firm (and thus affecting elements (1) and (3) above). On the
one hand, protection might hurt shareholders by weakening the disciplinary threat of
removal and thereby increase shirking, empire-building, and extraction of private
benefits by incumbents (Manne (1965)). On the other hand, protection might benefit
shareholders by inducing management to invest in long-term projects (Stein (1988),
Bebchuk and Stole (1992)) and to avoid deadweight and inefficient actions that it might
otherwise undertake to reduce the likelihood of a takeover bid (Arlen and Talley
(2003)).
        (ii) The Probability of an Acquisition: Such protection might hurt shareholders
by enabling a self-serving management team to block a hostile acquisition in order to
retain management’s independence (Easterbrook and Fischel (1981)), and by
discouraging potential acquirers from searching for companies and making offers for
them (Grossman and Hart (1980)). However, protection from removal also might
provide benefits to shareholders by enabling loyal boards to reject an offer that
management’s private information suggests is inadequate (Lipton (1979)) and by
encouraging targets to search for beneficial opportunities to be acquired (Bebchuk
(1982)).



                                                                               8
        (iii) Acquisition premia: Protection from removal might help shareholders by
strengthening incumbents’ bargaining power and enabling them to extract higher
acquisition premia (Stulz (1988)). However, management might have significant
bargaining power even without protection from removal (Bebchuk (2002),
Subramanian (2003)) and, furthermore, incumbents might use whatever additional
power comes with such protection to extract side payments for themselves rather than
higher premia for shareholders (Bebchuk (2002), Hartzell, Ofek, and Yermack (2001)).
       One approach for an empirical investigation of the overall desirability of
protection from removal is to investigate each of the particular effects listed – e.g., the
effect on premia in acquisitions, the effect on the incidence of hostile acquisitions and
negotiated acquisitions, the effect on operating performance, the effect on empire-
building, and so forth and so on -- and then to aggregate them. Some prior work has
focused on some of the pieces needed for putting together the overall impact of
protection from removal. The difficulty with this approach is that it cannot resolve
whether the overall impact of protection from removal is positive or negative until we
identity and measure each of the different effects that protection has.
       An alternative strategy, which we use in this paper, is to focus on the effect that
protection from removal has on market values. To the extent that the market correctly
estimates the value of firms, the market-to-book ratio of firms should reflect EV, and
thus reflect the aggregate effect of defenses on shareholder interests.
       Our approach might be questioned on grounds that it seems to assume that the
market accurately assesses the consequences that staggered boards would have on
shareholders’ interests. In response, it might be suggested that it is plausible to assume
that, by the middle of the 1990s, the market had considerable experience with the
effects of staggered boards. More importantly, however, our approach can be useful
even if the market is not assumed to assess well the effects of staggered boards. Even
without such accurate assessment, the market might be able to directly assess various
aspects of management’s current and expected performance, such as its strategy, the
extent to which it has a tendency to engage in empire-building or extraction of private
benefits, and so forth. To the extent that the market estimates these elements of



                                            9
expected shareholder value correctly in forming the market price, the existence of
association between firm value and staggered boards would be significant.
        We shall therefore test below the hypothesis that staggered boards are
associated with lower market value. We shall also test whether this effect is smaller or
non-existent for staggered boards that are bylaws-based and thus provide relatively
ineffective protection against removal.


2.3 Prior Empirical Work
        Although significant reservations have been expressed with respect to the use of
event studies in this area (see, e.g, Gompers, Ishii, and Metrick (2003)), a significant
number of event studies was done to investigate the changes in stock prices that
accompanied the passage of state antitakeover statutes (see, e.g., Karpoff and Malatesta
(1989), and see Gartman (2000) for a survey of this body of work).4 It is worth noting
that most state anti-takeover statutes are not the key determinant of the level of
protection from removal that management enjoys in any given company. All the
impediments established by standard state antitakeover statutes can be overcome if a
hostile bidder can get shareholders to replace the incumbent board. Thus, even when a
firm’s state of incorporation has all five standard antitakeover statutes, incumbents
have relatively limited protection from removal if the corporate charter does not
establish a staggered board. Recent evidence indeed indicates that a target’s state of
incorporation is not a key determinant of the outcome of hostile offers (Bebchuk,
Coates, and Subramanian (2003)).5


4
  In addition to the above event studies, there is also work that finds that the passage of state
antitakeover statutes increased management’s tendency to take actions favorable to it such as
making executive compensation schemes less performance-sensitive (e.g., Bertrand and
Mullainathan (1999, 2003)).
5
  More telling could be current work in progress by Robert Daines who is studying the effect of the
1991 passage of Massachusetts’ antitakeover statute. In a talk on this project at the meeting of the
American Law and Economics Association (“Do Staggered Boards Affect Firm Value? Takeover
Defenses After the Poison Pill”), Daines presented preliminary findings suggesting that this statute
had negative effects on the stock prices of Massachusetts firms. Such findings would nicely
complement our results. Swartz (1998) presents some results on this subject that are somewhat
difficult to interpret.


                                                10
       Another set of studies examines how the adoption of a poison pill affected stock
prices (see, e.g., Ryngaert (1988)). The stock price reaction to the adoption of a pill,
however, reflects not only the expected effect of the pill but also inferences that
investors draw as to management’s private information about the likelihood of a bid
(Coates (2000)). Furthermore, and most importantly for our purposes, having a pill in
place cannot be expected to affect substantially the extent to which incumbents are
protected form removal (Coates (2000)). Virtually all firms can put a poison pill in
place after a hostile bid has been launched – a “morning after pill” – without the need
for a shareholder vote; thus, boards that do not have a pill at any given point in time do
still enjoy the protection of a “shadow” or “off-the-shelf” pill. Furthermore, as
explained, once a bid is launched, the extent to which a pill can protect against the bid
depends on the extent to which the firm’s charter protects the board from being voted
out by shareholders.
       Garvey and Hanka (1999), Johnson and Rao (1997), and Borokohovich,
Brunarski, and Parrino (1997) study the effects that antitakeover charter provisions
have on various aspects of corporate performance. However, they lump together
effective staggered boards, which we predict to have significant effects, with other
antitakeover arrangements, such as fair price arrangements, which theory predicts
should have only mild or insignificant effects. Indeed, in the modern landscape of
takeover contests, provisions like fair price arrangements are largely irrelevant. With
incumbents permitted to maintain poison pills, hostile bidders cannot purchase a
controlling block without first replacing incumbents with a board willing to accept the
offer, and fair price arrangements generally do not apply to takeover bids approved by
the board. The above studies also rely in part on data from the 1980’s, i.e., prior to the
legal developments that permitted incumbents to maintain pills indefinitely and thus
gave effective staggered boards their anti-takeover potency.
       Bebchuk, Coates, and Subramanian (2002, 2003) do study the effects of
effective staggered boards using data from recent years. But these studies focus only on
a subset of the effects that such defenses have on shareholder value. In particular, these
studies find that effective staggered boards have a negative effect on shareholder



                                           11
returns after a hostile bid is made (Bebchuk, Coates, and Subramanian (2002, 2003)).
We supplement this work, whose findings are consistent with others, by investigating
the overall impact that effective staggered boards have on shareholders.
       Finally, in a recent study that our results complement, Gompers, Ishii, and
Metrick (2003) identify substantial correlation between firm value during the 1990s
and a broad-based index (G) of twenty four management-favoring provisions. Their
index includes staggered boards as one of its twenty four elements. The study does not
attempt to isolate the effects of any given provision, and it thus does not identify which
arrangements are especially responsible for the association between the G index and
lower firm value.
       There are reasons to expect some of the provisions in the G index to matter
much more than others, and to expect some of the provisions to be, at least partly, a
product of the others. For example, business combination statutes, control-share
acquisition laws, and fair price provisions – three elements of the G index – are
protections introduced largely during the 1980s and made largely redundant by the
subsequent development of the poison pill (Bebchuk, Coates, and Subramanian
(2003)). In terms of endogeneity, some of the arrangements forming the G index (e.g.,
change-in-control provisions in compensation contracts) can be unilaterally installed by
incumbent directors without shareholder approval. Whether incumbents adopt such
provisions might depend on how insulated management is by other arrangements, such
as the existence of charter-based staggered boards, that incumbents cannot adopt
without shareholder approval.
       Our study complements the Gompers-Ishii-Metrick study by looking inside the
box of the governance index to identify the effect of the staggered board element of this
index. We study the correlation between firm value and this provision controlling for
all the other governance provisions in the governance index. Our hypothesis is that
staggered boards, especially charter-based staggered boards, make a substantial
contribution to the negative correlation between the broad governance index and low
firm value that the Gompers-Ishii-Metrick study identified.




                                           12
3. The Data


3.1 Sources
       Our focus is on the correlation between firm value and staggered boards during
the period 1995-2002. As explained earlier, and as discussed in detail by Subramanian
(2004), the legal rules that made effective staggered boards so powerful were firmly in
place by 1995.
       The data set includes all the companies for which there was information in one
of the volumes published by the Investor Responsibility Research Center (IRRC)
during the period 1995-2002. The IRRC published volumes in 1995, 1998, 2000, and
2002. Each volume includes between 1,400 and 1,800 firms, with some changes in the
list of included firms from volume to volume. In any given year of publication, the
firms in the IRRC volume accounted for more than 90% of the total capitalization of
the U.S. stock market.
       The IRRC volumes provide data, now largely available at WRDS, about various
corporate governance provisions for each included company, as well as the company’s
state of incorporation. The IRRC data that is electronically available at WRDS
indicates whether each company has a staggered board but does not distinguish
(following Gompers-Ishii-Metrick (2003)) between charter-based and bylaws-based
staggered boards. However, the information whether a staggered board is established in
the charter or in the bylaws is provided in the IRRC volumes themselves, and we had it
hand-coded.
       Because IRRC did not publish volumes in each year, we filled in for missing
years by assuming that the governance provisions reported in any given year were in
place also in the year preceding the volume’s publication. In the case of 1996, for
which there was no IRRC volume in the subsequent year, we assumed that the
governance provisions were the same as reported in the IRRC volume published in
1995. We verified that using a different “filling” method does not change the results.




                                           13
       Data about firm financials was taken from Compustat. Data about the age of
firms was taken from the dataset of Gompers-Ishii-Metric, who in turn estimated it
based on the first date for which pricing information about a firm is available on CRSP.
       We excluded firms with a dual class structure, where the holding of superior
voting rights might be the key for entrenching incumbents. We also excluded real
estate investment trusts (REITs), which have their own special governance structure
and entrenching devices. Our dataset includes both financial and nonfinancial firms;
running our regressions on a subset including only nonfinancial firms (as done by
Daines (2001)) yields similar results throughout.


3.2. Summary Statistics
       Table 1 provides summary statistics for the percentage of firms with staggered
boards, charter-based staggered boards, and bylaws-based staggered boards in our data.
Throughout the period 1995-2002, the percentage of firms in our dataset that have a
staggered board was about 60%. Among the staggered boards, a small minority –
between 9% and 12% -- were established in the firm’s bylaws rather than in the firm’s
charter.

                       Table 1: Incidence of Staggered Board

                Year       Staggered       Charter-based   Bylaws-based
                           Board           Staggered       Staggered Board
                                           Board
                1995       61.4%           54.0%           7.4%

                1998       59.0%           53.5%           5.5%

                2000       60.3%           54.5%           5.8%

                2002       61.6%           54.9%           6.7%




       Let us now provide some summary statistics about the incidence of staggered
boards in different subsets of our data, focusing on firms in 2002 (the picture is similar
for earlier years). Figure 1 and Figure 2 depict the presence of staggered boards in



                                           14
different subsets of the data defined by market capitalization and firm age. As these
two figures indicate, when we divide firms into different segments by market
capitalization (Figure 1) and age (Figure 2), staggered boards have a substantial
presence in each segment.6

         Figure 1: Staggered Board Incidence and Market Capitalization

             80.00%



             70.00%



             60.00%



             50.00%


                                                                                                                                                     Bylaw
             40.00%
                                                                                                                                                     SB-Charter
             30.00%



             20.00%



             10.00%



              0.00%
                          10            20         30          40          50           60          70          80          90          100

                                                             Percentile of Market Value


         Figure 2: Staggered Board Incidence among Different Cohorts

               70.00%



               60.00%



               50.00%



               40.00%
                                                                                                                                                      Bylaw

               30.00%
                                                                                                                                                      SB-Charter


               20.00%



               10.00%



               0.00%
                        Went public bef ore t he Went public in t he 60's Went public in t he 70's Went public in t he 80's Went public in 1990 or
                                 60's                                                                                               lat er

                                                        Period in w hich Firm Went Public



6
  When we divided firms into groups based on industry sectors, we found that staggered boards
have a large presence in each industry sector. Gillan, Hartzell, and Starks (2003) report that the
incidence of many governance provisions varies greatly among industries, but this variance appears
to be lower for staggered boards than for many other provisions.


                                                                                15
       Figures 1 and 2 also indicate that staggered boards that are bylaws-based exist
in each of the firm groups. However, the fraction of staggered boards that are bylaws-
based tends to be smaller among firms with lower market capitalization and among
firms that went public in the past one or two decades.
       About 60% of the firms in our dataset are incorporated in Delaware. As Figure 3
indicates, the percentage of staggered boards is the same among both Delaware and
non-Delaware firms. However, the fraction of staggered boards that are bylaws-based
is somewhat smaller among Delaware firms than among non-Delaware firms.

               Figure 3: Staggered Board Incidence among Delaware
                           and Non-Delaware Companies

           80.00%



           70.00%



           60.00%



           50.00%


                                                                             Bylaw
           40.00%
                                                                             SB-Charter
           30.00%



           20.00%



           10.00%



           0.00%
                          Non-Delaware                            Delaware

                                         State of Incorporation




4. Results


4.1. The Association between Staggered Boards and Firm Value
       In studying the association between staggered boards and firm value, we use
Tobin’s Q as the measure of firm value. In doing so we follow earlier work on the
association between corporate arrangements and firm value (Demsetz and Lehn (1985),
Morck, Shleifer and Vishny (1988), McConnell and Servaes (1990), Lang and Stulz
(1994), Yermack (1996), Daines (2001), and LaPorta et al. (2001)).


                                                 16
        We use the definition of Q used by Kaplan and Zingales (1997), Gompers, Ishii,
and Metrick (2003) and others. According to this specification, Q is equal to the market
value of assets divided by the book value of assets, where the market value of assets is
computed as the book value of assets plus the market value of common stock less the
sum of book value of common stock and balance sheet deferred taxes.7 Our dependent
variable is industry-adjusted Tobin’s Q, which is a firm’s Q minus the median Q in the
firm’s industry in the observation year. We defined a firm’s industry by the firm’s 2-
digit primary SIC code. Using the Fama-French classification of industry groups, rather
than SIC two-digit codes, yields similar results.
        We ran four regressions. In all of the regressions, we included all the controls
used by Gompers, Ishii, and Metrick: the assets of the firm (in logs), the age of the firm
(in logs) (Shin and Stulz (2000)), whether the firm is incorporated in Delaware,
dummies for 2-digit SIC codes, and year fixed effects. In some regressions we included
additional controls as detailed below. In all the regressions (as well as in subsequent
regressions) we used White (1980) robust standard errors to account for potential
heteroskedasticity.
        Our first regression included only the controls listed in the preceding paragraph,
and their results are displayed in Table 2, column 1. As the table indicates, staggered
boards are associated, at 99% confidence, with a lower firm value. This is the case for
both the longer period and the more recent period.




7
  This measure, and simpler ones that drop deferred taxes, have been regularly used in light of the
complexities involved in the more sophisticated measures of Q and the evidence of very high
correlation between this proxy and more sophisticated measures (see, e.g, Chung and Pruitt
(1994)).


                                                17
                               Table 2: Staggered Boards and Firm Value
This table reports pooled OLS regressions of industry-adjusted Tobin’s Q on staggered boards and various controls. Tobin’s Q is the
ratio of the market value of assets and the book value of assets, where the market value of assets is computed as book value of assets
plus the market value of common stock less the sum of book value of common stock and balance sheet deferred taxes. Industry-adjusted
Tobin’s Q is equal to Tobin’s Q minus the median Tobin’s Q in the industry, where industry is defined by two-digit SIC code. The
staggered board dummy is equal 1 if the firm has a staggered board provision and 0 otherwise. The other provisions index is equal to the
G Index (Gompers-Ishii-Metrick (2003)) minus 1 if the company has a staggered board and equal to the G index otherwise. Insider
Ownership I is equal to the fraction of shares held by insiders if this fraction is below 0.05 and 0.05 otherwise. Insider Ownership II is
equal to 0 if the fraction of shares owned by insiders is below 0.05, equal to this fraction minus 0.05 if this fraction is between 0.05 and
0.25, and equal to 0.20 otherwise. Insider ownership III is equal to zero if this fraction is below 0.25 and to this fraction minus 0.25
otherwise. ROA is the ratio of net income to total assets. CAPEX/assets is the ratio of capital expenditures to assets. R&D / Sales is the
ratio of research and development expenditures to total sales. Year dummies and a dummy indicating when R& D data is missing are
included in all regressions, but their coefficients (as well as the constant) are omitted. OLS estimates are White (1980) robust. Standards
errors appear in parentheses and levels. Levels of significance are indicated by *, **, and *** for 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.



                   Variable                                      (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)

                   Staggered Board                            -0.21***       -0.166***      -0.169***       -0.173***
                                                               (0.034)        (0.036)         (0.035)        (0.044)
                                                                                      ***
                   Index of Other Provisions                                 -0.024                          -0.013
                                                                              (0.006)                         (0.01)
                                                                                                      ***
                   Log(Index of Other                                                       -0.179
                   Provisions)
                                                                                              (0.058)
                   Log(Assets)                                    0            0.003          0.003         -0.05***
                                                               (0.009)        (0.009)         (0.009)        (0.014)
                                                                       ***            ***             ***
                   Log(Company Age)                          -0.168          -0.147         -0.148          -0.234***
                                                               (0.023)        (0.023)         (0.023)        (0.032)
                   Delaware Incorporation                       0.02           0.016          0.016          -0.013
                                                               (0.031)        (0.031)         (0.031)         (0.04)
                   Insider Ownership I                                                                      -0.025*
                                                                                                             (0.015)
                   Insider Ownership II                                                                     0.029***
                                                                                                             (0.009)
                   Insider Ownership III                                                                    -0.03***
                                                                                                             (0.008)
                   Return on Assets                                                                          0.028
                                                                                                             (0.029)
                   CAPEX / Assets                                                                           0.963***
                                                                                                             (0.325)
                   R&D / Sales                                                                                0.01
                                                                                                             (0.008)


           We next turn to controlling for corporate governance provisions other than
staggered boards. Staggered boards are correlated with a high G index, an index that
Gompers-Ishii-Metrick (2003) found to be is correlated with reduced firm value. Thus,
the question arises whether the identified correlation between staggered boards and



                                                                    18
lower firm value might be simply driven by other management-favoring provisions that
companies with staggered boards have.8
       To control for other governance provisions, we create an index of all the other
23 management-favoring provisions followed by IRRC. Essentially we divided the
corporate governance index G that was constructed by Gompers, Ishii, and Metrick
(2003) into two components – the staggered boards element and all the other provisions
in the index. G is constructed by adding one point for each management-favoring
provision (among the set of 24 possible management-favoring provisions) that a firm
has. Having a staggered board adds one point to the index. We therefore defined for
each firm a parameter labeled the Index of all Provisions (G*), which is equal to the
firm’s governance index G minus the contribution of the firm’s staggered board if any
– i.e., equal to G minus 1 if the firm has a staggered board and to G otherwise.
       Column 2 displays the results of a regression in which the Index of Other
Provisions is added as an independent variable. The Other Provisions Index is
significant at a 99% confidence level, consistent with the possibility that staggered
boards do not fully drive the correlation between higher G and lower firm value.
Notwithstanding the inclusion of the Index of Other Provisions G*, the coefficient of
staggered boards remains significant at a 99% confidence level.
       We should note that staggered boards are correlated not only with G but also
with the Index of Other Provisions G*. Staggered boards and G* have a stable positive
correlation of 0.32-0.36 during the period 1995-2002. Because the correlation between
staggered boards and G* introduces a problem of co-linearity, it might bias our results
against finding significance for either one of these parameters. Thus, even if the
introduction of G* had made the coefficients of staggered boards no longer significant,
it would not have eliminated the possibility that staggered boards are in fact significant.
We do not have to address this problem, however, because the coefficient of staggered



8
 In current work, Faleye (2004) finds that staggered boards are correlated with lower firm value,
obtaining results consistent with those reported in columns 1 and 5 of Table 2, but he does not
proceed to investigate whether staggered boards are significant controlling for other governance
provisions.


                                               19
boards remains negative and statistically significant despite the stacking of the deck
against such a finding.
        It should also be noted that the introduction of the Index G* reduces by about
20%-25% the magnitude of the coefficient of staggered boards. However, the
coefficient of staggered boards remains large and, in particular, is seven times larger
than the coefficient for an average one-point increase in G*. This result indicates that
staggered boards play a relatively large role compared with the average role of other
provisions included in the G index. It is worth noting that the distribution of G* is
somewhat concentrated, with about 80% of the firms located within a range of 7 index
points. This pattern is consistent with the possibility that staggered boards play a
relatively large role in the correlation between G and lower firm value.
        Column 3 of Table 2 displays the results of a regression in which log(G*) rather
than G* is used as a control. As this column indicates, using this different functional
form for G* produces similar results.9
        We next ran a regression with additional controls to those used by Gompers,
Ishii, and Metrick (2003) in their Q regressions. Specifically, we added controls for the
level of insider ownership (allowing, as is standard, for insider ownership to have
different effects below 5%, between 5% and 25%, and above 25%), the return on assets
in the current and prior year, and the ratio of capital expenses to total assets, the ration
of R&D expenditures to sales. The results are displayed in Column 4. They indicate
that, with the addition of these controls, the coefficient of staggered boards retains its
magnitude and 99% confidence.


9
  In unreported regressions we used, instead of G* or log(G*), a dummy variable indicating
whether the firm’s level of G* exceeds the median level (i.e., whether the firm is in the top half of
the firms in terms of G*). Staggered boards remain significant at 99% confidence. The coefficient
of staggered boards did not significantly change and was substantially higher than the coefficient
associated with being in the top half of firms in terms of G*. For the association with firm value,
having a staggered board appears to be significantly more consequential than being in the top rather
than the bottom half in terms of G*.
        In other unreported regressions, we used as controls dummies based on dividing the firms
in our dataset into smaller groups based on their levels of G*, including dividing these firms into
separate groups for each possible level of G*. None of these specifications had a substantial effect
on the magnitude and significance of the coefficient of charter-based staggered boards.


                                                 20
        It is worth noting that the coefficient of staggered boards is not only statistically
significant but also economically significant. During the period 1995-2002, and
controlling for other governance provisions, having a staggered boards is associated
with a Tobin’s Q that is lower by 17 points.
        As to the coefficients of the various controls we used, one that is worth noting is
the coefficient of Delaware incorporation. In all of the regressions whose results are
displayed in Table 2, the coefficient of Delaware incorporation is statistically
insignificant. The correlation between Delaware incorporations and firm value has
already attracted some attention because of its potential implications for the long-
standing debate on regulatory competition among states. Daines (2001) finds positive
association between firm value and Delaware incorporation during the period 1981-
1996. However, Bebchuk and Cohen (2003) find no such correlation in 1999, and
Subramanian (2004) finds that such association did not exist during the 1990s except
for small firms during the period of 1991-1996. But none of the above three studies
controls, as we do, for corporate governance provisions.
        For a robustness check, we also ran annual regressions.10 We ran for each year
two regressions, both controlling for the Index of Other Provisions G*. The first
regression does not include controls other than those used by Gompers, Ishii, and
Metrick (2003). The second regressions uses all the additional controls we used in the
regression reported in Column 4 of Table 2. The results of all the annual regressions
are displayed in Table 3 below: The first column of Table 3 reports for each year the
coefficient of staggered boards and the Other Provisions Index in regressions of the
first type; the second column of Table 3 does the same for the second type of
regression.




10
   A regression with fixed firm effects does not fit our context. Because firms hardly change their
staggered boards status during the period of our study, either by adopting a staggered board or
dropping it, there is little point in running a regressions that focuses on the variation over time
within each given firm.


                                                21
           Table 3: Staggered Boards and Firm Value – Annual regressions

This table reports annual regressions of industry-adjusted Tobin’s Q on staggered boards and various controls. The independent variable
is industry-adjusted Tobin’s Q defined in the same way as in table 2. The independent variables in the regression displayed in Column
(2) are the same as in the regression reported in Column (4) of Table 2. The table reports only the coefficients of the staggered board
dummy and the Other Provisions Index. Fama-Macbeth coefficients are calculated and reported in the last row. Levels of significance
are indicated by *, **, and *** for 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.




                                                          (1)                                      (2)
               Year                       Staggered               Other            Staggered               Other
                                            Board               Provisions           Board               Provisions
                                                                  Index                                    Index

               1995                         -0.121*              -0.014             -0.229**              -0.007
                                             (0.074)              (0.013)             (0.108)              (0.020)
                                                     **                                       *
               1996                         -0.192               -0.0007             -0.142                0.006
                                             (0.008)              (0.014)             (0.008)              (0.019)
               1997                         -0.171**              0.015               -0.90                0.004
                                             (0.084)              (0.016)             (0.086)              (0.018)
               1998                         -0.189*              -0.031*            -0.216**               0.004
                                             (0.106)              (0.017)             (0.119)              (0.026)
               1999                         -0.325**             -0.070**            -0.338*               -0.06
                                             (0.151)              (0.028)             (0.175)              (0.038)
               2000                          -0.110              -0.045**            -0.066               -0.034
                                             (0.111)              (0.021)             (0.108)              (0.024)
               2001                         -0.136*              -0.017              -0.079                0.004
                                             (0.079)              (0.014)            (-0.069)              (0.015)
               2002                          -0.045              -0.018              -0.089*              -0.015
                                             (0.061)              (0.012)             (0.053)              (0.012)
                                                    ***                  ***                 ***
               Fama-Macbeth                -0.161               -0.023              -0.156               -0.012***
               Coefficients                 (0.0004)             (0.0000)            (0.0006)             (0.0000)




           As Table 3 indicates, the coefficient of staggered boards is negative in each and
every year in either type of regression. Furthermore, the coefficient of staggered boards
is significant in 6 out of the 8 annual regressions in the first column, and in 5 out of the
8 annual regressions in column 2. When the annual regressions are put together using
the Fama-Macbeth methodology, the coefficients of staggered boards are negative at
the 99% confidence level in both regressions.
            Interestingly, the Index of Other Provisions G* fares less well in the annual
regressions. In the first type of regression, it is negative and significant in only three of
the eight years. In the second type of regression, it is positive in half of the years, and it
is not significant in any year.


                                                                  22
4.2. Exploring Simultaneity
       The identified correlation between staggered boards and lower firm value raises
a question of simultaneity. How should we interpret the identified correlation? Do
staggered boards bring about a lower firm value? Or is the correlation produced by the
selection of staggered boards by firms with lower firm value -- either because boards of
low-value firms feel more vulnerable to a takeover or because low-quality management
tends both to produce low value and to seek antitakeover protection?
       To explore this question we use the fact that charter-based staggered boards,
which are the ones that are most used and most effective in protecting the board from
removal, cannot be adopted by incumbents without shareholder approval. Amending a
firm’s charter requires a vote of shareholder approval. Furthermore, during the 1990s,
shareholders were generally unwilling to approve charter provisions establishing a
staggered board. Recognizing shareholders’ unwillingness to approve such provisions,
management of existing companies without such provisions generally did not attempt
to get such provisions adopted. During 1991-2002, the annual percentage of firms in
which management brought a proposal to adopt a charter-based staggered board was
less than 0.5%; in 2000, among the 4000 firms whose voting is followed by the IRRC,
only ten had a vote on a proposal to stagger the board. In six of these firms,
management had over 35% of the shares, and of the remaining four attempts, only one
was successful ((Klausner (2003)).
       Thus, if a firm did not have a charter-based staggered board in 1990, the year in
which the first IRRC volume was published, its management was generally unable to
adopt such a staggered board later on. A firm’s not having a charter-based board at any
given time T during our period of study thus does not reflect a time-T decision by
management not to have such a protective arrangement; it might simply reflect the fact
that the company did not have such an arrangement in the beginning of the 1990s.
       Note that, whereas shareholders were generally unwilling to permit existing
firms to adopt charter-based staggered boards during the 1990s, shareholders did not
have the power to cause the dismantling of charter-based staggered boards in firms that
had them when the decade started. While the shareholders of many firms with a



                                          23
charter-based staggered board passed and continue to pass shareholder resolutions in
favor of de-staggering the board, such resolutions are precatory, and management
commonly ignores them. Thus, for firms that went public prior to 1990, whether they
had a charter-based staggered board at the end of our period of study largely depended
on the firms’ “initial condition,” i.e., on whether they had a charter-based staggered
board in 1990.
         We therefore ran regressions similar to those in Table 2 limiting ourselves to
firms that went public prior to 1990 and for which we had governance information the
1990 IRRC volume. We ran four regressions using different controls, and we display
the results of these regressions in Table 4 below. The first regression (Column 1)
controlled for other governance provisions during the year of observation, and the
second regression (Column 2) controlled for other governance provisions that were in
place in 1990. In both regressions we controlled for the full set of firm characteristics
we used earlier. In both regressions, the coefficient of staggered boards is negative,
large, and statistically significant at 99% confidence level. As before, the coefficient of
staggered boards is seven times larger than the coefficient of the other provisions
index.
         It might be argued that, although the existence of a staggered board in 1990
could not have resulted from a low value in the late 1990s, both the 1990 staggered
board and the low value later on might be a product of some other early parameter of
the company. On this view, having a feature X in the 1980s -- say, a “self-serving”
management -- could have led both to a firm’s having a charter-based staggered board
in 1990 and also to the firm’s having a low firm value both in 1990 and continuing into
the late 1990s. In assessing the plausibility of this explanation, note that public
companies and their management change a fair amount over time.
         Whatever managerial team ran a company in the 1980s is commonly no longer
in charge in the late 1990s or the beginning of this decade. In any event, to explore this
possibility, we ran two additional regressions in which we also control for industry-
adjusted Q in 1990. The results of these regressions, one using the index of other
provisions at the time in which the industry-adjusted Tobin’s Q is measured and the



                                            24
other using the index of other provisions in 1990, are displayed in Columns 3 and 4 of
Table 3.


               Table 4: 1990 Staggered Boards and Firm Value 1996-2002

This table reports pooled OLS regressions of industry-adjusted Tobin’s Q during the period 1995-2002 on whether the firm had a
staggered board in 1990 and various controls. The independent variable is industry-adjusted Tobin’s Q as defined in the regressions of
Tables 2. The dummy staggered board 90 is equal to 1 if the firm had a staggered board provision in 1990 and to 0 otherwise. The Index
of Other Provisions is equal to the G Index in 1990 minus 1 if the company had a staggered boarding 1990 and equal to the G index in
1990 otherwise. Tobin’s Q 90 is the industry-adjusted Tobin’s Q in 1990. All other independent variables are defined in the same way as
in the regressions of Table 2. As before, the coefficients on the constant, the year dummies, and the dummy indicating when R&D data
is missing, are omitted. Estimates are White (1980) robust. Standard errors appear in parentheses, and levels of significance are
indicated by *, **, and *** for 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.



                   Variable                                    (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)

                   Staggered Board 90                       -0.068**       -0.059*         -0.066**       -0.06*
                                                             (0.034)        (0.034)         (0.032)       (0.033)
                                                                       *
                   Other Provisions Index                   -0.012                         -0.009
                                                             (0.008)                        (0.007)
                                                                                      **
                   Other Provisions Index 90                               -0.015                        -0.011
                                                                            (0.007)                       (0.007)
                   Tobin’s Q 90                                                            0.398***      0.397***
                                                                                            (0.043)       (0.043)
                                                                     ***            ***            ***
                   Log(Assets)                              0.075          0.077           0.073         0.074***
                                                             (0.011)        (0.011)         (0.01)        (0.01)
                                                                     ***            ***
                   Log(company Age)                        -0.101          -0.093          -0.052        -0.047
                                                             (0.036)        (0.036)         (0.035)       (0.035)
                   Delaware Incorporation                     -0.03         -0.025          -0.02        -0.017
                                                             (0.031)        (0.031)         (0.03)        (0.03)
                   Insider Ownership I                       -0.008         -0.009         -0.011        -0.012
                                                             (0.012)        (0.012)         (0.011)       (0.011)
                                                                      *
                   Insider Ownership II                      0.013          0.013           0.012         0.011
                                                             (0.008)        (0.008)         (0.007)       (0.007)
                   Insider Ownership III                     -0.008         -0.008         -0.013**      -0.013**
                                                             (0.006)        (0.006)         (0.006)       (0.006)
                                                                     ***            ***            ***
                   Return on Assets                         7.992          7.994           6.599         6.603***
                                                              (0.35)        (0.351)         (0.347)       (0.347)
                   CAPEX / Assets                            -0.107         -0.117         0.543*        0.536*
                                                              (0.32)         (0.32)         (0.286)       (0.286)
                                                                     ***            ***            ***
                   R&D / Sales                              5.341          5.341           4.149         4.152***
                                                             (0.748)        (0.751)         (0.739)       (0.742)




           The results indicate that (industry-adjusted) Q during 1995-2002 is indeed
positively correlated (at the 99% confidence level) with (industry-adjusted) Q in 1990.


                                                                 25
However, even after controlling for 1990 Q, having a staggered board in 1990 remains
correlated with the firm’s value during the period 1995-2002 with a coefficient that
remains large and significant at the 99% confidence level.
         The above regressions indicate that the association between the staggered
boards of pre-1990 firms and low firm value during 1995-2002 cannot be fully
accounted for by the initial selection of staggered boards by firms that had low value
already in 1990. Rather, the results are consistent with the considered association being
at least partly produced by the staggered board that companies adopted during the
1980s or earlier for whatever reason. Of course, dealing with simultaneity is a
notoriously difficult task, and it would be worth continuing to investigate what caused
some firms but not others to have staggered boards in 1990. But the results thus far are
consistent with staggered boards bringing about, and not merely reflecting, low firm
value.
         Based on the results reported in Table 4, we estimate that having a staggered
reduces Tobin’s Q by 0.06-0.066. For the pre-1990 companies for which the
regressions of Table 4 are run, average Q was 1.56 in 2002 and 1.88 during the period
1995-2006. Thus, our estimates indicate that having a staggered board reduces Tobin’s
Q by 3%-4% on average.


4.4 Charter-Based vs. Bylaw-Based Staggered Boards
         Lastly, we turn to examine whether charter-based staggered boards and bylaws-
based staggered boards might have different effects. To this end, we re-ran all the 3
regressions displayed in Table 2 that controlled for the other provisions index,
replacing the dummy variable for a staggered board with separate dummy variables for
a charter-based staggered board and a bylaws-based staggered board. The results are
displayed in Table 5.




                                           26
Table 5: Charter-based Staggered Boards vs. Bylaws-based Staggered Boards

This table reports pooled OLS regressions of industry-adjusted Tobin’s Q on charter-based staggered boards and bylaws-based staggered
boards and various controls. The regressions are the same as those reported in Columns (2), (3), and (4) of Table 2 except that the
independent variable staggered board is replaced by two independent variables: (i) Charter-based staggered board, which is equal to 1 if
the firm has a staggered board provision in its charter and 0 otherwise, and (ii) Bylaws-based staggered boards, which is equal to 1 if the
firm has a staggered board provision in its bylaws (but not in its charter) and 0 otherwise. As before, the coefficients on the constant, the
year dummies, and the dummy indicating when R&D data is missing are omitted. Estimates are White (1980) robust. Standard errors
appear in parentheses, and levels of significance are indicated by *, **, and *** for 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.



                         Variable                                          (1)            (2)            (3)

                         Charter-Based Staggered Board                 -0.170***       -0.172***      -0.181***
                                                                         (0.036)        (0.036)        (0.044)
                         Bylaws-Based Staggered Board                    -0.086         -0.087         -0.069
                                                                         (0.054)        (0.054)        (0.074)
                                                                                 ***
                         Other Provisions                              -0.025                          -0.013
                                                                         (0.006)                       (0.010)
                                                                                                ***
                         Log(Other Provisions)                                         -0.183
                                                                                        (0.057)
                         Log(Assets)                                     0.003          0.003          -0.050
                                                                         (0.009)        (0.009)        (0.014)
                                                                                 ***            ***
                         Log(Company Age)                              -0.148          -0.149         -0.236***
                                                                         (0.023)        (0.023)        (0.031)
                         Delaware Incorporation                          0.019          0.019          -0.010
                                                                         (0.032)        (0.032)        (0.041)
                         Insider Ownership I                                                           -0.026*
                                                                                                       (0.015)
                         Insider Ownership II                                                         0.029***
                                                                                                       (0.009)
                         Insider Ownership III                                                        -0.029***
                                                                                                       (0.008)
                         Return on Assets                                                               0.028
                                                                                                       (0.029)
                         CAPEX / Assets                                                               0.928***
                                                                                                       (0.326)
                         R&D / Sales                                                                    0.010
                                                                                                       (0.008)




           As Table 5 indicates, in all the regressions, the coefficient of charter-based
staggered boards is negative and significant at 99% confidence. As to bylaws-based
staggered boards, their coefficient is negative but not statistically significant in all the
regressions. We also did F test that enabled us to reject (at the 99% confidence level)



                                                                    27
the hypothesis that the estimated coefficients of charter-based staggered boards and
bylaw-based staggered boards are the same.
       It should be noted that our data enables us to identify all the staggered boards
that are relatively ineffective against removal by determined shareholders. Our data
enables us to identify those staggered boards whose effectiveness is reduced by their
being established in the bylaws rather than in the charter. But it does not identify those
charter-based staggered boards whose effectiveness is reduced because shareholders
can pack the board or remove the board without cause. Thus, the coefficients of
charter-based staggered boards we obtain in the above regressions might under-
estimate the correlation between a fully effective staggered board and lower firm value.
In future work, it would be interesting to separate charter-based staggered boards that
are fully effective from those where shareholders can pack the board or remove it
without cause.

5. Concluding Remarks
       This paper has investigated empirically whether substantial protection from
removal – such as the protection now provided by staggered boards in a majority of
U.S. public companies – enhances or reduces the value of firms. This question has been
long debated, and defenders and opponents of management insulation have identified
many ways in which management insulation could affect value, some positive and
some negative. Putting this long-standing question to an empirical test, we find that
staggered boards are associated with a lower firm value. The reduction in firm value
associated with staggered boards is economically meaningful.
       The paper has also explored the question of simultaneity presented by the
identified correlation. We find that, even after controlling for firm value in 1990,
having a staggered board in 1990 is associated with a significantly lower value during
the period 1995-2002. This finding is consistent with staggered boards brining about a
lower firm value and not merely being selected by low-value firms.
       We find evidence consistent with the possibility that bylaws-based staggered
boards do not exhibit the same negative correlation with firm value as charter-based



                                           28
staggered boards do. In the normal case in which shareholders do not desire to replace
the board, bylaws-based staggered boards provide the same commitment to continuity
and stability in board composition that supporters of staggered boards applaud.
However, bylaws-based staggered boards do not provide the same insulation from
removal by determined shareholders as charter-based staggered boards, and such
insulation might be associated with lower firm value.
       Our analysis also helps to understand what drives the negative correlation
between firm value and a governance index based on twenty-four provisions that prior
work has identified. Our evidence indicates that staggered boards significantly
contribute to this negative correlation. We investigate in subsequent work (Bebchuk,
Cohen, and Ferrell, 2004)) whether there are any provisions other than staggered
boards that play an important role in producing this negative correlation.
       Another index of corporate governance that has recently received attention is
that put together by the Institutional Shareholder Services (ISS). In a recent study
commissioned by the Institutional Shareholder Services (ISS), Brown and Caylor
(2004) report positive correlation between this index and several measures of firm
value and performance. The study also reports that the sub-part of the ISS index that
seems to be most important is the one based on board composition and not the one
based on takeover defenses. Interestingly, however, the ISS incorporates the presence
of staggered boards into the board composition part of its index. Our findings suggest
that it would be worth testing whether staggered boards play an important role in the
formation of whatever correlation exists between the ISS index and firm value.
       By way of limitation, our analysis does not identify the effects of levels of
protection from removal more moderate than those arising from staggered boards. Of
the firms that do not have effective staggered boards, some have (1) arrangements
under which shareholders can remove the board immediately, and others have (2)
arrangements under which shareholders can remove the board only at the next annual
meeting. We do not identify which of these two groups (1) and (2) has higher market
value, focusing only on the consequences of having the considerable level of protection




                                           29
provided by effective staggered boards. Comparing groups (1) and (2) in terms of
market value is a worthwhile topic for further research.
       Our analysis also leaves for future work some questions about staggered boards.
Among other things, it would be desirable to investigate how staggered boards affect
various corporate decisions, as well as why firms going public often staggered boards
in their IPO charters (Bebchuk (2003), Klausner (2003)). Such additional work is
called for by our findings that staggered boards are a key feature of current corporate
governance. Staggered boards deserve much attention from future work.




                                           30
                                    References

Arlen, Jennifer and Eric Talley (2003), “Unregulable Defenses and the Peril of
      Shareholder Choice,” University of Pennsylvania Law Review, 152, 577-666.

Bebchuk, Lucian A., 2003, “Why Firms Adopt Antitakeover Arrangements,”
      University of Pennsylvania Law Review, 152, 713-753.

Bebchuk, Lucian A., John C. Coates IV and Guhan Subramanian, 2002, “The Powerful
      Antitakeover Force of Staggered Boards: Theory, Evidence & Policy,” Stanford
      Law Review, 54, 887-951.

Bebchuk, Lucian A., John C. Coates IV and Guhan Subramanian, 2003, “The Power of
      Takeover Defenses,” Working paper, Harvard Law School and NBER.

Bebchuk, Lucian A., and Alma Cohen, 2003, "Firms' Decisions Where to Incorporate,"
      Journal of Law and Economics, 46, 383-425.

Bebchuk, Lucian A., Alma Cohen, and Allen Ferrell, 2004, "What Matters in Corporate
      Governance?,” Working Paper, Harvard Law School and NBER.

Bebchuk, Lucian A., and Oliver Hart, 2002, “Takeover Bids vs. Proxy Fights in
      Contests for Corporate Control,” NBER Working Paper No. 8633.

Bebchuk, Lucian A, and Lars Stole, 1993, "Do Short-Term Managerial Objectives
      Lead to Under- or Over-Investment in Long-Term Projects?," Journal of
      Finance, 48, 719-729.

Bertrand, Marianne, and Sendhil Mullainathan, 1999, “Is There Discretion in Wage
      Setting?” Rand Journal of Economics, 30, 535–554.

Bertrand, Marianne, and Sendhil Mullainathan, 2003, “Enjoying the Quiet Life?
      Managerial Behavior Following Anti-Takeover Legislation,” Journal of
      Political Economy, 11, 1043-1075.

Brown, Lawrence, and Marcus Caylor (2004), The Correlation between Corporate
      Governance and Company Performance, Research Study Commissioned by the
      Institutional shareholder Services.


                                            31
Borokhovich, Kenneth, Kelly Brunarski, and Robert Parrino, 1997, “CEO Contracting
      and Antitakeover Amendments,“ Journal of Finance, 52, 1495-1517.

Coates IV, John C., 2000, “Takeover Defenses in the Shadow of the Pill: A Critique of
      the Scientific Evidence,” Texas Law Review, 79, 271-382.

Chung, Kee H. and Stephen W. Pruitt (1994), “A Simple Approximation of Tobin’s
      Q,” Financial Management 23, 70-74.

Comment, Robert and G. William Schwert, 1995, “Poison or Placebo? Evidence on the
      Deterrence and Wealth Effects of Modern Antitakeover Statutes,” Journal of
      Financial Economics, 39, 3-43.

Daines, Robert, 2001, “Does Delaware Law Improve Firm Value?” Journal of
      Financial Economics, 62, 559-571.

Demsetz, Harold, and Kenneth Lehn, 1985, “The Structure of Corporate Ownership:
      Causes and Consequences,” Journal of Political Economy, 93, 1155–1177.

Easterbrook, Frank and Daniel Fischel, 1981, “The Proper Role of a Target’s Board in
      Responding to a Tender Offer,” Harvard Law Review, 94, 1161.

Faleye, Olubunmi (2004), “Classified Boards and Long-Term Value Creation,”
      Working Paper, Northeastern University.

Gartman, Grant A., 2000, State Antitakeover Law, Investor Responsibility Research
      Center, Washington D.C.

Garvey, Gerald T., and Gordon Hanka, 1999, “Capital Structure and Corporate
      Control: The Effect of Antitakeover Statutes on Firm Leverage,” Journal of
      Finance, 54, 519–546.

Georgeson Shareholder, Annual Corporate Governance Review, available at
      http://www.georgesonshareholder.com.

Gillan, Stuart, Jay Hartzell, and Lauara Starks, 2003, Explaining Corporate
      Governance: Boards, Bylaws, and Charter Provisions, Working Paper,
      University of Delaware and University of Texas.




                                          32
Gompers, Paul, Joy Ishii, and Andrew Metrick, 2003, “Corporate Governance and
       Equity Prices,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118, 107-155.

Grossman, Sanford and Oliver Hart, 1980, “Takeover Bids, the Free-Rider Problem,
       and the Theory of the Corporation,” The Bell Journal of Economics, 11, 42-64.

Hartzell, Jay, Eli Ofek, and David Yermack, 2004, “What’s in It for Me?: Personal
       Benefits Obtained by CEOs Whose Firms Are Acquired,” Review of Financial
       Studies, 17, 37-61.

Johnson, Mark S., and Ramesh P. Rao, 1997, “The Impact of Antitakeover
       Amendments on Corporate Financial Performance,” Financial Review, 32, 659–
       690.

Kaplan, Steven N., and Luigi Zingales, 1997, “Do Investment-Cash Flow Sensitivities
       Provide Useful Measures of Financing Constraints?” Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, 112, 169–216.

Karpoff, Jonathan M., and Paul H. Malatesta, 1989, “The Wealth Effects of Second-
       Generation State Takeover Legislation,” Journal of Financial Economics, 25,
       291–322.

Klausner, Michael, 2003, “Institutional Shareholders, Private Equity, and Anti-takeover
       Protection at the IPO Stage,” University of Pennsylvania Law Review
       (forthcoming).

Koppes, Richard H., Lyle G. Ganske and Charles T. Haag, 1999, “Corporate
       Governance Out of Focus: The Debate over Classified Boards,” Business
       Lawyer, 54, 1023-1055.

Lang, Larry H. P., and Rene´ M. Stulz, 1994, “Tobin’s Q, Corporate Diversification,
       and Firm Performance,” Journal of Political Economy, 102, 1248–1280.

LaPorta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny,
       2002, “Investor Protection and Corporate Valuation,” Journal of Finance, 57,
       1147-1170.




                                          33
Lipton, Martin (1979), “Takeover Bids in the Target’s Boardroom,” The Business
      Lawyer, 35, 101-134.

McConnell, J. and H. Servaes (1990), “additional Evidence on Equity Ownership and
      Corporate Value,” Journal of Financial Economics, 27, 595-612.

Morck, Randall, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1988, “Management Ownership
      and Market Valuation: An Empirical Analysis,” Journal of Financial
      Economics, 20, 293–315.

Institutional Responsibility Research Center (IRRC) (1990, 1993, 1995, 1998, 2000,
      2002), Corporate Takeover Defenses.

Ryngaert, Michael, 1988, “The Effect of Poison Pill Securities on Shareholder
      Wealth,” Journal of Financial Economics, 20, 377-417.

Subramanian, Guhan, 2003, “Bargaining in the Shadow of Takeover Defenses,” Yale
      Law Journal, 113, 621- 686.

Subramanian, Guhan, 2004, “The Disappearing Delaware Effect,” Journal of Law,
      Economics & Organization, 20, 32-59.

Shin, Hyun-Han and René Stulz, 2000, “Firm Value, Risk, and Growth Opportunities,”
      NBER Working Paper No. 7808.

Stein, Jeremy, 1988, “Takeover Threats and Managerial Myopia,” Journal of Political
      Economy, 96, 61-80.

Stulz, Rene, 1988, “Managerial Control of Voting Rights,” Journal of Financial
      Economics, 20, 25-54.

Swartz, L. Mick, 1998, “The Massachusetts Classified Board Law,” Journal of Law,
      Economics, and Finance, 22, 29.

White, H, 1980, “A Heteroskedasticity-Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimator and a
      Direct Test for Heteroskedasticity,” Econometrica, 48, 817-838.

Yermack, David, 1996, “Higher Market Valuation for Firms with a Small Board of
      Directors,” Journal of Financial Economics, 40, 185–211.



                                        34
