                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           THE TAXATION OF INCOME FROM CAPITAL:
             A COMPARATIVE STUDY OF THE U.S.,
             U.K., SWEDEN AND WEST GERMANY
             --THE THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK--



                      Mervyn   A. King
                      Don Fullerton




                  Working Paper No. 1058




           NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                    Cambridge, MA 02138


                       January 1983




This working paper represents Chapter 2 of a book edited by Mervyn
King and Don Fullerton, to be submitted to the University of Chicago
Press for publication consideration. The other chapters include an
introduction, chapters on the United Kingdom, Sweden, West Germany,
the United States, a comparison of effective tax rates, and a conclusion.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                             NBER Working Paper #1058
                                                  January 1983




                The Taxation of Income From Capital:
                  A Comparative Study of the U.S.,
                  U.K., Sweden and West Germany
                  ——The Theoretical Framework——



                               ABSTRACT



    This working paper presents Chapter 2 of a book that has been submitted

to the University of Chicago Press for publication consideration. The

point of the book is to compare taxes on income from capital in four countries,

accounting for corporate, personal, and property taxes, and including

national, regional, and local level taxes. We describe statutory tax rates

and other tax rules in each country, and calculate overall effective marginal

tax rates for different combinations of asset, industry, source of finance,

and ownership categories.

     This chapter defines the methodological problems of estimating effective

tax rates on income from capital, and it defines the limits of this analysis

by pointing out areas that are excluded by this study. It sets out the

parameters that need to be estimated for each country, and describes other

data requirements involving the amount of each capital asset located in

each industry, financed by each source, and owned by each ownership category.




Mervyn A. King                               Don Fullerton
Department of Economics                      Woodrow Wilson School
University of Birmingham                     Princeton University
P.O. Box 363                                 Princeton, NJ 08544
Birmingham, Bl5 2TT
England

021—472—1301, ext. 3427                      (609) 452—4811
                                    Preface



          In early 1979, Martin Feldstein suggested that the general approach of

Mervyn King's Public Policy and the Corporation (1977) could be used to measure

effective marginal tax rates on a comparable basis for several different

countries. Our feeling was that the existing studies had employed different

methodologies thus making inter—country comparisons a hazardous task. We

decided to launch a study based on a common methodolo which might help to shed

light on the significant economic differences among the tax systems in four

major economies which have experienced differing degrees of economic success,

the U.S., U.K., West Germany and Sweden. In this book we report the results of

this enterprise which was undertaken with the combined financial and human

resources of the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) in Cambridge,

Massachusetts, the Institute for Economic Research (IFO) in Munich, West

Germany, and the Industrial Institute for Economic and Social Research (lul) in

Stockholm, Sweden. In addition, we gratefully acknowledge financial support

from the National Science Foundation under grant numbers SES79142O and

SES80254014.

          Our first meeting was held at NBER in August, 1979. This meeting

included Helnut Laumer and Willi Leibfritz from IFO in Germany, Gunnar Eliasson

and Jan S&dersten from IUI in Sweden, Mervyn King and John Flernrn!ng from

Britain, and several U.S. economists including Alan Auerbach, David Bradford,

Larry Dildine, Martin Feldstein, Don Fullerton, Charles McLure, John Shoven, and

Lawrence Summers. Subsequent meetings were held in Stockholm, June 1980, in

Munich, November 1980, in Cambridge, August 1981, at the london School of

Economics, January 1982, and again in London in June 1932. We received valuable

comments and assistance from participants at each of these meetings.
                                                                          Preface, p2


          ifl   particular,   although all authors participated in the writing of the

whole manuscript, we would like to acknowledge the primary efforts made with

respect to each chapter. The U.K. chapter was written primarily by Mervyn King

of the University of Birmingh and NBER, by Michael 3. Naldrett of the

University of Birmingham and later of Princeton University, and by

James Poterba of Nuffield College, Oxford and NBER. We received invaluable

assistance from E. B. Butler, R. N. Elliss, J. King, and P. Penneck of the

Inland Revenue, from R. I. Armitage of the Central Statistical Office, and from

J. S. Flemrning and J. Ryding of the Bank of England.

         The chapter on Sweden was written primarily by Thomas Lindberg of IUI

and by Jan SSdersten of IUI and the University of Uppsalla, Sweden. We are

especially indebted to Villy BerstrSrn, Gran Normann Rbáck and Roif Rundfelt

for valuable assistance and helpful comments. Contributions were also made by

Ragnar Bentzel, Christen Herzen, Sven—Olof Lodin, Gustav Sandstr6m, and

Leif Stindberg.

          Primary authors of the chapter on Germany were Willi Leibfritz of IFO

and Julian A1worth of the Bank for International Settlements in Geneva,

Switzerland. We are especially grateful to Heinz Ludwig of IFO for research

assistance. Other helpful comments and assistance were received from Hans—Georg

Jatzek, Josef K&rner, and Stephan Teschner. We are also grateful for statisti-

cal help from Christa Bronny and Christian Wagner, and from the

Deutsche Bundesbank and the Statistisches Bundesamt.

         Don Fullerton was the primary author of the U.S. chapter, though fre-

quent assistance was provided by Yolanda K. Henderson. At several points during
                                                                     Preface, p3


our progress, we received help from Alan J. Auerbach, Larry L. Dildine,

Daniel Feenberg, Martin Feldstein, Barbara M. Fraumeni, Roger H. Gordon,

Dale W. Jorgenson, Lawrence B. Lindsey, Charles E. McLure, John B. Shoven,

Martin A. Sullivan, and Lawrence H. Summers.

         Mervyn King had primary responsibility for the introductory Chapters 1

and 2, and he began the computer programming with Michael Naldrett at the

University of Birmingham. Later, computer work was undertaken at Princeton

University by Don Fullerton, Michael Naldrett, and Thori.s Kronmiller. Fullerton

had primary responsibility for authorship of Chapter 7. Tables for that chapter

were drawn up by Thomas Kronniiller, and David Bradford, also at Princeton,

kindly contributed his efforts as the primary author of our concluding chapter.

Particular mention must be made of Don Fullerton's efforts to produce results

for each country from the Princeton computer according to a tight schedule.

         Again, although we wish to credit these responsibilities for each

chapter, we also wish to emphasize that this book is a joint product and is not

a collection of separately authored papers. All authors participated in the

drafting and redrafting of the manuscript and in the development of a common

view as to how best to tackle the problem we set ourselves.

         Finally, we would like to express our thanks for remarkable efficiency

and patience to those who typed various parts of the manuscript, Ingrid Hensel,

Alice Pattersson, Jenny Saxby, Judy Weinberger, Michael Wickham and Maja Woxen,

and to Annie Zeumer of NBE and Liz Johnson of Chicago University Press for

making life as easy for the authors as it is possible for a publisher to do. A

last word of thanks must go to Randall Mrck who organized and shepherded the

preparation of the final manuscript.

                                       October 1982
                                  Chapter 2


                          The Theoretical Framework


        Our aim is to examine the incentives to save and invest in the private

nonfinancial corporate sector offered by the tax system in each country.

Clearly, taxes are only one of the determinants of capital formation, and our

four countries exhibit many important differences over and above differences in

the taxation of capital income. But the structure of the tax system is often

cited as an impediment to economic growth, and it is under the direct control of

government. Taxation can affect many economic dedisions, including labour

supply, work effort, enterprise, and risk—taking, as well as household savings

and corporate investment in real assets. In this study, we focus on the flow of

private savings into real corporate investment and the flow of profits which

result from this investment back to households. We do not discuss explicitly

the effects of taxes on risk—taking or work effort, and our analysis is limited

to the incentives to save and invest. Since the exercise of "enterprise"

usually involves some investment, that is, some sacrifice of present consumption

for future returns, our estimated effective tax rates bear closely on the incen-

tives or disincentives provided by government to channel resources into

entrepreneurship.


2.1 The Measurement of Effective Tax Rates

          The measurement of effective tax rates is not, however, straightfor—

ward. Popular discussion tends to concentrate on the tax burden on corporate

profits, expecially in periods of rapid inflation. This corporate tax burden

may be a misleading measure for two reasons. First, it ignores the interaction

between personal and corporate taxation. For example, interest payments which
                                     —2—


are deductible at the corporate level are taxed in the hands of the personal

sector upon receipt. The incentives to invest depend upon the combined weight

of personal and corporate taxes. Secondly, the tax burden measures the average

tax rate on realised capital income. It does not measure the incentive for

additional investment which is a function of the marginal tax rate. In what

follows, we try to develop estimates of the effective marginal tax rate on capi-

tal income for each of the four countries.

        To do this requires a precise definition of the margin involved. The

margin considered here is a small increase in the level of real investment in

the domestic nonfinancial corporate sector, financed by an increase in the

savings of domestic households. An alternative marginal tax rate would be that

applicable to an increase in profits which did not result from an addition to

investment but which resulted, perhaps, from an unexpected increase in selling

prices. Although the latter definition has its place, the former is preferred

here because it is the margin relevant to the incentive effects of taxation.

         The empirical study is restricted to domestic savings and investment.

International capital flows are important in a number of areas, but the intrica-

cies of double tax agreements and of the accounting behaviour of multinational

companies introduce complexities which are better deferred to a separate study.

In any event, the bulk of investment in each of the countries studied here is

financed domestically, and the effective tax rates presented below provide a

fairly accurate picture of the incentives provided by the different tax systems.

Public sector investment is also excluded from our study. Its determinants are

unrelated to the tax system, and our focus is on taxation. Finally, we examine

only corporate investment. This limitation means that we ignore not only unin-

corporated business but also investment in residential housing. Again, most
                                           —3—


industrial investment is in the corporate sector. Details of the size of the

corporate sector and the inportance of foreign ownership of domestic capital are

provided in the respective country chapters.

         To assess the impact of taxation on investment two approaches may be

identified. The first is the econometric rrtdelling of the process which gener-

ates time—series observations on savings and investment. A major problem with

this approach is the complexity of the correct specification of tax variables,

not to mention uncertainty, adjustment costs, and prqduction lags. As a con-

sequence, the very limited number of observations which are available, even with

quarterly data, contain insufficient information for us to be confident of iden-

tifying the underlying process. Moreover, the relationship between investment

and taxation depends upon corporate financial policy and on the structure of the

ownership of corporate securities. There is no unique cost of capital to the

corporate sector that is independent of its ownership structure and those other

factors which determine its capital structure.

         The second approach is to compute directly the tax "wedge" between the

rate of return on investment and    the    rate   of    return on savings for a series of

hypothetical marginal projects. In the absence of taxes, when the saver puts up

money to finance a project, he earns a rate            of   return equal to that earned on

the project itself. With distortionary taxes, the two rates of return can

differ. The size of the tax wedge depends upon the system of corporate taxa-

tion, the interaction of these taxes with inflation, the tax treatment of depre-

ciation and inventories, the personal tax code, the treatment of different legal

forms of income (capital gains    versus    dividends, for example), the existence of

wealth taxes, and   a number   of other details which we examine below. It is

clear, therefore, that the effective tax rate on an investment project depends
upon the industry where it is located, the particular asset which is purchased,
the way in which the investment is financed, and the identity of the investor
who supplies the finance. In this study, we shall compute estimates of the

effective marginal tax rate for a large number of different combinations of

these factors. Such estimates are not to be regarded as a substitute for econo-

metric analysis of investment behaviour. Rather, they provide a description of

the actual incentives offered by the tax system. We hope they will be useful as

inputs to future econometric studies of investment and other aspects of cor-

porate behavior. The effective tax rates calculated below are intended to sum-

marize a very complicated tax code in a way which is intuitively appealing.

          The tax wedge is the difference between the rate of return on invest-

ment and the rate of return on the savings used to finance the investment. We

denote by p the pre—tax real rate of return on a marginal investment project,

net of depreciation. It is the return which society earns on a particular

investment of one extra unit (dollar, pound, kroner, or mark). Let s denote

the post-tax real rate of return to the saver (whether a household or an

institution) who supplied the finance for the investment. The tax wedge, V

is   simply the difference between the two rates of return:


               wp—s                                                         (2.1)



          The effective tax rate, t , we define to be the tax wedge divided by

the pre—tax rate of return:



                    p-s
                t = _____                                                   (2.2)
                     p
                                       —5—



        This definition of the tax rate is a "tax—inclusive" measure in which

the denominator includes the tax paid as well as the net income received. An

alternative "tax—exclusive" measure would divide the tax wedge by the post—tax

return to the saver. This measure, te ,      is   defined by:




              te =                                                            (2.3)


         In presenting our results, we shall use all three measures of the

distortion caused by taxes, but we shall be concerned primarily with estimates

of the effective tax rate in (2.2). Nevertheless, in some circumstances the

tax wedge may be more informative than the tax rate.

         The link between the saver and the company which carries out the

investment is the rate of return which the company pays on the saver's financial

claims. For example, if the saver lends money to the company in the form of a

fixed interest loan, then the company must pay an interest rate on the loan. We

denote the real rate of interest on such financial claims by r and the corres-

ponding nominal interest rate by i .    If   ,    denotes the rate of inflation,

then

              r=i—1T       .                                                  (2.4)

         The interest rate r plays an intermediate role between the investment

decisions by companies and savings decisions by households, and it is important

in our analysis. For any given investment project we may ask the question, what

is the minimum rate of return it must yield before taxes in order to provide the

saver with the same net of tax return as that which he would receive from lend-

ing at the market interest rate? This minimum pre—tax rate of return is called
                                          —6—


the cost of capital. It depends upon the asset and industry composition of the

investment, the form of finance used for the project, and the saver who is

providing the funds. For a given combination of these factors, we may express

the relationship between the cost of capital and the interest rate as:


              p   c(r)                                                         (2.5)



         The cost of capital function, c(r), depends upon the details of the

tax code, and we derive explicit expressions below.

         Condition (2.5) may be thought of in two ways. On the one hand, we may

view it as an expression of capital market equilibrium which determines the

marginal yield on real investment of different types and using different finan-

cial instruments which would be chosen by profit—maximizing firms in an economy

with interest rate r.     In this case, p is determined by r. On the other hand,

we may think of (2.5) as indicating the maximum interest rate such that savers

would be indifferent between lending at this rate and receiving the after-tax

proceeds of a given type of project, financed in a particular way, yielding a

pre-tax return of p.     Ifl this case, the causation nina from p to r.   Ifl our

study, we make use of both interpretations.

         The relationship between the market interest rate and the return to the

saver depends on the tax treatment of personal income. In none of the four

countries studied here is the personal tax base defined as real income from

capital. Rather, tax is charged on receipt of nominal interest income. Hence

the post-tax real rate of return to the saver is given by


              a = (1 —    m)(r   +   — 11 — w                                   (2.6)
                                           -7-


where   in    is   the marginal personal tax rate on interest income, and w     is the

marginal personal tax rate on wealth. In the absence of taxes, p = s            r

Savers provide funds to companies, these sums are invested in physical assets,

and the profits accruing on the project are then distributed either to

bondholders in the form of interest or to stockholders in the form of dividends

and share value appreciation. As a result, savers earn the same rate of return

on their savings as companies earn on their investment. In practice, taxes

drive a wedge between the return on investment and the return on savings, and

this wedge can be measured by comparing equation (2.5) with (2.6).

             Using this approach, we measure effective marginal tax rates for each

of four countries. But even within a single country the tax rate varies from

one project to another depending upon the asset and industry in which the funds

are invested, the nature of the financial claims on the profits (equity versus

debt), and the ultimate recipient of the capital income. To investigate the

distribution of effective tax rates within each country, we consider a series of

hypothetical projects, where each project corresponds to a particular combina-

tion of asset, industry, financial instrument, and owner. The first set of

calculations is for the effective marginal tax rate on each project, where all

projects are assumed to have the same pre—tax rate of return. We call this the

"fixed-p" case. For each project we then compute the value of a ,       the    real

post-tax return to savers which the project could sustain, from equations (2.5)

and (2.6). From the fixed value of p and the calculated value of a , we com-

pute both the tax wedge w and the effective marginal tax rate t .         In    order

to compare the tax systems across countries, we use the same value for p in

all countries, and in most of our calculations we take a value of 10 percent per

annum. The relationship between the assumed value of p and the tax rate is

discussed further below.
                                          —8-


           A comparison of the tax rates corresponding to a common value for p

provides a picture of the incentives offered by the tax system for particular

kinds of investment projects. In other words, the fixed—p calculations describe

tax schedules facing different Drojects. But, in turn, we would expect that the

effect of these varying tax rates would be to stimulate investment in low-taxed

projects relative to more highly-taxed investments. We would expect the alloca-

tion of capital among the various combinations o adjust until an equilibrium is

established in which there exists no further opportunities for mutually profi-

table transactions. For a given individual saver, arbitrage would result in an

equilibrium in which the same net rate of return was earned on each project. We

might, therefore, calculate an effective tax rate for each combination for a

common value for a rather than a common value for p .        Arbitrage   oppor-

tunities are limited however, and, in particular we do not think it reasonable

to assume that differences in personal tax rates can be eliminated by arbitrage.

This arbitrage might be possible for a husband and dfe (in systems where

spouses are taxed   separately),   but it is unlikely to occur between unrelated

persons.    I may love my   neighbour, but not sufficiently to transfer the legal

ownership   of my assets to his    care. Moreover, a substantial fraction of capital

income   now accrues to tax-exempt institutions (such as pension funds), and if
arbitrage could eliminate differences in personal tax rates, then the only

possible equilibrium would be one in which all effective personal tax rates on

capital income were zero. This does not seem to us to be a reasonable assump-

tion.

           In practice, governments impose limits on the flow of savings from

households to institutions precisely for the purpose of preventing full tax

arbitrage. Hence, in a second set of calculations for this study, we
                                     -9-


assume that arbitrage leads to an outcome in which all projects offer the same

rate of return to savers before personal tax. In other words, we assume a com-

mon value of r for all combinations, and we call this the "fixed—r" case. For

any given saver (that is, given values of personal income and wealth tax

rates), this case implies that all projects yield the same value of s. But the

value of s varies from one saver to another if they face different personal

tax rates. It must be stressed that when arbitrage eliminates differences among

projects in the real rate of interest, there must be differences in the pre—tax

rates of return on investment. Hence the tax system distorts the allocation of

resources. The value of p in this case is not uniform across projects.

Allowing for the possibility of arbitrage in the capital market equilibrium does

not rule out inefficiencies in the allocation of resources.

         With a linear tax schedule, that is one in which the rate of tax is

independent of the value of p (or equivalently r) at which it is evaluated,

the tax rate on any given project will be the same in the fixed—p as in the

fixed—r case. Under a nonlinear schedule, as is the case in practice, the size

of the tax rate depends upon the value of p at which it is evaluated. If the

value for r in the fixed—r case implies a value for p different from that

assumed in the fixed—p calculations, then the two cases yield   different   values

for the tax rate. This results solely from the nonlinearity of the tax sche-

dule. Nore significant differences between the two measures arise when we exa-

mine a weighted average of hypothetical projects in order to assess the average

marginal tax rate on investment in the corporate sector as a whole.
                                     -10-



2.2 Combinations of 1ypothetical Projects

        For each hypothetical project we compute an effective marginal tax rate

for both the "fixed-p" and the "fixed-r" cases. A hypothetical project is

defined in terms of a particular combination of characteristics which affect the

tax levied on the returns from the project. The characteristics we examine in-

clude the asset in which the funds are invested, the industry of the project,

the way in which the project is financed, and th ultimate recipient or owner of

the returns. Each hypothetical project is described by a unique combination of

these four characteristics. For each characteristic we examine three alterna-

tives. First, the three assets are

              1.   machinery
              2. buildings
              3.   inventories.
         The category for machinery includes plant and machinery, equipment,
and vehicles. We shall not be concerned with investment in financial assets,

research and development, nor other intangibles such as goodwill. The study is

limited also to reproducible assets, and so we ignore investment in land.

         Secondly, our three industries are

              1. manufacturing

              2. other industry

              3.   commerce.

         The precise definition of industrial sectors is as follows. i1anufac—

turing forms a natural grouping and corresponds to the same description in

standard industrial classifications (sic). For the U.S., Standard Industrial

Classification manufacturing comprises SIC numbers 13—64. The "other industry"

group consists mainly of construction, transportation, communications and utili-

ties. It corresponds to SIC numbers 11, 12, and 65—68. The "commerce" sector
                                        _1i —



includes   nonfinancial services and distribution, which are SIC numbers 69, and

72—77. Those activities excluded are agriculture, extractive industries, real

estate, government, and financial services.

           Thirdly, our three sources of finance are

                1. debt

                2. new share issues

                3. retained earnings.

Debt is defined to include both bond issues and bank borrowing.

           Finally, our three ownership categories are

                1   .   households

                2. tax—exempt institutions

                3. insurance companies.

           The first category includes only direct household ownership, while the

second category includes indirect tax—exempt ownership through pension funds,

the pension business of life insurance companies, and charities. The third

category includes funds invested as part of contractual savings made by house-

holds via the medium of insurance companies, principally life insurance poli-

cies, which are not tax—exempt but are taxed at special rates. Our choices for

these categories of owner are motivated by their different tax treatment.

Although personal tax rates clearly vary within the personal sector, the sche-

dule is common to all households, and, in the individual country chapters below,

we describe the distribution of personal marginal tax rates in the respective

countries. More substantial differences exist in the tax—exempt status given to

pension funds and charitable holdings. Although deemed "tax—exempt," institu-

tions in this category may end up paying some tax because of the asymmetric

nature of the tax system. For example, both Britain and Germany have imputation
                                         -12-


credits   as part of their corporate tax systems. In Britain, the credit is

refunded to tax—exempt stockholders whereas in Germany the credit is not re-

funded. The effect of this difference is that tax—exempt institutions in

Germany do effectively pay some personal tax on dividend income. Finally, in-

surance funds are often taxed in special ways, as described in country chapters

below, and we take into account the tax treatment of premiums and distributions.

           With   three categories for each of four characteristics, the number of
distinct combinations which we identify is 34,      a   total of 81 for each country.
In   Chapter 7 we compute the effective marginal tax rate for each combination as

well as the distribution of tax rates. To plot the distribution of tax rates,

we need to know the proportion of investment identified with any given combina-

tion. We assume that the marginal increase in investment under consideration is

proportional to the existing distribution of net capital stocks among assets and

industries. Further, we assume that the saving required to finance the invest-

ment is proportional to existing ownership patterns. It might be argued that a

marginal investment would not be allocated in proportion to existing stocks and

that    not all ownership categories would provide the marginal finance. For
example, the size of funds held by     the   tax—exempt category might be limited by
legal    ceilings on the sums which households can invest in this favoured manner.

Such limits are usually related to income, however, and we prefer to consider a

marginal increase in savings and investment which corresponds to an equi—

proportionate expansion of the economy. Additional savings are assumed to be

made by all these ownership categories and are invested in proportion to existing

net capital stocks. Marginal investment is assumed to be proportional to net
                                         —13—



capital stocks rather than gross investment flows because the former are repre-

sentative of long—run asset requirements, while the latter are influenced by dif-

fering asset depreciation rates. Inventories, for example, form an important

component of net capital stock, while they account for a very small share of

gross investment. With steady growth, the use of net capital stocks is equiva-

lent to the use of net investment flows for the allocation of our marginal

inves troent.

          This assumption, about the nature of the marginal increment to savings

and investment, determines the weights which we apply to each combination when we

compute the distribution of marginal tax rates. The reader who wishes to make

alternative assumptions about the margin may use the basic data on effective tax

rates for each of the 81 combinations to plot his own distribution. These data

are provided in Appendix B.

         The mean of the distribution provides an estimate of the average marginal

tax rate on the capital income generated from a small equi—proportionate increase

in the capital stock. Let k denote a particular combination of asset,

industry, source of finance, and category of owner. Also, let ak denote the

capital stock weight for that combination         =   i).   The mean tax wedge on the

marginal capital income, w ,       is

                       81
                w =    E
                      k= 1
                               -
                                     k                                          (2.7)




For the kth combination,           and    are the real rates of return on the

investment and on savings, respectively. The additional capital income

generated, p ,    is    given by
                      81
                                                                                           (2.8)
                           k   }.




          The overall average marginal           tax rate, t ,   is

                                    8i

                                    E

                 -    —
                      'w

                      p
                               k1        c:        a1,
                                                                                           (2.9)


          In   addition to the overall average marginal tax           rate,   we calculate con-

ditional means by summing over appropriate subsets of combinations. For example,

we compute the mean marginal tax          rate   on investment in machinery by summing         over

all combinations which involve machinery            and which   correspond, therefore, to dif-

ferent   indus tries, sources of finance, and owners. There are 27 such combina-
tions.    The construction of the        weights is described in section 3 of each
country chapter, while overall and conditional means of marginal tax rates are
presented in section )4 of each country chapter. These tax rates are compared and
analyzed in more detail in Chapter 7.
           The   overall marginal tax rate derived from these calculations is an
aggregate statistic for the difference between the return to investment and
the return to saving in the econoxi as a whole. In many ways, however, the
distribution of marginal tax rates around the mean provides               more information.

The variance of this distribution reflects the distortion of the pattern                  of

savings   and investment created by the tax system. The variation in tax rates has

further implications for our measure of the aggregate marginal tax                 rate   itself.

If the tax rate applicable to all combinations were the same, then the overall

marginal tax rate would be equal to this common value, for both the fixed—p and
                                         —15—


the fixed-r cases. But when tax rates vary, the average marginal tax rate will

be different in the two cases. In the fixed—p case, where k is the same for

all combinations, equation (2.9) reduces to


              =     E                                                    (2.10)


where tk is the marginal tax rate for combination k. In the fixed—r case, the

same equation reduces to



                                                                         (2.11)
                    k kk
        The mean marginal tax rate in the fixed-p case is a weighted average of

the individual tax rates, where the weights are the capital stock weights for

each combination. In the fixed-r case, the weights are the product of the capi-

tal stock proportions and the pre-tax rates of return for each combination. In

order to produce the same value of r , the more heavily taxed combinations

require a higher value of p and therefore they receive a higher weight (ckp)

in the fixed—r case. Hence the average marginal tax rate will be higher in the

fixed-r case than in the fixed—p case.

        The difference between the two means reflects the variance in tax rates among

different combinations. To illustrate this argument, consider a simple example.

Suppose that there are two possible combinations and that the capital stock weights

are one—half for each combination. Suppose, further, that the tax rate on the

first combination is zero and on the second is 50 percent. Then in the fixed-p

case,


                =   .5(0)   +   •(.) =
                                                     —16—


         If there are no personal taxes, then r =             B from   equation (2.6). In

other words, assume that the difference in the tax rates comes solely from the

corporate tax treatment of the two combinations. Since tk =                           in the
                                                                          (pk_r)/pk
fixed—r case, we have


                =
                         —              •                                              (2.12)
                     1
                             tk
Substituting this into (2.9) yields


                                                                                       (2.13)


For our example, we then have


                    1 -      (0.5   +       1.0)_i = 1

         The greater weight given to the more heavily taxed combination produces

an average marginal tax rate of one—third in the fixed—r case, compared to one-

quarter in the fixed—p case. The difference between the two measures can be

large when some combinations are taxed and other combinations receive subsidies.

Returning to our example with two equally weighted combinations, suppose that

one combination is taxed at 50 percent and the other receives a subsidy of

50 percent. In the fixed—p case the average tax rate is zero. But in the

fixed—r case, the average tax rate is equal to one—quarter, from equation

(2.13). The fixed—r case uses weights given by              akpk ,   the additional pre—tax
profits which result from the marginal increment to the capital stock. If both

combinations are to earn the same r , then the taxed combination must have a

higher share of the additional pre—tax profits than of the capital stock.

         The choice between the fixed—p and the fixed—r distributions of margi—

na]. tax rates depends upon whether we are more interested in the tax schedule

facing potential investors or in the proportion of marginal factor income which
                                       —17-


is   taxed away. Both are of interest and we present results for both distribu-

tions. The fixed—p calculations probably give a better guide   to   the schedule of

tax rates levied on different combinations, and it is the distribution of rnargi—

nal tax rates which determines the welfare losses which result from the distor—

tionary nature of the taxation of capital income. In contrast, the weighted

averages in the fixed—r case are a better guide to the ratio of additional taxes

paid to additional profits earned which results from a small increase in the

corporate sector capital stock. If the tax schedule for each combination was

linear, then the fixed—r weighted average tax rates would always exceed the

fixed—p weighted averages. But in a nonlinear schedule, it is possible (though

it occurs only infrequently in our calculations) that the fixed—p tax rate

exceeds the fixed—r tax rate for a given combination by enough to offset the

fact that in the fixed-r case greater weight is given to combinations with high

tax rates.

         In recent years, the interaction between inflation and the tax system

has been one of the most important aspects of the effect of taxes on savings and

investment. The expected rate of inflation enters into both the determination

of p in equation (2.5) and the determination of s in equation (2.6).

          We examine the effect of inflation in detail below and we calculate

effective tax rates for three different rates of inflation. First, a zero rate

provides a benchmark against which to judge other figures, and it describes the

impact which the tax system would have if it were fully indexed. Secondly, we

look at an inflation rate of ten percent per annum, a midpoint in the historical

experiences of our group of countries in the decade 1970—79. We hope it is not

too optimistic to regard this rate as an upper bound on inflation for the next

decade. This second rate enables us to compare tax systems across countries for
                                        —16—


a common, and significantly positive, rate of inflation. Finally, for each

country, we take the actual annual rate of inflation experienced in the decade

1970—79. This actual rate varied from 4.2 percent for Germany to 13.6 percent

in Britain. The rate we take for each country is an average of the rates of

increase of the price deflators for consumer goods and for investment goods in

each country. Our interest is in the level of inflation and not in relative

price changes, so we use a common inflation rate for all sectors of the econorrr.


2.3 The Cost of Capital Function

         Given a value for p ,   or,   alternatively, given a value for r , we use

equations (2.5) and (2.6) to compute a value for the effective tax rate. We

therefore need an expression for the cost of capital function c(r)      ,   for   each

combination. In these expressions, we shall assume that statutory tax rates are

known and constant over time, that there is perfect certainty, and that infla-

tion is uniform over time. Consider an investment project with an initial cost

of one unit (a dollar, pound, rrark or crown). Let MRR denote the gross rginal

rate of return to this increment to the capital stock, and assume that the asset

depreciates at a constant exponential rate      •   The rate of return net of

depreciation is


              p MRR —                                                             (2.11)

         For convenience, we assume economic depreciation is exponential, but we

distinguish carefully between economic depreciation and tax depreciation. The

latter is not generally exponential (or, in discrete time, declining balance).

For the nment we ignore corporate wealth taxes and the tax treatment of inven-

tories. If the corporate tax rate is denoted by t      , and   the rate at which
                                         —19—



the company discounts cash flows in      nominal terms is denoted by p , then   the

present discounted value o the profits of the project, net of taxes, is1



              V = J (1-T)MRR e_(p+6)u du
                  0

                = (1—1)MRR                                                      (2.15)
                      p+5.-1T




         Nominal profits increase at the rate of inflation, fall in value at the
rate of depreciation, and are discounted at the rate p .        The value of the

discount rate is endogenous and depends not only on the real interest rate and

the inflation rate, but also on the source of finance, as we shall see below.

The cost of the project is unity, the initial payment for the asset, minus the

present discounted value of any grants or tax allowances given for the asset.

The present value of such grants and allowances we denote by A .        Hence the

cost of the project is


              C = 1     —   A   •                                               (2.16)

         For any given discount rate, the value of MRR which equates V

with C is the return which the project must earn if it is to be an attractive

investment. Looking at it the other way         round, if MRR is a given return on a
marginal project, then the net of tax interest rate which the firm could afford

to pay on the finance obtained to purchase the asset is the value of p which

equates V with C .          Setting   V from equation (2.15) equal to C from (2.16)

and using equation (2.l1), we solve to obtain the following relationship between

p andp
                                              -20-




                                                        .                                           (2.17)
             P= :(p+o-)-o
        To derive an expression for A , we assume that grants and                         allowances
for investment take one of three forms. These are:                    (i) standard depreciation

allowances; (ii) immediate expensing or free depreciation; (iii) a cash grant

(equivalent to a tax credit). The proportion of the cost of an asset which is

entitled to "standard" depreciation allowances is denoted by                          ,   and the pre-

sent value of tax savings from standard depreciation allowances on a unit of

investment is A       If f2 denotes the proportion of the cost of the project

qualifying for immediate expensing at the corporate rate t                       , then   the tax

saving.froni this write-off is f21 .              Finally,   suppose that the proportion

qualifying for grants is denoted by f3 , and that the rate of grant is g

Then


              A =
                    fAd   +
                              f2r
                                    +         .                                                     (2.18)
                                        f3g

         There is no need to restrict the sum of f1                             and f3 to unity. At
                                                                  ,
                                                                       f2   ,



certain times it exceeds unity (for example, when accelerated depreciation

does not reduce the base for standard depreciation allowances). Equation (2.18)

is capable of describing the full range of tax allowances and investment incen-

tives in the four countries studied here. The value of standard depreciation

allowances will depend upon the pattern which is allowed for tax depreciation.

Common examples are declining balance, straight-line, and other schemes under

which the firm may switch from one method of calculation to another part—way

through the asset's life. In each case, the present discounted value may be

computed from the parameters of the relevant legislation. Consider a simple

example in which tax depreciation is granted at an exponential rate
                                             —21 —




equal to a (this is the continuous—time version of declining balance deprecia-
tion), and suppose that tax depreciation allowances are computed at historic

cost. The value of standard depreciation allowances is given by




             Ad =         Ta   e_+1U du =                  .                    (2.19)
                                                     a+p


         There are other assets (buildings in Germany and the U.K., for example)

for which the tax system usually provides straight-line depreciation. In this

case, a tax lifetime, L ,       is   specified for each asset, and the asset may be

written down for tax purposes by i/L per unit in each year until L years

have elapsed. With straight—line depreciation,


                      L
                      r T      (1\       U    —      T1—e
                                                        -pL
              A   -
                  —
                               —j    e


         There exist more complicated depreciation formulae such as the U.S.

allowances for double declining balance with a switch to sum—of—the—years'—

digits part way through the tax—life of the asset. Where relevant, these for-

mulae are described in section 2.3 of each country chapter. For computational

purposes, we simply note that the value of Ad is a nonlinear function of the

firm's discount rate which in turn is a function of the real interest rate.

         We return now to the effect of wealth taxes on corporations and to the

tax treatment of inventories in periods of inflation (which itself is akin to a

wealth tax). Consider, first, a tax on the net worth of the company such that

an addition to the net capital stock of one unit raises the wealth tax base by a

unit. If the rate of corporate wealth tax iS W , then in the absence of a tax

on corporate profits, the wealth tax reduces the marginal rate of return from

NRR to 1RR — w    .   When there is a tax on profits at the rate T       , and the
                                              —22—


wealth tax is not deductible for corporation tax purposes, the net of tax return

to the company is reduced to (1—t)MRR — w            .   When the wealth tax is deductible

against corporate profits tax, the post—tax return is (1—T)(MRR —            w)
Equation (2.10) now becomes



              v =   [(1—t)iR      —                  e           du
                                      (1_d1T)w]

                =
                              —   (1d   1   T)wc]
                                                                                     (2.21)
                            p+ór

         where d1   =   1   if corporate wealth taxes are deductible against the

                            corporate tax, and

                    =   0 if wealth taxes are not deductible.


         The remaining issue in the specification of the cost of capital func-

tion is the tax treatment of inventories in periods of inflation. During each

accounting period, the book value of inventories changes for two reasons.

First, there may be an increase in the volume of inventories, and secondly,

there may be a rise in the price of inventories. In part, this latter component

of the increase in book value reflects general inflation and would not be taxed

under a corporate tax system based on real profits. But in some countries, the

use of historic cost accounting means that the inflationary gain on inventories

is taxed as current profits. We assume that v denotes the proportion of

inventories taxed on historic cost principles. Then a marginal investment of

one unit of inventories, if there are no relative price changes, will incur an

additional tax of Tvn per annum. This modifies equation (2.21) resulting in

the general form
                                                —23-



                                     (1d 1 t)wc — d 2 TV1I]
                 v=                     -                          ,                        (2.22)
                                    p + 0 —Tt

  where   d2 equals unity for inventories and zero for other assets. We may

  summarize our discussion on the cost of capital by noting that if we combine

  equation (2.22) with the definition of p , then the relationship between the

  pre—tax real rate of return on a project and the firm's discount rate is given

  by


                 p =
                       (11)    [(l-A)(p +       -   )+   (i   -
                                                                  diT)w   +
                                                                              d2tv]   - 6   (2.23)

           It   can easily be checked that when there are no taxes, the values of

  both p and s as given by equations (2.23) and (2.6), respectively, are equal to

  the real interest rate. The final step in our calculations is to relate the

  firm's discount rate to the market interest rate. With perfect certainty and no

  taxes, the two would be equal. In a world of distortionary taxes, however, the

  discount rate will differ from the market interest rate and, in general, will

  depend upon the source of finance. For debt finance, since nominal interest

  income is taxed and nominal interest payments are tax—deductible, the rate at

  which firms will discount after-tax cash flows is the net of tax interest rate.

  In other words, for the case of debt finance,


                   =   i(i—)                                                                (2.24)


           For the two other sources of finance, the discount rate depends upon

• both the personal tax system and the corporate tax system. We define the cor-

  porate tax system in terms of two tax variables. The first, defined above, is
                                                       —24—


the basic corporate tax rate i                 , the    rate of tax   paid if no profits are distri-
buted. The second variable measures the degree of discrimination between reten-

tions and distributions. The tax discrimination variable is denoted by 0 , and

is defined as the opportunity cost of retained earnings in terms of gross divi-

dends foregone. Gross dividends are dividends before deduction of personal

income tax. Hence 6 equals the additional dividends which shareholders could

receive if one unit of post—corporate tax earnings were distributed. For a

detailed discussion of these issues, see King (1977, chapter 3).

            Under a classical system of corporation tax (such as that in the u.s.),

no additional corporate tax is collected (or refunded) when dividends are paid

out, so the value of 0 is unity. With an imputation system (such as that in

the U.K.), a tax credit is attached to dividends paid out, so the value of

6 exceeds unity. From the definition of 0 , we know that if one unit of pro-

fits is distributed, 6 is received by shareholders as dividends, and (1—0)

is collected in tax. Hence the additional tax per unit of gross dividends is

equal to (i—e)/e .           The total tax liability of the company, that is, total

taxes excluding personal income tax on both dividends and interest, and

excluding any capital gains tax on retained earnings, is given by



                   T=TY+ (                 G                                                  (2.25)


where Y denotes taxable income and G denotes gross dividends paid by the

company.

            With an imputation system of corporation tax, part of the company's

tax bill is imputed to the stockholders. If the rate of imputation is c

then the stockholder receives a dividend before personal tax equal to the cash
dividend plus the           tax credit   of c/(l —   c).   Hence, ( — 1) eouals the          tax credit
and e    = 11(1   —   c).    When full    imDutation   at the cororLit-      tax   rate is   rante
(such that dividends are fully deductible against profits for corporate tax

purposes',    as in West Germany), then 8 =            1/(1   —   T).
            Consider        now the appropriate discount rate for the firm when financinC

investhent by new share issues. Potential investors would require a rate of

return    on the      money to which they     subscribe    to the company equal to i(l-m),

where  i is the nominal market interest rate. Suppose that the project yields
a return net of corporate income tax of p. Then this required yield (that is,
the firm's discount rate) must be such as to equate the net of tax dividend
yield with the investor's opportunir cost rate of return. The former is equal
to (l—m)&p , and the latter is (l—m)i. This means that for new share issues the
firm's discount rate is given by

                                                                                                 (2.26)

            The    use of retained earnings enables investors to accumulate at a rate
of return which is taxed by capital gains tax rather than income tax. This is
often attractive because the rates of capital gains tax are usually signifi-
cantly lower than income tax rates. If the yield of a project is p, then the
investor    would require a yield such that p(l—z)                  i(l —   m), where z is the
effective tax rate on accrued capital gains. The discount rate for retained

earnings is, therefore, given by3


                        =   i(4_) .                                                              (2.2T)

            In    practice, capital gains are taxed only on realisation, and to allow
for     the benefit of this deferral of tax, we must convert the                   statutory rate,
                                           —26—


      into an effective accrued tax (or EAT) rate. For this purpose, we use a

simple model of investor behavior. Let A be the proportion of accrued gains

which are realised by investors in a particular tax bracket in each period.

That is, a capital gain of one unit accruing in period one will lead to a

realised gain of A      in period one and an unrealised gain of 1-A .           In   the

second period, realizations are equal to A(1—X) .           In   the third period, reali-

zations are x(i—x)2 , and so on. If we assume that A is constant, then the

present discounted value of the stream of tax payments resulting from a unit of

accrued gain is given by



                z =                          =                                             (2.28)
                       Az5

where   P is the investor's nominal discount rate. In general, the investor's

nominal discount rate is equal to s + n

          When computing marginal tax rates, we substitute the expression for z

from (2.28) into equation (2.27). The EAT rate z is thus endogenous to the

calculations, because of its dependence on the market interest rate. The tax

treatment of capital gains is described in the appropriate sections of each

country chapter. Except where capital gains are taxed as they accrue (as for

insurance companies in Sweden), we take a value of 0.1 for A .               This   value

implies that corporate shares have a mean holding period of ten years (King

1977, chapter 3).


2.4   Computing Effective Tax Rates

          The above equations enable us to calculate the tax wedge w and the

marginal tax rate t for each combination. In the fixed—r case, we first com-

pute s from (2.6), and then the firm's discount rate from equations (2.24)
                                       -27—


through (2.28). With the resulting value of p , we compute p from (2.23).
In the fixed-p case, however, the calculations are more complicated. Given a

value for p ,   we solve (2.23) for the discount rate, but iteration is required

because the discount rate enters the expression for depreciation allowances in a

nonlinear fashion. For complicated depreciation schemes the function is highly

nonlinear but we have checked that our solution is unique in the feasible range.

Then, given a discount rate, we solve for the market interest rate. (In the

case of retained earnings, further iteration is required because the capital

gains tax rate depends upon the interest rate.) Then we solve for the post—tax

real rate of return to savers, a

        The functional relationship between p and a is, in general, nonli-

near. The values of the tax wedge and the tax rate thus depend upon the values

of p and r at which they are evaluated. We investigate these relationships

in chapter 7. For most of our tax rate calculations, we use a value of 10 per-

cent for p ,    or   5 percent for r

         One of the important relationships we investigate is the impact of

inflation on effective marginal tax rates. In the fixed-p case, we assume the

same 10 percent value for p , the real pre—tax return, at all inflation rates.

But in the fixed—r case, we must be more careful. With an unindexed personal

tax system, higher inflation inevitably widens the dispersion of effective tax

rates. A tax-exempt investor remains tax-exempt, but a taxed investor pays tax

not only on the real return but on the inflation premium as well. This in-

creased dispersion of effective tax rates is an inevitable consequence of the

arbitrage mechanism underlying our fixed-r assumptions, in which all differences

in post-tax rates of return are arbitraged away, except for those resulting from

differences in personal tax rates. With an unindexed personal tax system,
                                      —2 —



therefore,   an arbitrae eu±libriun is characterized by the dispersion of effec-

tive tax rates being an increasing function of the inflation rate. When eval-

uating tax rates at different inflation rates, we rrust choose an appropriate

value for r.    If we choose a constant value for r, then the implied values for

s will be a decreasing function of the inflation rate. Hence, as our benchmark,

we have chosen to evaluate the tax rates for values of r such that the average

value of s over ownership groups is constant across inflation rates. This rrans

that when comparing inflation rates, the value of r is not held constant. The

"fixed—r" assumption refers to the condition that, at any given inflation rate,

the value of r is the same for all combinations. It is justified by reference

to the possibility of arbitrage. But the arbitrage argument is not relevant

when making ceteris ribus, comparisons among different inflation rates.

          It is evident from (2.6) that if the average value of s over

ownership groups is to be independent of the inflation rate, then the nominal

interest rate assumed in our fixed—r calculations rrust rise with each percentage

point increase in inflation by a factor equal to unity divided by unity minus

the average personal tax rate. We stress that this is not an assumption about

how inflation   actually affects nominal market interest rates. There has   been a

great   deal of debate about the effect of inflation on interest rates, but   our

assumption is nerely a decision about the value of r at which to xasure tax

rates. With a linear tax system the nasured tax rate would be independent of

any such assumption. Alternative assumptions about the value of r at which to

compute effective tax rates are explored in Chapter 7. The results for the

fixed—r case in each country chapter are based on the benchmark described here.

          It is clear from the above equations that the effective marginal tax

rate depends upon the particular asset in which an investment is made, and upon
                                          —29—


the industry, source of finance, and category of owner. To obtain the solution

to the system of equations for each combination, and to compute the weighted

averages, it is necessary to resort to a large computer program. Yet it is

possible in simple cases to illustrate how the equations operate and to

demonstrate that they accord with our intuition. To proceed, we consider two

very special tax systems and demonstrate that the equations simplify to

expressions which are in agreement with our prior knowledge. Consider first a

personal expenditure tax on all investors combined with a cash flow corporation

tax in which all investment outlays are immediately expensed and in which

interest payments are not tax deductible. We know that this tax regime imposes

no tax wedge between the return to savers and the return to investors (for

example, King (1977), Chapter 8). With a cash flow corporation tax and no

interest deductibility, the firm's discount rate will be equal to the market

interest rate for all sources of finance. With this regime of immediate

expensing for all types of investment, then, f =
                                                       1
                                                           f3
                                                                = w
                                                                      C
                                                                              =   v   =   0   .   Also,     f
                                                                                                            2
equals unity, and hence A         .   The result is that the value for p in each

combination is equal to the real market interest rate (i —                            . With       a per-

sonal expenditure tax, m = z = w      =   0   ,   and hence s = p         .       Thus, the tax wedge
and the marginal tax rate are both equal to zero.

         The other special case which we consider is that of complete integra-

tion of the corporate income tax and personal income tax, and indexation of the

resulting integrated tax system. No corporate taxes as such are levied in this

case, and   the   investors' discount rate becomes that of the firm. With an

indexed tax system, this rate is equal to (1—m)r +          i . There                 are no wealth

taxes and no taxation of inflationary gains on inventories. Tax allowances are

given only for true economic depreciation at replacement cost. Hence
                                                   —-),—




   = f.    = 0   ,   and   1',   eauals unit', so Äö       =--_        . With   this expression, i

is easy to see from eauation (2.11; that p =                r   ,    the real market rate of

interest. It is also clear that s = r(1—m)                  .       Hence, for every combination,
the effective marginal tax          rate    is equal to the investor's personal tax rate.

           In practice, as we shall see, the complex tax systems which all of our

four countries levy on corporate income mean that not only does the effective

marginal tax         rate differ from the standard of either an income tax            or an expen—

diture tax, but that the tax rates vary              enormously      from one combination to
another.    One of the major aims of our      study is to document this phenomonon              -


empirically      and to    provide estimates of the magnitude of the effect and of the
proportion    of investment which is          channelled through each of the combinations.
These estimates enable us to          compute a distribution of marginal           tax rates.
           We conclude this chapter by noting a number of detailed points con-
cerning our xnethodolor. First, we have omitted taxes on gifts and estates from
our calculations. These taxes may well be important in particular ins tances
where   the principal motive for saving is to pass on wealth to succeeding genera-

tions. Much saving, however, is channelled through contractual schemes for life

cycle saving, and there are well known opportunities for avoiding taxes on gifts

and estates. In each country chapter we set out some relevant information con-

cerning these taxes, but          their    rates   are not incorporated into our calculations.
           Also,      we exclude net trade credit from our definition of debt finance.

This exclusion causes the magnitude of              debt finance to be understated, par-
ticularly for the "other industry" sector in Sweden. The matter is discussed
further in individual country chapters.
                                         —31—



           e   assume also that al relevant tax allowances can be claimed. Firms

engaging in our hypothetical investment projects are assumed to have positive
taxable profits, or, equivalently, the tax system is symmetric in that it
refunds losses at the same rate at which it taxes profits. In practice, there
are   firms with negative taxable profits, which are unable to claim allowances.

Tax losses can be carried forward, and in some cases backwards, so the fact that

taxable income is currently negative need not nan that the tax allowances are

lost forever. However, in the cases of Britain and Sweden there are ounds for

believing that the problem is one which cannot be overlooked. Sirmilations of

marginal tax rates for companies which have exhausted tax allowances are con-

tained in sections 14 of those two country chapters. One of the nin reasons for

the rapid growth of leasing has been the wish of "tax—exhausted" firms to lease

assets from companies with positive taxable profits who could claim the tax

allowances. Where this is possible the effectiveness of tax allowances is not

diminished.

           We have nEde no explicit allowance for risk in our calculations, and

the equations above assume perfect certainty. In itself, this is not a signifi-

cant assumption in that the effect of risk is ninly to alter the required rate

of    return on an investment project. A project which is unusually    risky   will
require a high rate of return, particularly if it has     a   high covariance with
other   projects thus reducing its value as an investment hedge. These differ-

ences nan that the value of r which we choose to use in the fixed—r calcula-

tions night differ for projects with varying degrees of risk. But we wish to

evaluate the incentives provided by the tax system, and it seems sensible to use

a common value of r (or p )       for   all projects. Risk might vary from one

industry    to another, or one asset to another, and   it is possible that our
                                     —32—


investor groups would have different degrees of risk aversion and would choose

different portfolios accordingly. These considerations mean that we might wish

to evaluate marginal tax rates at different values for the real rate of return

required by savers, but they do not alter the principles underlying calculations

of the magnitude of the wedge which is imposed by the tax system between a given

rate of return on a project and the rate of return which can be paid out to the

supplier of finance.

        We have used a definition of tax—exempt institutions that includes pen-

sion funds. The tax treatment of contributions to pension funds does indeed

imply a zero marginal tax rate on capital income, provided that the income tax

rate against which contributions may be deducted is equal to the income tax rate

at which ultimate pension benefits are taxed when paid out. In practice, indi-

viduals may have higher tax rates during their working life when making contri-

butions than during retirement when receiving pension benefits. To the extent

that tax rates fall after retirement, the effective tax on capital income from

pension funds is negative rather than zero. Our calculations overstate slightly

the true marginal tax rate on capital income in this case.

         One difficult problem concerns the tax treatment of funds which are

deposited by households (or institutions) in banks and then lent by banks to

companies. This indirect form of debt finance, in contrast to direct purchase

of corporate bonds, has been growing in recent years. We assume in our calcula-

tions that the banking system acts asa competitive financial intermediary, and

that at the margin, it earns no monopoly profits on interest receipts. Hence,

the only taxes which we assume are collected on interest receipts in connection

with corporate borrowing from banks are personal taxes levied on investors'

interest income. At this point, we draw a distinction between time deposits arid
                                          .7.7
                                         __) )—



checking accounts. The fcrrter pay interest at market rates (except in the U.S.
where legal restrictions hold rates down; see Chapter 6 for further discussion

of the tax treatment in this case) and investors pay income tax on such inter-

est income. For time deposits, we assume that interest payments are taxed at

investors' marginal tax rates. But where funds which are lent to firms origin-

ate from an addition to checking accounts, then, in those countries where

checking accounts do not pay interest, the income accrues to households in the

form of tax-free banking services. On accounts of this type, we assume that the

effective personal tax rate is zero. We assume that a marginal investment

financed by bank   borrowing   would come from the two types of accounts in propor-

tion to their existing deposits, such that the average marginal personal tax

rate   on interest paid to banks is a weighted average of zero (for checking

accounts) and the investor's marginal tax rate (for time deposits). A diagram-

matic illustration of our assumptions concerning the tax treatment of debt

finance is given below in Chapter 3 where this issue is first disucssed with

reference to a particular country. Readers are referred to that discussion for

an empirical analysis of the taxation of interest income.

          One final point concerns the estimation of the rates of true economic

depreciation used in our calculations. In our exposition, it was convenient to

asswne that assets decayed exponentially, but in most countries, national

accounts estimates of depreciation and capital stocks employ the assumption of

straight—line depreciation with lifetimes obtained from surveys or other

sources. In order to exploit these sources of data concerning asset lives, we

ask the question, "what rate of exponential depreciation would give the same

present discounted value of the depreciation stream as is implied by straight—

line depreciation with an asset life of L years?". If we discount at the real
                                                       —34—


interest rate (we are measuring real flows here), then the answer to this ques-

tion is the exponential rate 6 given by



              6
             r+ó
                      =    _i__ (1
                               r
                                      —    e"-')   .                       (2.29)


        Rearranging, this yields



                  =        r   i —e
                                  -rL\
                                                                           (2.30)
                      rL   —       (l—e)

        Although the value of 6 in equation (2.30) depends upon the real dis-

count rate, a good approximation may be found for values of the discount rate

close to zero. This is probably acceptable in countries where the post—tax

real rate of return is not large. Formally, it is possible to show that5



              urn (o) =               .                                    (2.31)
              r+o       L



        We use the asset lives provided by national accounts data and convert

to equivalent rates of true economic depreciation using equation (2.31).


2.5 Data Requirements

         The data requirements for our study are as follows. First, we need a

detailed description of the statutory tax rates embodied in the tax system and a

detailed description of the parameters embodied in the rules which enter into

the definition of the cost of capital equations. Given these data, we calculate

effective marginal tax rates for all 81 combinations. Secondly, we need weights

for the proportion of total net capital stock that can be identified with each
                                     - 5-

corriation.   The construction of both kinds of data is described in detail in

each country chapter. The first section of each chapter contains an introduc-

tion to the tax system and general background on its rules. The tax system

itself is described in Section 2. The capital stock weights are described in

Section 3. All data refer to the calendar year 1980, or to the nearest tax year

if the fiscal year differs from the calendar year. To enable the reader to

compare nnetary values across countries, we show in Table 2.1 the natrix of

exchange rates ruling at the end of 1980. Our aim is to provide sufficient

information about the rrthodology employed and the data used in our computations

so that other investigators nay, first, repeat our calculations to confirm the

results and, secondly, extend the coverage to earlier time periods and to a

wider range of countries.
                                 Tatle 2.1

                          Exchange Rates, end 1980


             (units of row currency perunit of eolumn currency)



                                U.S.    U.K.         Sweden   Germany

             U.S.              1.000    2.385        0.229    0.510

             U.K.              0.419    1.000        0.096     0.214

             Sweden            4.373   10.417        1.000     2.230

             Germany           1.959    4.680        0.448     1.000


Source: International Financial Statistics, I.M.F.
                                        Footnotes


1 .   To ensure convergence of the integral, we assume that p+6—ii is strictly

      positive.


2. A system where dividends are fully deductible at the corporate level and

      fully taxed at the personal level is equivalent to a system in which tax is

      collected on all profits at the corporate level but            is       rebated to indivi-

      duals on dividends received at the personal level. Recipients are taxable

      on gross dividends 6      11(1   — c), but they receive credit for c/(l —               c),
      the amount paid at the corporate level on those profits.


3.    In   practice, we often have data for the personal tax rate on dividend income

      that is different from the tax rate on interest income. This difference

      occurs because holders of equity are typically in higher tax brackets than

      holders of debt (and not because of different tax schedules for interest

      and dividends). A potential investor in equity, with a single personal tax

      rate me, would receive (1 — nle)Op            on dividends,    (1 —      z)p   on retained

      earnings, or (1 — me)j     on alternative investments. Hence, equations

      (2.26) and (2.27). His value for s is 1(1 —                    —   iT   —      and we have
                                                               me)
      enough information to find both p and s for any combination involving

      equity finance. A potential investor in debt, with personal tax rate

      would receive a net return a =      i(1   —
                                                    md)
                                                          —   — w.    The firm's discount

      rate for debt finance is i(1 —    ), from        equation (2.25), and again we can

      calculate the difference between p and a.
                                      Footnotes (continued)




.   When 12 =    13 = 0, 1 = 1,         and Ad             ,   then (2.17) become:




            =            6P        ) (p+ó-) - 6

                6(1—rn) +
            =                      —o
                   1—I



    In the integrated system,           p=    (1—m)r +   ii (see   text)   and T = m.   In this

    case,

                6(1—rn) + r(1—rn) +      ,—
                                                 —o
                            1—rn




5. Applying     L'Hôpital's rule twice.
                              Glossary of Notation


        This glossary includes notation defined in Chapter 2 and used through-

out the book. Notation that is specific to one country and used in a limited

context is defined at the point where it is used.


A       Percent discounted value of tax savings from depreciation allowances

        associated with a unit investment.


        Percent discounted value of tax savings from standard depreciaton
Ad
        allowances associated with a unit investment.


A       Present value of depreciation allowances associated with a unit
        investment (Ad =


a       Rate of tax depreciation on exponential basis.


a'      Rate of exponential tax depreciation before switch (   B/L).

B       Declining balance rate (= 2 for double declining balance).


b       Proportion of funds allocated to IF which must be deposited in

        Central Bank (Sweden).


b(n)    Value age profile of an asset (Sweden).


C       Effective cost of an asset.



Cr      Total gross dividends paid.


        Tax on distributed profits (Germany).


Cu      Tax on undistributed profits (Germany).
                                        —2—




                         Glossary   of Notation (continued)


D      Economic depreciation (Sweden).


d(n)   Average age of retirement of machines (Sweden).



       Dummy   equals   unity if corporate wealth taxes deductible against
d1

       corporate tax; zero otherwise.


       Dummy equals unity if asset is inventories; zero otherwise.


f(n)   Fraction of value of asset retained after n years (Sweden).


       Proportion of cost of asset which is entitled to standard depreciation

       allowances.


       Proportion of cost of asset which is entitled to immediate expensing.


       Proportion of cost of asset which is entitled to cash grant.


g      Rate of cash investment grant.


H      Multiplicative coefficient (Hebesatz) for local business tax (Gewerbes—

       teuer) (Germany).


i      Nominal interest rate.


K      Net capital stock (Sweden).


L      Asset life.



L5     Time of the asset's life for an optimal switch of depreciation method.
                                            —3—


                        Glossary of Notation (continued)


1      Proportion of profits which may be allocated to the IF (Sweden).


M      Base rate (Nesszahl) for local business tax rate (Germany).


MRR    Gross marginal rate of return on a project.


       Marginal personal tax rate.


       Marginal tax rate on dividend income (Sweden).


mSB    Hypothetical tax rate where no initial tax credit is given (Sweden).


       Equivalent tax    rate   (Sweden).


N      Number of machines originally in a cohort of assets (Sweden).


n      Period of fiscal depreciation (Sweden).


p      Pre—tax real rate of return on a project.


p      Mean of p.


q      Ratio of market value to replacement cost (Tobin's q).


r      Real interest rate.


5(u)   Survivor curve for capital assets (Sweden).


s      Post—tax real rate of return to the saver.


T      Total tax liability.
                                       —4—


                      Glossary of Notation (continued)


t       Marginal tax rate (w/p).


t       Average marginal tax rate (w/p).



te      Marginal tax rate on tax-exclusive basis (w/s).


u       Tine index.


V       Present discounted value of profits of a project.


v       Proportion of inventories taxed on historic cost principles.


w       Tax wedge (p -   s).

w       Mean of w.


        Rate of corporate wealth tax.


        Rate of personal wealth tax.


        Corporate taxable inconie.


z       EFfective accrued tax rate on capital gains.


        Statutory rate of capital gains tax.


    B   Equivalent tax rate on capital gains (Sweden).


        Proportion of net capital stock attributable to kk combination of

        asset, industry, source of finance and   owner.
                                  —5—


                   Glossary of Notation (continued)


     Growth rate in value of shares held by investment fund (Sweden).


y    Implied deduction against tax base of insurance company (Sweden).


     Rate of exponential depreciation.


0    Opportunity coat of retained earnings in terms of gross dividends

     foregone.


A    Proportion of accrued gains realized by investors in each period.


     Dividend yield of investment fund portfolio (Sweden).


     Rate of inflation.


p    Rate at which firm discounts net of tax cash flows.


     Investor's nominal discount rate.


     Rate of corporation tax.


     Effective tax inclusive local business tax rate (Germany).


Te   EFfective tax rate on insurance company (Sweden).


     Statutory corporate tax rate (Sweden).
