                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   RATIONAL ASSET PRICE BUBBLES




                          Behzad T. Diba

                       Herschel I. Grossman



                      Working Paper No. 1059




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138


                           January 1983



We presented an earlier version of this paper at the NEER Program
on Economic Fluctuations Research Meeting at Princeton in March
1982. Robert Flood, Peter Garber, Bennett McCaflum, Kenneth
Singleton, and Lawrence Summers gave us useful comments. The
National Science Foundation has supported this research. The
research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                          NBER Working Paper #1059
                                               January 1983



                 Rational Asset Price Bubbles



                           ABS TRACT




     The solution to a linear model in which supply and/or demand
depends on rational expectations of future prices can involve
three parts, which we denote as the fundamental component, the
deterministic bubble component, and the stochastic bubble
component. This paper explores the properties of these solution
components, emphasizing the distinction between deterministic
bubbles and stochastic bubbles, for a model of inflation and for
a model of the evolution of price and quantity in the market for
a storable commodity, such as gold. The analysis focuses on
stochastic bubbles as a possibility peculiarly associated with
models that involve rational expectations. In both the inflation
model and the gold model, although the analysis points to no
compelling reason to rule out rational stochastic bubbles a
priori, conventional behavioral assumptions imply that any
rational bubbles that arise, whether deterministic or stochastic,
are explosive. The paper discusses problems of implementing
econometric tests for the existence of rational bubbles, and, as
an alternative to these tests, suggests "diagnostic checking" of
the stationarity properties of time series. Although these
diagnostic checks do not constitute definitive hypothesis
testing, we conjecture they would provide strong evidence against
rational bubbles outside the context of hyperinflation.



                                       Behzad T. Diba
                                       Herschel I. Grossman
                                       Department of Economics
                                       Brown University
                                       Providence, Rhode Island 02912
     The recent literature includes various examples that
illustrate that a linear rational—expectations (RE) model can
permit a multiplicity of time paths for market—clearing price——
see, for example, Taylor (1977), Shiller (1978), Blanchard
(1979), Flood and Garber (1980), and Blanchard and Watson
(1982). Burmeister, Flood, and Garber (1982) point out that each
of these examples are cases of what they denote as a price
"bubble." Obstfeld and Rogoff (1982) demonstrate that maximizing
behavior does not preclude rational bubbles in interesting cases.

     These examples show that rational bubbles are theoretically
possible. Specifically, the solution to a linear RE model can
involve three parts, which we denote as the fundamental component
(FC), the deterministic bubble component (DBC), and the
stochastic bubble component (SBC). However, as Flood and Garber
point out, RE, by requiring expectations to be correct on
average, places strong and potentially testable restrictions not
only on the fundamental component, but also on the form that the
bubble components can take. The present paper explores the
properties of these solution components for a model of inflation
and for a model of the evolution of price and quantity in the
market for a storable commodity, such as gold. The critical
element in these models is the dependence of supply and/or demand
on rational expectations of future prices.

     An empirical motivation for studying bubble components is
that the volatility exhibited by many time series of prices seems
difficult to explain in terms of movements in their PC. Because
of this problem, economists frequently suggest casually that in
fact FC is sometimes not the only empirically relevant component
of price. Recently, some econometric studies have provided
evidence that might seem to support this common—sense
hypothesis. For example, Shiller (1981) concludes that the
variability of common stock prices is many times greater than the
apparent variability of their FC. Also, the Salant and Henderson
(1978) model of the price of gold, although it includes
interesting expectational elements in FC, does not seem able to
                                         —2—

explain all of the price gyrations between 1968 and 1978 in terms
of FC, and surely would not be able to account for price
movements since 1978.

     The distinction between DBC and SBC is important for a
number of reasons. From a theoretical standpoint, SBC is
peculiar to RE models whereas DBC can also arise in perfect
foresight models. From an empirical standpoint, SBC seems
potentially able to explain puzzling qualitative characteristics
of observed price paths. For example, SBC implies excess
volatility of prices and the dependence of prices on funda-
mentally irrelevant variables.
     In what follows, Section 1 develops the basic theoretical
analysis within a linear RE model of inflation. Section 2
extends the analysis to a linear RE model of the market for a
storable commodity like gold, that is both currently produced and
held in portfolios. Section 3 discusses problems in implementing
econometric tests for the existence of bubbles. For empirical
analysis of the existence of rational bubbles, we suggest
"diagnostic checking" of the properties of time series of
observable endogenous variables as an alternative to standard
econometric procedures. Section 4 summarizes and concludes the
paper.


1.    Components of a Rational—Expectation Solution for Market—
      Clearing Price
      To illustrate the idea of rational price bubbles in a
familiar context, consider the Cagan model of inflation with
rational expectations of inflation replacing Cagan's adaptive
expectations. In this model, the current price level satisfies a
condition of equality between the real money stock, given by the
lhs of equation (1), and the demand for real money balances,
given by the rhs of (1):

(1)       Mt —   't   =
                          at
                               —
                                   $(EtPt+i
                                              —
                                                  Pt),   > 0,
                              —3—

where     Mt is the logarithm of the nominal money stock at
              date t,
          Pt is the logarithm of the price level at date t,
          I represents all of the variables that influence
              demand other than expected inflation,
          8   is the semi—elasticity of real money demand with
              respect to expected inflation,
          Et is an operator that denotes a rational calculation
              of an expected value, i.e., a calculation
              consistent with the true model, conditional on
              information available at date t.

     The analysis assumes that Mt and       are exogenously
determined random variables and that the sequences {EtMt+ } and
{Etczt+j} do not grow exponentially with j, for any t. The
assumed exogeneity of Mt abstracts from feedback from the price
level to the nominal money stock and, given the nature of fiscal
processes that involve inflationary financing of public
expenditures, is probably unrealistic. The model can be extended
along the lines of Section 2 to allow the money stock to be
endogenous.
     The variables      Mt, and       are contemporaneously
observed. This assumption means that all market participants
have complete knowledge of the current values of relevant
variables. A potentially interesting, but ambitious, extension
would be to require market participants to form statistical
inferences about current events as in RE models with incomplete
current information. A further complication would be to assume
that market participants have differential information.

    The following discussion reveals that a critical property of
a linear RE model, which has a number of implications for the
characteristics of the model's possible solutions for the time
path of price, is whether its eigenvalues are real or imaginary,
positive or negative, and lie inside or outside the unit
circle. In the present example, rearranging (1) yields the
first—order partial difference equation,
                                       —4—


                                   -               —
 (2)      EtPt+i =    (l+8')Pt             8'(Mt       at).
Equation (2) is a partial, rather than ordinary, difference equa-
tion because E P     depends on both t and j, and not simply
                     .
on j. The single eigenvalue of (2) is 1+8 , which, given
that 8 is positive, is greater than unity. This property of
the model reflects an essential aspect of the structure——namely,
the inverse relation between the demand for money balances and
the expected rate of inflation. Because the eigenvalue is
greater than unity, and Mt and       do not grow exponentially,
a forward—looking particular solution for Pt involves a
convergent sum.

     If, alternatively, a model involved a first—order equation
with an eigenvalue inside the unit circle, a forward—looking
particular solution generally would not converge. Consequently,
such a model would not imply a meaningful dependence of current
price on expected future values of the exogenous variables. In
Section 2 below, we analyze a second—order system in which one
eigenvalue is greater than unity and the other is positive but
less than unity. In this case, the particular solution includes
convergent forward—looking and backward—looking terms.

     To obtain a forward—looking particular solution for 't and
EtPt+1, operate on both sides of (2) with Et and use a lag
operator——see Sargent (1979, pp. l71—177)—-to get



(3)       EtPt+i =    81     (18_1)_i Et(Mt+ —



Substituting   (3) into (2) yields



          Pt =    (1+8)[(Mt_czt)       +    Z(1+8)'           Et(Mt÷._ at+)I.
                                       —5—


The particular solution given by (4) represents what, following
Flood and Garber (1980), we denote as the fundamental component
of price (FC).

     In the present example, FC at date t involves the current
money stock and demand variables and a sum, with exponentially
declining weights, of expected future values of the money stock
and demand variables. If the processes generating Mt and
are not stochastic, these expectations are trivial and FC is
deterministic. If Mt and at are constants or follow a random
walk, the expression for FC reduces to Mt —

      Inspection
               of (2) reveals that a generalization of the
solution for Pt involves adding to the particular solution any
terms, denoted by '       that     satisfy

(5)        Ett+i —    (l+')t       =   0.

The interesting observation in the present context is that (5)
can have both a deterministic solution and a stochastic solution.
Specifically, the standard analysis of difference equations
indicates that the only deterministic solution of (5) is


(6)        t =   c(l+1)t,
where c is a constant to be determined by initial or terminal
conditions. The part of the general solution given by (6) repre-
sents what we denote as the deterministic bubble component of
price (DBC). If c is not equal to zero, because the eigenvalue
is greater than unity, DBC as given by (6) is not convergent.

     A more intriguing phenomenon than the standard derivation
of (6) is that we can also satisfy (5) with solutions to the
stochastic difference equation

                 -
                     (1+8')t   =
                                        —6—

where z is a random variable, representing new information
available at date i, that satisfies


                           (z    for    i (    j
             E.z. =
              J1            0    for i>j.

The key to the relevance of (7) for the general solution is that
(5) relates               to Etrt+1, rather than to t+l itself.
      A solution to (7) is


                      t
(8)          t =      Z    (1_l)t_1 z..
                                      1
                   i=l


Although the eigenvalue is greater than unity, beginning the sum
in (8) at date 1 insures that        is finite for all finite
values of t. We discuss below possible empirical interpreta-
tions of date 1.    The part of the general solution given by (8)
represents what we denote as the stochastic bubble component of
price (SBC).
     Adding together the expressions in (4), (6), and (8) gives
the general solution for the time path of the price level,



      Pt =    (l+8)'[(Mt—zt)        +   E(l+)              Et(Mt+1—at+1)]



                             +   c(l+l)t   +
                                                   i=l
                                                         (1_l)t_i z,


Updating (9) and operating on both sides with Et gives
                                    —7—

                   —
                       —            —l —'
          EtPt+i           i118               Et(Mt+—czt+)


                   +   c(l+_1)t+1   +    E     (18_1)t+i_l z.,
                                                            1
                                        i=l


because  Et[Et+i(Mt+i+j—zt+i+i)] = Et(Mt+i+—ctt+i+j) by the law
of iterated expectations and Etzt+i = 0 by assumption. Sub-
stituting into (2) the expression for Pt from (9) and the
expression for EtPt+i from (10) confirms that (9) and (10)
satisfy the model given by (1).
     The solution for the price level given by (9) contains each
of the three components of market—clearing price discussed
above. The key elements in the latter two terms, which we denote
as the bubble components, are the constant c and the random
variable z1. Note that, given RE, the bubble components can
enter the solution only in the self—confirming form given by (6)
and (8). The price level at date t can include the bubble
components only because the form of these terms implies that the
price level at any date t+j, j > 0, and its RE formed at
date t include these same terms multiplied by the relevant
eigenvalue raised to the power j. Consequently, given that the
eigenvalue,         is greater than unity, the existence of a
rational bubble would imply that {EtP+} is unbounded, even
if, for any t, {EMt+} and {Etat+} are bounded.
     In some optimization models in which real balances appear as
an argument   of agents' utility functions, the equilibrium price
path cannot   be explosive in the absence of explosive monetary
growth. See   Kingston (1982) and Obstfeld and Rogoff (1982) for
references,   discussion, and derivations relevant to this
result. A necessary and sufficient condition for ruling out
explosive price paths in these models is a kind of "super Inada"
condition imposed on the utility function. This condition, in
turn, implies that money is essential to the economy in the sense
that real tax revenue from inflation is bounded away from zero,
                               —8—

as the growth rate of the money stock tends to infinity. This
condition also implies that, given a finite rate of inflation, no
finite amount of extra consumption could compensate the agents
for reducing their money balances to zero.

     These implications are clearly quite restrictive. Moreover,
as Kingston (1982) points out, they are not consistent with the
Cagan money demand function used in equation (1) above. For this
function, real tax revenue from inflation converges to zero as
the rate of monetary growth tends to infinity. Equivalently, for
the utility functions that are known to deliver the Cagan money
demand function the "super Inada" condition does not hold.

     These observations imply that in the present model and in
general we cannot rule out the existence of rational bubbles, a
priori. It is also worth noting that expectations of explosive
behavior of the price level are not inconsistent with historical
experience. In sum, the question of the existence of rational
bubbles during a hyperinflation remains an open empirical
question.


The Deterministic Bubble Component of Price

     In the present example, DBC at date t equals the product
of the eigenvalue raised to the power t and a constant.
Although some related literature——for example, the empirical work
of Flood and Garber (l980)——is concerned with deterministic
bubbles, there are at least three reasons why DBC does not seem
to warrant primary attention.

     First, as a manifestation of the presence of arbitrary
constants in the solution, the term that we have denoted as DBC
is not peculiar to stochastic models incorporating expecta-
tions. Rather, it involves a phenomenon that arises in the
ordinary, as opposed to partial, difference equation systems of
deterministic economic models, such as perfect—foresight monetary
growth models and growth models with heterogeneous capital
goods. In the present model, we can think of FC as a degenerate
saddle path, and the possibility of DBC essentially reflects the
                              —9—

saddle point instability problem studied by Hahn (1966).
     Second, because the imposition of initial conditions can
resolve the indeterminacy of the arbitrary constants, the
existence of DBC depends on initial conditions. In some cases,
especially those in which the market under study has a short
history, economic theory gives us little guidance regarding the
determination of initial conditions. In other cases, however, it
seems likely that actual histories of market—clearing prices
would include initial conditions that preclude the existence of
DBC. Referring to the solution given by (9), suppose that at any
past date, denoted t = 0, the price level, P0, equalled its
FC. This initial condition implies that the constant, c,
equals zero, and, hence, that DBC equals zero for all dates
t > 0. In other words, without an unanticipated change in the
structure of the model, a possibility that seems inconsistent
with the RE concept, DBC cannot exist at any particular date
unless it existed at all previous dates.

     Third, DBC has no effect on the variance of 't    Thus, DBC
cannot help to explain the tentative observation that market—
clearing price in many cases is more variable than its FC.
Moreover, without unanticipated structural changes, DBC cannot
come and go. In the present example, as noted above, because the
eigenvalue is greater than unity, the existence of DBC would
imply a direct explosion of P. In any case, the time path of
DBC cannot exhibit the irregular oscillations with variable
periodicity that seem to characterize the cyclical fluctuations
of actual prices.


The Stochastic Bubble Component of Price

     In the present example, SBC at date t involves an average
of new information, represented by the random variable z1, that
became available from date 1 through date t, weighted by
powers of the eigenvalue that decrease as i approaches t. The
restrictions imposed on z1, Ez =
    = 0
                                     zfor i   j and
         for i > j, imply that current and past values of z
                              — 10 —



are known and that zj   is serially independent with mean zero.
In the related literature, the work of Taylor (1977), Shiller
(1978), and Blanchard and Watson (1982) is concerned with
stochastic bubbles.

     SBC is especially interesting theoretically because it is a
possibility peculiarly associated with models that involve
expectations. Specifically, the possible existence of SBC in a
solution for the model given by equation (1) required that the
difference equation (2), derived from (1), related P to
EtPt+1 rather than to          itself. As pointed out by Shiller,
the essential mathematical property underlying SBC is that an RE
model generates a system of n first—order partial difference
equations, the general solution to which involves n arbitrary
functions on the integers, i.e., n infinite sequences of
arbitrary constants, one for each date. Consequently, the
imposition of any finite number of initial conditions cannot
insure a bubble—free solution to an RE model. In contrast, a
system of n ordinary first—order difference equations
associated with a deterministic or perfect foresight model
involves only n arbitrary constants, such as the constant c,
associated with DBC in the present example.

     Any information on a new or newly observed phenomenon that
satisfies, either itself or through its innovations, the
restrictions on z1 can affect Pt in the way prescribed by SBC
as long as, beginning at date 1, individuals held expectations
of next period's price level that were rational given that the
solutions for all subsequent price levels include SBC. Thus, SBC
potentially can help to explain cyclical fluctuations in prices
and the tentative observation that market—clearing price in many
cases is more variable than its FC. Specifically, the existence
of SBC implies that constancy of the variables in FC, including
the money stock and its expected future values, is not sufficient
to insure constancy of the price level. As Shiller puts it,
              any unforecastable economic variable or the
          innovation in any variable [can] enter the solution!
          If all individuals conclude that the change in the
                                 — 11 —



            Dow Jones average should be used in [(5) as z1],
            then they will be rational in assuming so. If they
            have hunches which can be translated into the
            variable [z], then, if they forecast via [(5)],
            their hunches will yield rational forecasts (1978,
            p. 33).
     Note that even if FC were deterministic, the existence of
SBC would make the solution for t stochastic and would make
the expectation EtPt+i nontrivial. In this case, we could say
that the existence of SBC makes Pt depend on EtPt+i at the
same time that the dependence of P on EtPt+i makes SBC
possible.
     The existence of SBC can involve a reaction by market
participants to an intrinsically irrelevant variable, i.e., a
variable that is not a member of the set of exogenous variables
present in FC. Alternatively, it can involve overreaction to a
truly relevant variable. For example, the demand variable,
could depend on current or past values of the same variable,
     that enters SBC. In this case, the existence of SBC would
mean that the effect of the history of the variable z1
differs from the effect implied by FC. The specific way in which
the existence of SBC affects the time series properties of price
depends on the process generating the phenomenon represented by
     on the associated eigenvalue of the difference equation
relating current price and expected future price, and on the
role, if any, played by z1 in the other components of price,
especially FC.
     The random variable zj need not have a stationary dis-
tribution. For example, Blanchard and Watson (1982) propose a
form for SBC that implies, in the notation developed above, the
following specification of z1:

                                 -   -) +   with probability w
     zt=
                             +
                                 Ct         with   probability l—ir
                              — 12 —



where   Etict = 0.

In this model, the determination of zt involves both the random
selection between two populations and a random drawing from the
chosen population. The parameters of this process are such
that z•1 satisfies the condition E.z. = 0 for i > j, but the
                                       J1
mean of one of the populations changes through time in such a way
that at date t it equals the negative of the value of SBC at
date t—1. Consequently, the probability that the randomly
chosen value of zt will be large enough to make SBC reverse
sign is constant. In other words, this example specifies that
bubbles burst instantly with constant probability. The empirical
relevance of this formulation depends on whether SBC that exhibit
bursting actually exist.
     The designation of date 1, the initiation date of SBC as
specified in equation (8), would seem to have at least one of
three possible empirical counterparts. First, economic history
presumably began in the finite past. Specifically, date 1 in
all cases could be the point in time at which the market under
study was organized. One problem with this interpretation of
date 1 is that it would preclude identifying date 0 with
equality between P0 and FC.
     Second, in many cases date 1 could be the earliest date at
which the random event represented by z1 could have occurred.
In other words, the history of the variable z1 might include
zt = 0 for all t < 1.    Such an example of a z1 that might be
relevant for the German hyperinflation would be troop movements
associated with the French occupation of the Ruhr. Another
example, which might be relevant for the recent history of
markets for gold and foreign exchange, would be oil discoveries,
or the unexpected component of oil discoveries, in the North Sea.
     Third, in some cases date 1 could be the initial date at
which the random event represented by z was observed. Such an
example could arise whenever a data collecting agency institutes
a new survey that generates a new data series. In these cases,
                                       — 13 —



the existence of SBC involving z1 would suggest that market
participants believed at date 1 that z1, although previously
unobserved, was correlated with the innovations in FC, but that
this belief was qualitatively wrong or, at least, quantitatively
inaccurate.


2.     The Market for a Storable Commodity

     In the preceding section, the possibility of rational
bubbles involved the price level, i.e., the value of money, and
the analysis took the relevant asset quantity, i.e., the nominal
money stock, to be exogenous. To see the form that rational
bubbles can take in another interesting context, consider the
following model of the market for a storable commodity, like
gold, that is both currently produced and held in portfolios:

                        = a +                      —          and
(11)        St +   Pt           (Etpt÷1—pt)             yrt
(12)               —      =a    +
                                    bEtpt+i
                                              —
                                                  1St

where S is the logarithm of the stock of refined gold
            at date t,
             is the logarithm of the price of refined gold at
               date t relative to an index of prices of other
              commodities, and
        rt is an index of real rates of return on other assets
               (the real interest rate) from date t to date
               t+1.

The variable rt is exogenously determined and random. This
variable drives the model and makes it stochastic. For
simplicity, the analysis treats a and a as positive con-
stants. The coefficients 8, y, b, and S are nonnegative, and
5    is less than unity.

     Equation (11) says that the relative price of refined gold
satisfies a condition of equality between the existing stock of
refined gold, which is predetermined, and the portfolio demand
                               — 14 —



for refined gold. The value of refined gold held in portfolios
in terms of other commodities is related positively to the
expected real rate of return from holding gold, which is simply
the expected rate of change in the relative price of gold, and
related negatively to real rates of return on alternative
assets. These alternative returns are variable over time, but,
for simplicity, are assumed to be contemporaneously observable.

     Equation (12) says that current production of refined gold,
which involves both extraction and refining, depends positively
on the expected relative price of gold and, because the easily
accessible gold is mined first, negatively on cumulative
extraction. The model ignores final consumption of gold in
dentistry and. industry. This abstraction seems reasonable
because actual consumption of gold is small relative to annual
production and seems largely insensitive in the short run to
changes in price——see Kettell (1982, pp. 104—122). For
simplicity, equations (11) and (12) also specify the periodicity
of production adjustment to be the same as the periodicity of
price adjustment.
     Equation (12) is meaningful only when S1 — St ) 0
holds. We assume, for simplicity, that this constraint is not
binding. This assumption seems consistent with historical
experience. If the constraint, in fact, becomes binding at some
point in time, then, in the absence of final consumption of gold,
equation (12) is replaced by S1 — S = 0, and the path of the
relative price adjusts to satisfy equation (11).
      This model assumes that gold ore in the ground is not a
perfect substitute in portfolios for refined gold, but also
assumes that, although mining costs increase with cumulative
extraction, the quantity of unmined gold is essentially
unlimited. These assumptions are convenient, but are not
essential for modelling rational bubbles. An alternative model
of the gold market would assume that gold ore in the ground is a
close substitute for refined gold and that the stock of gold in
existence at date t, including both the ore and refined gold,
                             — 15 —



is exogenous and finite. This alternative model would consist of
a single equation relating this stock to the demand for it, and,
thus, would be formally analogous to the inflation model of the
preceding section.
     An implicit assumption that is critical for the possible
existence of rational bubbles is that the cumulative flow of
services generated by refined gold, aggregated over an infinite
time horizon, is not finite. To see this point, consider two
examples. In the standard model of the market for a truly
exhaustible resource, like oil, with given finite initial
reserves——see, for example, Dasgupta and Heal (1979; ch. 6)——the
time path of the resource price is determined as follows. First,
under the assumption of risk neutrality, profit maximization by
owners of the resource and/or the portfolio balance requirement
ensures that price grows at the rate of interest. Second,
substituting for price in the consumers' demand functions and
aggregating over time gives cumulative consumption as a function
of the initial price, alone. Finally, equating cumulative
consumption to the initial reserves determines the initial price,
and hence the entire price path, uniquely.

     As a second example, consider a resource, such as land, that
is not exhaustible. The fundamental component of the price
equals the present value of the flow of rental income. Because
the cumulative value of this flow is not finite, however, the
price of land is not uniquely determined in the same way as the
price of oil. Thus, a rational bubble can arise in the price of
land in the same way as in the inflation model of Section 1.

     The case of gold, in this respect, is like the case of
land. Gold jewelry, for example, generates an unending flow of
satisfaction or rental income. Thus, if, as price rises through
time to maintain portfolio balance, consumption demand in
industry and dentistry is choked off before the stock is
exhausted, as we are assuming, it would not be irrational for any
agent to plan to continue to hold gold jewelry or bullion
forever. A rational bubble, of course, would affect the date at
                                           — 16 —



which consumption demand is choked off.

The Components of the Price of Gold

       Rearranging and combining (11) and (12) yields the following
difference equation system:



(13)    [    s1 1      =   [1+b'_s         b(l—1)
        [EtPt+iJ           [ —l             l+—1
                                                    Lt

                   1yb1r +
                 +I        •l
                       y r— cx
                                    a —
                                      —l



The eigenvalues of this system are



        A1
             =
                  - (2÷8+b—6+[(2+8÷b8—o) 2÷                     ô+81 6__l_l)]l/

        A2 =          (2+ +b8 —6-[(2+ +b1-ô)2+ 4(


Both   eigenvalues are real:                 is greater than unity and A2 is
between zero and           unity.
       Let (S,p) denote the saddle path, i.e., the path to
which all convergent solution paths converge. The general
solution of (13) is obtained by adding to (S,p) the solutions
to the homogeneous system



              F   s1 1          F1+b8—6      b(1+')1     Isti
(14)
              [EtPt+ij
                            =
                                [   —1        1+—1
                                                     j   [j
Eigenvectors associated with A1 and A2, respectively, are
                                   — 17 —




   =
                         6+ —b8 +[(2+8_1+b1-6)2+4( o+l

   =
                         +8b1[(2+           +b8)2+4(

Analogously to the homogeneous equation of the inflation model of
Section 1, (14) can have both a deterministic solution and a
stochastic solution.

       The deterministic solution to (14) is



(15)                        +
            [flt] =



where C1 and C2 are constants to be determined by initial or
terminal conditions. If C1 is not equal to zero, because
is greater than unity, the solution given by (15) is explosive.
As in the inflation model, the actual history of price and
quantity is likely to include initial conditions that imply
that C1 equals zero. Given that RE precludes unanticipated
changes in the structure of the model, a sufficient condition
for C1 equal to zero is that at any past date the system was on
a convergent path.
     If C1 is equal to zero, the other constant, C2, is
                                                       —
determined by the initial asset quantity, S0, as C2 =
                                                         S0     S.
Accordingly, we define FC in this model as



           [tj =      {:] + (S —   S)4V2.

This equation specifies the only solution path that starts at
                                      — 18 —



the exogenously given stock of gold S0 and converges to the
saddle path as t tends to infinity. The difference equation
system (13) has the form of the system solved by Blanchard and
Kahn (1980, P. 1309), and following their calculations, with
appropriate corrections, we can obtain the following explicit
expressions for FC of price and quantity:


                                                    1 —
(16)      Pt =   [b( 1+8_i)) -1 E A1—1)( X1ab8            a A1—l- 8])
                                                           [




             +
                 (l+8'-Ai)St      —
                                       yb8(r + i1 A'Er)]

and



                              1
(17)      St =   (ab+a)(b+)        +   [S—     (b+a)(b+)1]A

             -   yb8          il j—l—i
                       j1

     As given by (16), FC of the relative price of gold depends
on the parameters of the portfolio balance equation and the
production equation, the existing stock of gold, which is pre-
determined, the current real interest rate, and a sum, with
exponentially declining weights, of expected future interest
rates. As given by (17), FC of the stock of gold depends on the
relevant parameters, on the initial stock of gold, and on a
weighted sum of past expectations of future real interest rates
that were formed from date 0 to date t—i. The terms involving
past expectations of real interest rates are relevant because the
current asset stock reflects the history of production, which,
in turn, reflects the history of price expectations, and, hence,
                                     — 19 —



the history of interest rate expectations. If rt is a constant
and S0 =       S,     equations (16) and (17) reduce to

Pt =    (b+)    (—a+—yr) and St = (b+6)(ab+a—byr).
        DBC for this model involves C1         0   in equation (15).
Therefore, solution paths reflecting DBC are nonconvergent. SBC
involves stochastic solutions to the homogeneous system (14).
Specifically, we can satisfy (14) with solutions to the ordinary
stochastic difference equation system


                                                          0
(18)                   =   [l+b'—s b(1+')1 [s        +
                                                              ]
                             81      l+—1
               Lt+i        [                   ]


where      is a random variable that has the same properties it
had in the inflation model. Importantly, it represents new
information available at date i and satisfies




                       (z1
                               for   i (   j
               Ez=1            for   i >j

The possible empirical interpretations of date 1 are the same
as discussed above in the context of the inflation model.

     As in the inflation model, the dependence of demand on
rational price expectations is essential for the inclusion of the
random variable z1 in the solution. Adding this variable to
the second equation in (18) does not contradict (13) only because
this second equation in (13) involves Etpt+ii rather than
merely t+l Note that we cannot add a similar variable to the
first equation in (18) because the first equation in (13)
involves S41 and not EtSt+i.
     The key property that expectations of quantities do not
appear in the structure of the model in addition to expectations
of prices reflects the proposition that, with markets working to
                                       — 20 —



equate quantities demanded and supplied, agents are constrained
only by endowments and prices. This observation suggests that
models of markets that do not clear, in which both price and
quantity expectations are relevant for current demand, could
exhibit qualitatively different forms of rational stochastic
bubbles.

       To solve for SE3C, we rewrite (18) in the form

       [1 —   (2-Fe   +b8-6)L +       (l+'—-            ')L2]St+i =   b(l+1)zt
where L is the lag operator, defined by LJSt =
Inverting the polynomial in L by the method of partial
fractions——see Sargent (1979, pp. l77—l80)——and substituting the
resulting solution for Sf41 into (18) we get



                         =
(19)                         b(l+')(X1—A2)                 1




(20)              Pt =   'l2     )1
                                      i=1
                                            [( X1—1—b    +6)



                         —             —1       t—i
                             (X2—1—         +6)X2 )z.


     The solutions given by (19) and (20) represent the
stochastic bubble component for this model. In this case, if SBC
exists, it arises in both the asset price and the asset stock..
The SBC of price at date t, given by (20), involves an average
of new information, represented by z, that became available
from date 1 to date t, weighted by the difference between
powers of the eigenvalues that decrease as i approaches t.
The SBC of the stock, given by (19), has a similar form, but
incorporates new information with a one—period lag.
                             — 21 —



     Because one of the eigenvalues exceeds unity, even though
the other one is less than unity, SBC in this model has
properties similar to SBC in the inflation model, Specifically,
under reasonable assumptions about parameters, rational bubbles
in this model are explosive. In contrast to the inflation model,
however, because the stock of gold is an endogenous variable,
rational bubbles are reflected in both the asset price and the
asset stock. These properties suggest what to look for in way of
empirical evidence relevant to the existence of rational bubbles
in the gold market.


3.   Tests for the Existence of Rational Bubbles
     This section discusses the formulation of econometric tests
for the existence of rational bubble components in asset
prices. The hypothesis that rational bubbles exist combines the
hypothesis that expectations are rational with the hypothesis
that price does not conform to the fundamental component (FC) of
the solution for market—clearing price. Consequently, an
interesting test of the hypothesis that rational bubbles exist
must involve more restrictions on the data and, hence, greater
possibilities of rejection than would tests of either one or the
other of its component hypotheses. For example, taken alone,
results that do not reject market efficiency or results that
suggest that price is more variable than its FC, although
consistent with the hypothesis that SBC exist, do not provide
telling evidence about this hypothesis.
     The essential problem involved in testing for the existence
of rational bubbles is that we cannot directly observe them
separately from the fundamental component of price.
Consequently, any test of the hypothesis that an asset price
includes bubbles must involve formulation of a joint hypothesis
about FC. A relevant criterion for judging the usefulness of a
proposed test for the existence of rational bubbles is,
therefore, the weakness of the joint hypothesis about FC involved
in the test. Specifically, the harder to reject that we judge
                              — 22 —



the joint hypotheses about FC to be, the more convincing is the
evidence from the test regarding the existence of SBC.


Direct Estimation of Rational Bubbles
     Flood and Garber (1980) and Flood, Garber, and Scott (1982)
carry out econometric tests for the existence of rational deter-
ministic bubble components (DBC) in price levels during European
hyperinflations. Recall that DBC at date t involves the
product of the eigenvalue raised to the power t and
a constant, c, in equation (9) above. Flood and Garber assume
that the growth rate of the nominal money stock followed an
autoregressive process and that the factors other than expected
inflation influencing the demand for real money balances followed
a random walk.

     Using these assumptions relating to FC, they develop two
testing procedures. One procedure is to estimate jointly (1) the
demand function for real money balances and (2) a solution for
the inflation rate consisting of FC and DBC. This procedure uses
predicted values from the estimated equation for the inflation
rate to measure the rationally expected inflation rate. The
other procedure is to estimate jointly (1) a demand function for
real money balances in which the rationally expected inflation
rate consists of FC and DBC and (2) the autoregressive money
process. This procedure uses the estimated money process to
generate the expectations of future money growth included in
FC. Both procedures yield estimates of the associated
constant, c, in equation (9) above, in the supposed DBC. The
test results fail to reject the no—bubble hypothesis, i.e.,
c=0.                                        -



     As Flood and Garber point out, this strategy of direct
estimation of the constant c involves serious technical
problems. The jth element of the corresponding regressor is, in
our notation, (1+8)J• Since (l+1) > 1, although the
estimator of c will be consistent, its asymptotic distribution
will be degenerate and confidence intervals cannot be calculated.
                                       — 23 —



      To obtain a nondegenerate normal asymptotic distribution,
Flood, Garber, and Scott test the hypothesis that a bubble passed
through the parallel hyperinflations of the 1920's. Their
results reject the no—bubble hypothesis in most cases. Their
estimators are consistent and have normal asymptotic
distributions (as the number of countries in the sample tends to
infinity). However, due to the small number of countries
actually involved in the sample, the relevance of these
asymptotic properties is questionable.
      Burmeister and Wall (1982) extend the direct estimation
strategy of Flood and Garber from testing for existence of DBC to
testing for both DEC and SEC by using a Kalman Filter. They
treat the rational bubble as an unobservable variable whose
evolution through time is governed by equation (5) above. The
results reject the no—bubble hypothesis in most cases. However,
the asymptotic degeneracy problem, pointed out by Flood and
Garber, also applies to the estimators obtained using a Kalman
Filter.


Indirect Tests for Rational Bubbles

     Blanchard and Watson (1982) propose tests for rational
bubbles that do not involve direct estimation of the parameters
of the solution for price. For stock prices, they assume that
the only forcing variable in FC is observable dividends. In the
absence of bubbles, the (conditional) variance of the distribu-
tion of dividends imposes an upper bound on the (conditional)
variance of the distribution of stock prices (or, equivalently,
the distribution of excess returns). Blanchard and Watson
tighten the bounds derived by Shiller (1981) by using information
contained in autocovariances of dividends. They conclude that
stock prices violate these bounds and, thus, that bubbles
exist.

     They also derive implications of the absence of bubbles for
cross—covariances of prices and dividends. Specifically,
stochastic bubbles are likely to decrease the correlation between
                              — 24 —



prices and dividends. The calculated relations between prices
and dividends also suggest the presence of bubbles.

     As Blanchard and Watson recognize, the apparent presence of
bubbles could be due to other phenomena. In the case of the
stock prices, the appeal to rational bubbles as an explanation
for excess volatility seems questionable because of similar
evidence reported by Shiller (1979) of excess volatility in long—
term interest rates. Rational bubbles cannot arise in bond
prices with finite maturity because, abstracting from possible
default, the prices at the maturity dates are known with
certainty. It seems plausible that these same unidentified
phenomena that produce excess volatility in bond prices are also
present in the stock market.

     For the price of gold, Blanchard and Watson assume that some
of the important variables affecting FC are unobservable, and
they examine the implications of their specification of SBC that
burst, discussed above, for the distribution of excess returns.
The tests are based on the likely effects of this form of
rational bubble for "runs" in excess returns from holding gold
and for the coefficient of kurtosis of the distribution of excess
returns. The empirical results are not conclusive. Moreover, as
Blanchard and Watson recognize, the implications of rational
bubbles for the number of runs and coefficient of kurtosis of
excess returns are quite sensitive to the particular form of the
bubble, to the form of FC, and to the information structure.


Diagnostic Checking for Rational Bubbles

     Given the limitations of the above strategies for testing
for the existence of rational bubbles, we suggest, as an
alternative, the development of diagnostic checks for the
stationarity of prices. This strategy involves an assumption
about FC that seems quite weak——namely, that the processes
generating the variables in FC (perhaps after differencing a few
times or removing a deterministic trend) are stationary. Given
this assumption, the proposed diagnostic checks can provide
                              — 25 —



evidence about the empirical relevance of rational bubbles
because, as the above analysis shows, conventional behavioral
assumptions imply that the processes generating rational bubbles
are not stationary.

     If the observed price sequence in the models analyzed above
contains a rational bubble, its nth difference is generated by a
nonstatioriary stochastic process, for any finite n. If the
bubble is stochastic, the deviations of price from any
deterministic trend are also generated by a nonstationary
process. In practice, however, given the finite size of actual
samples, we can make any time series look stationary by
detrending and/or differencing a sufficient number of times.
Consequently, we cannot detrend and difference the observed time
series of price, before running our stationarity checks,
arbitrarily. The proposed strategy, therefore, is as follows.
     First, find stationary stochastic processes that fit the
(differenced or detrended) time series of the variables that
enter FC. Second, assume that agents' information set consists
of current and past values of the relevant variables, and compute
the process that generates FC of price (or its nth difference).
This process will give some idea of how to detrend the observed
time series of price before running diagnostic checks for
stationarity.
     The third step in the proposed strategy is to carry out such
diagnostic checks for stationarity on the time series of price as
detrerided and/or differenced. There are, of course, no standard
statistical tests enabling us to reject, at a specific level of
significance, the hypothesis that a given time series is
generated by a nonstationary stochastic process. However, as a
matter of common practice econometricians use a variety of
procedures to make judgments about stationarity.
     If we find no evidence of non—stationarity we conclude that
no rational bubbles were present. One attraction of these
diagnostic checks is that any evidence they provide against
                               — 26 —



rational bubbles is unambiguous. In contrast, the other testing
strategies discussed above are capable only of rejecting the
joint hypothesis that no rational bubbles were present and that a
particular set of assumptions about FC and the information
structure are true.
     If, alternatively, we find evidence of nonstationarity, we
can draw no definite conclusions. Nonstationarity can mean that
rational bubbles, in fact, were present or that our assumptions
about FC and the information structure were inappropriate. One
possibility, in cases of nonstationarity, would be to difference
the time series once more and again carry out diagnostic checks
for stationarity. The evidence against rational bubbles would be
stronger, the fewer differences necessary to make the series
appear stationary.
     These diagnostic checks would probably be of little help in
investigating the presence of rational bubbles during hyper—
inflations, because, in these situations, sample size is small
and it is easy to believe that FC itself was generated by a non—
stationary process. For more "normal" situations, however, we
often have a large number of observations on prices, and
differencing or detrending the variables that we think enter FC
usually leads to stationary time series. A sequel to this paper
will involve the implementation of these diagnostic checks for
the price of gold and for the prices of stocks. e conjecture
that these checks will provide strong evidence against the
empirical relevance of rational bubbles outside the context of
hyperinflations.

                                                       -
4.   Summary and Conclusions
     The first section of the paper developed a linear RE model
of inflation in which the price level changes over time to keep
the real value of the nominal money stock equal to the demand for
real money balances, which depends in turn on rational
expectations of inflation. The analysis of this model focuses on
stochastic bubbles as a possibility peculiarly associated with RE
                             — 27 —




models.  This analysis does not point to any compelling reason to
rule out rational stochastic bubbles a priori. An important
result, however, is that conventional behavioral assumptions
imply parameter values such that any rational bubbles that arise
in this model are explosive.

     The second section extended the analysis to a linear RE
model of the market for a storable commodity, like gold, that is
both produced and held in portfolios. In this model, the current
and expected future relative prices of the asset change over time
to keep the portfolio demand for the asset, which depends on the
expected rate of change of its relative price, equal to the
existing asset stock, and the asset stock changes over time as a
result of net production, which depends on the expected relative
price and on cumulative extraction. Again, although there seems
to be no compelling reason to rule out rational stochastic
bubbles a priori, we find that conventional behavioral
assumptions imply that any rational bubbles that arise are
explosive. Furthermore, if the stock of the asset is an
endogenous variable, rational bubbles are reflected in both the
asset price and the asset stock.

     The third section discussed the implementation of
econometric tests for the existence of rational bubbles. An
essential problem is that such tests must involve formulation of
a joint hypothesis about FC. Furthermore, because the
theoretical analysis suggests that rational bubbles are
explosive, any time series that contain rational bubbles probably
violate the stationarity assumptions that underlie most existing
econometric procedures for hypothesis testing. For these
reasons, for empirical analysis of the existence of rational
bubbles, we suggest "diagnostic checking" of the stationarity
properties of observable time series of price. These checks are
based on finding a detrended and/or differenced time series of
                               — 28 —



price   that we would expect to be stationary in the absence of
rational bubbles and nonstationary in their presence. Although
these diagnostic checks do not constitute definitive hypothesis
testing, we conjecture that they would provide strong evidence
against rational bubbles outside the context of hyperinflations.
                             — 29 —



                           REFERENCES


O.J. B].anchard, "Backward and Forward Solutions for Economies
     with Rational Expectations," American Economic Review, 69,
     May 1979, 114—118.
0.J. Blanchard and C. Kahn, "The Solution of Linear Difference
     Equations Under Rational Expectations," Econometrica, 48,
     July 1980, 1305—1311.
0.3. Blanchard and M.W. Watson, "Bubbles, Rational Expectations,
     and Financial Markets," NBER Working Paper No. 945, July
     1982.
E. Burmeister, R. Flood, and P. Garber, "A Note on the
     Equivalence of Solutions in Stochastic Rational Expecta-
     tions Models," unpublished manuscript, February 1982,
     forthcoming in Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control.
E. Burmeister and K. Wall, "Kalman Filtering Estimation of
     Unobserved Rational Expectations with an Application to the
     German Hyperinflation," unpublished manuscript, March 1982.
P.S. Dasgupta and G.M. Heal, Economic Theory and Exhaustible
     Resources (Cambridge University Press, 1979).
R. Flood and P. Garber, "Market Fundamentals Versus Price Level
     Bubbles: The First Tests," Journal of Political Economy,
     88, August 1980, 745—770.
R. Flood, P. Garber, and L. Scott, "Further Evidence on Price
     Level Bubbles," NBER Working Paper No. 84lB, January 1982.
F.H. Hahn, "Equilibrium Dynamics with Heterogeneous Capital
     Goods," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 80, November 1966,
     633—646.
B. Kettell, Gold (Ballinger, 1982).
G.H. Kingston, "The Semi—log Portfolio Balance Schedule is
     Tenuous," Journal of Monetary Economics, 9, May 1982, 389—
     399.
M. Obstfeld and K. Rogoff, "Speculative Hyperinflations in
     Maximizing Models: Can We Rule Them Out?" NBER Working
     Paper No 855, February 1982.
                             — 30 —



S. Salant and D. Henderson, "Market Anticipations of Government
     Policies and the Price of Gold," Journal of Political
     Economy, 86, August 1978, 627—648.
T. Sargent, Macroeconomic Theory (New York, Academic Press,
     1979).
R. Shiller, "Rational Expectations and the Dynamic Structure of
     Macroeconomic Models: A Critical Review," Journal of
     Monetary Economics, 4, January 1978, 1—44.
R. Shiller, "The Volatility of Long—Term Interest Rates and
     Expectations Models of the Term Structure," Journal of
     Political Economy, 87, December 1979, 1190—219.
R. Shiller, "Do Stock Prices Move Too Much to be Justified by
     Subsequent Changes in Dividends," American Economic Review,
     71, June 1981, 421—436.
J. Taylor, "Conditions for Unique Solutions in Stochastic
    Macroeconomic Models with Rational Expectations,"
    Econometrica, 45, September 1977, 1377—1385.
