NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MEASURING GROWTH FROM BETTER AND BETTER GOODS
Mark Bils
Working Paper 10606
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10606
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2004

This work was conducted while I was visiting the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) under the IPA
(Intergovernmental Personnel Act) agreement. A number of persons at the BLS have been extremely helpful.
I want to particularly thank David Johnson, Teague Ruder, Paul Liegey, Michael Hoke, and Walter Lane. Any
interpretations presented are clearly my own, and should not be associated with the BLS. I also thank Pete
Klenow for his comments; this paper initiated from our discussions. The research is supported by a grant from
the National Science Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Mark Bils. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Measuring the Growth from Better and Better Goods
Mark Bils
NBER Working Paper No. 10606
June 2004
JEL No. O4
ABSTRACT
Using micro CPI data, I show that much of inflation for durable goods since 1988 reflects, not
increases in price for a given set of products, but rather shifts to a newer set of product models that
display higher prices. I examine how these price differences should be divided between quality
growth and price inflation based on how consumer spending responds to product substitutions. For
all goods examined (cars, other vehicles, televisions, and other consumer electronics), buying shifts
to the newer models despite their higher prices. This suggests that quality growth for durables has
averaged at least 5.8% per year, more than double the rate implied by CPI measurement.
Mark Bils
Department of Economics
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627
and NBER
bils@troi.cc.rochester.edu

Much of economic growth occurs through growth in quality as new models of consumer
goods replace older, sometimes inferior, models. Moulton and Moses (1997) estimate that
Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) methods allowed for perhaps as much as 1% average quality
growth in goods in 1995. It is often argued, however, that the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS)
methods miss much of the growth in goods' quality. (Hausman, 2003, and Pakes, 2003, are two
recent examples.) The Boskin Commission Report (1996) suggests that the BLS overstates
inflation by perhaps 1% per year. Unmeasured growth in quality of goods is put forth, based on
examining a fairly limited set of goods, as the most important component contributing an
overstatement of inflation of 0.6% per year.1
To calculate the CPI the BLS tracks a large set of prices, with each price specific to a
particular product at a particular outlet. The products followed change for two principle reasons.
At regular sample rotations, roughly every four years, the BLS draws a new sample of stores and
products within a geographic area to better reflect current consumer spending. I refer to these as
scheduled substitutions. In addition, a store may stop selling the particular product being priced.
The BLS agent then substitutes another model of that brand or of a similar product. These
(forced) substitutions occur on average about once every three years for all non housing CPI
items. They occur much more frequently, nearly once per year, for consumer durables.
I employ the CPI Commodities and Services Survey, the monthly micro data underlying
the Consumer Price Index, to show that both scheduled and forced substitutions are associated
with important increases in the unit prices of durable goods. How these price increases are
attributed to quality growth versus measured inflation dramatically affects long-term measures of
inflation, growth, and productivity growth for durables. Although the price increases
accompanying scheduled and forced substitutions largely reflect the same economic
phenomenon--newer versions of goods sell at higher prices than old, BLS methods treat them
very differently. Current methods implicitly treat the increases in goods' unit prices associated
1

Shapiro and Wilcox (1996) review much of the evidence on CPI bias. In Bils and Klenow (2001) we find that
measured CPI inflation is faster for goods that we predict will display faster quality growth. This suggests that an
important part of quality growth is not captured by the CPI.

1

with sample rotations as reflecting quality growth. Therefore, the National Income and Product
Accounts (NIPA) will interpret that part of the upward trend in unit prices as real growth. By
contrast, the price increases from forced substitutions within sample rotations have been largely
attributed to price inflation, not quality growth.2
In the next section I calculate that BLS methods implied quality growth for consumer
durables, excluding computers and related equipment, on the order of 2.7% per year for 1988 to
August 2003. More than 70% of this quality growth reflects price increases across scheduled
substitutions. Suppose counter factually that the BLS measured inflation based only on price
changes for matched models, that is, models available in consecutive periods. This omits for one
period the price changes accompanying forced substitutions, paralleling the treatment of price
increases with scheduled substitutions. I calculate this would have yielded 3.1% faster quality
growth for durables, with growth at 5.8% per year.
Much of the discussion of possible biases in measured inflation has been motivated by
perceived feedback from measured inflation to monetary or fiscal policies (e.g., social security
payments). But it should be kept in mind that most consumption deflators for the National
Income and Product Accounts (NIPA) are based on BLS's measures of CPI inflation. The NIPA
derive real growth measures by subtracting measured inflation from nominal spending growth for
each category of good. Thus any measurement error in CPI inflation will lead to an opposite error
in rates of real growth. If we cannot accurately attribute the price changes from model
substitutions between quality growth and price inflation then it is not possible to ascertain rates of
growth in real consumption or productivity. To illustrate, TFP growth for motor vehicles and
other transportation sector (SIC 37), reflecting BLS price measurement, averaged 1.1% per year
for 1987 to 2001 (from Bosworth and Triplett, 2003). But suppose that forced substitutions for
motor vehicles should be treated the way scheduled substitutions are treated, with price changes
across models viewed as quality upgrades. I calculate then that both quality growth and

2

This statement applies to nondurables as well. For instance, Moulton and Moses calculate that for 1995 forced item
substitutions account for perhaps 30 percent of inflation, even excluding apparel from the calculation.

2

productivity growth are understated by 4.4% per year. If, on the other hand, the treatment of price
changes for forced substitutions should actually be applied to scheduled substitutions then both
quality and productivity growth are overstated by 1.8% per year. The implied range for TFP
growth for motor vehicles varies dramatically from  0.7% to 5.5% per year.
How to allocate the price increases associated with product substitutions between quality
change and inflation is an open question. Suppose inflation from one month to the next were
measured based solely on price increases for models available in both months. This implicitly
assumes that substituted models exhibit the same rate of change in consumer surplus as those
models matched across months. As just stated, this approach would have yielded much faster
quality growth than measured by past practices. Pakes (2003) suggests that even this is likely to
understate quality growth because goods that exit the market are obsolete and, absent the
substitution, were likely to experience a relative fall in price. By contrast, Triplett (1997), among
others has argued that sellers use periods of model turnovers to increase price more than justified
by quality improvements. In principle, hedonic pricing equations, as introduced by Court (1939)
and developed by Griliches (1961) and Adelman (1961), might be used to split goods' rates of
unit-price inflation between quality growth and true declines in purchasing power. But in practice
the exacting detail on product characteristics this requires is rarely collected.3
I show how quality growth can be judged by the response of consumer purchases to model
changes. Consider estimating the price inflation, net of quality growth, associated with replacing
one television model with another. Suppose that we observe time series for prices and sales for
each model; and suppose further that we know the price elasticity of market demand across
models. Then, knowing the change in market share that accompanies a model change, we can
3Hausman

(2003) discusses practical limitations of hedonics given that the analyst typically possesses a quite small
number of relevant characteristics. These include the fact that the shadow prices of characteristics are notoriously
unstable and sometimes even appear perverse in sign. For instance, hedonic equations for automobiles can exhibit a
negative coefficient for gasoline mileage (miles per gallon), presumably reflected a negative correlation between
miles per gallon and unmeasured quality characteristics. The use of hedonic price equations by the BLS in
constructing the CPI is fairly limited. Computer equipment is one good where data on several relevant characteristics
is collected (e.g., RAM, processor speed) and hedonic prices play an important role. But even here, hedonics are
only employed if across the substitution it is possible to match brand and all but a small number of characteristics to
the base-period product.

3

multiply this change by the (negative) elasticity of demand to get the quality-adjusted change in
price relative to the rate of increase for goods without model turnovers. In practice we typically
do not know the elasticity of demand. However, if relative quantity movements are not too large,
then it is possible to limit the plausible range for relative effective price movements for new
models.4 To this end, section 3 presents a model in which consumers choose both variety and
quality for a broad set of durable goods. Section 4 employs the model to construct an estimator
of inflation based on the price changes of matched models (those available in consecutive
periods) and on what happens to the market share of matched goods.
Section 5 returns to the data to examine the question: If we measured price inflation
based only on the price changes for matched goods, would this measure be biased upward or
downward? I examine how market share responds to model substitutions for motor vehicles by
linking substitution rates by vehicle model in the CPI Commodities and Services Survey to sales
data by model from Ward's Automotive. I similarly examine changes in market share for video,
audio, and telecommunications products based on scanner data. These goods generate about 75
percent of the price increases from model substitutions for durables (weighting goods by
expenditure shares). For all these goods, I find a declining market share for matched models
relative to those with model turnovers. This suggests that even measuring inflation based on
matched-model inflation may overstate inflation and understate quality growth. Section 5
additionally examines how prices for continuing (matched) models respond to frequent model
changes for competing products.
The final section summarizes the findings. I conclude that average quality growth for
durables has likely been understated by 3 percent per year, or more, during the past 15 years.
This is about three times the bias for durables underlying the Boskin commission report. The
final section also discusses extending the results beyond durables.

4

A product should be priced in the elastic portion of its demand. So, if appearance of a new model creates a drop in
relative quantity of 5 percent, we can assume that its relative price increase is less than 5 percent. Relatedly,
Hausman (2003) argues that proper construction of a price index requires that the BLS collect data on quantities. I
attempt to recover much of the needed information for durables from available information on quantities.

4

2. The Quality Measurement Problem
The problem of measuring quality growth can be viewed as allocating the rate of growth
in unit prices of consumer goods (1?83>:<3-/ ) to that reflecting quality growth (1;?+63>C ) and that
reflecting true inflation, that is, the growth in prices holding quality constant (1-98=>+8> ;?+63>C )

1?83>:<3-/ œ 1;?+63>C  1-98=>+8> ;?+63>C .
Implicit are subscripts denoting a particular good and time period. It is also implicit that these
variables reflect averages over the population. Not all consumers will face the same rate of
growth in unit price for good i; and a good's model change can present a greater quality
improvement for some consumers than others. 1-98=>+8> ;?+63>C is the required change in nominal
expenditure to achieve a certain base-year level of welfare, given changes over time in prices and
qualities of goods. The next section provides a setting where 1;?+63>C and 1-98=>+8> ;?+63>C have clear
model interpretations.

The BLS collects prices on about 90,000 non-housing goods and services per month to
calculate the CPI. About half of goods are priced monthly, with the others priced bimonthly.
Prices are collected from about 22,000 outlets in 87 Primary Sampling Units across 45
geographic areas.5 These prices, and other information related to the constructing the nonhousing components of the CPI, are contained in the BLS' CPI Commodities and Services Survey.
This is the data employed in this section and in much of the empirical work in Section 5. As
discussed above, the specific products priced by the BLS change over time through both
scheduled sampling changes and forced substitutions. Scheduled substitutions occur every four

5

The BLS chooses outlets probabilistically based on household point-of-purchase surveys, and choose items within
outlets based on estimates of their relative sales. The BLS divides consumption into 388 categories called Entry
Level Items (ELIs). The BLS sampling methods are described in detail in Armknecht, et al. (1997) and the BLS
Handbook of Methods (1997).

5

years.6 For durables forced substitutions occur, weighting by importance of good, about once
every 14 months.
Unit-price inflation can be broken into three parts: Inflation calculated for continuouslyfollowed models, the extra unit-price increases across forced substitution of new versions, and
thirdly the unit-price inflation associated with sample rotations.

(1)

1?83>:<3-/ œ 1=+7/-79./6  =(1=?,=>3>?>398  1=+7/-79./6 )  1=+7:6/ <9>+>398= .

I express the unit-price inflation associated with forced substitutions as the share of quotes with
forced substitutions (s) multiplied by the excess inflation rate for these substitutions compared to
those without substitutions (1=?,=>3>?>398  1=+7/-79./6 ).
I examine the importance of each of these three components for 50 separate categories
(BLS Entry Level Items--ELI for short) of consumer durables using information from the CPI
Commodities and Services Survey for years 1988 to August 2003. My focus is on durables
because forced substitutions are much higher for durables. However, the approach proposed for
exploiting quantity and price information can potentially be applied to other goods. Goods with a
strong seasonal fashion cycle tend to be exhibit large price reductions as the seasons change. I
exclude apparel to limit the importance of fashion changes. I exclude other goods with important
seasonal or fashion cycles such as motor boats or entertainment CD's. I also exclude used cars,
which are priced based on auction data. The categories of consumer durables are listed in Table
1. The table's third column provides the number of quotes used in analyzing price changes. The
final column provides the weight of each durable in calculating the CPI for 1997. The combined
share for the 50 goods is about 10 percent of the CPI. Vehicles make up about half of this share.
I observe a total of 829,364 price changes within sample rotations for the 50 durables.
95.2% reflect price changes observed over one or two months. The average duration applying to

6

These rotations occured every 5 years historically, including much of my sample period. The BLS has moved to
even more frequent sample rotations for consumer electronics.

6

the price changes is 1.7 months. (I exclude price changes that are measured, due say to repeated
stock outs, over a period of more than 6 months.) 90.0% of price quotes reflect following the
same version, whereas 10.0 % reflect forced substitutions. For the remainder of the paper I
present weighted statistics--I construct mean values by expenditure category (ELI), then arrive at
an aggregate number by weighting the individual categories by their shares in the 1997 CPI.7
Weighting increases the share of forced substitutions to 12.9%.
BLS treatment of price changes associated with model changes for computers is
dramatically different than for other durables. So including them with the bulk of durables hides
a good deal of information. Unless noted otherwise, the statistics to follow are for the 49
durables excluding computer equipment, with results for computers and equipment presented
separately.
I calculate the rate of increase in unit prices (1?83>:<3-/ ) as follows. For each year for
each category of good (ELI) I construct the average natural log price. I then regress this average
price on a time trend separately for each good. Results for the separate ELI's are then weighted
by each category's consumer expenditure share for 1997. Unit prices for these durables increased
at an annual rate of 2.5% for January 1988 to August 2003.
The size of unit-price increases for good without and with forced substitutions are
reported in the second column of Table 2. For goods with no item substitutions the average price
change was actually quite negative, equaling  0.5%. This translated into an average annual
inflation rate within versions, that is 1=+7/-79./6 , equal to  3.3%.8 By contrast the price
increases calculated solely for forced substitutions averaged 4.0%, or 4.5% greater than for price
quotes without product substitutions. Although these forced substitutions constituted only 12.2

7

The BLS selects outlets proportionally to their importance in a somewhat wider product category than an ELI, for
instance, based on men's clothing, not the specific ELI men's shirts. In constructing ELI-level statistics I weight by
the percentage of sales within the broader category at the outlet corresponding to that ELI. The BLS refers to this
percentage as the percent of pops category. The BLS Handbook of Methods, 1997, gives more detail. To be more
exact, I also first construct year-ELI means then time aggregate to obtain the ELI's mean. Otherwise recent years
would often be weighted more heavily as the number of quotes collected has risen.
8 In creating the annualized inflation rate I weight the quote's inflation rate per unit of time by the duration covered
since the BLS previously sampled the item (usually one or two months).

7

percent of the price quotes, the excess of their rate of price increase over 1=+7/-79./6 added 3.8%
annual inflation to unit-prices.
The top panel of Table 3, Column A, breaks down unit-price changes according to
equation (1). The overall growth rate in unit prices, 2.5%, reflects the sum of the rate of inflation
within sample rotations plus the contribution from rotations. The average annual rate of price
increase within rotations equals 0.5%; this equals the  3.3% calculated based on goods without
substitutions, plus the 3.8% annual unit-price inflation contributed by the excess price increases
associated with forced substitutions. The rate of increase in prices across rotation samples is
obtained by subtracting 0.5% from the total unit-price trend of 2.5% per year. The implied
contribution from sample rotations is considerable, equaling 2.0% per year.
How these unit-price changes are divided into quality growth versus inflation defines
overall quality growth for durables. For example, if we were to base quality-adjusted inflation
simply on price changes for goods without model substitutions, then measured inflation would be
 3.3%, with quality growth equaling 5.8% per year.
How do BLS methods treat the components of price changes? The matched-model rate of
inflation,  3.3%, is obviously treated as part of CPI inflation. The price increases associated
with sample rotations, 2.0% per year, are implicitly treated as quality growth. For time period t
prices are collected for both the outgoing and incoming samples. The rate of inflation for t-1 to t
is based on price changes for the outgoing sample of products; the rate for t to t+1 is based price
changes for the incoming products. As there is no direct comparison of products' prices across
the two samples, price increases from sample rotations have no impact on measured inflation. By
contrast, for many forced substitutions the BLS does compare prices of the new version of
products to that of the discontinued item.
The BLS follows several different procedures for dividing the price increases from forced
substitutions between CPI inflation and quality growth. These are described in detail by
Armknecht and Weyback, 1989. Faced with a forced substitution, an analyst examines brief
written descriptions of the old and new goods provided by the field agent to determine which

8

procedure to apply. Table 2 shows the prevalence of each procedure for treating quality growth
for forced substitutions for durables for January 1988 to August 2003.
Often the new good is judged to be strictly comparable to the model that dropped out.
This occurred for a little over one third of substitutions for durable goods (weighting goods by
expenditure shares). It is even more common outside of durables, being employed in 58% of
substitutions for all goods and services in 1997. With this procedure the new model's price is
compared directly to that of the older model in calculating inflation, with quality growth across
the model change set to zero. For these substitutions price was, on average, 2.6% higher for the
new model than for model priced before, with all of this increase allocated to CPI inflation.
The BLS's other common method for durables is to make an explicit or direct quality
adjustment based on comparing the characteristics of the old and new models. These can reflect
applying hedonic pricing equations or employing information on production costs for new
features. This procedure was also employed in a little over a third of substitutions for durables.
(It is much less common for non durables.) Prices increased on average by 4.3% for these
substitutions. BLS direct quality adjustments for these substitutions averaged only 0.5%; so
much of the average price increase across these substitutions was treated as CPI inflation.
Other adjustments refer to two other procedures, called return-from-sale and class-mean,
that make an indirect adjustment for quality. Together they accounted for nearly 20 percent of
substitutions. Neither procedure directly compares the new model's price to the replaced model's.
The return-from-sale procedure adds back inflation equal to price reductions that the replaced
item exhibited during sales prior to disappearing. The class-means procedure assigns for that
quote the average CPI inflation rate exhibited within that category of goods by substitutions
treated as comparable or treated with direct quality adjustments.9 Goods treated with these two
types of adjustments exhibited unit-price increases across the substitutions of 7.3%. Because

9

Over the 1988 to 2003 period use of the return-from-sale procedure has been sharply reduced for durables, whereas
use of the class-means procedure has grown in importance.

9

these substitutions were assigned average CPI inflation of 5.1%, they were implicitly treated with
average quality growth of only 2.3%.
Finally, for only 10 percent of forced substitutions the BLS omitted the price change
entirely in calculating CPI inflation. This is referred to as the deletion method. This approach
implicitly treats the price change from the old to new model, net of measured inflation for other
price quotes, as the quality growth across models. This parallels the treatment of model changes
associated with regular sample rotations. These quotes exhibited price increases of 2.2%. Quotes
treated by the deletion method indirectly are assigned the inflation rate measured for all other
price quotes in their category. Because this rate averaged nearly zero, the price increases
associated with these forced substitutions translated into average quality growth of the same
magnitude.
Across all forced substitutions prices increased on average by 4.0%. (By comparison,
with no substitution prices fell by 0.5% on average.) Overall only 20 percent of the price
increases that accompanied forced substitutions were allocated, explicitly or implicitly, as quality
growth. Appendix 1 reexamines the impact of forced substitutions on unit-price and BLS defined
inflation using regression analysis. There I examine to what extent the big price increases across
forced substitutions are offset by smaller than usual price increases in the periods preceding or
following the substitution. There is a predictable fall in prices for the observations directly
preceding a forced substitution. But this cut is fairly small relative to the price increase
accompanying the substitution. Examining a larger window in time around the forced
substitutions reduces their impact on price changes by only about 20 percent in magnitude.
The annual rates of quality growth implied by alternative treatments of forced
substitutions are presented in the bottom panel of Table 3. The average BLS quality-adjustment
associated with forced substitutions averaged only about 0.7% per year. Adding to this the 2.0%
annual growth in unit prices contributed by sample rotations, I calculate total quality growth
implicit in BLS methods on the order of 2.7% per year. By contrast, had price inflation been

10

based solely on matched-model inflation, quality-growth associated with forced substitutions
would have been 3.8% per year, with total quality growth equaling 5.8% per year.
These results hide important differences across the 49 goods. Based on the analysis of
market shares to follow, I separate out two sets of durables: (i) vehicles, and (ii) consumer
electronics (video, audio, and telephone equipment). This is done in Columns B and C of Table
3. Both vehicles and consumer electronics display much higher forced-substitution rates than the
other durables. The substitution rate is 15.8% for vehicles and 15.1% for consumer electronics.
(For the balance of the 49 durables it is 7.1%.) Unit-price inflation is much lower for consumer
electronics, reflecting rapid deflation of nearly 10% per year for goods without substitutions. If
inflation had been based solely on same-model inflation, I calculate that quality growth would
have been 4.4% higher per year for vehicles and 2.9% percent higher for consumer electronics.
Table 3 shows that measured quality growth depends crucially on how much of the
increase in prices across substitutions is assigned to quality growth. Consider measuring inflation
based only on price changes for products available at consecutive observations (matched-model
inflation). This treatment has intuitive appeal. When products are replaced, either by scheduled
or forced substitutions, it treats the increase in price for the newer models, relative to increases
for the continuously observed goods, as a measure of quality change. It roughly corresponds to
Gordon's (1990) approach to measuring durables goods prices by following catalogue prices for
similar items over time. Table 3 shows that this measure of inflation implies quality growth of
5.8% per year for durables (excluding computing equipment). Again, even this could be too low;
it is quite conceivable that new products provide quality enhancements that more than justify their
higher, on average, prices (Hausman, 2003, Pakes, 2003).
BLS methods, by my calculations, implied quality growth of 2.7% per year for these
durables. But most of this, 2.0%, is from implicitly assigning price increases from sample
rotations to quality growth. It seems unlikely that the product and price upgrades associated with
sample rotations could be all associated with quality growth, while the product and price
upgrades associated with ongoing item substitutions reflects relatively little quality growth. For

11

illustration, suppose we assume the BLS methods applied to forced substitutions should also be
applied, approximately, to scheduled substitutions as well. Then the rate of quality growth should
be only 1.1% per year (0.7% within rotations plus 0.4% across rotations). Thus, without further
evidence, the plausible range for quality growth is at least as wide as from 1.1% to 5.8% per year.
Over the nearly 16 year period, 1988 to August 2003, quality would accumulate by less than 19%
with an annual growth rate of 1.1%, but by a very dramatic 148%, if growing by 5.8% per year.
The calculations above omit computers and computing equipment--BLS methods for
treating substitutions for computers differ dramatically from that typical for other durables. Table
4 considers the importance of substitutions calculated purely for computing equipment. The
substitution rate for computing equipment is 27.0%, twice as high as for other durables. Ignoring
substitutions, the average price quote shows a significant decline of  2.7%. The substitutions,
by contrast, are associated with jumps up in price of 5.4 percent, and for non-comparable
substitutions it is on the order of 10%. Unlike other durables, for computers these price increases
do not translate into CPI inflation. The BLS uses hedonics extensively for computing equipment
and price changes are much more likely to be omitted (deletion method). My calculations suggest
that BLS methods imputed on average about 10.2% quality growth for forced substitutions.
Column D of Table 3 presents annualized rates of quality growth for computers and
equipment. I calculate that BLS methods yielded about 18.5% annual quality growth from forced
substitutions for computing equipment for January 1988 to August 2003. This is not quite a
complete picture. As discussed above, price changes associated with sample rotations are
implicitly treated as quality growth. For computers, these changes are negative on average,
equaling  1.3%. So the implied overall rate of quality growth for computers equals 17.2% per
year, 18.5% within rotations minus 1.3% across rotations. If the BLS had based CPI inflation
simply on matched-model inflation, I calculate that quality growth would have actually been
1.8% lower for computers, at 15.4% per year. Columns A and D of Table 3 suggest the
importance of computing equipment in measured quality growth for durables. Although
computing equipment constituted only 5% of the CPI for the 50 durables in 1997, adding

12

computers more than doubles the annual rate of quality growth from forced substitutions from
0.7% to 1.6%. The picture is considerably different when the quality growth implicit in the BLS
treatment of sample rotations is added. Including computer equipment raises this broader
measure of BLS quality growth from 2.7% to 3.4%; so computing equipment contributed only
about 20%.

3. Quality Choices
This section draws a model of household quality choices for consumer durables. The
following section uses the model to judge relative price changes for products experiencing
substitutions based on the growth in their relative market share. This provides a gauge of quality
growth across product substitutions.

Household preferences
At time 0, household h maximizes lifetime utility given by

Yh0 œ

∞ ">~- "2>

>=!

1/5

Þ

" is the discount factor. ~
- 2> denotes effective consumption during >. I assume this effective
consumption reflects a Cobb-Douglas function of non-durable consumption, -9 , and consumption
of J distinct categories of durable goods.

J
~c 2> œ c"α # cαÎN .
j2>
!2>
j=1

The share parameter α is the same for all durables for ease of exposition. Consumption of the
(composite) non durable is divisible. The N durables are consumed indivisibly--a household

13

enjoys consumption from at most one television, one sofa, and so forth. Given the utility
function, all households will in fact consume each of the N durables.
Household h's consumption for durable j depends on two aspects of the good as follows

(2)

c42> œ ;42> @j2> .

q reflects a pure quality component; variations in q are evaluated commonly across consumers.
Measuring the average growth in ; is the purpose of the empirical work. I treat ; as a continuous
choice variable. This captures the idea that for each good households face a menu of qualityprice combinations. As an example, for sofas ; might reflect factors such as fabric quality.
Treating ; as a continuous choice variable abstracts from the possibility that increased variety in
quality choices over time might allow consumers to better match themselves with an optimal
level of quality. Here consumers will always be choosing their optimal degree of quality q.10

@ captures how well a household's specific taste in product characteristics match those for
a particular variant of j. Following Hotelling (1929), Lancaster (1966, 1971), and many others, I
represent preferences over good attributes by particular addresses in a characteristics space. In
addition to quality q, a good has K distinct attributes. A household's preferences reflect its ideal
bundle of characteristics for the good. The factor @j2 associated with consuming a particular
variant depends on how well its characteristics align with the household's ideal bundle. For an
arbitrary variant with vector of attributes D (with elements D5 ), this is specified as

(3)

O

P8 v2 ÐD Ñ œ  9  ÐD5  D k2 Ñ# .

5œ"

The good j and time > indices are implicit. This quadratic form is used widely in address models

10

The choice by consumers of quality q here parallels consumers choosing the quantity, as well as variety, of a good
in Anderson, de Palma, and Thisse (1993) and Feenstra (1995).

14

of product differentiation, particularly as applied to discrete consumer choices (e.g., d'Aspremont,
et al., 1979, Horstman and Slivinski, 1985, Anderson, et al., 1992).
Household h's period t budget constraint is given by
J

c0ht +  Hjht xjht œ y2> .
j=1

The price of the non durable is normalized to one. Household h's total expenditure equals y2> ,
which is the household's income plus any dissaving in t. H4ht is 1 if household h purchases
durable j in period t, and 0 otherwise. x4ht is the unit price paid by household h for good 4.
Durable j is assumed to depreciate stochastically and completely with probability $4 . The
empirical tests below do not hinge on this. Consumers do not sell used durables. I assume a
depreciation rate sufficiently high relative to the growth rate in quality that only a negligible set of
consumers would choose to discard a working durable in order to upgrade its quality.11

Product varieties
On the supply side each durable j is produced and sold by N4 competing variants, with
N4  K4  ". Each seller faces a marginal and average cost of w4> per unit of quality q4 .
Following Archibald, Eaton, and Lipsey (1986), Anderson, et al.(1993), among others, the N4
sellers are assumed to be located symmetrically in the space of characteristics so that

(4)

5 œ œ
D48

(4

30 5 œ 8ß 09< 5 œ "ßÞÞÞÞß Oà 8œ"ß ÞÞÞßR"
(4 9>2/<A3=/
Þ

.

5
D4R
œ  (4 0 9< 5 œ "ß ÞÞÞÞß O Þ

11

For instance, for a durable with an annual depreciation rate of 15% and quality growth of 3% per year, less than
half of one percent of the durable would last sufficiently long to be discarded while working. For a 5% growth rate
this fraction is about 3.9%. Certain depreciation at some point, for example after 15, could be entertained without
altering the analysis below except slightly modifying certain constant terms.

15

From here on, I set ( equal to "# , so that distance between variants equals one. This is a
normalization, as the impact of parameter ( can be encompassed in the preference parameter 9.
The number of product varieties is treated as constant over time. Expansion in the
number of variants could lead to additional welfare gains. My focus, again, is on measuring the
contribution of quality growth. Measuring gains from an increase in product varieties is an active
parallel line of research (e.g., Hausman, 2003, Berry, et al., 2002).12

Household choice of quality
Assume that firms set unit prices proportional to quality. So, for seller n of good j

Bjn> œ :48> ; .

(5)

Since costs of producing the unit are proportional to q, this corresponds to a proportional markup
that is independent of the quality chosen. I examine seller's pricing decisions below and find this
pricing does maximize profits, given that other sellers price in this fashion. Pricing as in (5)
constitutes a Nash equilibrium in pricing schedules (Wilson, 1993, Rochet and Stole, 2002).
Consider household h's choice of quality, conditional on choosing to purchase variant n of
durable j. The price of increasing the quality purchased of durable j, that is relative to the price of
the non durable, is simply :nt . The household should equate this relative price to the ratio of the
marginal utility gained from possessing a better quality of durable j versus having more non
durable consumption. Reflecting the durability of good j, this condition is
α q–"

N

nht

∞ Ð"Ð"$ÑÑ7 Ð µ-µ-2>2> Ñ" 5"

7 œ!

7

Ð"αÑ-ht–"

12

œ :nt .

The specification of locations in equation (4) makes variety grow proportionately with entry. This is perhaps
objectionable for estimating variety benefits from increased market entry (see Berry, et al., 2002, and Ackenberg and
Ryslin, 2002); but it is not so directly relevant for the exercise here.

16

The good index j is implicit. Also the household's consumption of the non durable c92 is labeled
simply as c2 . Recall that ~c 2> denotes the household composite of consumption of all goods from
equation (1). Allowing for a steady growth rate of g in real consumption, and rearranging, yields

;n2> œ

(6)

α

" 5"

NÐ"αÑÐ" Ð"$ Ñ" Ð"1Ñ

-2> .
:
Ñ 8>

Thus quality displays elasticities of one and minus one respectively in response to increases in
household non durable consumption and the relative price of the durable.13 Consider a growing
economy. Absent relative price changes, households increase the quality of, and expenditures on,
durables at the same rate as the non durable. We should anticipate the durable's quality growing
even faster if its price controlling for quality, :4> , is falling reflecting, for instance, faster
technological advances than for other goods.

Household choice of brand
Now consider the household's choice of which variant to purchase. Given spending based
on (6), this choice has no impact on the expenditure on non durables or choices for other
durables. Therefore, the problem reduces to maximizing effective consumption of good j.

R"

7+B  P8Ð:8> Ñ  9  ÐD58  D52 Ñ#  P8Ð<8 Ñ .
8
5œ"

(7)

13

It is more common to express demands in terms of expenditure and prices. If the number of durables is large, so
there is negligible uncertainty in how many durables are replaced during t, then expenditures on nondurables and on
the representative durable (given it is purchased) can be expressed compactly as

-2> œ Ð"  µα ÑC2> ,
:8> ;n2> œ
where:

µα œ

µα
$ N 2> ,

C

α
" .
α  "$ α Ð" Ð"$Ñ" Ð"1Ñ" 5 Ñ

17

Good index j is implicit. Although the good has K (>N-1) attributes, from (4) only the first N-1
are relevant for the household's choice, as the variants share the same address on N through K.
The term P8Ð<8 Ñ allows for unequal market shares by making, everything else equal, some
variants more popular in all households' eyes. This could be derived by slightly modifying the
specification of addresses in (4) so that brands have different addresses on one or more of
attributes N through K, with households sharing a common ideal point for these attributes.
Potential shifts in households' demand across variants can be captured by changes in <8 . Note
that the decision implicit in (7) does not depend on the household's income.
Let households' ideal points for the vector D of attributes be distributed according to the
continuous density 1ÐD Ñ. Then the share of households purchasing variant N, as an example, is
<R :R"
" P8Ð <R :" Ñ
"
<" :R
#9 P8Ð <R" :R Ñ 1ÐD ß á ß D
â '∞
R" Ñ.DR" â .D" Þ
"

#9
=R œ '∞

A distribution for 1ÐD Ñ often used in discrete-choice models is the Type-1 extreme value. The
market shares then have the closed-form
"

(8)

Ð:8 Î<8 Ñ .9

=8 œ R

Ð:3Î<3Ñ ".9

0 9< 8 œ "ß á ß R ,

3œ"

where . is a dispersion parameter for the distribution. These demands mirror the CES demand
function for divisible commodities. The elasticity of demand is smaller if products are poor
substitutes, 9 large, or if consumers are diffusely distributed in their preferences, . large. Since
these two parameters always enter multiplicatively in describing product demands, for the balance
I set the distribution parameter . equal to one for convenience.

18

Pricing
Using equations (6) and (8), profits for seller n are
"

Ð:8 Î<8 Ñ 9 " Ð:  AÑ ,
αProfitsn œ
8
" 5" R
NÐ"αÑÐ" Ð"$ Ñ" Ð"1Ñ Ñ Ð:3 Î<3 Ñ "9 :8



3œ"

_
where - equals mean non durable consumption; time subscripts are suppressed.
The profit maximizing net price markup can be expressed as

:8‡ A œ 9 Þ
A
"=8

(9)

where =8 is firm 8's market share given in (8). The markup is higher if consumers have strong
brand preference--9 large. The markup is increasing in the firm's market share, and indirectly its

R Ñ9 .
relative demand through <8 . For the symmetrical case (all <i 's equal), the markup is ( R"

4. Using Growth in Matched-Models' Market Share to Measure Inflation
The goal is to measure the rate of inflation in a price index for a good despite potential
quality changes across product substitutions.

R

Q

R

8œ"

8œ"

8œQ"

1 œ  =8 18 œ  =8 18   =8 18 Þ

Good j and time subscripts are implicit. 18t equals 68Ð:8ß> Î:8ß>" Ñ. Weighting by expenditure
shares corresponds to the BLS's primary current practice for weighting product models within an
ELI (geomeans weighting). Number the product models so that the first M correspond to those
products that experience no model substitution. Products M+1 to N are those for which
substitutions are made. The right-hand-side of the second equation breaks the inflation rate for
19

good j into the contributions from these two sets of products. The first component is measured by
following the unit prices of the matched models. For the second set it is necessary to somehow
deduct quality growth from inflation in unit prices.
Let W7 equal the combined share of the matched models (W7 œ

 =8). The inflation rate
Q

8œ"

for the product models with substitutions can be gauged, relative to that measured for matched
models, by what happens to W7 . Intuitively, if the inflation rate for products with substitutions,
net of quality growth, exceeds that for matched models, then W7 will increase. More exactly,
from equation (8) changes in W7 can be related to the changes in the relative prices of matched
models plus shifts in demands (<8 's). Substituting in the above equation yields

R

Q

7  0,
1 œ  =8 18 œ  ( W=8 )18  9 .W
W
7
7
8œ"
8œ"

(10)

where

R
Q
7 Ñ  = . <8 Þ
0 œ  =8 .<<88  Ð "W
W7 8œ" 8 <8
8œQ"

The inflation rate has three components. The first is the rate of inflation for the matched
products. I reported this in Section 2 as the matched-model rate of inflation. The second term
requires multiplying the growth rate in the market share of the matched products times the
parameter 9. The final term is an error term that is positive if preferences systematically shift
between t-1 and t toward those products that experience product substitutions between t-1 and t.
Product substitutions are triggered by a product being discontinued at an outlet. Decisions
to replace product lines presumably take at least several weeks to implement. Given the high
frequency of the data, monthly or bimonthly, this suggests that product substitutions between t-1
and t are predetermined with respect to innovations to < between t-1 and t. As a special case, if
disturbances to <8> follow a random walk, then the expectation of 0 is zero. Furthermore, given
the large number of goods and months aggregated in the empirical work, the variability to
measured inflation contributed by 0 should be extremely small. Of course, shifts in preferences
20

need not follow a random walk; but it is not necessary to assume this in the empirical work, as it
is possible to condition on past market shares.
Suppose the BLS had measured inflation simply based on matched models. From Section
2, this would have resulted in about 3% faster quality growth per year for durables (excluding
computing equipment) for 1988 to August 2003. The primary question I pursue is whether
measuring inflation based just on matched models would overstate quality growth. From
equation (10), the answer is yes if, for those goods matched between t-1 and t, market share is
declining. The intuition is straightforward. The inflation rate for matched goods understates
inflation if the new product models provide less consumer surplus than the products replaced,
given their respective prices. But from equation (10), this implies the market share of the
matched products should increase from t-1 to t. Alternatively, a decline in market share of the
matched models implies that even the low rate of inflation based on matched models is overly
high.
Note that these qualitative tests do not require knowing the parameter 9 in equation (10).
It is based just on the result that if inflation for the matched products is less than for the
substituted products then consumers should shift toward these products. It is also not particularly
sensitive to assuming the extreme value distribution for 1ÐD Ñ. In discrete choice models all
varieties are gross substitutes. So if we see consumers moving away from the matched products,
this robustly suggests that their relative price has not declined.

.W7
7
With knowledge of 9 and information on .W
W7 one can obtain, by substituting for 9 W7 in
equation (10), a more precise estimate of inflation. This is related to Hausman's argument that
constructing an accurate price index requires information on quantities and knowing demand
elasticities. Note, however, that convincingly estimating demand elasticities from data on prices
and quantities for a large set of goods, given problems of identification, could be as daunting as
constructing reliable hedonics estimates.
It is possible, however, to further constrain the reasonable range of values for inflation.

R Ñ9 .
From the previous section, for the symmetric case (common <'s) the markup equals ( R"
21

:8‡ A
This implies a value for 9 of ( R"
R ÑÐ A Ñ, which is strictly smaller than the percent markup of
price over marginal cost. This suggests values for 9 should be considerably less than one. For
instance, even if we accept the plausibility of a 100 percent markup, this still implies a value
importantly less than 1, unless N is large. But the presence of a large number of competitors
together with markups of 100 percent would seem implausible. The upshot is that, if realizations
7
for .W
W7 are not too large in magnitude, it is possible to state narrow bounds for the rate of

inflation and, implicitly, the rate of quality growth.
The next section examines sales data by product model for cars, other vehicles,
televisions, audio equipment, telephones, and other related consumer electronics. These goods
represent about three-quarters of the impact of forced substitutions on unit prices for the durable
goods. Because market-share information is not readily available for a number of durables, I
finish this section by discussing how price responses for matched products might proxy for
market-share information. Intuitively, if product substitutions are associated with price increases
greater than justified by quality, an increase in p in the notation above, then we might expect the
matched products to face less competition, justifying an increase in their prices.
7
From equation (10), we need a measure for 9 .W
W7 . In lieu of quantity information, note

that the 9-weighted individual share changes can be related from the pricing equation (9) to seller
n's change in price and marginal cost. Evaluated near the case of equal market shares

9.=8
s8

.:

.A
8
œ A8 Ð R"
R Ñ Ò :8  A Ó .
#

p

Aggregating yields

= (9
Q

("")

7
9 .W
W7 œ

8œ"

8

W7

.=8
s8 )

 A8 =8( .::88 )
Q

œ Ð R"
R Ñ

# 8œ"

22

p

W7

p

.A
 Ð R"
R Ñ ÐAÑ A .
#

p
A denotes the average gross price markup. For exposition, I have treated the firms as having
common growth in marginal cost.
7
9 .W
W7 reflects two terms. The first is the weighted average of inflation rates for the

p8
matched models, but the inflation rates are multiplied by the factor Ð R"
R Ñ A . This factor should
#

not much exceed one--it can only significantly exceed one in the odd scenario of a large price
markup in conjunction with a large number of competitors. Therefore this first term can be
qualitatively captured by the matched-model rate of inflation. The second term reflects the
impact of marginal cost changes on prices of the matched products--a price increase for the
matched products does not imply their share has risen if it is in response to a rise in marginal cost.
To augment information on quantities, I examine whether a durable's rate of matchedgood inflation is higher than usual at times when its rate of product substitution is high. If yes,
this suggests that the substituted products have become less competitive, implying their unit-price
inflation exceeds their quality growth. Conversely, if high substitution rates are associated with
lower than usual matched-good inflation, this suggests the substituted products are perhaps more
competitive than those replaced. This inference requires that periods with high substitutions not
be periods of particular high or low growth in marginal cost for the matched models, or times that
markups change for reasons other than market share. These are much stronger assumptions than
needed to exploit equation (10) based on market shares. Therefore, I treat the price reactions of
matched goods as a diagnostic statistic, rather than providing structural information.

5. How Market Shares Respond to Product Substitutions
The ideal exercise would be to examine market sales data collected at the same outlets for
the same products at the same times as the price data collected to construct the CPI. Such data do
not exist. I am able, however, to examine sales data for major components of consumer spending
on durables. In particular, in the next subsection I examine for the last 15 years how market sales
23

for automobiles, vans, pickup trucks, and SUV's that experienced a spike in forced substitutions
behaved relative to sales for models not experiencing substitutions. Secondly, I present results
based on scanner data on sales for televisions, audio goods, and other consumer electronics. The
results suggest that market share declines noticeably for matched models (those available in
consecutive periods). This suggests measuring inflation based just on matched models, which
yields much higher quality growth than current practices, may still understate quality growth.
Together the vehicles and consumer electronic goods make up more than 50 percent of consumer
spending on all the durables detailed in Table 1. Because substitution rates are skewed toward
these goods, they constitute about 75 percent of price increases accompanying forced
substitutions for durables, weighting by spending share. The final subsection examines how the
rates of inflation for products that do not experience substitutions respond to periods of rapid
product turnover as measured by forced substitutions.

Model substitutions and changes in market shares for automobiles and other vehicles
Data on monthly unit sales by car, van, and pickup model are available from compilations
by Ward's for their Automotive Yearbook. I obtained this data for January 1988 to June 2003. It
is then necessary to match this information to statistics on substitutions rates from the CPI data. I
construct a data table of substitution rates by vehicle model from the CPI data.14 Combining this
table with the Ward's data provides a panel data set with nearly 27,000 observations on forced
substitution rates, price increases, and sales growth by model.15
Table 5 presents results on how prices and sales for car models respond to the rate of
forced substitutions. Results are presented separately for automobiles and other light vehicles.
14

The BLS field agent records some descriptive information for an item at the time it is selected for pricing. I am
able to identify the vehicle model for 97.5% of price quotes for automobiles and 96.2% of other vehicles. For
automobiles the forced substitution rate is 15.1%, for other vehicles 16.2%. 88.7% of substitutions for cars, and
87.0% for other vehicles, are accompanied by a model-year change. Less than 1% of quotes result in a change in the
vehicle model being priced. These are not reflected in the substitution rates in the regressions below.
15 Only quotes in the CPI data covering one or two months are included. For quotes of two-month duration, I
allocate inflation equally between the months. For two-month quotes with substitutions I allocate slightly over one
half substitution to each month. The amount over one-half reflects the probability of exhibiting substitutions in
consecutive months estimated from quotes that are monthly in duration.

24

Observations are weighted by the number of monthly observations underlying the substitution
rate. The regressions include time-period dummies; so the coefficients should be interpreted as
the growth rate in prices or units sold for models that experienced a 100 percent rate of forced
substitutions for that month relative to the growth rate for models experiencing no substitutions.16
The first two rows show the impact of substitutions on unit-price inflation and unit-price inflation
net of the BLS adjustment for quality growth. The findings are consistent with the results
reported in Section 2. For cars substitutions are associated with 4.8% greater price increases with
only about one-sixth of this captured by the quality adjustment. For vans, pickups, and SUV's
substitutions are associated with a 3.9% greater price increases with only about one-tenth
captured as increased quality.
Row (3) shows the impact on market share. For automobiles forced substitutions are
associated with a considerable increase in market share of units sold of 15.1% (with standard
error of 2.1%). I also examined results separately by several classes of vehicle (e.g., compact);
the positive impact of substitutions on market share is quite consistent across classes.17
The results for cars suggest that quality growth accompanying substitutions is even larger
than the large impact observed for unit prices. That is, the 4.8% typical increase in price for
forced substitutions for cars is more than rationalized by quality growth. How much more? From
equation (10), it is necessary to add the positive impact on market share multiplied by the
parameter 9 . This impact is potentially important. Suppose 9 is equal to 0.1; in the model this is

R times 10 percent for the symmetric case. This implies that
associated with a mark up of R"
16 The tables show that substitutions are associated with a marked increase in market share for automobiles and at
least no decrease for other vehicles. It is not the case, however, that aggregate sales are high in months with many
substitutions. Counter results for relative sales, months with high rates of substitution are associated with
considerably lower sales. This largely reflects considerably lower sales growth in the fall season, at the same time
substitution rates are high.
17 The sales data compiled by Ward's combines leased vehicles with regular sales. Leased vehicles are not
incorporated into the CPI Commodities and Services Survey until 1998, and then only gradually. Furthermore, lease
quotes are not readily separated between cars and other vehicles. Therefore, my analysis of substitution rates, here as
well as in section 2, is based on purchased vehicles. Note, however, that market-share results are very similar for the
early and later parts of the sample period. The estimated impact on sales is 15.7% (with standard error 2.8%) for the
first eight years and 14.4% (with standard error 3.2%) in the latter seven-and-a-half years. (For vehicles other than
cars, discussed next, the estimates are 4.4%, with standard error 3.0%, for the first eight years and 1.8%, with
standard error 3.6%, for the latter seven-and-a-half years.) This strongly suggests that vehicle leasings, much less
important in the first half of the sample, are not driving the results.

25

substitutions are associated with an effective price cut of 1.5% relative to inflation for matched
products. Adding this to unit-price growth would bring the estimated typical impact of a
substitution on quality growth up from 4.8%, to 6.3%. (Given the substitution rate for cars, the
implied annual rate of quality growth would also be on the order of 6%.)
These results, it is important to note, do not imply that manufacturer's model-year changes
are typically associated increases in quality of this magnitude. Over the course of a year buyers
will be increasing quality of a given vehicle by incorporating more and more-expensive features.
This quality deepening is reflected in the model above by equation (6). Therefore, by triggering a
forced substitution, the model-year change will alter the vehicle being priced, not only to a new
model year, but also to one encompassing higher-value features.
There are one or more caveats to this picture. Separate from quality, a possible advantage
to the next-year model, if the vehicle is later sold used, is that it can be dealt as a year-later model
(assuming the used buyer does not know the car's exact age). My calculations suggest this might
explain some of the increase in market share accompanying model substitutions.18 One might
argue that part of the willingness to pay more, everything else equal, for the next-year model
reflects, akin to a fashion statement, a desire to have the most recent model. Willingness to pay
for this might not reflect aggregate quality upgrading as arrival of the new-year model creates a
loss to owners of cars that were formerly the most-recent model year. Several points of evidence
suggest this is not the primary factor in the results in Table 5.19 But based partly on these
18

Bluebooks for used cars suggest the typical impact of an added year on resale value. But this measure reflects, in
addition to a pure age effect, reductions in value due to mileage, observed wear, and obsolecence (from this paper of
about 6% per year). Netting these effects from the one-year impact on blue-book value (calculated from several
popular models) suggests that a newer model year car, truly everything else equal, will sell for only a few percent
more at the time of resale. To get the impact on original-purchase willingness to pay, it is necessary to discount these
few percent by the ratio of expected resale price to original price, as well as for foregone interest over the time the car
is held. Based on a reasonable expectation for age at resale for non-leased cars (see Genesove, 1993, for some
related data), the implied discounted effect on willingness to pay at initial purchase is likely well less than 1 percent.
For this alone to explain the 15 percent faster growth in market share from substitutions would require an extremely
high product demand elasticity and relatedly, an extremely low price markup.
19 Firstly, the positive impact on market share is very consistent across class of vehicles. If it reflects importantly a
fashion statement, it should be more important for upscale vehicles than economy cars. Secondly, I report below that
growth in market share remains above average for several months after a substitution. If the increase in market share
reflects desire to have the most-recent available car model, separate from quality, I would expect the impact on sales
to be more concentrated at the time of introduction. Finally, it is important to keep in mind that cars are a very
durable good. So the benefit of having the most-recent model year is limited to a quite short period of the asset's life.

26

caveats, I do not interpret the market-share results aggressively as showing that forcedsubstitutions generate increases in consumer surplus relative to matched models. I read the
results more conservatively as showing that measuring inflation based on the matched-model
prices does not importantly bias measured inflation downward.
For other light vehicles the estimated impact of substitutions on the rate of growth in
market share is positive, but much lower in magnitude than for automobiles, equaling 3.0%. It is
not statistically significant. I also estimated separately for vans, pickups, and SUV's, but results
look extremely similar across these categories--small positive, but statistically insignificant,
estimated impact of substitutions on growth in market share.20
Nearly half of forced substitutions for vehicles are concentrated in the two fall months of
October and November. The timing of these forced substitutions might be viewed as more
exogenous. I re estimated allowing a differential impact for these two months. For both cars and
other vehicles the impact on market share of a substitution is even more positive for October and
November: For cars a fall substitution increases market share by 19.2% (standard error 3.3%);
for other vehicles market share is increased by 7.0% (standard error 3.7%). But for cars
substitutions in other months still have a large and statistically significant impact on market share
of 12.5% (standard error 2.7%). For other vehicles the effect of a substitution outside of October
and November is positive, but small and insignificant.21

to have the most recent model, holding quality constant, is important, then it should be more important for leased
cars, because the first few months is a more important part of the life of a lease (which has been averaging 3 years)
than for the overall life of a vehicle. But I see no evidence of this. For the years after 1998 I can compare the impact
of model substitutions on unit prices of leased vehicles to the effect for purchased vehicles. Although modelsubstitutions are associated with an important increase in price for price quotes on leased vehicles, it is actually
statistically significantly smaller than the impact on purchased vehicles.
20 The model's equation (10) suggests examining market share of sales revenue, rather than market share of units
sold. Given unit prices increase predictably with forced-substitutions (Table 5, row 1), substitutions clearly are
associated with an increase in market share. This effect can be seen by summing the coefficients in the first and third
rows of Table 5. For cars substitutions increase market share by about 20%, for other vehicles by about 7%.
21 I also used this seasonality in substitutions to estimate by instrumental variables. I instrument for a model's rate of
forced substitutions by its rate 11, 12, and 13 months prior. (Again all regressions, first and second stages, include
time-period dummies.) This actually yields a more positive impact of substitutions on market share; but standard
errors for the estimates are much larger. The estimated impact on market share is 43.5% (standard error 18.3%) for
cars and 9.0% for other vehicles (standard error 20.6%).

27

Table 6 presents results for a specification that allows growth in a vehicle's market share
to depend on its past growth rates, as captured by four monthly lags. The data do strongly reject a
random walk in market shares. These regressions also allow for an impact of past substitution
rates by including the model's substitution rate for the previous 4 months. The first column
presents results for automobiles. The substitution rates, as a group, are statistically very
significant, though the contemporaneous rate is easily the most important. The estimated
response to a substitution is an initial increase in market share of 16.6%, growing to 19.6% by the
third month, and 23.4% in the sixth. Thus the faster growth in market share accompanying a
model substitution is not offset in the subsequent few months, as might be expected if it reflected
a burst of advertising at the time of substitution, instead continuing to build.22
The second column of Table 6 gives results for the dynamic specification for vans,
pickups, and SUV's. Here the results suggest, more clearly than in Table 6, that model
substitutions lead to an increase in market share, though considerably less in magnitude than for
cars. The increase in market share is largely concentrated in the month after a substitution. The
substitution rates, as a group, are statistically significant with a p-value less than .01. The
estimated response to a substitution is a very small decrease in market share of 1.3% in the first
month, but an increase of 8.0% as of the third month, and 6.6% in the sixth.23

Model changes and expenditures for video, audio, and telecommunications products
For two years, March 2000 to February 2002, I examine monthly scanner data on prices
and expenditures for video, audio, and telecommunications goods by product model. The scanner

22

There might also be concern that sales the month prior to substitutions are a bad reference point, if dealers provide
poorer selection of model features at that time. The data do not suggest this. Monthly growth in model sales are
somewhat higher than usual the month prior to substitutions for cars; it is little different than usual for other vehicles.
Related to this, if the regressions reported in Table 5 are estimated over a two-month window, rather than one, the
results are very similar. The impact of substitutions on rates of price inflation are slightly smaller, with the impact on
market share a little larger.
23 I also estimated expanding the specification to include six lags in both market share and substitution rates. The
estimated impact of substitutions, especially the estimated impulse response function, remains very similar.

28

data are collected by the company NPDTechworld.24 I present results for 18 categories of goods.
These categories are listed in Table 7, together with the number of observations and expenditure
shares. Color televisions are notably the most important good, with an expenditure share of 38.6
percent of the sample. The table also presents the monthly entry and exit rates for each good.
That is, on average, what fraction of products appears for the first time and what fraction appears
for the last time. These rates are quite high--the median is about 4%. By comparison, the forced
substitution rate for these goods in the CPI is 15%, which would translate into a monthly rate of
almost 9%. It is not surprising that the forced substitution rate is considerably higher--a forced
substitution is generated by a product no longer being carried at an outlet, whereas the exit rate
for the scanner data is generated by the product dropping out of all outlets.
The first column of Table 8 presents the average rate of inflation for each of the 18
categories based just on product models that can be matched across months (matched-model
inflation). It shows quite rapid deflation; the median rate is close to that for televisions of
 1.1% per month. This is quite consistent, however, with the rate from the CPI Commodities
and Services survey data of  9.9% per year, especially considerably that inflation rates for years
2000 and 2001 are lower than typical for the past 15 years.
The second and third columns of Table 8 present the average price and units sold for
products entering the scanner data relative to those exiting. For each good price is significantly
higher for entering goods, for instance, 62% higher for color televisions. At the same time the
entering models exhibit considerably higher sales than exiting models (though smaller than
typical for continuing models). As a result, the market share of the matched goods declines for
each of the 18 categories of goods, typically by about 2% per month (Table 8, Column 4).25

24

I was kindly provided access to this data as a visitor of the BLS under the IPA (Intergovernmental Personnel Act)
agreement. The data are compiled at a variety of types of retailing outlets. For the most part national coverage rates
are reasonably high. For instance, coverage is about 95% for electronic appliance stores, though only about 60% at
more general mass merchandisers.
25 This decline in share for the matched goods does not just reflect an expanding number of models. I also examined
what happened to average size, in terms of sales, of the matched goods relative to all models. With the exception of
two goods with very rapid entry rates, DVD players and telephone headsets, this relative size always declines,
typically by one-and-half to two percent per month.

29

Section 4 discussed how an estimate of the overall inflation rate for a good could be
7
obtained by adding 9 .W
W7 to the rate of inflation for matched models. Where 9, in turn, should be

a number considerably less than one, as pricing in the symmetric case implies 9 equal to

:‡ A

.W7
8
( R"
R ÑÐ A Ñ. Given W7 is, in all cases, negative, this suggests that the rate of inflation based
on the matched models is an overstatement of true inflation for these categories of consumer
electronics. In particular, consider color televisions. If we are willing to assume the markup
(actually times R"
R ) is no larger than 20%, then we can make a more precise statement. This
bounds the inflation rate between  1.1% (matched-model inflation) and  1.5% per month.
Table 3 showed that forced substitutions increased unit prices by 5.3% per year for these
goods. The results here suggest that these price increases are more than justified by quality-implying quality growth of greater than 5.3% per year for forced substitutions, or more than 2.9%
faster than from historic BLS adjustments.

How matched-goods' prices respond to forced substitutions
The sections above show for vehicles and consumer electronics that models experiencing
substitutions gain market share. Although these goods make up an important share of durables,
and a large majority of forced substitutions for the durables, it would be desirable to have
information on changes in market shares for additional durables. As discussed above, with some
relatively strong additional assumptions, the price response of matched goods from t-1 to t
reflects the impact of product substitutions on matched-goods market share. I examine this
response across the sets of goods distinguished in Table 3: Vehicles, consumer electronics, and
the balance of 43 other durables, excluding computers and equipment.
First consider vehicles. Estimation is as follows. Separately for cars and other vehicles, I
create a monthly time series for average rate of substitution and average rate of price inflation for
matched models.26 The categories are then pooled and the monthly rate of price inflation is
26

Only quotes covering one or two months are included. For quotes of two-month duration, substitution and
inflation rates are allocated between months as discussed in connection to Table 5. The regression includes linear
and quadratic time trends and a separate intercept for each goods category.

30

regressed on the monthly substitution rate, with the two categories weighted by their relative
expenditure shares for 1997. Estimation proceeds in a similar manner for consumer electronics
and for the remaining set of durables.
Results are presented in Table 9. For vehicles the impact of the substitution rate on
matched-model inflation is positive, but quite small in magnitude. (For each percentage increase
in the rate of substitutions, matched-model inflation rate is .003% higher.)27 As noted above, the
number of vehicles sold in aggregate is very much lower in those periods with high substitutions.
Therefore, it is difficult to argue that time-variation in substitution rates is exogenous to marginal
cost or factors beyond market share that might influence markups. Results for consumer
electronics appear in the next two columns. Periods with high rates of product substitutions are
clearly associated with bigger price declines for matched models. For each additional percentage
of forced substitutions, the matched-model inflation rate is .027% lower. This reinforces the
picture from scanner sales data that product substitutions reduce the competitiveness of the static,
matched models. The final two columns give results for the remaining durables. Inflation for the
matched models shows very little response to the rate of forced substitutions.28 I take this as
some support for interpreting the quality increases accompanying these substitutions as of the
same order as their associated price increases. By contrast, BLS methods attribute little quality
increase to forced substitutions for these goods.

27

Seasons (months) with predictably high substitutions are associated with a slightly lower rate of matched-goods
inflation for vehicles; with this effect not significantly different from zero. But times with unusually high substitution
rates, for that month of the year, are clearly associated with larger than usual price increases for static product models
(by .018% for each percentage increase in the substitution rate). Results for the other sets of durables do not differ
dramatically between the seasonal component in substitutions and other aggregate variations in substitutions.
28 I also estimated separately for each of these 43 goods. This yields as many goods that show a significantly lower
rate of matched-good inflation in periods with high substitutions as show higher inflation. Regardless of seasonal
controls, five goods show a significantly negative effect at a p-value less than 0.10 (three at less than 0.05); four
goods show a significantly positive effect at a p-value less than 0.10 (two at less than 0.05).

31

6. Conclusions
It is difficult to distinguish quality growth from true price increases for goods, such as
consumer durables, that display frequent model changes. I show that one can arrive at vastly
different measures of price inflation and real growth under arguably plausible competing
assumptions. Hedonic methods have received the bulk of attention for treating these
measurement problems. I have tried to make progress on the problem by examining how
consumer expenditures respond to product substitutions.
I find the following. For automobiles and consumer electronics, consumer spending
moves away from the static goods, that is, those with no model changes. This suggests a true rate
of inflation that is even lower than that exhibited by these static goods. For light vehicles other
than cars, market share appears to increase only quite modestly with substitutions; but certainly
does not show any decline. Although I do not have market share results for the balance of
durables, I do observe that prices for static models respond very little to competing product
substitutions, suggesting the higher price increases for the product substitutions may largely
reflect higher perceived quality.
What do these results suggest for quality growth? For vehicles my results suggest that
quality growth has been understated by perhaps as much as 4.4% per year. My results suggest
growth for consumer electronics has also been substantially faster than historically measured, by
2.9% or more per year. Finally for the balance of durables, if price inflation is reasonably well
captured by the rate of inflation for matched products, then this implies quality growth that is
about 1.6 percent faster than suggested by methods underlying BLS measurement of the CPI.
Putting it all together, this suggests quality growth that is 3 percent faster per year than has been
measured for these durables, with a resulting growth rate of at least 5.8% per year, even with
computers excluded. My results suggest much faster quality growth for durables than the Boskin
Commission Report, which stated BLS methods understated quality growth for durables by about
1 percent. This derives from two main differences: (1) The Boskin Report assumed no quality

32

bias for a number of durables; (2) The Report assumed no quality growth for vehicles except from
greater durability, contributing about 0.6% per year.
Product substitutions are more important for consumer durables than for most consumer
goods; so it would not be appropriate to project the magnitudes here to non durables. It is
conceivable, however, to extend the approach beyond durables. The key is to obtain information
for additional goods on how market share responds to product substitutions. BLS methods
potentially provide such information. The outlets and items priced are periodically updated to
reflect changes in spending patterns. The shifts in product coverage, as a reflection of changing
market shares, could be related to past product substitutions. Furthermore, greater availability of
scanner data should gradually provide researchers with market information for a broader set of
goods and for longer sample periods.

33

Appendix 1
The text displays that forced substitutions are associated with significant increases in unit
prices, with much of this increase typically attributed to price inflation. Table A1 presents these
facts within a regression framework. The data is again from the BLS Commodity and Services
Survey and reflect 49 categories of consumer durables, with computers and related equipment
omitted. The dependent variable is the rate of price increase relative to the previous price collected
for that quote. Observations are weighted by the importance of the goods category (ELI) in the CPI
for 1997. Consistent with the text results, substitutions are typically associated with a 4.5% higher
unit-price increase than no substitution. By my calculations, using BLS methods (column 2), most
of this shows up as higher inflation, 3.7% higher, not as quality growth.
The last two columns of Table A1 expand the regression to examine price responses, not
only the month of a substitution, but also for the two observations prior to a substitution (variables
substitution (t+2) and substitution (t+1)) and one observations after (variable substitution (t-1)).
The substitution variables for after the price change display any impact of firms cutting price to sell
off inventory prior to a substitution. The last variable is to test if firms cut price after the initial
product introduction. (I included a variable to capture the second observation post substitution. But
is was empirically unimportant.) Examining this larger window reduces the number of observations
considerably. The data do show a tendency for firms to cut price, and presumably markup, in the
observation preceding a substitution. But it is not an overly large effect. Unit prices fall by about
0.7% the observation before a substitution, and 0.3% two observations before. Though statistically
significant, these cuts only constitute about 20 percent of the magnitude of the price increase
associated with the substitution. The pattern for price inflation, by my calculations using BLS
methods, gives a parallel picture. The price, and presumably the markup, is cut for the observation
that follows the observation with a substitution. But the cut is very small, equaling about 0.1
percent. The sum of effects over the four observations, which covers, on average, about 7 months,
is still a very significant increase in unit prices of 3.8% and in calculated inflation of 2.9%.

34

Table 1: Durable Goods Studied

Good
Watches
Jewelry
Personal computers & equipment
Telephone & equipment
Calculators, typewriters, etc.
Electric personal care products
Luggage
Infant’s equipment
Curtains & Drapes
Window coverings
Mattresses & springs
Bedroom furniture
Sofa & slipcover
Living room chairs
Living room tables
Kitchen & dinning room furniture
Infant’s furniture
Occasional furniture
Refrigerator & home freezer
Washers & dryers
Stoves
Microwaves
Vacuums
Small kitchen appliances
Other Electric appliances
Lamps & lighting
Clocks & decorative items
Dishes
Flatware
Non-electric cookware
Tableware & non-electric kitchenware
Power tools
Misc. hardware
Non-powered hand tools
Medical equipment for general use
Supportive & convalescent equipment
Televisions
Other video equipment
Audio equipment

Observations

Expenditure
Share

22,497
64,919
11,432
7955
3123
1882
8464
1288
9526
6590
14,438
18,467
18,485
11,382
6007
15,859
3936
18,067
12,687
13,005
5905
10,051
7848
13,071
5155
4923
16,112
12,248
3442
4658
6218
7392
6001
2068
1546
1609
35,548
19,480
26,998

.069
.401
.488
.065
.018
.014
.034
.011
.057
.038
.146
.193
.291
.136
.063
.163
.027
.125
.106
.098
.037
.030
.051
.020
.112
.035
.225
.066
.014
.034
.064
.051
.096
.030
.009
.013
.269
.095
.177

Table 1 continued on next page

Table 1 (continued): Durable Goods Studied

Good
Bicycles
General sports equipment
Hunting, fishing & camping equipment
Photography equipment
Sewing machines
Musical instruments & accessories
New cars
Pickups & Vans
New motorcycles
Tires
Other vehicle equipment accessories

Data: CPI Commodities and Services Survey.

Observations

Expenditure
Share

6466
30,207
7641
10,491
3010
15,248
138,108
34,215
14,465
66,105
43,127

.047
.255
.064
.042
.045
.064
2.748
1.953
.082
.290
.245

Table 2: Price increases, inflation, and quality growth by substitution status,
Durable Consumer Goods, 1988 to March 2003

Percent of
Quotes
(Weighted)

Price
Increase

Inflation
(BLS
methods)

Quality
Growth
(BLS
methods)

100 %

0.06 %

-0.04 %

0.10 %

No Substitution

87.8

-0.5

-0.5

0%

Substitution

12.2

4.0

3.2

0.8

-- treated as same quality

4.3

2.6

2.6

0

-- direct quality adjustment

4.5

4.3

3.8

0.5

-- other adjustments

2.2

7.3

5.1

2.3

-- omitted in calculating
Inflation

1.2

2.2

-0.04

2.3

All Quotes

Total number of quotes equals 817,932.
Data: CPI Commodities and Services Survey. Computer equipment excluded

Table 3: Annual Price Inflation and Quality Growth  January 1988 to August 2003
(A)
Durables
Excluding
Computers

(B)
Cars, Vans,
Trucks,
SUV’s

(C)
Video,
Audio,
Telephones

(D)
Computers
and
equipment

2.5%

4.0%

-2.4%

-4.9%

-- πsame-model

-3.3

-3.3

-9.9

-20.3

-- s(πsubstituion ─ πsame-model)

3.8

5.2

5.3

16.7

-- πsample rotations

2.0

2.1

2.3

-1.3

∆ quality for forced (BLS)

0.7

0.8

2.4

18.5

∆ quality for forced (BLS)

2.7

2.9

4.7

17.2

5.8

7.3

7.6

15.4

12.2%

15.8%

15.1%

27.0%

817,932

172,322

89,981

11,432

πunit-price

Panel A

Panel B

+ πsample rotations

πunit-price ─ πsame-model

Substitution rate

Number of quotes

Data: CPI Commodities and Services Survey

Table 4: Price increases, inflation, and quality growth by substitution status,
Computers and Related Equipment, January 1988 to August 2003
Percent of
Quotes
(Weighted)

Price
Increase

Inflation (BLS
methods)

Quality
Growth (BLS
methods)

100 %

-0.6 %

-3.3 %

2.8 %

No Substitution

73.0

-2.7

-2.7

0%

Substitution

27.0

5.4

-4.8

10.2

-- treated as same quality

9.1

-3.6

-3.6

0

-- direct quality adjustment

8.0

1.9

-8.0

9.9

-- other adjustments

0.5

61.2

14.2

47.0

-- omitted in calculating
Inflation

9.4

14.0

-4.3

18.4

All Quotes

Total number of quotes equals 11,432
Data: CPI Commodities and Services Survey.

Table 5: Response of Unit-price Inflation, Inflation net of BLS quality adjustment, and
Market Share of Units Sold to Substitutions for Cars and other Light Vehicles

Dependent Variable

Automobiles

Vans, Pickups, and
SUV’s

∆ Unit Price

4.8
(.09)

3.9
(.14)

∆ Unit Price ─ ∆ BLS Quality

4.0
(.08)

3.6
(.12)

∆ Share of Unit Sales

15.1
(2.1)

3.0
(2.4)

Number of model-month
observations

19,806

7,587

Data: CPI Commodities and Services Survey, 1988 to June 2003. Ward’s Automotive
Sales Data, 1988 to June 2003. Standard errors in parentheses. Regressions include
monthly time-period dummies.

Table 6: Dynamic Responses of Market Share to Substitutions for Vehicles
Dependent variable is ∆ Share of Sales
Automobiles

Vans, Pickups,
SUV’s

∆ Share of Sales (t-1)

-0.22
(.008)

-0.25
(.012)

∆ Share of Sales (t-2)

-0.18
(.008)

-0.18
(.012)

∆ Share of Sales (t-3)

-0.11
(.008)

-0.12
(.012)

∆ Share of Sales (t-4)

-0.05
(.007)

-0.07
(.012)

Substitution Rate (t)

16.6
(2.4)

-1.4
(2.6)

Substitution Rate (t-1)

7.1
(2.5)

7.5
(2.7)

Substitution Rate (t-2)

3.3
(2.4)

3.1
(2.7)

Substitution Rate (t-3)

7.2
(2.4)

1.9
(2.6)

Substitution Rate (t-4)

2.2
(2.2)

0.5
(2.4)

Adjusted R2

.25

.39

17,779

7,225

Number of observations

Data: CPI Commodities and Services Survey, 1988 to June 2003. Ward’s Automotive Sales Data,
1988 to June 2003. Standard errors in parentheses. Regressions include monthly dummies.
p-value for the set of substitution variables for autos is < .0001. For other vehicles it is < .01.
Estimated impulse response in market share to a substitution for autos is 16.6% the first month,
19.6% in month 3, and 23.4% in month 6. For other vehicles the estimated response is -1.3% in
month one, 8.0% in month 3, and 6.6% in month 6.

Table 7: Scanner Data—Goods’ Shares and Monthly Entry/Exit Rates

Good

Observations

Share

Entry Rate

Exit Rate

19,399

38.6

4.4%

4.2%

Remote controls, web browsers,
caller ID
DBS Satellite, TV box-decoders

2363

0.7

3.2

3.5

2089

1.8

3.5

4.6

TV combinations

3361

2.7

4.2

4.1

VCR’s

6161

4.5

4.3

6.1

Camcorders, personal video recorders

5420

11.0

4.6

3.4

DVD players

4468

8.6

5.3

2.1

10,408

5.2

3.5

4.2

Portable radios, radio/cassettes

3493

0.9

3.4

3.5

Portable tape recorders,
Solid-state voice recorders
Headset stereos, stereo headphones

1628

0.4

3.4

2.7

6770

1.4

3.8

3.6

Receivers, cassette decks

7490

3.9

4.2

4.1

13,829

4.6

3.9

3.3

Rack or shelf systems

6391

5.0

4.1

4.5

Corded phones

2661

0.9

3.1

3.4

Cordless phones, 2-way radios

6033

5.3

4.8

3.1

Answering devices

3808

4.1

4.0

3.3

Headsets

1821

0.5

7.6

3.0

Color TV’s

CD players

Home speakers

Data: NPD Scanner data for video, audio, and telecommunications products, Monthly for
March 2000 through February 2002

Table 8: Scanner Data—Matched-good Inflation and Share Changes
Matched
Inflation
(monthly)

Ln(Pin/Pout)
(X 100)**

Ln(Qin/Qout)
(X 100)**

Change in
Matched
Share

-1.1%

62%

174%

-1.9%

Remote controls, browsers,
caller ID
DBS Satellite, TV box-decoders

-0.5

87

79

-0.8

-1.9

68

143

-2.0

TV combinations

-1.0

53

176

-3.1

VCR’s

-2.3

26

225

-1.9

Camcorders, video recorders

-2.2

83

210

-2.5

DVD players

-2.1

57

183

-2.9

CD players

-1.0

54

229

-2.4

Portable radios, radio/cassettes

-0.8

46

62

-1.8

Portable tape/voice recorders

-0.6

37

175

-2.0

Headset stereos, stereo headphones

-0.2

17

116

-1.4

Receivers, cassette decks

-1.3

38

240

-1.8

Home speakers

-0.9

36

104

-1.2

Rack or shelf systems

-1.3

42

157

-3.0

Corded phones

-0.8

60

189

-1.3

Cordless phones, 2-way radios

-2.0

46

142

-2.3

Answering devices

-1.7

84

326

-2.1

Headsets

-1.6

12

141

-4.6

Good
Color TV’s

Data: NPD Scanner data for video, audio, and telecommunications products, Monthly for
March 2000 through February 2002
**

Pin/Pout denotes the ratio of the average price of entering models relative to those exiting;
similarly, Qin/Qout denotes the ratio of units sold.

Table 9: Response of Matched-Model Inflation to Substitution Rate
Dependent variable is rate of price increase.

Vehicles*

Consumer
Electronics**

Balance of 43
Durables

0.32
(.14)

-2.67
(.65)

0.32
(.34)

Adjusted R2

.26

.11

.03

Number of
Observations

372

746

8002

Substitution rate

Data: CPI Commodities and Services Survey, January 1988 to August 2003.
*

Vehicles include cars, vans, pickups, and specialty vehicles.

**

Consumer electronics include televisions, other video equipment, audio equipment, and
telephones and equipment.
Standard errors in parentheses.
Regressions include good dummies and linear and quadratic trend terms.

Table A1: Responses of Unit-price and Inflation by BLS methods to Substitutions
Dependent variable is rate of price increase.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Unit-price

Unit-price net
of BLS quality
adjustment

Unit-price

Unit-price net
of BLS quality
adjustment

Substitution (t+2)

-0.30
(.051)

-.30
(.043)

Substitution (t+1)

-0.66
(.059)

-.53
(.050)

4.80
(.053)

3.83
(.045)

Substitution (t-1)

-.09
(.049)

-.11
(.041)

Sum of coefficients

3.75
(.107)

2.89
(.090)

.024

.023

Substitution (t)

Adjusted R2

Observations

3.69
(.031)

4.50
(.038)

.021

.022

817,932

Data: CPI Commodities and Services Survey, 1988 to August 2003.
(Computer equipment excluded.)
Standard errors in parentheses.
Regressions include time period and good dummies.

392,075

References
Anderson, Simon P., Andre' de Palma, and Jacques-Francois Thisse (1992), Discrete Choice
Theory of Product Differentiation, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Armknecht, Paul A. and Donald Weyback (1989), "Adjustments for Quality in the U.S.
Consumer Price Index," Journal of Official Statistics 5, 107-123.
Armknecht, Paul A., Walter Lane, and Kenneth J. Stewart (1997), "New Products and the U.S.
Consumer Price Index," in T. F. Bresnahan and R. J. Gordon, eds., The Economics of New
Goods. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Berry, Steven and Ariel Pakes (2002), "The Pure Characteristics Demand Model," mimeo,
Harvard University.
Boskin Commission Report (1996), "Toward a More Accurate Measure of the Cost of Living,"
final report to the Senate Finance Committee from the Advisory Commission to Study the
Consumer Price Index, http://www.ssa.gov/history/reports/boskinrpt.html.
Gordon, Robert J. (1990), The Measurement of Durable Goods Prices. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Genesove, David (1993), "Adverse Selection in the Wholesale Used Car Market," Journal of
Political Economy 101, 644-665.
Hausman, Jerry (2003), "Sources of Bias and Solutions to Bias in the CPI," Journal of Economic
Perspectives.
Moulton, Brent R. and Karin E. Moses (1997), "Addressing the Quality Change Issue in the
Consumer Price Index," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 305-366.
Pakes, Ariel (2003), "A Reconsideration of Hedonic Price Indexes with an Application to PC's,"
American Economic Review 93, 1578-1596.
Rochet, Jean-Charles, and Lars Stole (2002), "Nonlinear Pricing with Random Participation,"
Review of Economic Studies.
Triplett, Jack E. (1971), "Quality Bias in Price Indexes and New Methods of Quality
Measurement," in Z. Griliches, ed., Price Indexes and Quality Change: Studies in New
Methods of Measurement. Harvard University Press.
Triplett, Jack E. (1997), "Measuring Consumption: The Post-1973 Slowdown and the Research
Issues," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review.

35

U.S. Department of Labor (1997), BLS Handbook of Methods, Bulletin 2490, U.S. Government
Printing Office.
Wilson, Robert B. (1993), Nonlinear Pricing. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.

36

