NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EVALUATING THE CALVO MODEL OF STICKY PRICES
Martin Eichenbaum
Jonas D.M. Fisher
Working Paper 10617
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10617
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2004

We thank Lawrence Christiano for helpful conversations. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2004 by Martin Eichenbaum and Jonas D.M. Fisher. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Evaluating the Calvo Model of Sticky Prices
Martin Eichenbaum and Jonas D.M. Fisher
NBER Working Paper No. 10617
June 2004
JEL No. E0, E1, E3
ABSTRACT
Can variants of the classic Calvo (1983) model of sticky prices account for the statistical behavior
of post-war US inflation? We develop and test versions of the model for which the answer to this
question is yes. We then investigate whether these models imply plausible degrees of inertia in price
setting behavior by firms. We find that they do, but only if we depart from two auxiliary
assumptions made in standard expositions of the Calvo model. These assumptions are that
monopolistically competitive firms face a constant elasticity of demand and capital can be
instantaneously reallocated after a shock. When we modify these assumptions our model is
consistent with the view that firms re-optimize prices, on average, once every two quarters.
Martin Eichenbaum
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2003 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
eich@northwestern.edu
Jonas D.M. Fisher
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
jfisher@frbchi.org

1. Introduction
This paper addresses two questions. First, can variants of the Calvo (1983) sticky price model
account for the statistical behavior of post-war U.S. inflation rates? Second, can these models
succeed statistically with plausible degrees of inertia in pricing setting behavior at the firm
level? Our answer to the first question is yes. Our answer to the second question is also
yes, but only if we depart from two auxiliary assumptions made in standard expositions
of the Calvo model. These assumptions are that monopolistically competitive firms face a
constant elasticity of demand and capital is not firm-specific. Under these assumptions, our
estimated model implies that firms re-optimize prices roughly once every two years. This
finding motivates us to consider a variant of the model in which the elasticity of demand
facing firms is variable and capital is firm-specific. The resulting model is observationally
equivalent to the original model in terms of its implications for the aggregate time series
used in our analysis. However, inference about how frequently firms re-optimize prices is
aﬀected in an important way. This model is consistent with the view that firms re-optimize
prices on average once every two quarters.
Despite ongoing controversies, models embodying sticky prices continue to play a central
role in analyses of the monetary transmission mechanism. In time-dependent sticky price
models, the number of firms that change prices in any given period is specified exogenously.1
In state-dependent pricing models, the number of firms changing prices in any given period
is determined endogenously.2 While state-dependent models seem promising (at least to us)
they are substantially more diﬃcult to work with than time-dependent models. Perhaps
more importantly, empirically plausible versions of time and state-dependent models often
generate similar results for many policy experiments that are relevant in moderate inflation
economies.3 Here we take as given the widespread interest in time-dependent models and
1

Classic models of this sort were developed by Taylor (1980) and Calvo (1983). Modern variants are now
central elements of a large class of models. See, for example, Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2004),
Erceg, Henderson and Levon (2000), Gali and Gertler (1999), Rotemberg and Woodford (1997) and Yun
(1996).
2
Important recent examples of state-dependent pricing models include Dotsey, King and Wolman (1999),
Burstein (2003) and Golosov and Lucas (2003).
3
See, for example, Burstein (2002) and Klenow and Krystov (2003). In contrast, Golosov and Lucas
(2003) argue that the shock repsonses in their model are very diﬀerent from the analog responses in a Calvotype model. It is not clear whether this would be the case in a version of the Golosov and Lucas model
calibrated to the finding in Klenow and Krystov (2003) that 90% of monthly US inflation stems solely from
fluctuations in the average size of price changes, as opposed to the fraction of firms who change prices.

2

focus on the empirical properties of Calvo-style models.
We interpret the Calvo price-setting mechanism as capturing firms’ responses to various
costs of changing prices. The basic idea is that in the presence of these costs, firms fully
optimize prices only periodically, and follow simple rules for changing their prices at other
times. The type of costs we have in mind are those associated with optimization (e.g., costs
associated with information gathering, decision making, negotiation and communication).
These costs are diﬀerent from menu costs, which apply to all price changes.4 Consequently,
we estimate and test variants of Calvo-style models where firms, who do not re-optimize
their prices, index their price either to the unconditional rate of inflation (static indexation)
or lagged inflation (dynamic indexation). In addition, we allow for the possibility that there
is a lag between the time at which firms re-optimize their price plans and the time at which
they implement the new plan. In our model, this lag is equivalent to the assumption that
firms re-optimize time prices based on an information set that only includes lagged values of
marginal cost. For convenience, we proceed under the “implementation lag” interpretation.
Our main statistical findings can be summarized as follows. First, we find strong evidence
against the model if we assume that firms instantly implement new price plans. This finding
is true for both the static and dynamic indexation versions of the model. However, when
we allow for a one-period implementation lag of new pricing plans, neither the static nor
dynamic indexation versions of the model can be rejected using conventional statistical tests.
Interestingly, this is the specification of the Calvo model adopted in Galí and Gertler (1999)
and Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2004), among others.
Standard tests of the model’s over-identifying restrictions may have low power against
specific alternatives. Galí and Gertler (1999) argue this is the case when the Calvo model
is confronted with the possibility that some firms adopt backward-looking rules of thumb
for setting prices. Consistent with Galí and Gertler (1999), we find evidence against the
hypothesis that there are no rule-of-thumb firms if we assume that optimizing firms adopt a
static indexation rule. However, we find virtually no evidence against this hypothesis if we
assume that optimizing firms adopt a dynamic indexation rule.
Evidently, allowing for a one-quarter delay in the implementation of new prices and
dynamic indexation renders the standard Calvo model consistent with the aggregate data
4

Zbaracki, Ritson, Levy, Dutta and Bergen (2000) provide some microeconomic evidence that costs
associated with reoptimization are much more important than menu costs.

3

in a statistical sense. But that does not mean the estimated model makes economic sense.
Here, the key question is whether the model implies plausible inertia in price setting behavior
by firms. Taken at face value, the answer to this question is no. Specifically, the estimated
version of our preferred model implies that firms re-optimize prices, on average, roughly once
every two years. This implication seems implausible to us and would justify rejection of the
Calvo model.
As it turns out, this inference about price inertia at the firm level is warranted only
under very special auxiliary assumptions associated with the Calvo model; namely, that price
setting firms face a constant elasticity of demand and capital is not firm-specific. Following
Kimball (1995), we allow for the possibility that the elasticity of demand is increasing in
a firm’s price. In addition, we follow Woodford (2003) and allow for the possibility that
capital is firm-specific. In this specification, a firm’s capital can only be augmented with a
one-period delay using final goods, subject to adjustment costs. For reasons discussed below,
each of these extensions enable the Calvo model to account for the dynamics of inflation with
lower degrees of price rigidity.
We demonstrate that the parameters of the extended Calvo model are not separately
identified using aggregate time series data. In particular, one cannot separately identify
the probability that a firm re-optimizes its price, the nature of demand elasticities, and the
degree of capital mobility. Still, we can identify the frequency of re-optimization if we have
information about demand elasticities and the degree of capital mobility.
If we assume that capital is firm-specific and there are modest costs of adjusting capital,
then the model implies a degree of inertia in price re-optimization that is much more plausible
than that implied by the benchmark Calvo model. Depending on our assumptions about
demand elasticities, our measure of inflation, and the sample period under consideration,
we infer that firms re-optimize prices between once every 2.3 and 3.0 quarters. In no case
can we reject, at conventional confidence intervals, the hypothesis that firms re-optimize
prices once every 1.8 quarters. While there are ambiguities involved in the comparison, this
result renders our model consistent with the micro evidence discussed in Klenow and Krystov
(2003) and Golosov and Lucas (2003).
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses our extended version
of the Calvo model. In Section 3 we display our econometric strategy for testing the model,
including the variant that allows for rule-of-thumb firms. Section 4 discusses the data that
4

we use. Section 5 presents our statistical results. In Section 6 we interpret the parameters
of the estimated model. Finally, Section 7 contains brief concluding remarks.

2. The Calvo Model of Sticky Prices
In this section we display an extended version of the Calvo model. In the first subsection
we consider a version of the model in which intermediate good firms face a non-constant
elasticity of demand for their output. In addition, we allow for a finite lag between the time
firms re-optimize prices and when they implement new plans. In the second subsection we
assume that capital is firm-specific and can only be augmented with a one-period delay.
2.1. The Calvo Model with Non Constant Elasticity of Demand
At time t, a final good, Yt , is produced by a perfectly competitive firm. The firm does so
by combining a continuum of intermediate goods, indexed by i ∈ [0, 1], using the following

technology:

Z 1
0

(1)

G(Yit /Yt )di = 1.

Here G is increasing, strictly concave, G(1) = 1 and Yit denotes the input of intermediate
good i. This specification corresponds to the one adopted in Kimball (1995). The standard
Dixit-Stiglitz specification corresponds to the special case:
G(Yit /Yt ) = (Yit /Yt )(µ−1)/µ , µ > 1.
We refer to the general version of G(·) as the Kimball specification.
The final good firm chooses Yt and Yit to maximize profits, Pt Yt −

R1
0

Pit Yit di, subject to

(1). Here Pt and Pit denote the time t price of the final and intermediate good i, respectively.
The first order conditions to the firm’s problem imply
0−1

Yit = Yt G

5

µ

¶

Pit Yt
.
λt

(2)

Here λt , the time t Lagrange multiplier on constraint (1), is given by:
λt = R

Pt Yt
.
0
G (Yit /Yt ) · (Yit /Yt )di

Throughout, the symbol ‘0 ’ denotes the derivative operator and G0−1 (·) denotes the inverse
function of G0 (·). Our assumptions on G(·) imply that the firm’s demand for input Yit is
decreasing in its relative price.5
Intermediate good i ∈ [0, 1] is produced by a monopolist who uses the following technol-

ogy:

Yit = Zt Kitα Hit1−α

(3)

where 0 < α < 1. Here, Hit and Kit denote time t labor and capital services used to produce
intermediate good i, respectively. Intermediate good firms rent capital and labor in economywide, perfectly competitive factor markets. With this specification, individual firms do not
view their own capital stock as predetermined within the period. The variable Zt denotes
possible stochastic disturbances to technology.
Profits are distributed to the firms’ owners at the end of each time period. Let st denote
the representative firm’s real marginal cost. Given our assumptions on factor markets, all
firms have identical marginal costs. Consequently, we do not index st by i. Marginal cost
depends on the parameter α and factor prices that the firm takes as given. The firm’s time
t profits are [Pit /Pt − st ] Pt Yit , where Pit is the price of intermediate good i.

Intermediate good firms set prices according to a variant of the mechanism spelled out

in Calvo (1983). In each period, a firm faces a constant probability, 1 − θ, of being able to

re-optimize its nominal price. So, on average, a firm re-optimizes its price every (1 − θ)−1

periods. The firm’s ability to re-optimize its price is independent across firms and time. For

now, we leave open the issue of what information set the firm has when it resets its price.
We consider two scenarios for what happens if a firm does not re-optimize its price. In
the first scenario, the firm adopts what we call the static indexing scheme, i.e., it updates
0

5

To obtain this result we use the fact that, given our assumptions on G, if x = G −1 (z), then
0−1
dG (z)/dz = 1/G00 (x).

6

its price according to the rule:
(4)

Pit = π̄Pit−1 .

Here π̄ is the long-run average gross rate of inflation.6 In the second scenario, the firm adopts
what we call the dynamic indexing scheme, i.e., it sets its price according to7
(5)

Pit = π t−1 Pit−1 .

Let Pt∗ denote the value of Pit set by a firm that can re-optimize its price. In addition, let
Yt∗ denote the time t output of this firm. Our notation does not allow Pt∗ or Yt∗ to depend
on i because all firms who can re-optimize their price at time t choose the same price (see
Woodford, 1996 and Yun, 1996). In what follows we focus, for convenience, on specification
(4). The firm chooses Pt∗ to maximize
Et−τ

∞
X
l=0

h

i

(βθ)l vt+l Pt∗ π̄l − st+l Pt+l Yt∗

(6)

subject to (2). Here, Et−τ denotes the conditional expectations operator and the firm’s t − τ

information set, which includes the realization of all model variables dated t − τ and earlier.

In addition, vt+l is the time-varying portion of the firm’s discount factor. The intermediate

good firm views st , Pt , vt and λt as exogenous stochastic processes beyond its control.
Let p∗t = Pt∗ /Pt . Log linearizing the first order condition of the firm around the relevant
steady state-values we obtain:

where

pb∗t

= Et−τ

∞
X

"

l

(βθ) π̂ t+l + AEt−τ ŝt +

l=1

A=

∞
X
l=1

l

#

(βθ) (ŝt+l − ŝt+l−1 )

(7)

1 + G00 (1)/G0 (1)
.
2 + G000 (1)/G00 (1)

Throughout, x̂t denotes the percent deviation of a variable xt from its steady-state value.
For future reference it is useful to write ŝt as
ŝt = Ŵt − P̂t −
6
7

1
α
α
Ẑt +
Ŷt −
K̂t .
1−α
1−α
1−α

(8)

Other authors who make this assumption include Erceg, Henderson and Levin (2000) and Yun (1996).
See Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2004) for a discussion of this form of indexation.

7

Note that ŝt depends only on economy-wide variables, which an individual firm views as
beyond its control.
Several features of (7) are worth emphasizing. First, if inflation is expected to be at its
steady state level and real marginal cost is expected to remain constant after time t, then
the firm sets pb∗t = AEt−τ ŝt . That is, the percent deviation in the firm’s relative price is

a constant markup of the expected deviation of marginal cost from its steady-state value.

Second, suppose the firm expects real marginal costs to be higher in the future than at time
t. Anticipating those higher future marginal costs, the firm sets pb∗t higher than AEt−τ ŝt .
It does so because it understands that it may not be able to raise its price when higher

marginal costs materialize. Third, suppose firms expect future inflation to exceed its steadystate level. To avoid a decline in its relative price, the firm incorporates expected changes
in the inflation rate into pb∗t .

The degree to which pb∗t responds to current and future values of ŝt is increasing in A,

which in turn depends on the properties of G(·). One way to interpret A is that it governs
the degree of pass-through from a rise in marginal cost to prices. For example, according
to (7), a highly persistent 1% increase in time t marginal cost from its steady state value
induces the firm to initially raise its relative price by approximately A percent.
A diﬀerent way to interpret A involves the elasticity of demand for a given intermediate
good, η(x) = −G0 (x)/(xG00 (x)), where x = Yt∗ /Yt . In the Appendix we show that
A=

1
,
ζ² + 1

(9)

where ² = (P̃ /η(1))(∂η(1)/∂ P̃ ). The variable ² is the percent change in the elasticity of
demand due to a one percent change in the relative price of the good, evaluated in steady
state. The variable ζ denotes the firm’s steady state markup, η(1)/(η(1) − 1) − 1. In the

standard Dixit Stiglitz case, ² is equal to zero and A is equal to one.

Relations (9) and (7) imply that the larger is ², the lower is A and the less responsive
is pb∗t to current and future values of ŝt . To understand these relationships, recall that, other
things being equal, a rise in marginal cost induces a firm to increase its price. A higher value

of ² means that, for any given rise in its price, the more elastic is the demand curve for the
firm’s good. So, relative to the case where ² = 0, the firm will raise its price by less. As we
discuss below, this means that inflation will respond by less to movements in marginal cost.
8

Zero profits in the final goods sector and our assumptions about the distribution of θ
across firms and time imply
Pt Yt =

Z 1
0

Pit Yit = (1 − θ)Pt∗ Yt+l G0−1

µ

¶

µ

¶

Pt∗ Yt
π̄Pt−1 Yt
+ θπ̄Pt−1 Yt G0−1
.
λt
λt

(10)

Linearizing this relationship around the steady-state values of the variables in (10) yields
the standard relationship pb∗t = θπ̂ t /(1 − θ). Combining this equation and (7) we obtain
π̂ t = βEt−τ π̂ t+1 +

(1 − βθ) (1 − θ)
AEt−τ ŝt .
θ

(11)

When τ = 0 and A = 1 (the Dixit-Stiglitz case), (11) reduces to the standard relationship
between inflation and marginal costs studied in the literature.8
Iterating forward on (11) yields
π̂ t =

∞
X
(1 − βθ) (1 − θ)
β j ŝt+j .
AEt−τ
θ
j=0

(12)

Relation (12) makes clear a central prediction of the model: deviations of inflation from its
steady state value depend only on firms’ expectations of current and future deviations of
real marginal cost from its steady state value. The lower is A, i.e., the more sensitive is
the elasticity of demand for intermediate goods to price changes, the less responsive is π̂ t to
changes in expected values of ŝt+j . Similarly, the higher is θ, the smaller will be the response
of π̂ t to expected changes in marginal cost. So the version of the Calvo model considered in
this subsection has two distinct mechanisms that can account for a small response of inflation
to movements in marginal cost.
In the case where firms adopt the dynamic indexing rule, (5), the linearized first order
condition is

8

pb∗t

= Et−τ

∞
X

"

l

(βθ) ∆π̂ t+l + AEt−τ ŝt +

l=1

∞
X
l=1

l

#

(βθ) (ŝt+l − ŝt+l−1 )

We derived (11) by linearizing around steady state inflation π̄. Various authors assume that firms which
do not reoptimize prices leave their price unchanged, i.e., Pit = Pit−1 . The model is then linearized around
π̄ = 1. Since π̂ t is defined as the percentage deviation from steady state, (11) does not depend on the assumed
value of π̄.

9

and (11) takes the form
∆π̂ t = βEt−τ ∆π̂ t+1 +

(1 − βθ) (1 − θ)
AEt−τ ŝt .
θ

(13)

In addition, (12) is replaced by
∆π̂t =

∞
X
(1 − βθ) (1 − θ)
AEt−τ
β j ŝt+j .
θ
j=0

(14)

Here, ∆ denotes the first diﬀerence operator. Notice that with dynamic indexation, it is the
first diﬀerence of π̂ t that is a weighted average of expected current and future values of ŝt .
2.2. Firm-specific Capital
Standard variants of the Calvo model assume that firms rent capital and purchase labor
services in perfectly competitive economy-wide markets. Woodford (2003) has proposed a
variant of the Calvo model in which capital is firm-specific. In this specification, a firm’s capital can only be augmented with a one-period delay using final goods, subject to adjustment
costs. These assumptions imply that, unlike the case in which capital is not firm-specific,
intermediate good firms do not view marginal costs as being beyond their ability to control.
As we show below, this perturbation of the Calvo model allows it to account for the time
series behavior of inflation with less inertia in firms’ pricing plans, i.e., lower values of θ.
The basic intuition for this claim can be described as follows. With firm-specific capital,
a firm’s marginal cost depends partly on economy-wide factors such as the real wage rate
and the aggregate level of technology. But, because its stock of capital is predetermined, a
firm’s marginal cost is also an increasing function of its output. Consider a shock that raises
the economy-wide component of marginal costs, such as a rise in the real wage rate. Other
things equal, a firm that is re-optimizing its price will respond by planning to raise its price.
However, this rise in price reduces output, which leads to a countervailing fall in marginal
cost. Therefore, the firm will plan to raise its price by less than it would have were capital
not predetermined. The presence of adjustment costs implies that the firm will only slowly
adjust its stock of capital. Consequently, the dynamic eﬀects stemming from adjustment
costs reinforce the eﬀects of predetermined capital on firms’ pricing decisions.
To be concrete, we now briefly describe a version of Woodford’s (2003) model in which
10

final output is produced using the Kimball specification (see (1)). We refer the reader to the
appendix for details. The model is identical to the one described in the previous subsection
except for the nature of capital. At time t, firm i’s capital, Kit , is given. The firm can
augment its capital by purchasing time t output of the final good sector. But it does so
subject to convex capital adjustment costs. Specifically, increasing capital to Kit+1 in period
t + 1 requires time t investment, Iit , satisfying
Iit = Q

µ

¶

Kit+1
Kit .
Kit

(15)

The function Q (·) satisfies the following properties: Q(1) = δ, Q0 (1) = 1 and Q00 (1) = ψ,
where 0 < δ < 1 and ψ ≥ 0. In non-stochastic steady state, investment is equal to δ times
the steady-state capital stock. So, we can interpret δ as the steady-state rate of capital

depreciation. The parameter ψ controls the degree of adjustment costs. For simplicity,
we assume that capital decisions are made subject to the same timing constraints as price
decisions. Specifically, we assume Iit is chosen at time t − τ . When τ = 1, this assumption

coincides with the corresponding assumption in Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2004).
The average marginal cost across firms is st =

R1
0

sit di, where sit is the relevant measure

of marginal cost entering into firm i’s pricing decisions. In the appendix we show that the
marginal cost for firm i satisfies
ŝit = ŝt +

i
i
α h
α h
Ŷit − Ŷt −
K̂it − K̂t .
1−α
1−α

Here, ŝt is given by (8). Unlike the case in which capital is firm-specific, firm i’s marginal
cost is not beyond its control.9 Instead, ŝit is an increasing function of firm i’s output relative
to economy wide output and a decreasing function of firm i’s capital stock relative to the
economy-wide stock of capital.
With the static indexation scheme, the analog to (11) is
π̂ t = βEt−τ π̂ t+1 +

(1 − βθ) (1 − θ)
· A · D · Et−τ ŝt ,
θ

(16)

where A is defined as in (9) and D is a function of the underlying parameters of the model
9

Without firm specific capital, Ŷit = Ŷt and K̂it = K̂t and ŝit = ŝt .

11

(see the Appendix). For simplicity, we summarize this relationship as
D = d(β, α, δ, ψ, θ, ζ, ²).

(17)

Under dynamic indexation, the analog to (13) is
∆π̂ t = βEt−τ ∆π̂ t+1 +

(1 − βθ) (1 − θ)
· A · D · Et−τ ŝt .
θ

For the parameter values that we consider, D ≤ 1. So, for any given value of θ, firm-specific
capital, like a non-constant elasticity of demand, reduces the response of π̂ t to movements

in ŝt . So firm-specific capital gives rise to an additional mechanism that generates a small
response of inflation to movements in ŝt .
In the appendix we show that when adjustment costs approach infinity, that is, as ψ
approaches infinity, then
D→

1
.
1 + η̄αA/(1 − α)

Under Dixit-Stiglitz, A = 1 and η̄ = µ, in which case D corresponds to the coeﬃcient in the
model considered by Sbordone (2002) and Galí, Gertler and López-Salido (2001). The key
characteristic of that model is that each firm has a fixed stock of firm-specific capital.

3. Assessing the Empirical Plausibility of the Model
In this section we discuss two strategies for estimating and testing our variants of the Calvo
model. The first corresponds to the strategy pioneered by Hansen (1982) and Hansen and
Singleton (1982) and applied to the Calvo model by Galí and Gertler (1999) and Galí, Gertler
and López-Salido (2001). The idea is to exploit the fact that in any model incorporating
Calvo pricing, certain restrictions must hold. One can analyze these restrictions, without
making assumptions about other aspects of the economy. We test these restrictions using
Hansen’s (1982) ‘J statistic’.
A possible shortcoming of tests based on the J statistic is that they may have low power
against specific alternatives. Galí and Gertler (1999) argue that this is the case when the
Calvo model is confronted with the possibility that some firms adopt backward-looking ‘rule
of thumb’ rules for setting prices. In the second subsection we incorporate this type of firm
12

into our analysis and discuss one strategy to test for their presence. An alternative to the
limited information methods that we use is to embed our version of the Calvo pricing model
within a fully articulated general equilibrium model. One could then estimate and test
the model using maximum likelihood methods. Two interesting examples of this approach
include Linde (2002) and Smets and Wouters (2003).
3.1. Testable Implications of the Calvo Model
To derive the testable implications of the Calvo model, it is convenient to focus on the model
with static indexation and define the random variable
ψ t+1 = π̂t − β π̂ t+1 −

(1 − βθ)(1 − θ)
· A · D · ŝt .
θ

(18)

Since π̂ t is in agents’ time t − τ information set, (16) can be written as:
Et−τ ψ t+1 (σ) = 0,
where σ denotes the structural parameters of the model. It follows that
Eψ t+1 (σ)Xt−τ = 0

(19)

for any k dimensional vector Xt−τ in agents’ time t − τ information set. We exploit (19) to

estimate the true value of σ, σ 0 , and test the over-identifying restrictions of the model using
Hansen’s (1982) Generalized Method of Moments procedure.10
Our estimate of σ is
σ̂ = arg min
JT (σ),
σ

(20)

JT (σ) = gT (σ)0 WT gT (σ)

(21)

T h
i
1 X
gT (σ) = ( )
ψ t+1 (σ)Xt−τ .
T t=1

(22)

where

and

10

We require that {π̂ t , ŝt , Xt } is a stationary and ergodic process.

13

Here, T denotes the size of our sample and WT is a symmetric positive definite matrix that can
depend on sample information. The choice of WT that minimizes the asymptotic covariance
matrix of σ̂ is a consistent estimate of the spectral density matrix of {ψ t+1 (σ 0 )Xt−τ } at

frequency zero. Our theory implies that ψ t+1 (σ)Xt−τ has a moving average representation
of order τ . So we choose WT−1 to be a consistent estimate of
τ
X

E[ψ t+1+k (σ)Xt+k−τ ][ψ t+1+k (σ)Xt+k−τ ]0 .

(23)

k=−τ

The minimized value of the GMM criterion function, JT , is asymptotically distributed as
a chi-squared random variable with degrees of freedom equal to the diﬀerence between the
number of unconditional moment restrictions imposed (k) and the number of parameters
being estimated.11
One does not have to impose the restriction that ψ t+1 (σ)Xt−τ has an MA(τ ) representation when constructing an estimate of WT−1 . Specifically, one could allow for higher-order
serial correlation in the error term than the theory implies. However, as we describe below,
whether one does so or not has an important impact, in practice, on inference.
It is evident from (18) and (20) - (22) that θ, A and D are not separately identified. All
that can be identified given the assumptions made so far is the reduced form parameter
c=A·D·

(1 − βθ)(1 − θ)
.
θ

(24)

However, given any estimate of c, ĉ, and assumed values for A and D, one can deduce the
implied value of θ. When capital is not firm-specific, we have D = 1, and θ can be derived
from the relation
A=

θĉ
.
(1 − βθ)(1 − θ)

(25)

Here A is function of ζ and ². When capital is firm-specific, one can deduce θ using (17) and
A=

θĉ
.
D(1 − βθ)(1 − θ)

(26)

11
According to relation (12), π̂ t is predetermined at time t − τ . If we were only interested in assessing the
hypothesis that inflation is predetermined at time t − τ , we could test whether any variable dated between
time t − τ and t has explanatory power for time t inflation.

14

The previous discussion implies that, given priors about a key subset of the model’s
structural parameters and the nature of capital markets, we can deduce the degree of inertia
in price optimization (θ) required to render the extended Calvo model consistent with the
aggregate time series data.
3.2. Testing the Calvo Model Against a Specific Alternative
Galí and Gertler (1999) have argued it is necessary to allow for backward looking ‘rule of
thumb’ firms to render the Calvo model consistent with the data. Here we show how to
incorporate the presence of Galí - Gertler-type ‘rule of thumb’ firms into our analysis.12 As
in our basic model, we consider two cases corresponding to whether optimizing firms update
their prices using static or dynamic optimization rules. For simplicity, we derive the model
under the assumption that capital is not firm-specific and A = 1.
Optimizing Firms With Static Indexation
Following Galí and Gertler (1999), we assume that there are two types of firms in the
economy. A fraction (1 − ω) of intermediate good firms are optimizing Calvo type firms.

That is, they face a constant probability, 1 − θ, of being able to re-optimize their nominal

price. As above, when they re-optimize, they solve problem (6) subject to (2). When they do
not re-optimize, they adopt the static optimization scheme, (4). A fraction ω of intermediate
good firms adopt the rule of thumb for setting prices discussed in Galí and Gertler (1999).
With probability θ, rule of thumb firm i sets its price according to13
Pit = π̄Pit−1 .

(27)

With probability (1 − θ), this firm sets its price according to
Pt0 = π t−1 P̄t−1 .
12

(28)

An important motivation for introducing ‘rule- of-thumb’ firms is the observed inertia in inflation. See
Linde (2001) for a discussion of the diﬃculties that standard dynamic general equilibrium models have in
accounting for the backward-looking component of inflation.
13
This rule is precisely the same as the one considered by Gali and Gertler (1999) except that they assume
π̄ = 1. As explained above, this assumption has no impact on the estimation equations used in the analysis.

15

Here
P̄t = (1 − ω)Pt∗ + ωPt0 ,

(29)

and Pt∗ denotes the price set by firms that can re-optimize their price at time t. The aggregate
price level is given by
·

³

Pt = (1 − θ) P̄t

´

1
1−µ

+ θ (π̄Pt−1 )

1
1−µ

¸1−µ

(30)

.

Log linearizing (27) - (30) and combining the resulting expressions with (7), one can show
that the analog to (11) is given by:
π̂ t =

βθ
ω
(1 − ω)(1 − βθ)(1 − θ)
Et−τ π̂ t+1 + π̂ t−1 +
Et−τ ŝt
φ
φ
φ

(31)

where φ = θ + ω [1 − θ(1 − β)] . As long as ω > 0, rule-of-thumb firms generate additional

persistence in inflation in the sense that π t−1 appears in (31). When ω = 0, (31) collapses to
the analog expression for π̂ t in the standard Calvo model with static indexing.
Optimizing Firms With Dynamic Indexation
We now modify the version of the Galí-Gertler model discussed above on exactly one
dimension: we assume that optimizing firms adopt the dynamic optimization scheme (5)
instead of the static scheme (4). With this modification, the aggregate price level is given
by:

·

³

Pt = (1 − θ) P̄t

´

1
1−µ

+ θ ((1 − ω)π t−1 Pt−1 + ωπ̄Pt−1 )

1
1−µ

¸1−µ

.

(32)

Replacing (30) with (32) in the derivation with static indexation, one can show that the
analog to (11) is given by
∆π̂ t =

βθ
∆π̂ t+1
φ0

+

ωθ
(1
φ0

+ ωθ
(1 − ω)(1 − βθ)π̂ t−1 +
φ0

− ω)∆π̂ t−1

(1−ω)(1−βθ)(1−θ)
Et−τ ŝt ,
φ0

(33)

where φ0 = θ(1 − ω) + ω. Notice that rule of thumb firms imply that both ∆π̂ t−1 and π̂t−1

appear in the equilibrium relationship determining ∆π̂ t . When ω = 0, (33) collapses to the
analog expression for π̂ t in the standard Calvo model under the dynamic indexing scheme.
Estimation and Testing
16

We estimate the parameters of the model described in this section using the methodology
and instruments described in section 4.1. The key modification is that, under static indexation, equation (31) replaces (11). Under dynamic indexation, (33) replaces (13). To test
the model against the general alternative that the model is misspecified, we use Hansen’s JT
statistic. More interestingly, in the present context, we can test the standard Calvo model
against the specific alternative that there exist rule-of-thumb firms by assessing whether the
parameter ω is significantly diﬀerent from zero.

4. Data
Our benchmark sample period is 1959:1 - 2001:4. However, numerous observers have argued
that there was an important change in the nature of monetary policy with the advent of
the Volker disinflation in the early 1980s. It is also often argued that the Fed’s operating
procedures were diﬀerent in the early 1980s than in the post-1982 period. Accordingly, we
re-estimated the model over the two distinct subsamples used in Galí, Lopez-Salido and
Vallés (2003): 1959:1-1979:2 and 1982:3- 2001:4. We report results for two measures of
inflation: the GDP deflator and the price deflator for personal consumption expenditures.14
We measure π̂ t as the diﬀerence between actual time t inflation and the sample average of
inflation.
In the case where capital is not firm-specific, real marginal costs are equal to the real
product wage divided by the marginal product of labor. Production function (3) implies that
real marginal cost is proportional to labor’s share in national income, Wt Ht /(Pt Yt ), where
Wt is the nominal wage. In practice, we measure Wt Ht as nominal labor compensation in the
non-farm business sector. Our measure of Pt Yt is nominal output of the non-farm business
sector. The variable ŝt is measured as the diﬀerence between the log of the time t value of
our measure of labor’s share in national income and its sample average. This is a standard
measure of ŝt which has been used by Galí and Gertler (1999), Galí et. al. (2001) and
Sbordone (2002). As it turns out, this is the correct measure of ŝt even when capital is
firm-specific (see the Appendix).
Rotemberg and Woodford (1999) discuss possible corrections to this measure that are
14

All data sources are listed in the Appendix. We also considered the price deflator for the non-farm
business sector and the consumer price index (CPI) and found that our key results are insensitive to these
alternative measures.

17

appropriate for diﬀerent assumptions about technology. These corrections include those that
take into account a non-constant elasticity of factor substitution between capital and labor
and the presence of overhead costs and labor adjustment costs. We redid our analysis for
these alternative measures of marginal costs and found that they do not aﬀect the qualitative
nature of our results.15
Consider next the instrument vector Xt−τ . Let Zt denote the four-dimensional vector
consisting of the time t value of real marginal cost, quadratically detrended real GDP, inflation, and the growth rate of nominal wages in the non farm business sector. Our specification
of Xt−τ is given by16
Xt−τ = {1, Zt−τ , ψ t−τ }0 .
We include lagged values of the Euler error, ψ t , because we found that doing so increased
the power of our statistical tests (see below).

5. Empirical Results
In this section we present our empirical results. To facilitate comparisons with the literature,
we report point estimates of θ corresponding to the identifying assumption that capital is
mobile and G(·) in (1) is of the Dixit-Stiglitz form. The first subsection reports results for
the case in which there are no delays in implementing new optimal price decisions (τ = 0).
When A = 1 and capital is firm-specific, this case corresponds to the standard Calvo model.
In the second subsection, we discuss the impact of allowing for a delay in implementing new
optimal price decisions. In the third subsection, we report results for the Galí and Gertler
(1999) ‘rule of thumb’ version of the model.
15
See also Gagnon and Khan (2004) who study versions of the Calvo model under diﬀerent assumptions
about marginal cost.
16
Gali and Gertler (1999) use an instrument list consisting of a constant and lagged values of Zt , where
the latter is augmented to include an index of commodity prices and the spread between the annual interest
rate on the ten year Treasury Bond and three month bill. We redid our basic analysis, setting Xt to
{1, Zt−j , j = 0, 1, 2, 3}0 and {1, Zt−j , j = 1, 2, 3, 4}. Gali et..al. (2001) adopt the same specification as we
do but set Xt = {1, Zt−j , j = 1, 2, 3, 4}. It turns out that the point estimates are similar across diﬀerent
specifications of Xt , including the one used in this paper. However, using a larger set of instruments
leads to misleading inference about the plausibility of the overidentifying restrictions implied by the model.
Specifically, often we cannot reject the model with a larger set of instruments on the basis of the JT statistic,
but we can do so with the smaller set of instruments.

18

5.1. The Standard Calvo Model
We begin by analyzing results for the standard Calvo model (τ = 0) in the case where firms
adopt the static indexing scheme. The top panel of Table 1 summarizes results obtained using
the full sample. We report our estimate of the parameter θ (standard error in parenthesis)
and the JT statistic (p-value in square brackets). The label L refers to the maximal degree
of serial correlation that we allow for when estimating the weighting matrix WT . Initially we
consider two values for L : (i) L = 0, which corresponds to the degree of serial correlation
in ψ t+1 implied by this version of the model, and (ii) L = 12, the value used by Galí and
Gertler (1999). Both values of L are admissible. But, by setting L to zero we are imposing
all of the restrictions implied by the model. This restriction may lead to greater eﬃciency
of our estimator and more power in our test of the model’s over-identifying restrictions.
Recall that Table 1 presents our estimates of the model’s parameters under the assumption that A and D equal one. Notice that θ is estimated with relatively small standard
errors. In addition, the point estimate itself is reasonably robust across the diﬀerent inflation measures and the two values of L, ranging from a low of 0.87 to a high of 0.91. This
implies that on average, firms wait between 7.5 and 11 quarters before re-optimizing their
prices. This result is consistent with findings in Smets and Wouters (2003) who find, using
maximum likelihood methods, that high degrees of price inertia are required to render a
standard Calvo model consistent with the data. This result is also consistent with findings
in Galí and Gertler (1999).
We hesitate to attribute much importance to these point estimates. When L = 12, the
model cannot be rejected at the 1% significance level, although it can be rejected at the
5% significance level. However, when we set L = 0, the model is strongly rejected for both
inflation measures. Evidently, imposing all of the relevant restrictions implied by the model
on the weighting matrix has an important impact on inference.
The middle and bottom panels of Table 1 report our sub-sample results. Note that when
L = 12, there is virtually no evidence against the model for either measure of inflation,
regardless of which subsample we consider. As with the full sample results, inference is
significantly aﬀected by setting L = 0. In the first sample period, the model is now rejected
at the 5% significance level for both measures of inflation. In the second subsample, the model
is decisively rejected using data from the second subsample when we measure inflation using
the GDP deflator. There is considerably less evidence against the model in this case when
19

we use the PCE deflator-based measure of inflation. Comparing the point estimates in the
three panels, we see that inference about θ is reasonably robust to allowing for a split in the
sample. As above, we are hesitant to attach much importance to this result in light of the
overall statistical evidence against the standard Calvo model.
Table 2 reports results when we allow for dynamic indexation. The key result to note
is that this version of the model is also rejected when we set L = 0. Viewed overall, we
conclude that there is strong statistical evidence against the standard Calvo model.
5.2. Alternative Timing Assumptions
Table 3 reports the results of estimating the model when τ = 1 and we assume that firms
adopt the static indexation scheme, (4). In the previous subsection we showed that imposing
the degree of serial correlation in ψ t+1 implied by the model on the estimator of the weighting
matrix, WT , improves the power of our statistical tests. So, for the remainder of the analysis,
we report results only for the case where these restrictions are imposed. In the case of τ = 1,
this means setting L = 1. The instruments used are
Xt−1 = {1, Zt−1 , ψ t−1 }0 .

(34)

Two key results from Table 3 are worth reporting. First, regardless of which sample
period we consider or which measure of inflation we use, there is virtually no statistical
evidence against the model. Second, θ is estimated with reasonable precision with the point
estimates ranging from a low of 0.83 to a high of 0.91. This corresponds to firms changing
prices on average from between 6 quarters and 11 quarters, which seems implausible high.
Table 4 reports the results of estimating the model when τ = 1 and we assume that
firms adopt the dynamic indexation scheme, (5). As with the static indexing scheme, there
is virtually no statistical evidence against the model. Moreover, the point estimates of the
parameters θ are quite similar, now ranging from a low 0.83 to a high of 0.89.
We conclude that allowing for a one period lag (τ = 1) in the implementation of new
pricing plans is suﬃcient to overturn our statistical evidence against the standard Calvo
model. But it is not suﬃcient to generate economically plausible parameter estimates of the
degree of inertia in price re-optimization. Note, however, that this conclusion is conditional
on the assumption that intermediate goods are combined via a Dixit-Stiglitz technology to
20

produce final goods (A = 1) and that capital is not firm-specific (D = 1). Before exploring
the quantitative trade-oﬀ between the parameter A, the nature of capital markets, and the
degree of price stickiness, we investigate the claim that the standard Calvo model must be
modified to allow for the presence of rule-of-thumb firms.
5.3. ‘Rule of Thumb’ Firms
We now report the results of estimating the Calvo model, modified to allow for backwardlooking ‘rule of thumb’ firms. We begin by confirming Galí and Gertler’s result that there is
evidence of backward looking firms under the static indexation scheme. We then show that
this evidence disappears under the dynamic indexing scheme. Throughout we assume, as do
Galí and Gertler, that τ = 1.
Table 5 summarizes our results for the static indexation case. Four key findings are
worth noting. First, using the full sample, we estimate that roughly 50% of firms behave
in a rule-of-thumb manner, with the exact percent depending on how we measure inflation.
In both cases, we can reject, at conventional significance levels, the null hypothesis that
there are no rule-of-thumb firms (ω = 0). Second, there is virtually no evidence against the
over-identifying restrictions imposed by the model. Third, the point estimates of θ still seem
implausibly large. Fourth, there is little evidence of rule-of-thumb firms once we allow for a
split in the sample if we measure inflation using the GDP deflator. But there is still evidence
that ω is greater than zero when we measure inflation using the PCE deflator, at least in
the second subsample.
Viewed overall, the results in Table 5 are consistent with Galí and Gertler’s conclusion
that the standard Calvo model with static indexation is rejected when we test it against
a specific alternative, namely, the presence of some rule-of-thumb firms. Table 6 reports
our results for the case of dynamic indexation. Three key findings emerge. First, our point
estimates of ω are substantially smaller than those emerging under the assumption that
optimizing firms adopt the static indexation scheme. Indeed, for the full sample, our point
estimates are roughly equal to zero. Second, our point estimates of θ are similar to those
obtained when we estimated the model under the constraint that ω is equal to zero (see
Table 4). Perhaps most importantly, there is virtually no evidence of rule-of-thumb firms.
Regardless of which sample we consider or which measure of inflation we use, we cannot
reject the null hypothesis that ω = 0. We conclude that the evidence for rule-of-thumb firms
21

disappears once we allow for dynamic indexation.

6. Interpreting the Estimated Calvo Model
In Section 5 we argued that there is little evidence against the version of the Calvo model
with a one-period implementation lag, optimizing firms use the dynamic indexation scheme,
and there are no rule-of-thumb firms. However, the estimated degree of inertia in price
re-optimization implied by the model seems implausibly large. Taken at face value, these
findings indicate that the Calvo model can be rescued statistically, but not in any interesting
economic sense. However, this conclusion follows only under the maintained assumptions
that firms face a constant elasticity of demand (A = 1) and that capital is not firm-specific
(D = 1). In this section we explore the sensitivity of inference about θ to these assumptions.
Specifically, we analyze the quantitative trade-oﬀ between θ, the nature of capital markets,
and the elasticity of demand for intermediate goods with respect to relative prices, ².
Recall that the relationship between the reduced parameter c and the underlying parameters of the model is given by expressions (17) and (24) - (26). Suppose we have an
estimate of c and values for (β, α, δ, ζ). In the case where capital is not firm-specific, these
equations reduce to one equation in two unknowns, θ and ². When capital is firm-specific,
we have two equations in three unknowns θ, ψ and ². In general, diﬀerent values of ψ and ²
imply diﬀerent values of θ that are consistent with a given estimate of c.
To explore the nature of these trade-oﬀs, we proceed as follows. We set the share of
capital in the production function, α, to 1/3, the quarterly depreciation rate of capital, δ,
to 0.025, the markup, ζ, equal to 10% and the discount rate, β, to 0.99. We consider three
values for ² : 0, 10 and 33. Recall that ² equal to zero corresponds to the Dixit - Stiglitz
case. The case of ε = 10 is consistent with results in Bergin and Feenstra (2000). The case
of ² equal to 33 is the benchmark value considered in Kimball (1995).
When firm capital is not firm-specific, D = 1 and the parameter ψ does not appear in
the model. When capital is firm-specific we consider three values of ψ. First, we assume
that ψ = 0. This assumption allows us to disentangle the impact of pre-determined firmspecific capital per se from the eﬀect of capital adjustment costs. Second, we set ψ equal
to three, the value emphasized in Woodford (2003). The parameter ψ can be interpreted
as the elasticity of the investment-to-capital ratio with respect to Tobin’s q, evaluated in
steady state. As shown in the appendix, for our model, this elasticity is given by 1/(δψ).
22

With δ = 0.025 and ψ = 3, this elasticity is equal to 13.3, a value that is large relative to
those reported in the literature (see Christiano and Fisher 1998). In this sense, ψ = 3 is a
conservative choice; we would have to assume larger adjustment costs to obtain elasticities
closer to those in the literature. Finally, in results not reported here, we also considered the
case of ψ equal to infinity. Here the elasticity of the investment-to-capital ratio with respect
to Tobin’s q is equal to zero. This case corresponds to Sbordone’s (2002) assumption that
capital is firm-specific and cannot be augmented over time. As it turns out, raising ψ from
three to infinity to ψ = ∞ has very little impact on our findings.

Table 7 reports results based on estimates of c implied by Table 4 (τ = 1, dynamic index-

ation and no rule-of-thumb firms). The values in square brackets represent 95% confidence
intervals.17 Since our findings are similar for the two inflation measures, we focus on the
GDP deflator case. Three key results emerge from Table 7. First, as anticipated, θ is a
declining function of ². For example, when capital is not firm-specific, the point estimate of
θ falls from 0.88 to 0.76 as ² rises from the benchmark value of 0 to 33. This fall corresponds
to a decline in the average frequency with which firms re-optimize prices from roughly two
years to one year. Second, for any given value of ², θ decreases if we assume that capital is
firm-specific. For ψ = 3, our point estimate of θ is less than 0.75 (a re-optimization rate of at
least one year) regardless of which value of ² we work with. By comparing the case of ψ = 0
and ψ = 3, we see that the fall in θ is partly attributable to the eﬀect of predetermined
capital per se and partly to the eﬀect of capital adjustment costs. As mentioned above,
assuming larger adjustment costs has very little impact on inference regarding θ. Third,
conditional on the presence of firm-specific capital, there is only marginal evidence against
the null hypothesis that firms re-optimize prices every half-year.18
Table 8 reports the analog statistics calculated for values of c estimated allowing for a
break in the sample period. Notice that the qualitative results from Table 7 are very robust
to this change: allowing for a non-constant elasticity of demand or firm-specific capital leads
to lower values of θ. Perhaps more importantly, the reported values of θ are lower than those
reported in either Table 4 or Table 7. It is useful to focus on the case in which capital is
17

These intervals were calculated as follows. Using the information from Table 4, we construct a 95%
confidence interval for c. Then, for the diﬀerent specifications of our model, we compute the values of θ
that correspond to the lower and upper values of the confidence intervals for c. Using these values of θ, we
computed the corresponding lower and upper values of 1/(1 − θ).
18
The confidence intervals for the statistic 1/(1 − θ) are asymmetric. Because of the nonlinear nature of
this function, the right hand tail of the reported confidence intervals are very large.

23

firm-specific. With ψ = 3, our point estimate of θ is substantially lower than 0.75, varying
from a low of 0.56 to a high of 0.67, depending on the value of ² we assume. So the average
amount of time between price re-optimization ranges from 2.3 and roughly 3 quarters. In no
case can we reject the hypothesis that firms re-optimize prices on average every 2 quarters.
We conclude by discussing the relationship between the properties of our estimated model
and recent findings in the literature regarding the degree of price stickiness based on microeconomic data. Using disaggregated CPI data from the greater New York metropolitan area
over the period 1988 to 1997, Golosov and Lucas (2003) report that roughly 21.9% of prices
of items in the CPI basket remain unchanged each month. Using data from New York,
Chicago and Los Angeles over the sample period 1988-2003, Klenow and Krystov (2003)
report that 24.8% of prices of items in the CPI basket remain unchanged every month.19
Comparing our variants of the Calvo model with these findings is delicate. At one level,
the models in this paper imply that prices change too frequently relative to the micro data.
This is because with price indexation, all prices are changing all the time. An even more
subtle diﬃculty is that just because firms are changing prices does not mean that they have
re-optimized those prices: a subset of the price changes being recorded could reflect various
forms of time dependent price updating rules. So, in principle, our model could be consistent
with findings that prices change all the time.
Despite these diﬃculties, we think it is still useful to compare the average frequency with
which firms re-optimize prices in the estimated version of our model with the findings in
Golosov and Lucas and Klenow and Krystov. Golosov and Lucas’ estimates imply that firms
change prices once every 1.9 quarters, while Klenow and Krystov’s estimates imply that
firms change prices roughly every 1.7 − 1.8 quarters. Table 8 indicates that, based on the
GDP deflator, in the version of the model with firm specific capital and ψ = 3, we can never

reject the hypothesis that firms re-optimize prices, on average, every 1.8 quarters. With the
PCE deflator, we can never reject the hypothesis that firms re-optimize prices, on average,
every 1.9 quarters. In this sense, our model seems consistent with the findings in Golosov
and Lucas and Klenow and Krystov.
We are not claiming that our variants of the Calvo model are literally ‘true’. There
are some obvious aspects of these models that are counterfactual, such as the implication
19

In both cases, these fractions are based on data excluding sales. Interstingly, Klenow and Krystov also
report that roughly 90% of the variance in monthly inflation stems solely from fluctuations in the average
size of price changes. This last finding is inconsistent with a large class of state dependent pricing models.

24

that some firms never re-optimize prices. Nevertheless, the degree of inertia in price reoptimization implied by the estimated version of our model does not seem implausible relative
to the findings in Golosov and Lucas and Klenow and Krystov.

7. Conclusion
This paper assesses the empirical performance of the Calvo model of sticky goods prices. We
argue that a version of the model in which there is a one-quarter delay in the implementation
of new prices and dynamic indexation renders the model consistent with the aggregate data
in a statistical sense. A separate question is whether the estimated model implies plausible
inertia in price setting behavior by firms. On the face of it, the answer to this question is
no: our benchmark model implies that firms re-optimize prices roughly once every seven
quarters.
However, this conclusion is not warranted once we abandon two special auxiliary assumptions associated with standard expositions of the Calvo model: (i) monopolistically
competitive firms face a constant elasticity of demand and (ii) capital is not firm-specific
and can be instantaneously reallocated after a shock. Once we abandon these assumptions,
the estimated model implies a degree of inertia in price re-optimization that is much more
plausible. Specifically, it is consistent with the hypothesis that firms re-optimize prices at
least once every two quarters. This result holds even though the model is observationally
equivalent to the original model in terms of its implications for the time series data on
inflation.

25

References
[1] Bergin, Paul and Robert Feenstra, “Staggered Price Setting, Translog Preferences, and
Endogenous Persistence,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2000, v. 45, pp. 657-680.
[2] Bils, Mark and Peter Klenow, “Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky Prices,”
December 2003, forthcoming in the Journal of Political Economy.
[3] Burstein, Ariel, “Inflation and Output Dynamics with State Dependent Pricing Decisions,” 2002, manuscript, University of Michigan.
[4] Calvo, Guillermo, “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 1983, 12(3), pp. 383-98.
[5] Christiano, Lawrence, “Notes on Firm-specific Capital,” manuscript, 2004.
[6] Christiano, Lawrence, Eichenbaum, Martin and Charles Evans, “Nominal Rigidities
and the Dynamic Eﬀects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” 2004, forthcoming, Journal
of Political Economy.
[7] Christiano, Lawrence and Jonas Fisher, 1998, “Stock Market and Investment Good
Prices: Implications for Macroeconomics,” Chicago Fed working paper 98-6.
[8] Dotsey, Michael, King, Robert, G. and Alexander L. Wolman, “State-Dependent Pricing
and the General Equilibrium Dynamics of Money and Output,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 1999, 114(2), pp. 655-90.
[9] Erceg, Christopher, J., Henderson, Dale, W. and Andrew T. Levin, “Optimal Monetary
Policy with Staggered Wage and Price Contracts,” Journal of Monetary Economics,
2000, 46(2), pp. 281-313.
[10] Gagnon, Edith and Hashmat Khan, “New Phillips Curve with Alternative Marginal Cost
Measures for Canada, the United States, and the Euro Area,” Forthcoming European
Economic Review, 2004.
[11] Galí, Jordi, and Mark Gertler, “Inflation Dynamics: A Structural Econometric Analysis,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 1999, 44, pp. 195-222.
[12] Galí, Jordi, Mark Gertler and David Lopez-Salido, “European Inflation Dynamics,”
European Economic Review, 2001, pp. 1237-1270.
[13] Galí, Jordi, David Lopez-Salido and Javier Valles, “Technology shocks and Monetary
Policy: Assessing the Fed’s Performance,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2003, 50(4),
pp. 723-743.
[14] Golosov, M. and R.E. Lucas, Jr. “Menu Costs and Phillips Curves,” (2003), manuscript,
University of Chicago.
[15] Hansen, Lars P. “Large Sample Properties of Generalized Method of Moments Estimators,” Econometrica, 1982, Vol. 50, pp. 1029—1054.
26

[16] Hansen, Lars P. and Kenneth J. Singleton, “Generalized Instrumental Variables Estimation of Nonlinear Rational Expectations Models,” Econometrica, 1982, Vol. 50,
1269-1286.
[17] Kimball, Miles, “The Quantitative Analytics of the Basic Neomonetarist Model,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 1995, 27(4), Part 2, pp. 1241-1277.
[18] Klenow, P. and O. Krystov, “State-Dependent or Time-Dependent Pricing: Does it
Matter for Recent US Inflation,” Stanford University, manuscript, September 2003.
[19] Linde, Jesper, “The Empirical Relevance of Simple Forward- and Backward-Looking
Models: A View From a Dynamic General Equilibrium Model,” 2001, Sveriges Riksbank
Working Paper No. 130.
[20] Linde, Jesper, “Estimating New-Keynesian Phillips Curves: A Full Information Maximum Likelihood Approach,” 2002, Sveriges Riksbank Working Paper No. 129.
[21] Rotemberg, Julio J. and Michael Woodford, “An Optimization-Based Econometric
Framework for the Evaluation of Monetary Policy,” 1997, National Bureau of Economic
Research Macroeconomics Annual.
[22] Rotemberg, Julio J. and Michael Woodford, “The Cyclical Behavior of Prices and
Costs,” Handbook of Macroeconomics, Vol. 1A, eds. Michael Woodford and John Taylor,
New York: Elsevier Science, North-Holland, 1999.
[23] Sbordone, Argia, “Prices and Unit Labor Costs: A New Test of Price Stickiness,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 2002, 49(2), pp. 265-292.
[24] Smets, Frank and Raf Wouters, “An Estimated Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium Model of the Euro Area,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2003,
1(5), pp. 1123-75.
[25] Taylor, John “Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts,” Journal of Political Economy, 1980, Vol. 88, pp. 1-23.
[26] Woodford, Michael, “Control of the Public Debt: A Requirement for Price Stability,”
1996, NBER Working Paper 5684.
[27] Woodford, Michael, Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy,
2003, Princeton University Press: Princeton, NJ.
[28] Woodford, Michael, “Notes on Solving Model with Firm-specific capital,” manuscript,
2004.
[29] Yun, Tack, “Nominal Price Rigidity, Money Supply Endogeneity, and Business Cycles,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 1996, 37(2), pp. 345 - 370.
[30] Zbaracki, Mark J., Mark Ritson, Daniel Levy, Shantanu Dutta, and Mark Bergen, “The
Managerial and Customer Costs of Price Adjustment: Direct Evidence from Industrial
Markets,” manuscript, 2000, Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania.
27

Appendix
In this appendix we describe the following: (i) data sources, (ii) how to interpret the
parameter A, (iii) the model without rental markets for capital and D, and (iv) how to
assess the magnitude of the adjustment cost parameter, ψ.
Data
Our data are from the Haver Analytics database. For each data series below, we provide
a brief description and, in parenthesis, the Haver codes for the series used.
• Price measures: GDP deflator is the ratio of nominal GDP (GDP) and real chainweighted GDP (GDPH); personal consumption expenditures deflator (JCBM2).
• Real marginal costs: Share of labor income in nominal output for the non-farm business
sector, which is proportional to the Bureau of Labor Statistics measure of nominal unit
labor costs divided by the non-farm business deflator (LXNFU/LXNFI).
• Adjusted real marginal costs: Per capita hours - hours non-farm business sector
(LXNFH) divided by over-16 population (LN16N); Capital-output ratio - annual private fixed capital (EPQ) interpolated with quarterly private fixed investment (FH)
divided by GDP (GDPH), all variables in chained 1996 dollars.
• Instruments: Quadratically detrended real GDP is the residual of a linear regression
of real GDP (GDPH) on a constant, t and t2 ; inflation is the first diﬀerence of the log
of the price measures; growth rate of nominal wages is the first diﬀerence of the log of
nominal compensation in the non-farm business sector (LXNFC).

Interpreting A
Recall that the elasticity of demand for a given intermediate good is
η(x) = −
where

G0 (x)
xG00 (x)

Y∗
.
x=
Y

(35)

(36)

The coeﬃcient A can be written
A=

1 − 1/η̄
2 + G000 (1)/G00 (1)

(37)

where η̄ = −G0 (1)/G00 (1) is the steady state elasticity of demand. Note that in steady state
an intermediate good firm sets price as a markup over marginal cost, where the markup, ζ,
is η̄/(η̄ − 1) − 1.
28

Many authors have considered the value of
¯

P ∗ ∂η(x) ¯¯
²=
¯
.
η(x) ∂P ∗ ¯x=1

This is the percent change in the elasticity of demand due to a one percent change in the
own price at the steady state. The value of ² can be derived in terms of A and η̄ (or ζ) using
(2), (35), (36), and (37)
"

P ∗ ∂η(x) ∂x ∂ Ỹ
²=
η(x) ∂x ∂ Ỹ ∂P ∗

#

x=1

"

#

"

#

1 − 1/η̄
1
1+ζ
−1 =1+
−1 .
= 1 + η̄
A
ζ
(1 + ζ)A

Notice that under Dixit-Stiglitz, when A = 1, ² = 0. This is to be expected: under DixitStiglitz, the markup is constant. Solving for A using the last equality in the above expression,
we find
1
A=
.
ζ² + 1
Firm-Specific Capital with the Kimball Specification
In this section we describe the solution to the model with firm-specific capital and the
Kimball specification of the final good technology. Our derivation follows Christiano (2004)
and Woodford (2004), who consider firm- specific capital with the Dixit-Stiglitz specification.
The model is identical to the one described in section 2.1 except that, in addition to the usual
Calvo price-setting, at each date t − τ all intermediate good firms choose date t + 1 capital
subject to adjustment costs.20 Labor continues to be hired in economy-wide competitive
labor markets. Firms take all aggregate variables as given, including the return on risk-free
one-period real bonds, Rt . Below we focus on the static indexation case. The derivation
under dynamic indexation is similar.
The objective of a randomly chosen intermediate firm i at date t − τ , before it knows
whether it can re-optimize its price, is to maximize the expected present value of profit:
Et−τ

∞
X

j=0

h

1/(1−α)

Λt+j Pi,t+j Yi,t+j − Wt+j Yi,t+j

−1/(1−α)

At+j

−α/(1−α)

Ki,t+j

− Pt+j Ii,t+j

i

(38)

Q

subject to (2) and (15). Here Λt+j = ∞
l=0 π t+j+1 /Rt+j and It+j is the investment of the i’th
intermediate firm. In (38), we have substituted out for labor using the production function.
Also, we have assumed, without loss of generality, that the price of investment goods is the
same as that for consumption.
Marginal cost at firm i is given by
sit =

1
Wt
.
Pt (1 − α)Zt Kitα Hit−α

20

In practice we only require that it be made at least τ periods before date t. Assuming otherwise
complicates the analysis in a manner described below.

29

Linearizing average marginal cost, st =
Z 1

ŝt =

R1
0

sit di, we find

ŝi,t di

0

= Ŵt+j − P̂t+j −

1
α
α
Ât+j +
Ŷt+j −
K̂t .
1−α
1−α
1−α

It follows that

i
i
α h
α h
Ŷit − Ŷt −
K̂it − K̂t .
1−α
1−α
Linearizing the first order condition associated with the price choice (in the event that it
can re-optimize its price) and substituting for real marginal cost of firm i, ŝit :

ŝit = ŝt +

i
Êt−τ

∞
X

h

i

(βθ)j (1 + ξAη̄) p̂it+j − Aŝt+j + ξAk̂it+j = 0

j=0

h

(39)

i

where A is defined in (9), k̂it ≡ K̂it − K̂t , ξ ≡ α/(1 − α), pit+j ≡ Pit+j /Pt+j , and xb denotes

i
percent deviation of x from its steady state value. Also, Êt−τ
Xit+k denotes the expectation
of the random variable Xit+k , conditional on date t−τ information and on the event that the
i’th firm optimizes its price in period t, but not in any period after that, up to and including
t + k.
Linearizing the first order condition for the choice of t + 1 capital (regardless of whether
the firm can reoptimize its price or not)

h

i

Et−τ Q(L)k̂it+2 = ΞEt−τ p̂it+1 ,
where

(40)

Q(L) = β − φL + L2 ,

1 1
,
1−αψ
1 1
Ξ = (1 − β(1 − δ)) η̄
.
1−αψ
φ = 1 + β + (1 − β(1 − δ))

Here L is the lag operator. Also, Et−τ denotes the expectation operator, conditional on date
t − τ information, where the expectation integrates over all possible continuation histories
associated with the date t − τ information, including histories in which firm i reoptimizes its
price. A comparable expression is derived in Woodford (2003, p. 689).
Linearizing the zero profit condition for final good producers yields
π̂ t =

1−θ ∗
p̂ .
θ t

(41)

Here, p̂∗t is the percent deviation from steady state of the average optimized relative price
set in period t.
Following Christiano (2004) and Woodford (2004), we solve (39) and (40) using the
30

method of undetermined coeﬃcients and combine this solution with (41) to derive the reduced
form inflation equation. We posit that the price chosen by price-optimizing firms is:
p̂∗it = p̂∗t − ν k̂it ,

(42)

where ν is a number to be determined and p̂∗t is a function of aggregate variables only, which
is also to be determined. Note that, according to our assumptions, the variables on the right
hand side of (42) are known when the price decision is made at t − τ . The capital decision
of a firm is assumed to satisfy:
k̂it+1 = κ1 k̂it + κ2 Et−τ p̂it ,

(43)

where κ1 and κ2 are to be determined. Here, the variable p̂it denotes the i’th firm’s price,
whether optimized or not. If the firm is not reoptimizing at date t − τ , then p̂it is not in the
information set used to choose k̂it+1 . This is why we have Et−τ in (43).
The requirement that (42) and (43) must be satisfied for all possible realizations of p̂∗t , k̂it
and Et−τ p̂it implies the unknown coeﬃcients, κ1 , κ2 and ν must satisfy the following three
equations, subject to |κ1 | < 1:
1 − [φ + (1 − θ) ν (βκ2 − Ξ)] κ1 + βκ21 = 0
Ξθ + [φ − β (θ + κ1 ) − (1 − θ) Ξν] κ2 + β (1 − θ) νκ22 = 0
ξA (1 − βθ)
− ν = 0.
(1 + η̄ξA) (1 − βθκ1 ) + ξAβθκ2
Christiano (2004) incorporates industry-specific labor in this model. Except for this difference, these three equations are equivalent to analogous equations he derives under the
assumption of a constant elasticity of demand, A = 1.
Following Christiano (2004), we can derive an expression for p̂∗t using the linearized first
order conditions as well as (42) and (43):
p̂∗t =

∞
X

(βθ)j Et−τ π̂t+j +

j=1

∞
X
(1 − βθκ1 ) (1 − βθ)
(βθ)j Et−τ ŝt+j .
(1 + η̄ξA) (1 − βθκ1 ) + ξAβθκ2 j=0

By substituting this expression into (41), we obtain the following equation relating inflation
to average marginal cost:
π̂ t = βEt−τ π̂ t+1 +
where
D=

1−θ
(1 − βθ) A · DEt−τ ŝt
θ

(1 − βθκ1 )
.
(1 + η̄ξA) (1 − βθκ1 ) + ξAβθκ2

When adjustment costs go to infinity, that is as ψ → ∞, then κ1 → 1 and κ2 → 0. In
this case it is easy to see that
1
.
D→
1 + η̄ξA
31

Under Dixit-Stiglitz, A = 1 and η̄ = µ, in which case D corresponds to the coeﬃcient derived
by Sbordone (2002) for her model of constant capital.
When there are no adjustment costs (ψ = 0) it is easy to verify that
κ1 = 0, κ2 = −Ξ̃/φ̃, ν = ξA (1 − βθ) / [(1 + η̄ξA) + ξAβθκ2 ]
where Ξ̃ = (1 − β(1 − δ)) η̄/(1 − α) and φ̃ = 1 + β + (1 − β(1 − δ))/(1 − α). In this case
D=

1
.
(1 + η̄ξA) − ξAβθΞ̃/φ̃

Interpreting the Adjustment Cost Parameter, ψ
In the model without capital rental markets, what is an empirically plausible value for the
capital adjustment cost parameter, ψ? Typically, the magnitude of capital adjustment costs
is assessed by considering its implications for the elasticity of the investment-capital ratio
with respect to Tobin’s q. To do this in our model, we assume the existence of a competitive
stock market in which claims on the profits of intermediate good firms are traded. Under
our assumptions, in general, intermediate good firms will be valued diﬀerently.
Tobin’s q for firm i is defined as
PKi0 t
qit =
PIt
where PKi0 t denotes the marginal value of capital at firm i installed at the beginning of
time t + 1 and PIt is the price of investment goods, which is unity, since investment and
consumption goods are both derived from the composite final good. Profit maximization
implies the value of a marginal unit of installed capital is equal to its cost. That is,
PK 0 t =

PI,t
1
=
MP It
MP It

where MP It = dKit+1 /dIt is the marginal product of investment in producing installed
date t = 1 capital. The marginal product of investment can be derived by diﬀerentiating equation (15). Under the assumption that Ki,t is predetermined at date t this yields
dKit+1 /d (Iit /Kit ) = Kit /Q0 (Kit+1 /Kit ). It follows that
qit =

Q0

³

Kit+1
Kit

Kit

´

(44)

.

The desired elasticity may be derived by diﬀerentiation of (44) and (15). Diﬀerentiating (44) yields dKit+1 /dqit = Kit /Q00 (Kit+1 /Kit ) and (15) implies d (Iit /Kit ) /dKit+1 =
Q0 (Kit+1 /Kit ) /Kit . Therefore, the elasticity of Iit /Kit with respect to qit is
³

´

0 Kit+1
qit ∂Iit /Kit ∂Kit+1
qit Q Kit
qit d(Iit /Kit )
³
´.
=
·
=
Iit /Kit
dqit
Iit /Kit ∂Kit+1
∂qit
Iit /Kit Q00 Kit+1
Kit

32

Evaluating the expression on the right hand side of the second equality above in steady state,
1
q d(I/K)
=
,
I/K ∂q
δψ

(45)

where we have dropped subscripts to denote steady state values of variables. Equation (45)
follows since Q0 (1) = 1, Q00 (1) = ψ, q = 1 and I/K = δ.

33

Table 1. Estimates of the Standard Model with Static Indexing
Inflation
Measure

θ

L=0
JT

GDP Deflator 0.90
(0.05)
PCE Deflator 0.87
(0.04)

GDP Deflator
PCE Deflator

GDP Deflator
PCE Deflator

L = 12
JT

1959:I-2001:IV
28.2
0.91
[9e-5] (0.03)
36.9
0.88
[2e-6] (0.02)

10.2
[0.04]
11.1
[0.03]

1959:I-1979:II
12.1
0.87
4.58
[0.02] (0.03) [0.33]
16.8
0.83
5.60
[0.02] (0.02) (0.23)

0.86
(0.05)
0.82
(0.04)

0.87
(0.04)
0.87
(0.04)

θ

1982:III-2001:IV
15.8
0.90
[0.003] (0.03)
8.89
0.89
[0.06] (0.03)

6.16
[0.19]
4.39
[0.36]

Notes: The JT statistics are distributed as χ2 random variables with 4 degrees of freedom.
Standard errors in parentheses. P-values in brackets. In the L = 12 cases, the Newey-West
correction to the weighting matrix is used.

34

Table 2. Estimates of the Standard model with Dynamic Indexing
Inflation
Measure

θ

L=0
JT

GDP Deflator 0.81
(0.03)
PCE Deflator 0.79
(0.03)

θ

L = 12
JT

1959:I-2001:IV
35.0
0.91
[6e-7] (0.02)
47.9
0.88
[1e-9] (0.02)

10.2
[0.04]
10.8
[0.03]

1959:I-1979:II
GDP Deflator 0.76
17.5
0.87
5.59
(0.05) [0.002] (0.04) [0.23]
PCE Deflator 0.77
18.1
0.88
5.80
(0.04) [0.002] (0.03) (0.22)

GDP Deflator
PCE Deflator

0.68
(0.04)
0.54
(0.03)

1982:III-2001:IV
17.0
0.83
[0.002] (0.08)
14.2
0.77
[0.007] (0.06)

4.41
[0.35]
4.54
[0.34]

Notes: The JT statistics are distributed as χ2 random variables with 3 degrees of freedom.
Standard errors in parentheses. P-values in brackets. In the L = 12, cases the Newey-West
correction to the weighting matrix is used.

35

Table 3: Prices Chosen One Period In Advance with Static Indexing
Inflation
Full Sample
Measure
θ
JT
GDP Deflator 0.89
6.89
(0.03) [0.14]
PCE Deflator 0.90
8.54
(0.03) [0.07]

1959:I-1979:II
θ
JT
0.84
2.96
(0.03) [0.56]
0.83
2.95
(0.05) [0.56]

1982:III-2001:IV
θ
JT
0.92
3.98
(0.04) [0.41]
0.91
3.50
[0.05] [0.48]

Notes: The JT statistics are distributed as χ2 random variables with 3 degrees of freedom.
Standard errors in parentheses. P-values in brackets.

Table 4: Prices Chosen One Period In Advance with Dynamic Indexing
Inflation
Full Sample
Measure
θ
JT
GDP Deflator 0.88
2.65
(0.05) [0.62]
PCE Deflator 0.86
4.98
(0.05) [0.29]

1959:I-1979:II
θ
JT
0.86
0.89
(0.09) [0.93]
0.84
2.05
(0.08) [0.73]

1982:III-2001:IV
θ
JT
0.83
6.33
(0.05) [0.18]
0.83
5.61
(0.06) [0.23]

Notes: This table considers the case where firms that do not reset their price plans use the
updating scheme: Pit = π t−1 Pit−1 . The JT statistics are distributed as χ2 random variables
with 3 degrees of freedom. Standard errors in parentheses. P-values in brackets.
Table 5: Prices Chosen One Period In Advance, Static Indexing, and Rule of Thumb Firms
Inflation
Full Sample
Measure
θ
ω
JT
GDP Deflator 0.85
0.44
0.92
(0.08) (0.17) [0.82]
PCE Deflator 0.96
0.56
1.66
(0.09) (0.22) [0.64]

1959:I-1979:II
θ
ω
JT
0.88
0.51
0.68
(0.11) (0.32) [0.97]
0.97
0.72
0.73
(0.09) (0.35) [0.87]

1982:III-2001:IV
θ
ω
JT
0.85
0.37
0.73
(0.12) (0.28) [0.87]
0.48
0.80
0.12
(0.18) (0.08) [0.99]

Notes: This table considers the case where (1 − ω) of firms that have the opportunity to
change prices do so optimally, while ω are of the Gali-Gertler type; that is, they set prices
according to Pt0 = π t−1 P̄t−1 . where P̄t = (1 − ω)Pt∗ + ωPt0 . When unable to reset the price
plan, all firms use the same updating scheme, Pit = π̄Pit−1 . The JT statistics are distributed
as χ2 random variables with 3 degrees of freedom. Standard errors in parentheses. P-values
in brackets.

36

Table 6: Prices Chosen One Period In Advance,
Dynamic Indexing, and Rule of Thumb Firms
Inflation
Full Sample
Measure
θ
ω
JT
GDP Deflator 0.87
0.04
2.79
(0.05) (0.14) [0.43]
PCE Deflator 0.88
-0.06 4.79
(0.06) (0.15) [0.19]

1959:I-1979:II
θ
ω
JT
0.83
0.12
0.61
(0.10) (0.22) [0.89]
0.85
-0.02 1.85
(0.09) (0.18) [0.60]

1982:III-2001:IV
θ
ω
JT
0.82
0.15
6.12
(0.07) (0.26) [0.11]
0.76
0.40
5.67
(0.63) (2.73) [0.13]

Notes: This table considers the case where (1 − ω) of firms that have the opportunity
to change prices do so optimally and use dynamic indexing when they do not have the
opportunity to reset the price plan. In addition, ω firms are of the type Gali-Gertler considered in their paper. That is, they set prices Pit0 according to Pit0 = π t−1 P̄t−1 , where
P̄t = (1−ω)Pt∗ +ωPt0 when they have the opportunity to reset their plan, but use Pit = π̄Pit−1 .
The JT statistics are distributed as χ2 random variables with 3 degrees of freedom. Standard
errors in parentheses. P-values in brackets.
Table 7: Frequency of Reoptimization with Prices Chosen One Period
in Advance and Dynamic Indexing: Full Sample Results
Rental Market
Firm-Specific Capital
for Capital
ψ=0
ψ=3
1
1
1
Deflator ²
θ
θ
θ
1−θ
1−θ
1−θ
GDP
0
0.88
8.3
0.83
5.9
0.72
3.6
[0.78, 0.98] [4.5, 50.0] [0.65, 0.97] [2.9, 33.3] [0.53, 0.95] [2.1, 20.0]
10
0.83
5.9
0.79
4.8
0.70
3.3
[0.70, 0.96] [3.3, 25.0] [0.60, 0.96] [2.5, 25.0] [0.51, 0.94] [2.0, 16.7]
33
0.76
4.2
0.72
3.6
0.66
2.9
[0.60, 0.95] [2.5, 20.0] [0.52, 0.94] [2.1, 16.7] [0.46, 0.93] [1.9, 14.3]
PCE

0

0.86
7.1
0.80
5.0
0.69
3.2
[0.77, 0.96] [4.3, 25.0] [0.62, 0.95] [2.6, 20.0] [0.51, 0.91] [2.0, 11.0]
10
0.81
5.3
0.76
4.2
0.67
3.0
[0.68, 0.94] [3.1, 16.7] [0.57, 0.93] [2.3, 14.3] [0.49, 0.90] [2.0, 10.0]
33
0.73
3.7
0.69
3.2
0.63
2.7
[0.57, 0.91] [2.3, 11.1] [0.49, 0.91] [2.0, 11.1] [0.44, 0.88] [1.8, 8.3]

Note: Estimates based on labor’s share equal to 2/3, a 10% markup and a 2.5% quarterly
depreciation rate.

37

Table 8: Frequency of Reoptimization with Prices Chosen One Period
in Advance and Dynamic Indexing: Sub-Sample Results
Panel A: 1959:I-1979:II
Rental Market
Firm-Specific Capital
for Capital
ψ=0
ψ=3
1
1
1
Deflator ²
θ
θ
θ
1−θ
1−θ
1−θ
GDP
0
0.86
7.1
0.79
4.8
0.67
3.0
[0.73, 0.98] [3.7, 50.0] [0.56, 0.98] [2.3, 50.0] [0.45, 0.96] [1.8, 25.0]
10
0.80
5.0
0.75
4.0
0.65
2.9
[0.64, 0.97] [2.8, 33.3] [0.50, 0.97] [2.0, 33.3] [0.43, 0.96] [1.8, 25.0]
33
0.72
3.6
0.68
3.1
0.61
2.6
[0.52, 0.96] [2.1, 25.0] [0.43, 0.96] [1.8, 20.0] [0.38, 0.94] [1.6, 16.7]
PCE

0

0.84
6.3
0.80
5.0
0.65
[0.75, 0.94] [4.0, 16.7] [0.62, 0.95] [2.6, 20.0] [0.48, 0.89]
10
0.78
4.6
0.76
4.2
0.63
[0.66, 0.91] [2.9, 11.1] [0.57, 0.93] [2.3, 14.3] [0.46, 0.86]
33
0.70
3.3
0.69
3.2
0.59
[0.55, 0.87] [2.2, 7.7] [0.49, 0.91] [2.0, 11.1] [0.41, 0.82]

Panel B:
Rental Market
for Capital
1
Deflator ²
θ
1−θ
GDP
0
0.83
5.9
[0.73, 0.93] [3.7, 14.3]
10
0.77
4.4
[0.64, 0.90] [2.8, 10.0]
33
0.68
3.1
[0.52, 0.86] [2.1, 7.1]
PCE

2.9
[1.9, 9.1]
2.7
[1.9, 6.7]
2.4
[1.7, 5.6]

1982:III-2001:IV
Firm-Specific Capital
ψ=0
ψ=3
1
1
θ
θ
1−θ
1−θ
0.75
4.0
0.63
2.7
[0.56, 0.92] [2.3, 12.5] [0.45, 0.85] [1.8, 6.7]
0.70
3.3
0.60
2.5
[0.51, 0.90] [2.0, 10.0] [0.43, 0.84] [1.8, 6.2]
0.62
2.6
0.56
2.3
[0.43, 0.85] [1.8, 6.7] [0.38, 0.81] [1.6, 5.3]

0

0.83
5.9
0.80
5.0
0.63
2.7
[0.71, 0.95] [3.5, 20.0] [0.62, 0.95] [2.6, 20.0] [0.43, 0.91] [1.8, 11.1]
10
0.77
4.4
0.76
4.2
0.60
2.5
[0.62, 0.92] [2.6, 12.5] [0.57, 0.93] [2.3, 14.3] [0.41, 0.89] [1.7, 9.1]
33
0.68
3.1
0.69
3.2
0.56
2.3
[0.50, 0.89] [2.0, 9.1] [0.49, 0.91] [2.0, 11.1] [0.36, 0.85] [1.6, 6.7]

Note: Estimates based on labor’s share equal to 2/3, a 10% markup, and a 2.5% quarterly
depreciation rate.

38

