                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    THE EVOLUTION OF CONCENTRATED OWNERSHIP
                   IN INDIA BROAD PATTERNS AND A HISTORY OF THE
                             INDIAN SOFTWARE INDUSTRY

                                             Tarun Khanna
                                             Krishna Palepu

                                          Working Paper 10613
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10613


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2004




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2004 by Tarun Khanna and Krishna Palepu All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
The Evolution of Concentrated Ownership in India Broad Patterns and a History of the Indian
Software Industry
Tarun Khanna and Krishna Palepu
NBER Working Paper No. 10613
June 2004
JEL No. G34, N85, O53
                                      ABSTRACT

        As in many countries (Canada, France, Germany, Japan, Italy, Sweden), concentrated
ownership was a ubiquitous feature of the Indian private sector over the past seven decades. Yet,
unlike in most countries, the identity of the primary families responsible for the concentrated
ownership changes dramatically over time. The resulting turnover is perhaps even more than
turnover in leading U.S. firms over the same time period. It does not appear that concentrated
ownership in India is entirely associated with the ills that the literature has recently ascribed to it in
emerging markets. If the concentrated owners are not exclusively, or even primarily, engaged in
rent-seeking and entry-deterring behavior, concentrated ownership may not be inimical to
competition. Indeed, as a response to competition, we argue that at least some Indian families have
consistently tried to leverage internal markets for capital and talent inherent in business group
structures to launch new ventures in environments where external factor markets are deficient. In
the process they have either failed hence the turnover in identity or reinvented themselves. Thus
concentrated ownership is a result, rather than a cause, of inefficiencies in markets.

        Even in the low capital-intensity, relatively unregulated setting of the Indian software
industry, we find that concentrated ownership persists in a privately successful and socially useful
way. Since this setting is the least hospitable to the existence of concentrated ownership, we
interpret our findings as a lower bound on the persistence of concentrated ownership in the economy
at large.



Tarun Khanna
Harvard Business School
tkhanna@hbs.edu

Krishna Palepu
Harvard Business School
kpalepu@hbs.edu
                  The Evolution of Concentrated Ownership in India
             Broad Patterns and a History of the Indian Software Industry1

                             Tarun Khanna and Krishna G. Palepu
                                       June 30, 2004


I. Introduction


        Concentrated ownership has been an important feature of the Indian private sector
for the past seven decades. In this respect, India is no different from several other
countries, including Canada, France, Germany, Japan, Italy, and Sweden. However, we
show that, unlike in these countries, the identity of the primary families responsible for
the concentrated ownership changes dramatically over time. In fact, by some measures
the changes are even more dramatic than in a comparable set of U.S. data.
        Concentrated ownership exists at any point in time because of institutional voids,
the absence of specialized intermediaries in capital markets (Khanna and Palepu 1997,
2000a). However if these concentrated owners are not exclusively, or even primarily,
engaged in rent-seeking and entry-deterring behavior, there is no intrinsic reason why
concentrated ownership is inimical to competition. Indeed, as a response to competition,
we argue that at least some Indian families – the concentrated owners in question – have
consistently tried to use their business group structures to launch new ventures. In the
process they have either failed – hence the turnover in identity – or reinvented
themselves.
        Further, family-owned business groups, typically diversified over several
industries, can co-exist with specialist firms focused on a particular industry. We
demonstrate this through an examination of the history of India’s globally competitive
software industry. This is an intriguing setting in which to explore the role of
concentrated ownership since it is the setting least hospitable to the advantages that
groups might have. We argue that groups’ generally advantageous access to capital and

1
 We are grateful to Randall Morck for coordinating and spearheading the project on the History of
Concentrated Ownership at the National Bureau of Economic Research, to Dr. Gita Piramal (Mumbai,
India) for access to some of her historical data on Indian business families, and to seminar audiences who
commented on earlier drafts of this paper in Cambridge and Fontainebleu. The Division of Research at the
Harvard Business School financed this work. All errors remain our own.


                                                     1
talent through internal markets – when external markets do not work as well – offers less
of an advantage, if any, in this setting. Here groups are also least able to influence
regulations, since the sector is one of the few left untouched by vestiges of India’s famed
regulatory miasma, the License Raj. Yet it turns out that concentrated ownership, in the
guise of business groups, plays a defining and prominent role even in this inhospitable
setting, and does so in a way that is not inimical to entry from de novo entrepreneurs. We
interpret the privately successful and socially useful persistence of groups in the software
industry as a lower bound on the persistence of concentrated ownership in the economy
writ large.
        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II begins with a sweeping
overview of dominant business groups in India over the past century. We show that,
while particular families have acted as concentrated owners at each of three points in time
in the past seven decades, the identity of these families has changed drastically over this
time period. We then consider two, not mutually exclusive, explanations for the
persistence of concentrated ownership. The first (Section III) is political relationships
between dominant families and the power structure. The second (Section IV) is a process
of entrepreneurship by the dominant families. From these sections we conclude that it is
difficult to tell a story of concentrated ownership resulting purely in stasis and rent-
seeking. Section V characterizes changes in India during the last decade as moving
towards less regulation and government intervention and toward freer markets. Even in
this setting, we point out that family-based business groups continue to thrive. Finally, in
Section VI, we study the software industry.


II. A Brief History of Corporate Ownership in India


        While there has been organized economic activity in India for hundreds of years,
it was relatively fragmented till the advent of the British Raj. Under the Mughals, from
approximately 1100 AD to 1650 AD, there was only a semblance of a ‘national market.’
The Mughals were content with tax revenues and tributes that they received as a result of
their power and therefore did not rely on the merchant classes. The fragmentation and
demise of the Mughal empire marked the advent and co-existence of dozens of smaller



                                              2
principalities, each of whom came to rely on local merchants and local financiers to
sustain their princely states. Thus were created the nuclei of several prominent family
businesses.
        The British empire gradually filled the void left by the Mughals. And British
merchants set up trading businesses in India after the East India Company lost its
monopoly on trade with India, giving rise to the creation of several large trading houses.
        Table 1 offers a birds-eye view of the different factors underlying the emergence
of family based business groups over the past century. We list representative business
groups that arose in each of four different time periods (though the Tata and Birla groups
predate 1900), as well as a generic factor that described the rise of that type of group at
that time.
        By the early 1900s, in addition to the British trading houses, a number of
indigenous business groups had come into prominence. Whether this happened in an
atmosphere inimical to the rise of indigenous enterprise (Swamy, 1979), indifferent to it
(Das, 2000, Chapter 5), or supportive of it (Ferguson, 2002) is a matter of continuing
controversy.
        Subsequently, the Indian economy underwent several phases of major structural
changes after India achieved independence from Britain in 1947. In the first phase, in the
1950s, the assets controlled by the British trading houses were transferred to Indian
owners. In the second phase, from the late 1950s through the 1970s, the Indian
government intervened in the economy through a variety of measures, which collectively
came to be known as the “Licence Raj.” Finally, there was an economic reform era,
which began with small steps of deregulation in the 1980s, and picked up speed in the
1990s following a major economic crisis in 1991.
        The next two subsections show that concentrated ownership persisted in India
over several decades but that the identity of the concentrated owners changed over time
quite drastically.


The Persistence of Concentrated Ownership
        Remarkably, while the economy was governed by these significantly different
regimes over time, family business groups continued to dominate the Indian corporate



                                              3
landscape. Table 2 shows comparative statistics on the Indian state owned companies
(SOEs) (or public sector companies) and exchange listed private sector companies , and
multinational companies (MNCs) operating in India, as of 1993.2 The ratio of number of
traded private sector companies to state owned companies was approximately 17 to 1.
Thus, there were far more traded private sector companies than public sector companies.
However, public sector companies were on average significantly larger than traded
private sector companies. Revenues of all traded private sector companies was only 1.5
times the revenues of state owned companies; similarly, assets of traded private sector
companies were only 1.2 times the assets held by the public sector companies. More
strikingly, the total amount of equity capital in traded private sector companies was only
0.51 times the equity in public sector companies. Thus, private sector companies, while
large in number, were more fragmented and relied on far less equity investment, relative
to the public sector companies.
          Table 2 also compares the traded Indian private sector companies with
multinational companies operating in India as of 1993. For each MNC operating in India,
there were approximately 17 exchange listed private sector companies. Domestic private
companies we 4.3 times larger than MNCs in sales, and 9 times in terms of assets, 6.7
times in terms of equity. Thus MNCs played a relatively minor role in the Indian
corporate sector as of 1993.
          Within the indigenous private sector, a distinction should be drawn between
group-affiliated companies and unaffiliated companies. The term group deserves
discussion. Hazari (1966) in a classic study of Indian business groups, defined a group as
the ‘area over which a decision-making authority holds sway’ (1966: page 7). The
decision-making authority in question was almost always a family, though it could be a
close-knit ethnic community as well. The area of control in effect was almost always a
very diversified range of businesses. He started his work by saying that it was ‘based on
the proposition that the business group, not the individual joint stock company, is the unit
of decision and, therefore, of economic power.’ (1966: preface). Earlier work concurred.
For example, another influential study opined that the study of concentration of economy
power is ‘unreal if divorced from a study of communities’ (Gadgil, 1951, p 29; the

2
    Date drawn from Khanna (1997).


                                              4
reference is to ethnic communities).3 Hazari’s study provided an influential evaluation of
the extent to which business groups had exercised monopoly power (he concluded that
they had). Subsequent regulators and policymakers (e.g. Dutt, 1969) built on this work to
demonstrate that the control that Hazari used as the defining feature of groups was often
exercised through non-equity channels, e.g. through family ties or through manipulation
of the boards of directors.
         In 1993, there were a total of 1113 group companies that were publicly listed on
one of India’s several stock exchanges. Post-independent India also gave birth to a large
number of new companies that went on to become publicly listed on the countries’ stock
exchanges. In 1993, there were 1539 publicly listed non-group companies. These
companies were in part a result of government’s policy of restricting existing companies
from expanding capacity. Promoters of these companies were also able to launch these
businesses with relatively small amount of own equity, thanks to the access to capital
from state-owned financial institutions, and public capital markets.
         Table 3 compares group and non-group companies listed on Bombay stock
exchange (BSE) as of 1993.4 The sample consists of 567 group firms and 437 non-group
firms for which the necessary data was available. The group affiliates are members of
252 different groups. Ninety five percent of the groups have five or fewer affiliates
traded on the BSE and the largest group (the Tata group) has twenty one affiliated
companies traded on the BSE. The mean (median) sales of group affilates is 1,411 (666)
million Indian rupees. This is significantly larger than the mean (median) sales of
unaffiliated firms, which is 366 (217) million rupees. The mean (median) age of group
firms, which is 28.3 (22) years, is also significantly larger than mean (median) age of
unaffiliated firms. The mean (median) Tobin’s q for group firms was 1.39 (1.14),
insignificantly different from the mean (median) value of 1.37 (1.06) for the non-group
firms.



3
  In recent work, Khanna and Rivkin (2002) have demonstrated econometrically that business groups in
Chile can, at best, be identified only partially on the basis of equity interlocks. Director ties and common
owner ties play an important role in delineating what Chileans (regulators and participants in financial
markets) deem to meaningfully be part of a business group. Thus control is exercised, de facto, in ways
very similar to India.
4
  These data are from Khanna and Palepu (2000)


                                                      5
       The total sample has the following mean (median) ownership structure: foreign
institutions, 8.9 (1.6) percent; domestic institutions, 13.9 (10.2) percent; insiders 27.1
percent (26.5 percent); directors, 9.4 percent (3.4 percent); top fifty owners excluding the
above categories, 6.21 (4.0) percent. The remainder is held by dispersed shareholders.
Relative to unaffiliated firms, group firms, on average, have significantly higher
percentages of foreign and domestic institutional ownership, and higher insider
ownership.
       In summary, the Indian corporate sector as of early 1990s had the following
profile: A little more than a hundred relatively large state owned enterprises and more
than 2500 smaller publicly traded private sector companies, roughly equally split between
group affiliated and non-group companies. In the private sector, companies affiliated
with business groups, with concentrated family ownership, accounted for a substantial
proportion of assets.


The Lack of Persistence of the Identity of Concentrated Owners
       While there has been a significant persistence in the phenomenon of concentrated
family ownership in India over much of the 20th century, there was less persistence in the
actual composition of the top business groups themselves. The Tata group remained the
largest Indian group during the entire 60 year period on which we present data below.
But other leading groups from the pre-Independence era (e.g. British groups such as
Martin Burn, Andrew Yule, Inchcape) did not persist in their then-form. Several new
business houses rose to prominence during this period, including the Thapar group in the
1950s and 1960s, the Ambani group in the 1970s and 1980s, and the Wipro and Munjal
groups in the 1980s and 19990s.      Thus, the history of modern Indian corporate sector is
characterized by both a persistence of concentrated ownership at the aggregate level, and
a significant lack of persistence of dominance at the individual business group level.
       To demonstrate this more formally, we analyzed the persistence of dominance for
Indian business groups over the past 60 years. This is based on size rankings (assets) for
the fifty largest business groups compiled by Dr. Gita Piramal of Mumbai, India, for the
years 1939, 1969, and 1999 (Table 4). Her rankings have themselves been compiled
from miscellaneous historical sources, including, but not limited to, various government



                                              6
reports commissioned by the Government of India at various points in time. Note that
the rankings are not of firms, but of groups. That is, all firms controlled by a single entity,
typically a family, are treated as a single economic unit. As a benchmark against which
to compare our analysis of the persistence of Indian groups, we also amass market value-
based rankings of the 50 largest U.S. firms at identical time periods. These data are
compiled from Compustat and are in Table 5.
        Consult Table 4 for some summary statistics. Our first observation is that the
Indian data show considerable turnover in ranks. 32 out of 50 of the top groups in 1969
were not in the top 50 list in 1939. 43 of the top groups in 1999 were not in the top 50 list
in 1969. This flux in the list of largest entities is greater than that in the U.S. in
comparable time periods where 28 and 37 firms enter the top 50 U.S. list in 1969 and
1999 respectively. The comparison is all the more dramatic because the Indian data
measures groups, which are collections of firms, while the U.S. data measures firms. (In
other words, individual firms within Indian groups almost certainly would have greater
turnover than that suggested by the data on groups.)
        Of the 18 groups that remain in the top 50 list in the 1939-1969 period (50 less
32), 16 change ranks while only 2 have ranks that remain unchanged. Further, 10 of the
18 groups whose ranks change do so dramatically (that is, by more than 10 ranks in either
direction). In contrast, a smaller proportion of the firms whose ranks change in the U.S.
top-50 list in 1939-1969 do so dramatically (5 out of 22). The proportion of radical rank
changers is also higher in India during the 1969-1999 period (3 out of 7) than in the U.S.
in the same period (5 out of 13).
        Note also that the turnover in the ranks of Indian groups is greater in the second
30-year window than in the first. This is important because part of the turnover in the
1939-1969 period was due to transfer of assets from British ownership to Indian
ownership at the end of the British colonial rule of India. The turnover in the 1969-1999
period reflects less unusual circumstances.
        Finally, an analysis of the groups or firms that are born in any period suggests that
they do not generally leapfrog to the top of the rankings, nor do the top groups or firms in
any period dramatically fall off the rankings. A regression of ranks on ‘births’ and on a
variable that measures whether the group or firm is going to ‘die’ (that is, exit the top



                                                7
rankings) the following period reveals positive and significant coefficients on both
variables. That is, firms born in a particular period have higher ranks (are smaller) and
firms that are about to die in the next period have higher ranks (are smaller). The
regression reveals point estimates that are quite similar for both the Indian top50 group
and U.S. top50 firm rankings, hinting at some underlying similarity in the competitive
processes underlying such turnover.
       The above pattern of corporate ownership in India is inconsistent with a pure
corporate ownership entrenchment story. We will turn, in each of the next two sections,
to considering two potential explanations for concentrated ownership in an emerging
economy like India (Ghemawat and Khanna, 1998; Khanna, 2000). The first explanation
has to do with rent-seeking behavior by prominent business families with strong political
connections. Under this hypothesis, business families control business groups to extract
personal gains, and attain their position through directly unproductive economic activities
and through their influence over government policies and actions. The second hypothesis
is that family business groups arise as a result of their entrepreneurial activity which is in
short supply in emerging economies such as India with significant market failures and
institutional voids (Khanna and Palepu, 1997, 1999, 2000a,b).


III Political Connections and Rent Seeking Behavior


       In this section, we first describe how business government relationships evolved
over the relevant timeframe for this paper, and then consider particular groups’
relationships with the government, with a view to uncovering whether or not there is
systematic evidence to support the political connections story for persistence of
concentrated ownership.


Shifting Contours of Business Government Relations
       A close relationship between business and government had existed for quite some
time in India. During the British colonial rule, the interest of British companies was
naturally favored over the interest of Indian business houses (Piramal, 1998; pp. 162,
230). As the movement for freedom from the British Raj gathered momentum in the



                                              8
1920s and 1930s, close relationships developed between Indian businesses and leaders of
the political movement for India’s independence. Underscoring their symbiotic
relationship in a letter, as he was building steam for India’s independence movement in
1927, Mohandas Gandhi told G.D. Birla, a prominent Indian businessman, “I am ever
hungry for money” (Cited in Piramal, 1991).
       The pragmatic collaboration between the new Indian government and the business
community to build modern India continued in the immediate aftermath of independence
(1947 to 1960). For example, Hindalco and Telco collaborated with the Government of
India to set up Hindustan Aeronautics Limited to develop the aviation sector in India.
However, the relationship soured in the 1960s as Indian government, under the leadership
of Prime Minister Jawarharlal Nehru, moved the country’s economic policies towards
socialism. This period, often characterized as the License Raj, began with the
government’s desire to curb big business houses, and to directly intervene in economic
activities through public sector corporations.
       Several prominent government commissions, including the Mahalanobis
Committee of 1964, Monopolies Inquiry Commission of 1965, R. K. Hazari Committee
of 1966, and the Industrial Licensing Policy Committee of 1969, were established during
this period. These commissions documented evidence that big business houses were
exerting significant influence on Indian economy, and that they were exploiting growth
opportunities through favorable access to finance and government permits. These
commissions were followed by the creation of Monopolies and Restrictive Trade
Practices Act (MRTP) and the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act (FERA), and the
nationalization of the largest private sector banks. These policy changes, spearheaded by
the government of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, imposed strict government controls on
private sector’s ability to pursue growth opportunities, access domestic finance, or
collaborate with foreign technology or business partners. The FERA act also required
that multinational companies operating in India divest their ownership so that a majority
of the ownership in the Indian operations was held by Indian shareholders.
       In the mid-1980s, under the government of Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi, a
gradual move towards deregulation began. These reforms relaxed some of the MRTP
and import restrictions, and freed up some of the economy from licensing requirements.



                                             9
Despite these changes, the Indian economy grew at a fairly modest rate during this entire
period, culminating in a foreign exchange payment crisis in the early 1990s. This crisis
led to a dramatic deregulation and liberalization of the Indian economy. Under the
Congress Party government of Prime Minister Narasimha Rao, and then subsequently
under the BJP government of Prime Minister Atal Behari Vajpayee, the MRTP and
FERA Acts were repealed, several sectors of the economy including telecom, commercial
aviation, and banking - previously reserved for the public sector - were opened to private
sector, and import duties were dramatically reduced.


Business Groups and Government
       As the contours of business-government relations shifted in India during the past
half century, there were complex shifts in relationships between individual business
groups and the government in power. Different groups occupied different positions of
favoritism at different times. There is evidence that these political connections played an
important role in the rise and fall of different business houses. But it is interesting that
the groups that remained dominant throughout did so despite ebbs and flows in their
relationship with the government. Clearly proximity to government was not the only
cause of their success.
       Consider the House of Tata. JRD Tata, in the pre-independence period, presided
over a group that was, in fact, quite reliant on government contracts. Before World War
I, Tata Steel would not have started without a guarantee from the British government for
Indian Railways, nor would Tata Steel have grown to the largest integrated steel factory
in the British Commonwealth without such government contracts. And Tata Steel was
protected by tariffs against German and Japanese, if not British, steel (Hazari, 1986). The
Tatas adopted a neutral stance in the Independence movement. As Piramal (1998; p. 481)
puts it, in the British Raj, the Tata Group ‘bristled’ with knights.
       But by 1960, the group remained India’s largest even though it had fallen out of
favor, as it was opposed to the socialist philosophy of Prime Minister Nehru. Reacting to
the various government commissions suggesting that large business houses manipulated
and abused the licensing system, JRD Tata is reported to have cynically said, “Yesterday
in Parliament, they called me a monopolist with ‘great concentration of power.’ I wake



                                              10
up every morning and I am supposed to say, ‘ I have great concentration of power. Whom
shall I crush today? A competitor or a worker in my factory or the consumer?’ .... No
dear boy I am powerless .. I cannot decide how much to borrow, what shares to issue, at
what price, what wages or bonus to pay, and what dividend to give. I even need the
government’s permission for the salary I pay to a senior executive” (quoted in Das, 2000;
pp 168-169). Indeed, far from manipulating the licensing system to its advantage, the
Tata group reportedly made 119 new proposals for expansions in (existing or de novo)
businesses between 1960 and 1989 and every one of them was rejected (Das, 2000; p.
93). Further, some of the Tata’s assets were nationalized, most famously Tata’s airline.
And JRD Tata contributed to the Swatantara Party’s coffers, to create an alternative to
Nehru’s Congress since the former stood for less regulation than that espoused by the
latter.
          Turn to the Birla’s next. Under G.D. Birla, the group supported the Independence
movement financially. Sarojini Naidu, herself a prominent figure in the India of that era,
famously said ‘it took all Birla’s millions to enable Gandhi to live in poverty. And he
gave for free’ (Piramal, 1998). The group rose to prominence in the post-independence
period, and by 1969 became the second largest Indian business group. However, under
the government of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, the Birla group became the target of
criticism for its manipulation of the licensing system, as it was targeted by the Hazari
reports and criticized for preempting licenses – that is, for applying for licenses which it
then failed to use. Indeed G. D. Birla’s successor, Aditya Birla, was allegedly sufficiently
disappointed by being, in his view, unfairly tarnished by the government’s allegations,
that he simply shifted his expansion plans overseas. So much so that, between 1970 and
1995, the Birla’s had established plants in Egypt, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines,
and Thailand, with overseas activity accounting for a third of their overall business, and
the world’s leading position in viscose staple fiber, palm oil and insulators, and the
world’s sixth largest position in the manufacture of carbon black (Das 2000, pp 176). The
implication is that the size and prominence of the group is due to the Birla’s
entrepreneurial tendencies finding expression around the licensing restrictions at least in
part, rather than by embracing them and engaging purely in rent-seeking activities.




                                             11
         All this is not to deny that rent-seeking existed. Clearly there were abuses in the
system, far too many indicators are consistent with this. See recently Bertrand, et al.
(2002), for example, and our own earlier work (Khanna, 2000; Khanna and Palepu,
2000c) on the dark side of business groups.5 But it is a mistake to tar the entire corporate
sector with the same broad brush. As the caselets above suggest, some of the groups
remained dominant despite sustained periods of falling out of favor. Others directed their
energies to expansion outside India rather than manipulating the licensing system.
         Further, note the following possibility of possibly misplaced emphasis and
incorrect inference. We do not contest that the license raj was bad for economic
development. As Hazari (1986; pp. xxiv) put it, ‘the abuses and failures are no longer, as
the Italians say, mere apertura; they are wide-open doors.’ But whether concentrated
ownership was the cause of this miasma is less clear. The ‘Kafkaesque maze of controls’
(Bhagwati, 1993) had more to do with a heady fascination with the intellectual cuisine of
the London School of Economics and Cambridge (Hazari, 1986), and the wonder of the
then ascendant Soviet planning machine, than with the actions of India’s dominant family
businesses. Business groups had to either manipulate it, as some did, or invent themselves
around it, as did others.


IV Entrepreneurship in the context of institutional voids


         In an emerging economy, many institutions necessary for the functioning of
product markets, labor markets, and financial markets are typically missing or
underdeveloped. In India, this was certainly true under colonial rule. Indeed, the heavy
state intervention in the economy in the first few decades of independence was justified
by successive governments as a way to deal with these market failures.
         As Khanna and Palepu (1997, 1999, 2000a,b) and others (Leff, 1976, 1978,
Strachan, 1976) argue, business groups could be seen as a private sector response to the
institutional voids in the economy. Groups often perform functions traditionally
performed by market institutions in more mature markets. One such important function

5
  De Long (2001) suggests, based on an analysis of growth rates of several countries, that the effects of the
License Raj might have been overstated (or, at least, the negative effects were offset by other positive
factors).


                                                     12
is the provision of something akin to venture capital, consisting of identifying promising
new business opportunities in the economy and exploiting them with in-house risk
capital and managerial talent, which are traditionally in short-supply in the economy at
large. This, in turn, leads to the observed predominance of the business group type of
organizational form in emerging economies.
        It is important to note that this hypothesis only implies that economies such as
India will have a preponderance of business group type organizations. It does not
necessarily imply that the same set of business groups will continue to be prominent in
the economy over time. This continued success of a business group under this
explanation depends on its ability to sustain its entrepreneurial nature over a long period
of time. While some groups may succeed in this endeavor, others may fail. In this sense,
the rise and fall of business groups over time in emerging economies is akin to the rise
and fall of businesses in advanced economies.
        The history of the Tata group provides a classic example of how some Indian
business groups pursued new business opportunities successfully over time. Figure 1
shows the time line of the entry of the Tata group into various new businesses, from 1870
to 2001 - textiles in 1874, hospitality industry in 1902, steel in 1907, power in 1910,
cement in 1912, soaps and toiletries in 1917, printing and publishing in 1931, aviation in
1932, chemicals in 1939, consumer electronics in 1940, commercial vehicles &
locomotives in 1945, cosmetics in 1952, air-conditioning in 1954, pharmaceuticals in
1958, tea and coffee in 1962, information technology in 1968 (see Section VI), watches,
financial services in 1984, auto components in 1993, telecom services in 1994, passenger
cars in 1998, retail in 1999, and insurance in 2001. Despite the remarkable diversity of
these businesses, the group has been able to maintain a leading position in many, if not
most, of the businesses it entered over time. It only had to exit a small handful of
businesses in its history – aviation in 1953 (due to government nationalization),
locomotives in 1970, soaps and toiletries in 1993, cosmetics and pharmaceuticals in
1998, cement in 2000, textiles in 2001, and printing and publishing in 2003.6


6
 There appears to have been a short-lived and aborted entry into shipping in the late 1890s. This effort,
along with those of a number of other Indian entrepreneurs until the establishment of Walhand Hirachand’s
Scindia shipping company, foundered when faced with the British-controlled shipping ‘conference’
controlled by Inchcape and others.


                                                   13
       The role played by the Tata’s is exactly to fill the institutional void of venture
capital in these instances, as well as to provide an exit mechanism to aspiring
entrepreneurs in the absence of well-functioning public markets. For example, Tata
Chemicals supported its engineers’ efforts to innovate. In some instances, these engineers
left to start up their own companies, and the Tata’s had been known to buy out the results
of these efforts subsequently (see example in Piramal, 1998; p. 473).
       It is interesting that this process of entrepreneurship is often criticized in the
media as being undisciplined and characterized by a failure to adhere to core
competencies. This reflects a mistaken notion of what constitutes the ‘core competence’
(Selznick) as it were. Here it is at least as much an ability to circumvent institutional
voids as it is some industry-specific knowledge. As N. A. Soonawala, a board member of
Tata Sons, the main holding company of the Tata’s, said to us in 1998 in response to
criticisms by leading multinational consulting firms at the time, “If everyone is told not to
go into unrelated businesses, how will the airlines, oil, and telecommunications industries
develop? The government has said that they can’t do it. So there’s a social benefit to all
this diversification” (Khanna, Palepu, and Wu, 1998).
       An important feature of entrepreneurship in India is the reliance on the ethnic
group, to supplement family networks (Lamb 1976). The Marwari, Gujerati and Parsi
communities are, by far, the dominant business communities in India in recent decades,
and even today. For example, these communities collectively controlled 62 of the 100
largest companies in 1989 (Piramal, 1989). Other active communities include the
Punjabis, Chettiars and the Maharashtrians.
       These communities share their distinctive tenors. For example, Gujeratis were
traditionally traders with countries in the Middle East and East Africa. Parsis, from the
small minority Zoroastrian community in India, were most “Westernized” in their
business outlook, and traditionally played the role of intermediaries with Europe.
Marwaris, a demographically small segment originally from the state of Rajasthan in
western India, have been the most geographically spread business community, pursuing
businesses all over the country. By 2000, Das (p 174) quotes an estimate that says that the
Marwaris controlled half the industrial assets of India.




                                              14
           Tinberg (1978) chronicled the modus operandi of Marwari businesses.
Traditionally, the great Marwari firms had networks spreading all over Asia and deep into
China. They relied on their own kin for information and for effective contractual
enforcement. In our terminology, these ethnic networks were substitutes for institutional
voids, and shared features with the networks used by the Genoese and Maghribi traders
studied by Greif (1994) and by the Rothschilds. Famously, Marwaris’ simple and
rigorous, if manual, cost accounting systems provided a cost-effective means of financing
that allowed them to stomach risks in a time of capital scarcity.
           In pre-British and British India, the history of prominent business groups is
characterized by the willingness of the successful members of each ethnic community to
help spawn new members, some times even to compete with their existing businesses.
For example, several prominent Marwari groups in existence today are spun off from the
Birla group. Birlas have been known to actively encourage talented employees to pursue
their own business opportunities, and sometimes even finance these new ventures.
Several groups spun off the Birla group (e.g. Khaitan, Kejriwal, to cite just a couple) and
continue to exist today (Piramal, 1998; p. 142-43). Kasturbhai Lalbhai, a prominent
textile businessman, helped his ethnic group members with the technology of setting up
textile mills. Walchand Hirachand Doshi actively promoted shipping companies,
including direct competitors of his own, as part of the struggle against the British Raj
(Piramal, 1998; p. 162, 230). As Lamb puts it (1976), the acts of entrepreneurship in
British India were heroic, especially in view of the powerful interests arrayed against the
entrepreneurs.
           The entrepreneurship has continued in modern times and extends beyond
expansion of product lines to institutional innovation. A good example is that of the
Ambanis. A relatively recent entrant into the leading business groups, the flagship
company, Reliance, is India’s only entry into the Global Fortune 500. While many point
to a close relationship with the government of Mrs. Indira Gandhi as being part of the
reason for the company’s initial success – founder Dhirubhai Ambani famously said he
would ‘salaam’ (salute) anyone to sell his ideas7 – the fact remains that the group has
developed world-class capabilities in managing large-scale capital intensive projects, and

7
    India Today, June 30, 1985. Cited in Piramal (1991).


                                                      15
is an innovative financier. Its most notable contribution to institutional innovation in
India is perhaps the creation of an equity cult. As Das (2000, chapter 13) chronicles,
Dhirubhai Ambani single-handedly mobilized small investors around the country in 1977
and listed on the Bombay and Ahmedabad stock exchanges when the dominant public
financial institutions would not lend him capital. Between 1980 and 1985, the number of
Indian shareholders went from 1 to 4 million, and fully 25% of these shareholders owned
shares in Reliance, the Ambani company.
       To recapitulate, we have considered two classes of explanations – rent seeking
behavior and entrepreneurial activity – to explain the dual phenomena of persistence of
concentrated ownership, but turnover in the identity of the concentrated owners. Both
explanations have circumstantial evidence in favor of them. Superficial attempts to
attribute data to one or the other of these explanations should be met with disdain. It is
hard to believe, in particular, that rent-seeking can provide a full explanation, especially
of the shifting identity of concentrated ownership.


V The recent evolution of groups and markets


       The evidence presented above is consistent with the idea that Indian business
groups with family and community ties arose historically, in part, due to the absence of
well-developed financial markets. During the past three decades, financial markets in
India have developed significantly, in part due to paradoxical consequences of policies
aimed at other ends during the era of socialism, and in part due to direct attempts by the
government aimed at market development during the more recent reform era.
       Under the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act passed during the socialist era of the
1960s and 1970s, multinationals operating in India were required to reduce their
ownership to below 40%, and divest the rest to Indian investors. To comply with this
requirement, many multinationals offered their shares to public investors through public
offerings on the Bombay Stock Exchange. The issue prices were set by the Controller of
Capital Issues, a government body, at book values which were often dramatically below
economic values. As a result, individual investors were able to buy shares at very
attractive prices in very good companies. These public offerings had a number of



                                             16
spillover effects. First, they created a culture of equity ownership in India on a large
scale, because many retail investors were attracted to the opportunity of earning
significant returns that were almost assured. Second, the process of listing these
companies on Bombay stock exchange resulted in the creation of an intermediation and
market infrastructure – accounting and auditing professionals, financial analysts,
investment bankers, and stock-brokers.
       When India began to liberalize its economy in the 1990s, one of the key
objectives of the government policy was to attract foreign institutional investors. To
accomplish this, the government established the Securities and Exchange Board of India
(SEBI), modeled closely after the US Securities Exchange Commission. Following the
establishment of SEBI, a number of significant capital market reforms were put in place:
new regulations strengthening corporate disclosure and governance standards, new
regulations and enforcement mechanisms to ensure orderly and fair trading practices on
the country’s stock exchanges, and opening the market to international financial
intermediaries. Companies were allowed to float shares at market prices, rather than at
the artificially low prices dictated by the Controller of Capital Issues. Finally, Indian
companies were also allowed for the first time to list on international stock exchanges.
All these changes resulted in significantly improved financial markets in India, and
enhanced the ability of entrepreneurs and established businesses to access domestic and
international equity capital.
       These changes, coupled with a significant deregulation of product markets, led to
new opportunities and challenges for business groups. A number of first generation
entrepreneurs were able to tap into the capital markets to exploit new business
opportunities. Prominent among them was the Reliance Group, which raised vast sums
of money on the Bombay Stock Exchange to finance its petrochemical ventures to
become one of the largest enterprises in India. Reliance went on to become a diversified
business group when it began to exploit new business opportunities thrown open with the
deregulation of power and telecommunication sectors. This era also gave rise to a
number prominent companies in the software and pharmaceutical sectors - Infosys,
Wipro, and Satyam Computer Services in software, and Ranbaxy and Dr. Reddy’s in
pharmaceuticals. Some these companies are family controlled but professionally



                                             17
managed (Wipro, Satyam, Ranbaxy, and Dr. Reddy’s); some are diversified (Wipro
operating in consumer products and information technology) while others are focused in
one sector (Infosys, Satyam, Ranbaxy, and Dr. Reddy’s).
       While the development of capital markets and the deregulation and globalization
of the Indian economy has given rise to the birth of these new entrepreneurial firms, some
of the old family business groups also have adapted and grown during this era. The most
prominent among them is the Tata group which continues to be the largest business group
in India. The Tata group has been able to exploit many of the new business opportunities
in software and telecom. Today, TCS, one of the Tata group companies, is the country’s
largest information technology services company, and Tata Telecom is one of the largest
telecommunication companies in India.


VI. The Indian Software Industry


(a) Why study the software industry?
       The software services industry provides a lower bound on the relative advantage
of family business groups over independent entrepreneurs in exploiting new opportunities
for a number of reasons. First, the industry was very conducive to de novo entry because
of low capital requirements, little government regulation on entry, and a relatively low
level of minimum economic scale to achieve profitability. Further, the Indian
government invested in elite technical institutions, such as the Indian Institutes of
Technology and Indian Institutes of Management, and a large number of other
engineering colleges. These institutions produced abundant talent, a critical input for the
software services industry. Graduates of these institutions, relying on a recognized
education brand, were more willing to work for de novo startups than for incumbent
business groups. Finally, government policies restricting operations of multinationals
such as IBM left plenty of opportunities for domestic entrepreneurs. Given all these
factors, software services is one industry where individual entrepreneurs could compete
effectively with established family business houses of India. Further, business houses
could not rely on any ability they might have had to exercise regulatory muscle, since
there were no regulations to muscle into. Thus, the history of software industry, and the



                                             18
role of business groups in this industry, provide further evidence on why business groups
play such an important role in India even today.


(b) Origins of the Indian Software Industry
       Until the mid-1960s, there was virtually no software development going in India.
Whatever software sold was bundled with computers sold by multinational companies
like IBM. The early software development efforts focused on producing in-house
applications for efficient use of these computers. Government policies attempted to
encourage the growth of a domestic hardware industry through high import tariffs on
hardware. State owned hardware companies, such as the Electronic Corporation of India
Limited, attempted to produce computers for domestic academic and commercial use,
and these efforts included development of operating systems, compilers and application
packages. Most of these efforts, however, were not very successful.
       Of course, many of the reasons to which modern observers attribute the success of
today’s Indian software industry – e.g. low cost talent, English language, and a tradition
of entrepreneurship – did in fact exist prior to the 1960s. The fact that the industry did
not, however, and the fact that the industry continues not to have made a mark in other
low-cost, English speaking countries suggests that these are certainly not sufficient
conditions for the success of the Indian software industry.
       It is instructive that the industry really got its start with the establishment in 1968
of Tata Consultancy Services (TCS), a wholly-owned subsidiary of Tata Sons, itself the
holding company of the Tata Group, a diversified business group and the epitome of
concentrated ownership. As per Heeks (1996), TCS was the first commercial
organization to subscribe to the export-commitment related terms under which the Indian
government allowed the import of hardware. Tata’s ostensible purpose was to allow its
diverse companies to use computers in their operations. Toward this end, the company
formed an alliance with Burroughs Corporation. Under this alliance, Burroughs would
help secure US clients for TCS; in return, TCS would act as an exclusive sales agent for
Burroughs hardware in India. Based on this alliance, TCS secured its first U.S. client –
the Detroit Police Department. TCS today is the largest software services company in




                                              19
India employing more than 19,000 software engineers. The company is privately held,
fully owned by Tata Sons Limited, the apex of the Tata group companies.
       But it was a serendipitous event that triggered the rise of TCS, having to do with
the withdrawal of the ‘incumbent,’ IBM, in 1978. IBM took this step in response to the
Foreign Exchange Regulation Act (FERA) of India, which limited multinational
companies (MNCs) to a maximum of 40% ownership stake in their Indian subsidiaries,
and specified policies for access to foreign exchange for imports, and the use of foreign
exchange earned through exports. MNCs had to either choose between reducing their
stake to this level by selling their shares to the Indian public, or leave the country.
Several MNCs chose to dilute their stakes through public offerings on the Bombay stock
exchange, but IBM and Coca Cola were two prominent exceptions. The decision of
IBM to leave India meant that 1200 employees of the company had to look for other
alternatives to exploit their skills. Many of these employees set up small software
consulting companies which would offer software development and maintenance services
to former IBM customers, leading to the beginnings of the Indian software industry. The
departure of IBM also allowed many smaller hardware companies to expand into India,
exposing Indian software programmers to a variety of software platforms.
       Other unintended consequences of Indian government policy also played a role in
shaping the nascent industry. For example, the severe import restrictions on hardware –
requirements of government permits, high customs duties, and control of foreign
currency availability – gave a fillip to the industry practice that received the derogatory
title of ‘bodyshopping,’ whereby programmers were shipped off to the client site and
worked on the client’s computers. This in turn led to some companies building
relationships with their clients that were then to play a major role in shaping the industry.
       The outward-looking nature of the industry from the outset was also influenced by
the unattractiveness of the domestic market. This, in turn, had several causes. First,
fearing unemployment from automation, the government did not encourage the adoption
of computerization in government and state-owned enterprises. Second, its interest in
developing a domestic hardware industry led the government to impose extremely high
tariffs (350 percent in much of the 1970s and early 1980s). Third, Indian private sector
companies had little incentive to adopt information technology to improve operations and



                                              20
productivity, given the highly protected nature of the economy. As a result, Indian
software firms found it difficult to generate much demand for their services in the
domestic market. This outward orientation stood in significant contrast to the orientation
of much of the Indian private sector, which was focused on the Indian domestic market
rather than the export market.
       More broadly than these specific serendipitous events, software slipped under the
discerning bureaucrat’s otherwise omnipresent proverbial radar screen, so to speak. The
origin of India’s socialist policies and heavy-handed micromanagement of enterprise lay
in Oxford & Cambridge-indoctrinated Fabian socialism which sought to regulate the
‘commanding heights’ of the economy. But this required physical assets to control.
Software, with its characteristic intangibles, was too ephemeral to be included in the
purview of these regulations.
       Other than the intangible nature of the assets in question in the software industry,
another reason why the industry escaped some of the pernicious effects of Indian
socialism had to do with its non-capital-intensive nature. The state’s stranglehold on the
financial sector did not matter as much. Several of the last decade’s changes have helped
move an already existing industry along. For example, far-ranging deregulation initiated
following an exchange-rate crisis in 1990 generically improved the outlook for business.
The delicensing of hardware imports and the greatly falling hardware prices
internationally meant that entry barriers into the Indian domestic software industry fell
drastically. Software firms were allowed to set up private telecommunications networks
to promote remote software services (often to clients in the west). The party in power
until early 2004, the Bhartiya Janata Party (BJP), was generally pro-business and the first
to explicitly support the software industry in its election manifesto.
       But our general point is that these recent changes do not shed much light on the
origins of the industry. It is interesting to ask how a low-cost, talent-intensive
environment could become a world-player in a knowledge-intensive industry. Clearly
serendipity, as opposed to explicit design, played a role. More interestingly for our
purposes, concentrated ownership, in the garb of TCS, was the best positioned to
capitalize on the opportunities revealed by serendipity. Indeed, the ownership links
among the Tata companies were among the ties that cemented them (along with director



                                             21
interlocks, a shared if informal access to the Tata brand, and shared senior level talent),
and permitted TCS to leverage the Tata Group’s reputation. It is doubtful that an entity
could have arisen in a vacuum, unaffiliated with an existing reputable private sector
entity, to capitalize on the software industry opportunity. In a subsequent sub-section, we
will show how TCS’s approach differed from that of other firms in India and that, not
only did TCS not deter the entry of de novo aspirants, it actually facilitated entry.


(c) The modern industrial organization of the Indian software industry
        Table 7 shows the distribution of the companies in the industry by revenues.
Table 8 shows a list of top 20 companies and their revenues. The top five firms in the
industry, with sales greater than 10 billion Indian rupees, account for 32 percent of the
total revenues of the industry. These five firms are: Tata Consultancy Services (TCS),
Infosys Technologies, Wipro Technologies, Satyam Computer Services, and HCL
Technologies. TCS, Wipro, and Satyam are affiliated with family owned business
groups, which entered the software industry as part of a diversification move by their
parent groups. TCS is privately owned; Wipro is publicly traded, but approximately 84
percent of the shares are held by the founder; Satyam is publicly traded, with only 11
percent of the shares held by the founding family. Infosys and HCL were started by
computer professionals, and are publicly listed companies. There are also several large
Indian software companies that are affiliates of multinational companies. These include
Indian arms of overseas software services firms such as IBM Global Services. Also,
there are arms of multinational operating companies which use India as a base for their
internal software development needs. Examples include Siemens Information Systems
Limited and Motorola. Affiliates of multinational companies together account for 22
percent of the industry’s total revenues. There are 24 large software companies that are
publicly traded on the Indian stock exchanges.8 Three of these – Infosys, Satyam, and
Wipro- are also listed on the U.S. stock exchanges.
        Compare the industrial organization of the software industry to that of the Indian
economy as a whole reported in Tables 2 & 3. The role of the private sector looms much


8
 There were also other software companies that are publicly listed, but these have very small amount of
sales.


                                                   22
larger than that of the (absent) public sector in the software industry than it does in the
economy at large. There are large, dominant software firms that have emerged –
separating the wheat from the chaff, as it were – and this has happened through the
normal forces of global competition. Three of the five most successful companies in the
software industry – TCS, Wipro, and Satyam - were launched by business groups, and
remain affiliated to these groups9. Whereas absence of capital barriers to entry
characterizes the industry, reputation, the forte of those groups that have succeeded,
poses a formidable barrier to entry. Further, from the fact that multinationals have not
been able to displace the domestic group companies, we can conjecture that the
reputation of the former is probably based at least in part on some hard-to-replicate
ability to run a software company in India.


(d) The Success of the Indian Software Industry
         The case of the Indian software industry provides a contrasting picture to the
received wisdom that primarily emphasizes the ills of concentrated ownership.10 Here,
we provide some broad data to support the claim that the software industry is, in fact, a
success story despite the ubiquity of concentrated ownership. Why do we think of this as
a success? In contrast to the lackluster performance of the Indian economy as a whole,
the performance of the Indian software industry has been impressive.11 12 The industry’s


9
  A fourth company, Infosys, has a very high level of insider ownership even though it is not affiliated with
a business group.
10
   Morck, Shleifer and Vishny (1988) used U.S. data to argue that the monitoring benefits of concentrated
ownership declined beyond a certain threshold level of concentrated ownership. A more recent literature
on corporate governance around the world points to the exploitation of minority shareholders by controlling
concentrated owners as being a prevalent problem (La Porta et al. 2000; Shleifer & Wolfenzon, 2002).
Morck et al. 1998 have argued that concentrated ownership has resulted in the onset of ‘Canadian disease’
which they associate with slower growth, lower innovation and other forms of non-competitive malaise.
11
   This history relies on the following sources: Delong and Nanda (2002), Heeks (1996), Ghemawat (2002),
NASSCOM (2002, 2003), Kennedy (2001), and Kummerle (2003).
12
   Some aggregate performance indices for the country are worth keeping in mind to interpret the software
industry numbers. At the macro level, India’s overall economic performance during the post-independence
years can only be characterized as relatively poor. For example, the United Nation’s Human Development
Report of 2002 ranks India 124 among the 173 countries. According to the statistics reported by the
Planning Commission of the Government of India, the country’s GNP grew at annual average rate of
approximately 4 percent between 1951 and 1990. This rate increased to approximately 6 percent in the
post-reform years of 1990 to 2002. India’s population has grown significantly to 1.05 billion by 2002.
While government spending on public education was more around 3 percent of GNP, a disproportionate
amount of this went to supporting higher education. According to the Indian government’s 2001 Census of
India, adult illiteracy rate stood at 34.6 percent in 2001. Agriculture still remained the dominant source of


                                                     23
total revenues in 2002 stood at $10.2 billion, and it grew at more than 40% per year
during the 1990s. The industry accounted for $7.7 billion in exports in 2002, which was
a significant portion of the approximately $73.3 billion total exports of goods and
services from India in that year.13 One indication of technical prowess is that five of the
nine software development centers in the world with CMM Level 5 ratings, the highest
ratings on the predominant quality scale developed for software at Carnegie-Mellon
University, were located in India. Companies like General Electric, Citicorp and IBM
had their only CMM-certified operations in India rather than in the U.S.14 According to a
report prepared by the international consulting firm McKinsey for the National
Association of Software and Service Companies (NASSCOM), an industry trade
association, the industry is expected to grow to $77 billion by 2008, accounting for 7
percent of India’s GDP, 33 percent of its foreign exchange inflows, and 4 million jobs.
By all these measures, software industry is the crown jewel of India’s post-independence
economy.
         While this establishes that the Indian software industry has done well relative to
any sensible domestic benchmark, two other benchmarks are worth considering.
Consider, first, comparisons with U.S. software companies, and then, comparisons of the
Indian industry with itself, as it were, over time.
         Table 9 compares the largest Indian software companies with the some of the
largest U.S. software companies in terms of revenues, employees, profitability, and
market capitalization, all as of 2002. Indian companies are clearly not as large as some
of the largest US software firms such as CSC, Accenture, and EDS in terms of revenues
or manpoer. However, in terms of profitability, Indian firms are significantly better than




income for a very significant portion of the population, and there were significant levels of unemployment
and underemployment. Per capita GNP in 2001 stood at approximately $450 dollars. A caveat to this
interpretation is that, in the two decades leading to 2000, India’s cumulative average growth rate was
second only to China’s in this time period. Our reading is that it was a good performance, but not stellar
enough to alleviate the suffering of the Indian masses. In a recent analysis, De Long (2001) argues that
India was in the middle of the pack of countries that he analyzes over longer time periods.
14
  It may be that quality concerns are greater when a firm is located in an environment with a reputation for
poor governance and poor quality products. Perhaps U.S. firms do not find it necessary to seek certification
of this sort.


                                                    24
their US counterparts. The stock market valuations of Indian companies, despite their
smaller size, are often larger than the market capital of the US firms.15
        Consider, now, the industry’s evolution over time. Table 10 shows the time-series
of the total activity of the Indian software industry from 1988 to 2002. The industry had
a total revenue of 0.7 billion Indian rupees in 1988, and the proportion of exports to
domestic sales was 41 percent. By 2002, the industry grew to a size of 365 billion
rupees, with exports accounting for 76 percent. This is driven by the rising importance of
offshore services (from 51% of export revenues in 2002 from 5% in1991), the value-
added part of the Indian software firms’ offerings. This, in turn, is a reflection of
gradually developed reputations for reliability and high quality of services, starting from
a base of primarily bodyshopping (Banerjee and Duflo, 2000). By 2000, the U.S.
accounted for 66% of the total exports of the industry and UK accounted for the second
largest share of exports, at 14%. 185 of the Fortune 500 US companies were customers
of the Indian software services industry.
        This smorgasbord of data leaves us relatively convinced that, despite the ubiquity
of concentrated ownership, it is hard to tell a story of a sclerotic industry, engulfed with
rent-seeking behavior and in its death throes. Quite the contrary. It is also instructive to
note that direct measures of corporate governance, which we turn to below, also do not
yield predictions consistent with the predicted dismal effects of concentrated ownership.
        The Indian software industry, on average, appears to follow better corporate
governance practices relative to the rest of the Indian industry, consistent with the
hypothesis that globalization puts pressure on companies to improve their governance to
global standards. Some data from Credit Lyonnais Securities Analysis (CLSA, 2001)
supports this assessment of the current state of Indian corporate governance. The data are
from a set of questions regarding corporate governance administered to 482 companies in
24 emerging markets in 2001. The companies are generally the ones of greater interest to
foreign investors, typically characterized by some subset of the following characteristics
– large size, greater equity float, and foreign listings. When we ranked countries by the
mean corporate governance score constructed by CLSA, we found that India ranked in

15
  Software industry market capitalization on Indian stock exchanges rose from $4 bn in January 1999 to a
high of $90 bn and then, following the NASDAQ crash and its ripple effect in India, settled at $55 bn by
mid-2000.


                                                   25
about the middle. Since most countries in these data have poor average corporate
governance (with some exceptions like Hong Kong and Singapore), and since the
selected companies are generally the better governed ones, this confirms the
characterization offered above.
         The same CLSA data, however, also point out that the corporate governance
ratings of the software firms are higher than those of other Indian firms. The mean ratings
for software firms (of which there are eight in the CLSA data) and for non-software firms
(of which there are 72) are, respectively, 64.3 and 54.7 (minimum of 0 and maximum of
100), with the difference statistically significantly with a p-value of 0.02. The medians
are, similarly, 62.9 and 53.8, with the difference statistically significant with a p-value of
0.2.
         The data also confirm that software firms are, on average, more exposed to global
competition than other Indian firms. To ratify this assertion, we supplemented CLSA data
with a variety of indicators of global competition. Software firms are more likely to be
traded on a U.S. stock exchange (p value 0.02) and on the London Stock Exchange (p-
value 0.08) and more likely to be listed on the NYSE (p value 0.01). Software firms
garner a higher percentage of their revenues through exports (p value 0.01), are more
likely to employ foreign talent in senior managerial positions (p value 0.01) and are
somewhat more likely to employ a Big 5 accounting firm (p value 0.12).16
         Finally, having established that the Indian software industry outperforms domestic
benchmarks (in terms of profitability, market capitalization, and corporate governance),
outperforms U.S. benchmarks, and is improving over time, consider some evidence that,
while least precise, is perhaps farthest reaching. The social transformation brought about
by the rise of the software industry is difficult to exaggerate. Most compellingly, Indian
talent have role models of entrepreneurship – from both de novo bootstrapped firms and
from business group offshoots – to spur them forward (Khanna and Palepu, 2004).
Individuals, in rural and urban settings, are much closer to having the information they
need to be ‘empowered’ (Das, 2000). Indeed, rural India is being transformed by the
roadside availability of computing power (in much the same way that a previous


16
  However there is no statistically significant difference between software and non-software firms in the
proportion of equity held by institutional investors.


                                                    26
dissemination of franchised telephone kiosk services around the country revolutionized
telecommunication service provision). It is thus difficult to escape the conclusion that the
positive spillovers from the Indian software industry exceed, perhaps vastly, the direct
benefits internalized by stakeholders of the industry.


(e) A Tale of Two Software Firms
        In this section, we provide a more detailed description of two very successful
firms in the Indian software industry, TCS affiliated with the Tata group, and Infosys, a
new entrepreneurial venture arising out of the opportunities provided by the new
economic environment. Elsewhere, we have argued that there are two qualitatively
different ‘solutions’ to the instutitional voids that hamper entrepreneurship in emerging
markets. The first is for incumbent groups to leverage their internal access to capital and
talent to start new ventures – this is the TCS story – and the second is for aspirants to tap
into external institutions outside the country – this is the Infosys story (Khanna and
Palepu, 2004).
        The stories of these two firms shows how group affiliated firms coexist
successfully with independent entrepreneurial firms in this industry. It also demonstrates
that the success of group affiliated firms is attributable not to their ability to exploit
government connections, but due to their ability to exploit entrepreneurial opportunities
in the economy successfully. Finally, not only is it not the case that the group, the
embodiment of concentrated ownership, deterred the entry of the unaffiliated firm, it
actually laid the groundwork for a vast array of subsequent entrants.
        The founding of Tata Consultancy Services (TCS) in 1968 marks the birth of the
first Indian domestic software firm at a time when IBM was riding herd in India.17 TCS
was set up by India’s oldest business group, the House of Tata, by pooling together
management talent from existing Tata companies to create a new entity to act as an
information technology bureau for various members of the Tata group. In two senses, it is
the prototypical example of the filling of institutional voids (Khanna and Palepu, 1997,
1999, 2000a,b), that is, of the creation by diversified business groups of internal solutions


17
  The data, though not the interpretation, for the few paragraphs on the founding of TCS are from Kennedy
(2001).


                                                   27
to compensate for the absence of external specialized intermediaries (institutional voids).
The voids in question here refer to the absence of intermediaries facilitating the pooling
of talent to launch such a company and the absence of an entity to provide information
technology services to service the corporate demands of the time.
         Armed with the reputation of the Tata Group, and its track record in India, TCS
sought business overseas, turning successfully to secure an alliance with Burroughs
Corporation in the U.S., whereby Burroughs would secure programming contacts and
TCS would execute them. Under newly appointed CEO F. C. Kohli, TCS built up a
credible list of major Indian customers between 1969 and 1973.18
         It is important to realize that India’s distortionary foreign exchange regulations
played a key role in prompting TCS to solicit business overseas. Foreign exchange was
needed to pay for importing the hardware on which TCS performed its software
programming services. It is also worth noting that such cross-border arrangements have
been common in the history of the Tata group. For example, its ventures in the late 1990s
included joint venture agreements with the likes of AT&T, NTT, Honeywell, Jardine
Matheson, (the then) Daimler Benz, and numerous others. Elsewhere we have argued that
the network of joint venture agreements represent credible commitments not to engage in
short-term opportunistic behavior toward the marginal joint venture partner, and that the
network itself is facilitated by the diverse (cross-industry) scope of the Tata Group
(Khanna and Palepu 1997).
         Experience gained domestically and through Burroughs meant that TCS was well-
positioned when another distortionary Indian regulation – the requirement of divesting
sufficient equity to local partners – forced IBM (and several other multinationals) out of
India in 1977. A separate entity – Tata Burroughs (later Tata Infotech) – was created to
focus on business based on the Burroughs platform, while TCS decided to focus on the
rising IBM platform in its outside-India work. A U.S. office was opened in 1979 to
solicit business and, with successful projects for various banks, American Express, IBM
and others under its proverbial belt, TCS had established the industry, and its position, by
the mid 1980s.

18
  It is true that the MIT-trained Kohli’s own contacts in the U.S., as part of the IEEE association, no doubt
played a facilitating role in securing contacts. But of course Tata’s had the reputation to attract someone of
Kohli’s stature in the first instance.


                                                      28
        In contrast to TCS, Infosys Technologies, another of India’s software success
stories, is the prototypical example of building a business by leveraging external (i.e.
non-India specific) institutions to compensate for domestic (India-specific) institutional
voids. Narayan Murthy, the individual most associated with Infosys today, mused that the
biggest challenge facing Infosys was “running a first-world firm in a third world country’
(Nanda and De Long, 2002, page 9). Infosys was founded in 1981 by seven
entrepreneurs, all ex-employees of Patni Computer Systems (itself one of the entrants
into the post-IBM-withdrawal vacuum). Its initial capital consisted of approximately
$1,000 of personal savings and no Tata-like reputation to leverage. However, at least one
of the founders, Murthy, had his professional outlook sensitized to the importance of
personal incentives by his own stint working outside India (Paris).
        Infosys struggled, teetering on the precipice of bankruptcy in 1989, until a foreign
exchange crisis forces India to ‘open up.’ Reasons cited for Infosys’ early difficulties can
reasonably be traced to pre-1991 institutional voids in product markets (lack of
availability of quality hardware), capital markets (limited availability of financing for de
novo entrepreneurs) and labor markets (visa restrictions preventing cross-border talent
mobility). A lot of these constraints were removed when barriers to the flow of people,
capital and ideas were relaxed so that Indosys software engineers could be relocated
relatively easily to their customer sites, Infosys management did not spend excessive time
circumventing regulations in New Delhi, foreign knowhow regarding the industry was
accessible, and equity capital could be accessed locally through listings (which Infosys
did in 1993).
        While the post-1991 liberalization eliminated some institutional voids, more
fundamental ones remained. A Forbes article commented that there was a ‘perception that
a smart, honest, reputable company could never come out of a country where cows still
run in the street.’19 A 1999 NASDAQ listing was designed to ameliorate informational
problems that hampered Infosys reaching blue-chip companies in the global market.
Several executives at Infosys and its competitors, and several regulators at Securities and
Exchange Board of India (SEBI; India’s SEC equivalent) commented to us, for example,


19
  Eric Pfeiffer, ‘From India to America,’ Forbes ASAP, August 23, 1999, pp. 19-24. Quoted in De Long
and Nanda (2002: pp. 13).


                                                  29
that the NASDAQ listing was designed primarily to gain credibility with customers and
to permit the issuance of dollar-denominated stock options to compete in global markets
for talent.20 For a company that, by this time, was not liquidity constrained, as we have
demonstrated elsewhere (Khanna and Palepu, 2004), raising capital was not the reason to
list overseas. SEBI member Jayanth Verma’s comment to us regarding the spate of
software listings overseas that followed is instructive. “The industry that probably needs
capital the least, went after the international capital markets most aggressively…. In fact
many of these companies don’t know what to do with the capital they raised. .. The
pressures that the capital markets can put on a company that doesn’t need to raise capital
are next to nothing.”
         A few final points are worth noting. First, TCS’s moves arguably laid the
foundation for the industry’s development. Azim Premji, founder of Wipro, India’s
second largest software company and an NYSE-listed company, commented, ‘The legacy
of the early pioneers – Tata Consultancy Services – was a growing number of foreign
companies favorably impressed about what Indian companies could do in software’
(Ramamurti, 2001). Thus, TCS, launched by the Tata group, far from deterring entry,
appears to have facilitated it.


VII. Discussion: The (socially useful) persistence of concentrated ownership


         In this section, we argue that the persistence of concentrated ownership is, in fact,
a robust feature of many, if not most, emerging markets. The story of the Indian software
industry, and the (socially) useful role that business groups with concentrated ownership
play in it, is not an artifact of serendipitous outcomes, but has generalizable aspects to it.
In contrast, the literature’s current focus on the dark side of concentrated ownership, to
the virtually complete exclusion of the positive aspects, has the potential to understate the
beneficial aspects of such ownership, especially in emerging markets.



20
  Note, however, that the international listing was not feasible until Infosys had a stable track record. As
Azim Premji, CEO of rival Wipro commented, ‘It is also important to remember that Indian companies
built their expertise serving domestic customers before venturing abroad’ (Ramamurti, 2001). Even TCS
ventured overseas after it had a strong domestic track record.


                                                     30
          Consider other instances in space and time that are consistent with this idea of the
socially productive longevity of concentrated ownership. We have focused on Chile in
earlier work on the sustainability of business groups (Khanna and Palepu, 2000b) because
Chile is the one country in modern economic history that has arguably undergone one of
the most rapid movements toward a market economy, starting from the socialist society
left behind by Salvador Allende in 1973 (following his overthrow by the right-wing
General Augosto Pinochet). In particular, Chilean markets are widely celebrated as being
the best in Latin America especially since 1990. Thus, if one were to see business groups
atrophy as external markets develop, this is where one ought to find the effect most
glaringly. Our study confirmed that the value of business group affiliation fell during the
ten years between 1987 and 1997. But business group affiliation, even in the relatively
developed markets of the late 1990s, continued to be valuable. Our interpretation was that
group capabilities, under attack in this instance since 1973 and especially since 1990, fall
slowly.
          We supplemented this by detailed fieldwork in nine of Chile’s largest groups over
the same time period (Khanna and Palepu, 1999). It is important to note that these were
not the ten best performing groups. Here we found that these groups bucked the trend, so
to speak, by not only improving their performance over this time period, but by
increasing the trend toward greater concentration in ownership, greater family control and
greater diversfication, all allegedly correlates of the deleterious effects of concentrated
ownership. Similar field evidence was obtained and reported from India in the 1990-1997
time period.
          The parallels with business groups in history are uncanny and relatively
unexplored (Jones and Khanna, 2003). Here we draw largely on the work on
multinational trading companies in the 1800s and 1900s by Geoffrey Jones (2000).
Primarily around the mid 1800s, British trading houses in particular (and trading houses
originating elsewhere in Europe to a lesser extent) were cross-border structural analogs of
the sorts of contemporary business groups that one observes in Chile, India and elsewhere
(Khanna, 2000). In these trading companies, which Jones describes as business groups,
the merchant house was the ‘core’ and was tied through a medley of contracts, informal




                                               31
and formal, to a series of separately publicly quoted (traded) affiliates around the world,
which operated in very diverse industries.
        Examples of such British trading companies included the Inchcape/Mackinnon
group, a shipping enterprise spread over Asia and Australia, with a trading business in the
Gulf, India and Africa, and plantations in India. Another was Jardine Matheson, which
originated as an opium trader between China and India and, drawing extensively on its
Scottish heritage to source talent, evolved into a multinational business group with
operations in China, and outposts in Japan, the U.S., South Africa and Peru, in diverse
services and manufacturing businesses and an active venture capital business in mining
worldwide.
        Some funds were draw from British (and other) expatriate savings in the colonies
and from the London capital markets, and a lot of funds were sourced locally. That is,
there was the structural issue of controlling and minority shareholders that we have
already discussed as a hallmark of contemporary groups. Yet, as Jones points out, while
the potential for minority shareholder exploitation existed in spades, there were very few
such cases. Why? His answer is that reputation mattered, and these business groups
sought to build trust by doing things like foregoing commissions (owed to the core firm
by the affiliates as compensation for management services rendered) when times were
bad. The groups referred to a ‘moral responsibility’ toward their affiliates. Thus we have
an instance where concentrated ownership appears to have exercised self-restraint, even
amidst a weak corporate control environment, a factor that was probably associated with
its longevity.
        Consider also the adaptability of this historical business group, another reason
why the concentrated ownership has persisted. Continuing the examples above, the
Inchcape group gradually divested from India in the late 1960s and 1970s as that country
became less attractive, and also withdrew from the Middle East and Africa, ultimately
reconfiguring itself as a group invested in Southeast Asia, Hong Kong and Australia.
Jardines and Swires recovered from rather drastic business setbacks, including the
Communist revolution in China, and reconfigured themselves as Hong Kong based
groups, and entered numerous new businesses. Such reconfigurations can be observed
even in contemporary groups. The Tata group started, for example, with a steel and



                                             32
airlines and insurance in the 1800s, had to undergo nationalization and confiscation of
several of its major businesses (including airlines and insurance), built up and eventually
divested major businesses in consumer products, and most recently, entered, successfully,
automobiles, and software. Thus, TCS, discussed above, is a recent diversification of the
Tata group. Similarly, the roughly $4 bn Ayala Group in the Philippines started with
distilleries and has evolved into a real estate and financial services group as of the 1990s,
and most recently as a major and very successful player in mobile telephony (Khanna,
Palepu, and Vargas, 2004).
       Groups, and the concentrated ownership that they represent, whether in history or
in contemporary emerging markets, are robust forms of business organizations. They
potentially last centuries, changing their footprint and functional form, and weathering
severe shocks. Whereas egregious violations and crony capitalism by groups are often
reported (e.g. Fisman’s 2001 study of groups in Suharto’s Indonesia), the constructive
stories are actually far more numerous, even though lacking the drama of exploitation.
       As a coda, it is worth commenting on the implicit counterfactual that underpins
our assertion that groups are socially productive organizational forms. One should ask,
what would happen if there were no groups? Would organized commerce happen in
quite the way that it does in emerging markets, when the specialized intermediation
needed to facilitate arms-length transactions between buyers and sellers in all manner of
markets are missing? We think not. Such a world would be closer to first-best, but is also
patently unrealistic. Then, a critic of groups might say, groups are sensible responses to
the absence of specialized intermediation at a point in time, but their very presence deters
the emergence of intermediaries. Therefore groups are self-perpetuating. There is some
truth to this (Khanna, 2000), but it is a characterization that rings more true for extreme
concentration of groups as in South Korea or South Africa, than for the ‘median’
emerging market.




                                             33
                                     Bibliography

Arora, Ashish and Athreye, Suma, 2002. The software industry and India's development.
Information Economics and Policy, 14, pp. 253-273.

Athreye, Suma S. 2002. The Indian software industry and its evolving service capability.
Open University Working Paper, UK.

Banerjee, Abhijit V. and Esther Duflo. 2000. Reputation Effects and the Limits of
Contracting: A Study of the Indian Software Industry. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, (August): 989-1017.

Bertrand, Marianne, Mehta, Paras, and Mullainathan, Sendhil, 2002. Ferreting out
tunneling: An application to Indian Business Groups, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
Vol. 117, No. 1, pp. 121-148.

Bhagwati, Jagdish (1993): India in Transition: Freeing the Economy, Clarendon Press,
Oxford.

CLSA. 2001. Saints & Sinners: Who’s Got Religion? Credit Lyonnais Securities Asia,
Research Report. Hong Kong.

Das, Gurcharan. 2000. India Unbound: From Independence to the Global Information
Age, Penguin Books.

De Long, J. Bradford, 2001. India since independence: An analytic growth narrative,
UC Berkeley Department of Economics Working Paper, July.

DeLong, Thomas and Nanda, Ashish. 2002. Infosys Technologies. HBS Case No. 801-
445 Boston: Harvard Business School Publishing.

Dutt Report 1969. Report of the industrial licensing policy enquiry committee, Main
Report. Government of India.

Ferguson, Niall. 2002. Empire: The Rise and Demise of the British World Order and the
Lessons for Global Power, Allen Lane, Penguin Books, London, England.

Fisman, Raymond, 2001. Estimating the value of political connections, American
Economic Review. September Vol. 91, Iss. 4; p. 1095

Gadgil, D. R. 1951. (with Staff of Gokhale Institute of Politics and Economics, Poona,
India). Notes on the Rise of the Business Communities in India. Mimeograph,
International Secretariat, Institute of Pacific Relations, New York, NY, April.

Ghemawat, Pankaj. 1999. The Indian Software Industry in 2002. HBS Case No. 700-036
Boston: Harvard Business School Publishing.



                                           34
Ghemawat, Pankaj and Khanna, Tarun. 1998. "The Nature of Diversified Business Groups:
A Research Design and Two Case Studies," Journal of Industrial Economics, Volume
XLVI, No. 1, pp. 35-62, March.

Greif, A. 1994. Cultural beliefs and the organization of society: A historical and
theoretical reflection on collectivist and individualist societies. Journal of Political
Economy, 102 (5), 912-950

Hazari, R. K. 1966. The structure of the corporate private sector: A study of
concentration, ownership and control, Bombay: Asia Publishing House.

Hazari, R. K. 1986. Industrial Policy in Perspective. in Essays on Industrial Policy.
New Delhi: Naurang Rai Concept Publishing Company.

Heeks, Richard. 1996. India’s Software Industry: State Policy, Liberalisation and
Industrial Development. New Delhi: Sage Publications.

Jones, G. 2000. Merchants to Multinationals. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000.

Jones, G., and Tarun Khanna, 2003. Bringing History into International Business,
Harvard Business School unpublished mimeograph.

Kennedy, Robert E. 2001. Tata Consultancy Services: High Technology in a Low-
Income Country. HBS Case No. 9-700-092. Harvard Business School Publishing.

Kapur, Devesh, and Ravi Ramamurti. 2001. India’s Emerging Competitiveness in
Tradable Services. Academy of Management Executive, vol. 15, no. 2 (May).

Khanna, Tarun. 1997. Modern India. HBS Case No. 797-108 (Boston: Harvard Business
School Publishing.

Khanna, Tarun, 2000. Business groups and social welfare in emerging markets: Existing
evidence and unanswered questions European Economic Review. Amsterdam: May Vol.
44, Iss. 4-6; p. 748

Khanna, Tarun, Krishna Palepu , Why focused strategies may be wrong for emerging
markets, Harvard Business Review. Boston: Jul/Aug 1997. Vol. 75, Iss. 4; p. 41 (8 pages)

Khanna, T., and Palepu, Krishna. 1999. Policy Shocks, Market Intermediaries, and
Corporate Strategy: Evidence from Chile and India. Journal of Economics and
Management Strategy 8, no. 2,. 271-310. June.

Khanna , Tarun, Krishna Palepu, 2000a Is group affiliation profitable in emerging
markets? An analysis of diversified Indian business groups, The Journal of Finance.
Cambridge: Apr 2000. Vol. 55, Iss. 2; p. 867



                                              35
Khanna, Tarun , Krishna Palepu, 2000b. The future of business groups in emerging
markets: Long-run evidence from Chile, Academy of Management Journal. Briarcliff
Manor: June. Vol. 43, Iss. 3; p. 268

Khanna, Tarun and Krishna Palepu, 2000c. Emerging Market Business Groups, Foreign
Intermediaries, and Corporate Governance, in Concentrated Corporate Ownership,
edited by Randall Morck (Chicago and London: The University of Chicago Press, 2000.

Khanna, Tarun and Palepu, Krishna, 2004. Globalization and Convergence in Corporate
Governance: Evidence from Infosys and the Indian Software Industry, forthcoming,
Journal of International Business Studies.

Khanna, Tarun and Palepu, Krishna, and Wu, Danielle Melito, 1998. House of Tata
1995—The Next Generation (A). HBS Case No. 798-037, Boston: Harvard Business
School Publishing.

Khanna, Tarun, Palepu, Krishna, and Vargas, Ingrid, 2004. Globe Telecom. HBS Case
No. 704-505, Boston: Harvard Business School Press.

Kuemmerle, Walter. 2003. Infosys: Financing an Indian Software Start-Up. HBS Case
No. 800-103, Boston: Harvard Business School Publishing.

Lamb, Helen B. 1976. Studies on India and Vietnam. New York: Monthly Review Press.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, Robert Vishny, 2000.
Investor protection and corporate governance, Journal of Financial
Economics. Amsterdam: Oct/Nov. Vol. 58, Iss. 1,2; pg. 3

Leff, N. 1976. Capital markets in the less developed countries: The group principal. In
R. McKinnon (Ed.), Money and Finance in Economic Growth and Development. New
York: Marcel Dekker.

Leff, N. 1978. Industrial organization and entrepreneurship in the developing countries:
The economic groups. Economic Development and Cultural Change, 26: 661-75.

Morck, Randall, David A. Stangeland, Bernard Yeung, 1998. Inherited Wealth,
Corporate Control and Economic Growth: The Canadian Disease, NBER Working Paper
November

Morck, Randall, Shleifer, Andrei, Vishny, Robert W., Management Ownership and
Market Valuation: An Empirical Analysis, 1988. Journal of Financial
Economics. Amsterdam: Jan/Mar. Vol. 20, Iss. 1,2; pg. 293, 23 pgs

NASSCOM 2002. National Association of Software and Service Companies.
NASSCOM-McKinsey Report 2002: Strategies to achieve Indian IT industry’s
aspiration. New Delhi, India: National Association of Software and Service Companies,
June.


                                           36
NASSCOM 2003. National Association of Software and Service Companies. Strategic
Review: The IT Industry in India, New Delhi, India: National Association of Software
and Service Companies, February

Piramal, Gita, 1989. Long Shadows of the Past. Corporate Dossier, The Economic Times,
India, August 18, 1989.

Piramal, Gita, 1991. The Politics of Business, Perspectives- The Independent Journal of
Politics and Business, India, March 28.

Piramal, Gita, 1998. Business Legends. Viking Penguin India. New Delhi.

Shleifer, Andrei, Daniel Wolfenzon, 2002. Investor protection and equity markets
Journal of Financial Economics. Amsterdam: Oct. Vol. 66, Iss. 1; p. 3

Strachan, H. 1976. Family and other business groups in economic development: The
case of Nicaragua. NY: Praeger.

Swamy, Subramanian. 1979. The response to economic challenge: A comparative
economic history of China and India: 1870-1952. Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Ramamurti, Ravi, 2001. Wipro's CEO Azim Premji on building a world-class Indian
company, Academy of Management Executive, Vol. 15, No. 2, May.

Timberg, Tom. 1978. The Marwaris. New Delhi, Vikas.




                                           37
                                     Table 1
                 Origin of Concentrated Ownership over the Years

                      1900s            1950s           1960s           1990s
   Period               Pre-            Post         License Raj    Liberalization
                   Independence     Independence
Representative       Tata, Birla   Goenka, Khaitan     Ambani       Wipro/Infosys
  Business                                                          Ranbaxy/DRL
   Group
   Factor             Ethnic         Transfer of      Playing the     Advent of
 underlying         Community          Assets        license game      markets
     rise




                                        38
                                        Table 2
Comparison of Indian Public Sector, Private Sector, and Multinational Corps., 1993



Expressed                            Private sector comparedIndian private sector
in ratio                             to public sectora      compared to all foreign
                                                            companiesb
# of Co.                      16.92                         17.18
Sales                         1.53                          4.32
Profits                       2.22                          3.87
Assets                        1.21                          9.07
Equity                        0.51                          6.71
Source: Author’s calculations from a datebase maintained by the Center for Monitoring
the Indian Economy (CMIE), Bombay, India. Found in Tarun Khanna, “Modern India,”
HBS Case No. 979-108 (Boston: Harvard Business School Publishing, 1997, p. 7.




a
  The private sector is comprised of Indian group-affiliated firms (IG) and Indian non-group affiliated firms
(IN). The public sector is comprised of central and state government owned firms (P). This column depicts,
for each category, the ratio (IG+IN) / P. (i.e. there are 16.92 times as many companies in the private sector
as there are in the public sector, but total sector sales are only 1.53 times greater than total public sector
sales.)
b
  This column depicts the Indian private sector relative to foreign firms (F), i.e., the ratio: (IG+IN) / F.


                                                     39
                                         Table 3
Comparison of Group and Non-Group Firms Listed on the Bombay Stock Exchange
                                         in 1993.
                                 Group Firms                   Nongroup Firms
Variables                 Mean          Median           Mean             Median
Sales (million of        1,411          666              366              217
rupees)
Age (years)                  28.3        22               19.8             14
Tobin’s q                      1.39        1.14            1.37             1.06
Ownership by foreign
institutional investors      10.1          2.3             7.4              0.9
(%)
Ownership by Indian
institutional investors      15.6        13.3             11.3              6.5
(%)
Ownership by insiders        31.9        31.3             20.8             17.1
(%)
Directors’ ownership          5.7          1.1            14.2             10.7
(%)
Top fifty owners
excluding the above           4.9          3.2             7.6              5
categories (%)
Number of firms            567          567              437              437
Source: Tarun Khanna and Krishna Palepu, “Emerging Market Business Groups, Foreign
Intermediaries, and Corporate Governance,” in Concentrated Corporate Ownership, ed.
Randall K. Morck (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 2000), P. 276. Data
obtained from the Center for Monitoring the Indian Economy (CMIE) for 567 affiliates
of 252 different groups and for 437 unaffiliated firms traded on the BSE.

Note: The summary statistics in this table are based on 1993 values. Tobin’s q is defined
as (market value of equity + book value of preferred stock + book value of debt)/(book
value of assets). Sales are measured in millions of rupees, with an approximate exchange
rate at this time of U.S. $1.00 = Rs 30.00. Age measures number of years since
incorporation. Foreign institutional ownership aggregates ownership of foreign
corporations as well as that of foreign financial intermediaries. Domestic institutional
ownership aggregates ownership in the hands of all state-run financial intermediaries.
Insider ownership includes the stakes held by group family members and by other group
firms and measures stakes held by insiders for nongroup firms. Directors’ ownership
captures the ownership of nonfamily directors. Top fifty ownership captures the largets
shareholders not included in the aforementioned categories. Group membership is based
on definitions of groups from CMIE (see text of paper for comments). The mean and
median values for all the variables except for the mean value of Tobin’s q and change in
Tobin’s q are significantly different between the group and nongroup firms at the 5
percent significance level.




                                           40
                                      Table 4
                  Top 50 Indian Business Groups down the Years**
                             Courtesy Dr Gita Piramal
              1939*                    1969°                      1997#
          Group       Asset      Group        Assets          Group      Assets
                        s
1    Tata            62.42 Tata             505.36      Tata            37510.8
                                                                        0
2    Martin Burn     18.02 Birla            456.40      BK-KM Birla     19497.9
                                                                        4
3    Bird            12.40 Martin Burn      153.06      Reliance        19345.5
                                                                        9
4    Andrew Yule     12.38 Bangur           104.31      RPG             9664.12
5    Inchcape        10.70 Thapar           98.80       Essar           9593.78
6    E D Sassoon     9.56    S Nagarmull    95.61       OP Jindal       5456.10
7    ACC             8.68    Mafatlal       92.70       MAC             4782.10
8    Begg            5.75    ACC            89.80       LM Thapar       4434.09
9    Oriental        5.60    Walchand       81.11       Ispat           4425.35
     Tel&Elec
     Dalmia          5.51    Shriram        74.13       Group USHA      4210.87
10
     Jardine        5.33    Bird Heilgers     68.62   Lalbhai           4112.44
11
     Wallace Bros   5.33    JK Singhania      66.84   Videocon          3737.87
12
     Birla          4.85    Goenka            65.34   Lloyd Steel       3705.27
13
     Wadia          4.70    Sahu Jain         58.75   Bajaj Group       3415.87
14
     Duncan         4.54    Macneill &        57.28   Williamson       3351.62
15                          Barry                     Magor
     Finlay         3.84    Sarabhai          56.72   Hari S Singhania 3275.80
16
     Scindia        3.66    Scindia           55.99   KK Birla          3094.90
17
     Killick        3.51    Lalbhai           51.20   Torrent           3077.23
18
     Kilburn        3.23    Killick           51.08   Hinduja           2967.20
19
     Sarabhai       3.00    ICI               50.06   Arvind Mafatlal   2862.94
20
     Brady          2.82    Andrew Yule       46.75   Murugappa         2840.62
21                                                    Chettiar
   Rajputana        2.80    TVS               43.83   Escorts           2642.22
22 Textiles


                                         41
              1939*                       1969°                     1997#
           Group      Asset      Group            Assets        Group       Assets
                         s
     Steel Bros       2.77    Kirloskar         43.02      Mahindra         2633.70
23
     MacLeod          2.67    Parry             41.93      GP Goenka        2630.43
24
     Walchand         2.61    Jardine Hend.     40.19      CK Birla         2530.32
25
     Lawrie           2.55    Mahindra          38.58      Kirloskar        2622.61
26
     Thackersey       2.56    Bajaj             35.28      Nagarjuna        2511.54
27
     Mafatlal         2.45    Simpson           32.92      Jaiprakash       2442.48
28                                                         Group
     BIC              2.38    Seshasayee        32.72      Indo Rama        2440.88
29
     Lalbhai          2.33    Gill              29.02      UB Group         2414.65
30                            Arbuthnot
     Kettlewell       2.23    Kilachand         27.22      Kalyani          2395.29
31
     Gillanders       2.16    Dalmia J          26.72      GE Shipping      2357.59
32
     Shri Ram         2.16    Naidu GV          26.41      Oswal Agro       2342.36
33
     Swedish Match 2.05       Shapoor           26.36      Wadia            2334.97
34                            Pallonji
   Octavious          2.00    Turner            23.15      Manu Chhabria    2286.02
35 Steel                      Morrison
   Shaw               1.95    Ruia~             22.40      TS Santhanam     2214.06
36
   CV Mehta           1.90    Naidu VR          21.55      SK Birla         2080.11
37
   Mangaldas          1.80    A&F Harvey        21.33      Vijaypat         1979.88
38                                                         Singhania
   Daga               1.67    Wadia             20.56      Modern           1967.85
39
   Forbes             1.59    Shaw Wallace      20.14      MM Thapar        1963.47
40
   Harvey             1.50    Murugappa         20.07      Ranbaxy          1875.71
41
   Dunlop             1.42    Modi              19.38      SRF/A Bharat     1863.26
42                                                         Ram
   Spencer            1.38    RamaKrishna       18.79      Finolex          1712.73
43


                                           42
            1939*                           1969°                       1997#
         Group        Asset        Group            Assets          Group          Assets
                         s
     Williamson       1.23     Chinai             18.36       Godrej              1695.97
44
     Harrisons        0.89     Jaipuria           18.24       BPL                 1691.57
45
     Henderson        0.63     Kamani             18.05       Vinod Doshi         1519.89
46
     C Jehangir       0.42     Rallis             17.94       Usha Martin         1514.06
47
     Turner           0.39     Thackersey         17.19       OWM                 1412.76
48
     Provident        0.34     Thiagaraja         16.55       Amalgamation        1353.47
49
     J Warren         0.22     Swedish            15.70       Vardhman            1282.40
50                             Match

Source:
* compiled from Claude Markovits, Indian Business & Nationalist Politics. P192-3.
Significant exclusions (for a miscellaneous bunch of reasons) from the list are: BAT,
Thomas Duff, J Taylor, Assam Company, Burmah Oil, F Peek and Hukumchand. As we
are concerned only with Indian groups and as rankings are not relevant for the purpose of
this article, we can safely assume that all the key Indian business houses have been
accounted for the pre-independence period in the table.
° compiled from Report of the Industrial Licensing Policy Inquiry Committee, 1969.
# Business Today.
~ Ruia in 1969 list should not be confused with Essar Ruia of the 1997 list.

** Assets in RsCr. Normally sales or market cap are the accepted international criteria for
ranking business performance. However assets have been taken in this case for the sake
of uniformity. Accurate, reliable and complete data for Indian business houses by sales is
not available pre-1984.




                                             43
                          Table 5
              Top U.S. Firms down the Years

RANKING      COMPANY                  COMPANY           COMPANY
             NAME 1939                NAME 1969         NAME 1999
   1          American            International      Microsoft Corp
          Telephone & Teleg       Business Machs Cor
                 Co
   2       General Motors         American              General Electric Co
                Corp              Telephone & Teleg
                                  Co
   3        Du Pont E I De        General Motors        Cisco Systems Inc
            Nemours & Co          Corp
   4      Standard Oil Co NJ      Eastman Kodak Co      Wal Mart Stores Inc
   5      General Electric Co     Standard Oil Co NJ    Exxon Mobil Corp
   6       Union Carbide &        Sears Roebuck &       Intel Corp
              Carbon Corp         Co
   7       United States Steel    Texaco Inc            Lucent
                  Corp                                  Technologies Inc
   8      International Nickel    Xerox Corp            International
              Co CDA Ltd                                Business Machs Cor
  9            Texas Co           General Electric Co   Citigroup Inc
  10       Sears Roebuck &        Gulf Oil Corp         America Online Inc
                   Co
  11         Coca Cola Co         Minnesota Mining      American
                                  & Mfg Co              International Group
                                                        Inc
  12        Kress SH & Co         Du Pont E I De        SBC
                                  Nemours & Co          Communications
                                                        Inc
  13      Allied Chemical &       Avon Products Inc     AT&T Corp
               Dye Corp
  14      Procter & Gamble        Coca Cola Co          Oracle Corp
                  Co
  15      Eastman Kodak Co        Mobil Oil Corp        Home Depot Inc
  16      Kennecott Copper        Procter & Gamble      Merck & Co Inc
                 Corp             Co
  17       Standard Oil Co        Standard Oil Co       MCI WorldCom Inc
                 IND              California
  18        Chrysler Corp         Polaroid Corp         Procter & Gamble
                                                        Co
  19      Socony Vacuum Oil Merck & Co Inc              Coca Cola Co
                 Inc
  20      Woolworth FW Co Atlantic Richfield            Nortel Networks
                            Co                          Corp
  21         Reynolds RJ    American Home               Dell Computer Corp


                                 44
         Tobacco Co        Products Corp
22   Consolidated Edison   International Tel &    Johnson & Johnson
          Co NY Inc        Teleg Corp
23     Commonwealth        Standard Oil Co        Bristol Myers
          Edison Co        IND                    Squibb Co
24   United Gas Impt Co    Johnson & Johnson      Pfizer Inc
25     Standard Oil Co     International Nickel   Sun Microsystems
          California       Co CDA Ltd             Inc
26   Chesapeake & Ohio     General Tel &          QualComm Inc
         Railway Co        Electrs Corp
27      Pennsylvania       Shell Oil Co           Hewlett Packard Co
         Railroad Co
28   Norfolk & Western     Ford Motor Co Del      Yahoo Inc
         Railway Co
29      Westinghouse       Burroughs Corp         EMC Corp MA
      Electric & Mfg Co
30   Montgomery Ward       Penney JC Inc          Bell Atlantic Corp
             & Co
31    American Can Co    Pacific Telephone & Motorola Inc
                         Teleg Co
32       International   Caterpillar Tractor BellSouth Corp
         Harvester Co    Inc
33     Bethlehem Steel   Weyerhaeuser Co     Bank of America
             Corp                            Corp
34    Anaconda Copper Westinghouse           Time Warner Inc
           Mng Co        Electric Corp
35    American Tob Co Georgia Pacific        Morgan Stanley
                         Corp                Dean Witter and Co
36   General Foods Corp Union Carbide Corp Daimlerchrysler AG
                                             Stuttgart
37      Roan Antelope    Goodyear Tire &     Texas Instruments
      Copper Mines Ltd Rubr Co               Inc
38     United Fruit Co   Pfizer Chas & Co    Berkshire Hathaway
                         Inc                 Inc Del
39      Penney JC Inc    Bristol Myers Co    American Express
                                             Co
40   Pacific Telephone & Honeywell Inc       BP Amoco PLC
           Teleg Co
41     Liggett & Myers   RCA Corp            Lilly Eli & Co
            Tob Co
42    Parke Davis & Co Warner Lambert        Warner Lambert Co
                         Pharmaceutical Co
43    Pacific Gas & Elec Dow Chemical Co     Du Pont E I De
              Co                             Nemours & Co
44      Union Pacific    General Foods Corp GTE Corp
         Railroad Co


                       45
        45            Phelps Dodge Corp      Imperial Oil Ltd     Wells Fargo & Co
        46            North American Co      Creole Petroleum     Tyco International
                                             Corp                 Ltd New
        47            Phillips Petroleum     Pacific Gas & Elec   AT&T Corp
                              Co             Co
        48               Commercial          Kresge SS Co         Chase Manhattan
                     Investment Trust Co                          Corp New
        49             Public Svc Corp   Reynolds RJ              Federal National
                                         Tobacco Co               Mortgage Assn
        50            Wrigley William Jr United States Steel      Schering Plough
                              Co         Corp                     Corp

Source: Compustat, based on market values.




                                          46
                                       Table 6
       Persistence of Dominance of Indian Groups and U.S. firms over 60 Years

                      Indian Groups          Indian Groups         U.S. Firms             U.S. Firms
                      1939-1969              1969-1999             1939-1969              1969-1999
Birth                 32                     43                    28                     37
RankUp                6                      3                     7                      5
RankDown              10                     3                     15                     6
RankUp10              5                      2                     1                      2
RankDown10            5                      1                     4                      3
RankSame              2                      1                     0                      2

Birth refers to the number of groups or firms that are ‘born’ in the 30-year window in question, that is, that
enter the top 50 list for that country in that time window, given that they were not part of the list in the
previous 30 year window (there are no groups or firms that exit and then re-enter the top 50 list in either
country). RankUp refers to the number of groups or firms that rise in the asset-based size rankings. A
smaller rank measures a larger group or firm, with rank=1 and rank=50 being the largest and the smallest of
the top-50 groups or firms in each country in each time period. RankUp10 counts the groups or firms
whose rank rises by more than 10. RankDown and RankDown10 are defined analogously. RankSame
counts the number of groups or firms whose rank remains unchanged during that 30 year period.




                                                     47
                                      Table 7
                   Structure of Indian Software Exports Industry

                                           No. of Companies
Annual turnover                         2000-01             2001-02

Above Rs. 1,000 crore                   5                       5
Rs. 500 crore – Rs. 1,000 crore         7                       5
Rs. 250 crore – Rs. 500 crore           14                      15
Rs. 100 crore – Rs. 250 crore           28                      27
Rs. 50 crore – Rs. 100 crore            25                      55
Rs. 10 crore – Rs. 50 crore             193                     220
Below Rx. 10 crore                      544                     2,483
Note: In 2001-02, companies under Rs. 10 crore revenues included non-NASSCOM
member companies.

Source: Adapted from “NASSCOM: Strategic Review 2003: The IT Industry in India”
( New Delhi, 2003). Available from the National Association of Software and Service
Companies.




                                         48
                                       Table 8

               Top 20 IT Software and Services Exporters from India

Rank     Company                                   Rs. core           US$ million
1        Tata Consultancy Services                 3,882              813
2        Infosys Technologies Limited              2,553              535
3        Wipro Technologies                        2,256              481
4        Satyam   Computer  Services Limited       1,703              357
5        HCL Technologies. Ltd.                    1,319              277
6        IBM Global Services India Pvt. Ltd.       764                160
7        Patni Computer Services                   732                153
8        Silverline Technologies                   603                126
9        Mahindra-British Telecom Limited          541                113
10       Pentasoft Technologies Ltd.               459                96
11       HCL   Perot Systems  Ltd.                 449                94
12       Pentamedia Graphics Ltd.                  431                90
13       NIIT Limited                              400                84
14       Mascot Systems Ltd.                       399                84
15       i-Flex Solutions Ltd.                     392                82
16       Digital Globalsoft Ltd.                   331                69
17       Mphasis BFL Group (Consolidated)          313                66
18       Mascon Global Limited                     307                64
19       Orbitech                                  264                55
20       Mastek Limited                            259                54
Source: Adapted from “NASSCOM: Strategic Review 2003: The IT Industry in India”
( New Delhi, 2003). Available from the National Association of Software and Service
Companies.




                                         49
                                    Table 9
          A Comparison of the large US and Indian Software Companies

                 Revenues         Operating        No. of           Market
                 June 2002,       Margin           Employees        Capitalization
                 $ million ttm    June 2002,       June 2002        October 2002,
                                   Per cent ttm                     $ million
U.S.
Companies
Accenture        11,600           3.9              75,000           12,400
CSC              11,500           4.7              67,000           4,800
EDS              22,300           10.3             143,000          6,370
KPMG
Consulting       2,368            5.6              9,300            1,240
Sapient          217              N/A              2,427            123

Indian
Companies
HCL Tech         340                28.1            5,587             1,209
Infosys          571                32.1            10,470            7,140
Satyam           421                26.7            9,532             1,370
TCS              810                25              19,000            8,100
Wipro            734                24.5            13,800            6,340
Source: Adapted from “NASSCOM Newsline, November 2002” (2002). Available from
the National Association of Software and Service Companies. <http://www.nasscom.org>




                                          50
                                    Table 10
   India’s Software Exports, Domestic Sales, and Imports (Rs. Billion/$ Million)


Year              Exports                             Domestic          Exports/
                  Rs.               US$               Sales             Total Sales (%)
1987-88           Rs. 0.70          $52               Rs. 1.00          41
1990-91           Rs. 2.50          $128              Rs. 2.25          52
1991-1992         Rs. 4.30          $164              Rs. 3.20          57
1992-93           Rs. 6.70          $225              Rs. 4.90          57
1993-94           Rs. 10.20         $330              Rs. 6.95          59
1994-95           Rs. 15.30         $485              Rs. 10.70         59
1995-96           Rs. 25.20         $735              Rs. 16.70         60
1996-97           Rs. 39.00         $1,110            Rs. 25.00         61
1997-98           Rs. 65.30         $1,790            Rs. 35.80         64
1998-99           Rs. 109.00        $2,650            Rs. 49.50         68
1999-00           Rs. 171.50        $4,000            Rs. 94.10         70
2000-01           Rs. 283.50        $6,230            Rs. 98.90         74
2001-02           Rs. 365.00        $7,680            Rs. 115.00        76

Note: The figures for the domestic software activity do not include in-house development
of software by end users, which is presumed to be a considerable amount.

Source: Adapted from Pankaj Ghemawat, “The Indian Software Industry in 2002,” HBS
Case No. 700-036 (Boston: Harvard Business School Publishing, 2002), p. 20. Data from
NASSCOM; Heeks, R. India’s Software Industry: State Policy, Liberalisation and
Development, (New Delhi: Sage Publications, 1996).




                                          51
           Figure 1
           Evolution of the Tata Group: 1900-2003
                                                                                      Year Entered




                                                                                      Chemical    Commercial           Pharmaceutical                                  Passenger
                                                                                         s         Vehicles &                s                               Teleco      Cars
                                                        Cement            Printing/               Locomotive      Air-                                         m
                                                                         Magazine                             Conditioning                   Watches                                Insuranc
                                         Steel          (1912)                                         s                        Tea &                       Services
                                                                         Publishing                              (1954)                         &                          Retail       e
                                        (1907                                                        (    )                     Coffee
                                                             Soaps &       (1931)           Consumer Cosmetics                               Financial                     (1999
Textiles                  Hospitality                        Toiletrie                                                                       Services    Auto
                           (1902)                                                           Electronic    (1952)                      IT
(1874)                                      Power                s             Aviation         s                                   (1968     (     ) Components
                                            (1910                               (1932)                                                                  (1993)




1870       1880    1890          1900            1910            1920        1930          1940         1950         1960         1970       1980        1990          2000           2010

                                                                                                                                                    Soaps &                           Printing/
                                                                                                           Aviatio              Locomotive          Toiletrie          Cemen         Magazine
                                                                                                              n                     s                   s                t           Publishing
                                                                                                                                                                                       (2003)
                                                                                                                                                          Cosmetics &
                                                                                                                                                         Pharmaceutical        Textiles
                                                                                                                                                               s               (2001)




                                                                                       Year Exited



  Source: Bombay House, Tata Group, Jan 2004




                                                                                                      52
