                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                USING INVESTMENT DATA TO ASSESS THE IMPORTANCE
                           OF PRICE MISMEASUREMENT

                                             Diego Comin

                                        Working Paper 10627
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w10627


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2004




I am grateful to Jess Benhabib, Hyunbae Chun, Jan Eberly, Mark Gertler, Lars Hansen, Bart Hobijn, Boyan
Jovanovic, John Leahy, Ned Nadiri, Sergio Rebelo, Plutarchos Sakellaris, Tom Sargent, Kevin Stiroh,
Gianluca Violante, Karl Whelan, Ed Wol. and the participants at NYU, the New York Fed, the Stern Macro
lunch, the University of Pennsylvania and at the NBER conference on Productivity and Macroeconomics and
the CEPR-ECB conference on Productivity and Prices for comments, suggestions and for helpful
conversations. Financial assistance from the C.V. Starr Center is gratefully acknowledged. Please direct
correspondence to diego.comin@nyu.edu. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Diego Comin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Using Investment Data to Assess the Importance of Price Mismeasurement
Diego Comin
NBER Working Paper No. 10627
July 2004
JEL No. C6, D9, E2
                                       ABSTRACT

This paper presents a new approach to assess the role of price mismeasurement in the productivity
slowdown. I invert the firm's investment decision to identify the embodied and disembodied
components of productivity growth. With a Cobb-Douglas production function, output price
mismeasurement only should affect the latter. Contrary to the mismeasurement hypothesis, I find
that in the Post-War period, disembodied productivity grew faster in the hard-to-measure than in the
non-manufacturing easy-to-measure sectors, and that disembodied productivity slowed down less
in the hard-to-measure than in the easy-to-measure sectors since the 70's. These results hold a
fortiori when capital and labor are complements.

Diego Comin
Department of Economics
New York University
269 Mercer Street, 725
New York, NY 10003
and NBER
diego.comin@nyu.edu
1       Introduction

Measured productivity growth is aﬀected by the mismeasurement of the growth rate of
the output deflators. A failure to adjust for the quality improvements of output will bias
downwards the measure of productivity growth. For a variety of reasons,1 measurement
problems are more serious in construction and in some service sectors (retail and whole-
sale trade, finance and insurance and general services). These hard-to-measure sectors
have experienced lower growth rates of total factor productivity (TFP) in the post-war
period, as can be appreciated in the first column of table 1.2 This observation has lead
many to consider the degree of mismeasurement of the output deflators as a key factor
in the variation of productivity growth across sectors.3 Since the 1970’s the US econ-
omy has suﬀered a slowdown in the annual growth rate of total factor productivity of
about 1.2 percentage points.4 This slowdown has not been homogeneous across sectors.
As illustrated in the second column of table 1, it has been concentrated in the sectors
whose output is hard to measure. Since these sectors have traditionally experienced
lower productivity growth rates, the cross-sectional distribution of productivity growth
has become more dispersed after 1970. Some authors have associated this higher disper-
sion with the worsening of the mismeasurement problems in the hard-to-measure sectors.
Baily and Gordon [1988] have suggested that an important component of the slowdown
in retail and finance can be due to the unmeasured improvements in the convenience
of the services provided in those sectors. Bresnahan [1986] estimates large unmeasured
eﬀects on the total factor productivity of the finance sector associated with the adoption
of mainframes computers. Dranove, Shanley and White [1991] conclude that the bias in
    1
     Historically, much more data were collected on agricultural and manufacturing commodities and
their prices than were collected in services; moreover, for many commodities, one has publicly available
data on the characteristics for individual items that are relevant to the measurement of output while
this detail is unavailable on the performance characteristics of doctors, lawyers and stockbrokers. In
many service sectors it is not exactly clear what is being transacted. Finally, service output often
depends on the interaction with the user and thus is more diﬃcult to standardize.
   2
     This diﬀerential is equally large when we measure productivity with labor productivity (Baily and
Gordon [1988] and Griliches [1994]).
   3
     See Griliches [1992] for this argument and further references.
   4
     The size of the slowdown is very robust to the cuttoﬀ date. However 1970 seems an appropriate
cuttoﬀ since it isolates, as much as possible, the productivity measures from variation associated with the
business cycle. This is the case because the measure of the output gap computed by the Congressional
Budget Oﬃce was at about the same level in 1960, 1970 and 1997.




                                                    2
the health-care price level has increased over time.5

The goal of this paper is to assess the relative importance of mismeasurement as a de-
terminant of the variation in productivity growth across sectors and as a culprit of the
productivity slowdown. To address these questions, I propose a new approach based on
the assumption that firms observe the relevant prices with no bias. If this is the case,
we can infer the importance of the bias in the BEA deflators by inverting the firm’s
decisions. More specifically, I consider the firm’s investment policy and investigate how
using a biased price series would aﬀect the measured embodied and disembodied pro-
ductivity growth.6 For a Cobb-Douglas production function, the marginal product of
capital is linear in nominal sectorial output and in the level of productivity embodied
in the new vintage. Interestingly, the only eﬀect that the price of output has on the
marginal product is through the nominal level of output. Hence, if nominal output is
properly measured, the series of embodied productivity obtained by inverting the firm’s
investment decision will be neutral to any output price mismeasurement. The disem-
bodied component is the residual in productivity after taking into account the growth in
the (properly quality-adjusted) capital stock. Therefore, in the Cobb-Douglas case, the
bias in the output price deflator shows up one-for-one in our estimate of disembodied
productivity.7

This result provides the basis for the tests on the relative importance of output price
mismeasurement relative to other factors. If mismeasurement of the output deflator is
the key determinant of the cross-sectional variation in TFP growth, we should observe
that the disembodied component in the hard-to-measure sectors grows substantially
more slowly than in those sectors that do not suﬀer from severe measurement problems.

Surprisingly, this is not the case empirically. With the exception of manufacturing,
the sectors where output growth is easy to measure have lower growth rates of the
   5
      Griliches [1994] has taken a related route. He suggests a compositional change in favor of the
sluggish hard-to-measure as the likely candidate to explain the productivity slowdown. Sichel [1997]
has convincingly argued that the compositional change can account for a very minor fraction of the
decline in measured ptoductivity leaving open only the door of a within sector decline in productivity.
That is the route analyzed in this paper.
    6
      This distinction dates back to Solow [1959] who argued that increases in productivity may come
both from installing new more productive capital and from improving symmetrically the productivity of
all the vintages. He denoted the first as embodied productivity growth and the second as disembodied.
    7
      Interestingly, this result also holds in the presence of any sort of mismeasurement in the prices of
the capital input in the sector as shall be shown in section 3 (corollary 4).


                                                    3
disembodied component than the hard-to-measure sectors. This necessarily implies that
the cross-sectional variation of TFP growth is influenced by other “real” factors that are
more relevant than price mismeasurement.

A second question that we can investigate is whether a worsening of the mismeasurement
problems in the hard-to-measure sectors can account for the productivity slowdown. In
this event, the growth rate of the disembodied component should have declined more in
the hard-to-measure than in the easy-to-measure sectors since the 1970s. But again, this
is not what we observe. In the data, there has been a larger decline in the growth rate
of disembodied productivity in the easy- than in the hard-to-measure sectors. Hence,
the role of mismeasurement in the productivity slowdown is also dominated by other
factors.

One may wonder whether the Cobb-Douglas assumption is too stringent and whether
these conclusions hold when capital and labor are complements, which is the empirically
relevant alternative hypothesis (Antràs [2001]). In section 4.4, I show that the role of
mismeasurement for productivity growth seems even more limited when we allow for
more general patterns of substitution between the inputs.

These results are in sharp contrast with previous work. The hedonics literature has
tried to provide more exact measures of quality adjusted-output by estimating the re-
lationship between diﬀerent attributes of the goods and services and their price.8 This
approach is aﬀected by two problems. First, it requires a comprehensive description of
the characteristics of the goods. This is diﬃcult to obtain specially for the output of
the hard-to-measure sectors. Second, most of the available detailed data sets needed to
build hedonic price indexes do not cover the pre 1970 period. Consequently, it is very
diﬃcult for this research agenda to infer whether the mismeasurement problems have
become worse in the last thirty years.

A newer approach proposed by Hamilton [2001] and Costa [2002] has tried to identify the
CPI bias by estimating the income elasticity of food and recreation (defined as entertain-
ment plus reading) using cross-sectional micro data pooled across many years and using
these estimates to measure the increase in households’ real income over time controlling
for changes in prices and in demographic characteristics. They both find that during
the 1970s there was an important upward bias (about 2.5 percent per year) in the CPI,
  8
      For a critical survey and references see Hulten [2002].


                                                     4
higher than in the 80s and 90s (about 0.6 percent) and in the 60s (Costa, 0.4 percent).
The spirit of this empirical strategy is similar to the one proposed here in that it uncovers
the degree of mismeasurement by inverting the agents’ choices (consumption in Hamilton
[2001] and Costa [2002] and investment here). Interestingly the Hamilton-Costa strat-
egy has the additional advantage of providing an absolute measure of the importance
of mismeasurement, while the methodology proposed in this paper only can provide a
measure of the importance relative to other factors. Nevertheless, the Hamilton-Costa
strategy also faces some diﬃculties that leave room for further examination.9

I begin the paper with an illustration of the identification strategy for embodied pro-
ductivity in a simplified setting where this can be done by comparing the investment
output ratio to the growth rate of sectorial nominal output deflated by some aggregate
deflator. By inspecting the trends in these variables, we can understand the intuition of
the empirical findings. Section 3 formalizes these intuitions in a more general framework
and proves the neutrality results. Section 4 contains the implementation of the mismea-
surement tests and several robustness checks. Specifically, I consider various alternatives
for the interest rates, the inclusion of adjustment costs and more general specifications
for the production functions. The findings are very robust to these variations. Section
5 concludes.
   9
     First, there are some data problems. The reporting of the food expenditures is sensitive to the
survey method in ways that aﬀect the estimate of the bias during the 70s. Defining recreational goods
is hard. For example, reading is included in Costa’s definition, but reading could be used for educational
purposes as well. The increase in college enrollment in the 70s may be driving the reported increase in
the share of recreation in expenditures instead of the unmeasured real income as Costa argues. This
leads to a second criticism. In order to assign the average deviation from the share of expenditures
predicted by demographics, relative prices and income to CPI bias the authors must assume that this
relationship is stable. Omitting some relevant variable will result in a wrong assessment of the CPI bias.
For example, if new technologies are developed in the 70s that make nonfood goods more attractive and
that are complements to entertainment, ceteris paribus the consumer will tend to increase her share of
expenditures in recreation and will reduce her share in food. Of course, the approach proposed in this
paper is also subject to biases if the problem of the firm is misspecified. However, since my tests apply
to the sum of the output deflator bias and the disembodied improvements in production, the risk of
dealing with an unstable relationship and incurring in an omitted variable bias is substantially lower. A
second advantage of the approach proposed here is that the quality of the data required to implement
it is quite high.




                                                    5
2      The smoking gun

Consider a multisector economy. Firms have access to a constant returns to scale tech-
nology. Without loss of generality, we can aggregate firms into sectors indexed by i. Each
sector’s output (Yit ) is produced according to the following Cobb-Douglas production
function:
                                    Yit = Zit Jitαi L1−α
                                                     it
                                                        i
                                                                                       (1)

where, αi is the capital share, Lit is employment, Zit is disembodied productivity, and
Jit is quality-adjusted capital which, following Solow’s terminology, I refer to as jelly
capital. The law of motion for jelly capital is as follows:


                                  Jit+1 = (1 − δi )Jit + Ait+1 Iit                               (2)

where δi is the depreciation rate, Iit is investment and Ait+1 reflects a potential failure
by the BEA to adjust perfectly investment for the eﬃciency embodied in the new capital
vintage.10

Firms maximize the expected present discounted value of profits taking as given the
distribution of labor (Lit ) and the price of final output (Pit ). I assume that the interest
rate is constant and equal to R − 1, the price of investment is also constant and equal
to PiI , and that Ait evolves according to the following common knowledge stochastic
process:


                                     Ait+1 = (1 + γAi )Ait eεit

where γAi denotes the average growth rate of embodied productivity in sector i and
          σ2     2
εit ∼ N(− 2Ai , σAi ) is white noise. No restriction is imposed on {Zit }.

I introduce mismeasurement of the prices by assuming that firms observe perfectly the
prices of the output they produce and the inputs they purchase, but the BEA may
measure them imperfectly. The timing of the model is as follows: every period t, firms
  10
    Comparing equations (1) and (2) it is clear that Zi aﬀects symmetrically all the capital vintages
while improvements in Ai are embeded only in new vintages.


                                                 6
produce output, observe the random variables for period t + 1 and decide how much to
invest to build up Jelly capital for period t + 1.

Formally, the problem of the representative firm in the ith sector is as follows :

                                                   X
                                                   ∞
                                 Max
                                  ∞
                                              Et            R−(t−τ ) [Piτ Yiτ − PiI Iiτ ]
                                {Iτ }τ =t
                                                   τ =t+1

s.t (1) and (2).

It is easy to check that optimal investment induces the following level of Jelly capital:

                                                   Jit = Di Ait Pit Yit ,                          (3)
            h                            i
                     α(1+γAi )
with Di =       [R(1+γAi )−(1−δi )]PiI
                                          .

                                                                                             PI
Isolating Iit from the law of motion for Jelly capital, multiplying both sides by PitiYit and
using expression (3), we reach the following expression for the investment-output ratio
as a function of the growth rate of nominal sectorial output and of the growth rate of
embodied productivity.
                                         ·                               ¸
                         PiI Iit     I     Pit+1 Yit+1              Ait
                                 = Pi Di               − (1 − δi )
                        Pit Yit              Pit Yit               Ait+1

An increase in Zi , Pi or Li has a positive eﬀect on the investment-output ratio. But,
since the production function is Cobb-Douglas, this eﬀect operates only through the
growth rate of nominal output. This implies that, after controlling for the growth rate of
nominal output, the other movements in the investment output ratio must be attributed
to variation in the growth rate of Ai .11 By inverting this investment function we can
identify the growth rate of Ai .

                                             ·                          I
                                                                              ¸
                               Ait      1      Pit+1 Yit+1         −1 Pi Iit
                                    =                      − (D̃i )                                (4)
                              Ait+1   1 − δi     Pit Yit              Pit Yit
  11
    Note also, that we cannot identify separately the depreciation rate and the growth rate of embodied
productivity. Since we are only interested in the evolution of disembodied productivity, this is an
advantage because any mismeasurement of the depreciation rate across sectors or over time will be
automatically reflected in the measured growth rate of Ai leaving unaﬀected the identified growth rate
of disembodied productivity.


                                                               7
                  PiI αi (1+γAi )
where D̃i =     R(1+γAi )−(1−δi )
                                  .12

In principle, the presence of biases in the prices measured by the BEA may aﬀect the
recovered series for both embodied and disembodied productivity. However, for the
Cobb-Douglas case, the identification of the rate of embodied productivity in equation
(4) just requires the series for nominal output and nominal investment. If the BEA
measures of these variables are unbiased, the growth rate of embodied productivity will
be unaﬀected by any possible mismeasurement of the output deflator. The mismeasure-
ment will fully show up in the identified growth rate of disembodied productivity. This
observation is the key for the mismeasurement tests. If there is a systematic upward bias
in the output deflators of the hard-to-measure sectors, we should observe that, ceteris
paribus, the growth rate of Z is lower in those sectors. Furthermore, if the bias has
increased since the 1970s, we should observe that, ceteris paribus, the growth rate of Z
has declined in the hard-to-measure sectors.

To identify disembodied productivity, we just need to subtract the contribution of jelly
capital from labor productivity. Given equation (4), this is the same as subtracting the
growth rates of embodied productivity and the price level from productivity growth as
in equation (5).
                           µ              ¶1−αi µ       ¶αi µ       ¶αi
                   Zit+1     Yit+1 /Lit+1          Ait         Pit
                         =                                                           (5)
                    Zit         Yit /Lit          Ait+1       Pit+1

In section 4.2, we shall see that the growth rate of embodied productivity in the non-
manufacturing easy-to-measure sectors during the period 1960-97 has been much larger
than in the hard-to-measure sectors. As a result, the growth rate of disembodied produc-
tivity in the latter has been higher than in the former despite the important diﬀerential
in productivity growth in favor of the non-manufacturing easy-to-measure sectors. The
intuition for this result can be illustrated with figures 1 and 2 that display the time
series for the investment output ratio and the share in the aggregate nominal output
for the manufacturing, the hard-to-measure and the non-manufacturing easy-to-measure
sectors. Firms in the non-manufacturing easy-to-measure sectors have invested a large
fraction of their value added (34 percent) despite the low growth rate of their nominal
output (6.6 percent). This can only be an optimal decision by the firms if the growth
rate of the productivity embodied in the new capital installed in these sectors has been
 12
      Hobijn [1999] develops an equation very similar to this one for a one sector economy.

                                                    8
                 0.45


                  0.4


                 0.35


                  0.3


                 0.25


                  0.2


                 0.15


                  0.1


                 0.05


                   0
                    60




                                 65




                                          70




                                                     75




                                                              80




                                                                       85




                                                                                90




                                                                                         95
                 19




                              19




                                       19




                                                  19




                                                           19




                                                                    19




                                                                             19




                                                                                      19
                        (PI*I)/(P*Y) Hard      (PI*I)/(P*Y) Easy non-manuf    (PI*I)/(P*Y) Manuf




                           Figure 1: Investment output ratio by sector.

very large (equation (4)). The opposite occurs in the hard-to-measure sector. In these
sectors, firms have invested a relatively small fraction of their value added (8.7 percent)
despite the large growth rate of their nominal output (8.2 percent). This unmistak-
ably indicates a low growth rate of embodied productivity. As a result, the ranking
of sectors by their growth rates disembodied productivity implies that there are other
elements more important than price mismeasurement for the cross-sectional variation in
productivity growth.

The second main finding from our analysis is that the productivity slowdown cannot
be explained by a worsening of the mismeasurement problems in the hard-to-measure
sectors, despite the larger decline in productivity growth experienced by these sectors
since 1970. Specifically, there has been a larger acceleration of the growth rate of A in the
easy-to-measure than in the hard-to-measure sectors and this diﬀerential is suﬃcient for
the slowdown in disembodied productivity since 1970 to be larger in the easy-to-measure
than in the hard-to-measure sectors.

There are two reasons for the larger increase in the growth rate of A in the easy-to-
measure sectors. First, the manufacturing sectors have experienced an acceleration in
the investment output ratio since 1970 (from 8.5 to 10.6 percent) while the growth


                                                          9
  0.8



  0.7



  0.6



  0.5



  0.4



  0.3



  0.2



  0.1



   0
    60




            65




                     70




                             75




                                        80




                                                85




                                                           90




                                                                   95
 19




         19




                  19




                          19




                                     19




                                             19




                                                        19




                                                                19
             Hard-to-measure      Manufacturing      Easy non-manuf



Figure 2: Share in private non-residential nominal output.




                 Figure 3: Real Interest Rates.



                                   10
rate of nominal output declined (from 6.4 to 6.2 percent). This indicates that the
productivity embodied in the new capital used in manufacturing accelerated since 1970.
In the hard-to-measure and the non-manufacturing easy-to-measure sectors, however,
both the investment intensity and the growth rate of nominal output have been roughly
flat. Second, the discount rates (independently of whether we measure them by the
real BAA corporate bond rates, by the expected stock returns or by a weighted average
of the two) have been higher in the post 1970 period as illustrated by figure 4. This
makes necessary a higher growth rate of embodied productivity to rationalize a given
investment rate. As is evident in equation (4), the required increase in the growth rate
of A is higher the higher is the investment output ratio. Therefore the increase in the
interest rates is going to induce a larger acceleration of embodied productivity in the
non-manufacturing easy-to-measure sectors. Next we formalize these intuitions with a
more comprehensive model.



3     The model

In this section, I extend the previous framework along two dimensions. First, the prices
of investment (PitI ) and interest rates (Rt ) are not forced to be constant. Second, the firm
now faces a tax system. In addition to a corporate tax (τ̂t ), firms enjoy an investment
tax credit (τ̂itI ) and a capital consumption allowance for the assets of vintage τ at sector
i (τ̂iτδ t ).

The timing of the economy is as follows. Every period t, firms produce their sectorial
output (Yit ), then they observe the random variables for period t + 1, (i.e. Lit+1 , Pit+1 ,
  I               I
                          ©         ªt
Pit+1 , τ̂t+1 , τ̂it+1 and τ̂iτδ t+1 τ =1 ) and decide how much output to invest in order to
maximize the expected present discounted value of after-tax profits taking as given the
stochastic processes that generate the exogenous variables.

Formally, the problem of sector’s i representative firm can be expressed as follows:


                   "µ                ¶ "                                                                               ##
                 X
                 ∞   τQ
                      −1                                                                           X
                                                                                                   τ −1
    Max Et                    Rs−1      (1 − τ̂τ ) (Piτ Yiτ − wτ Lτ ) − (1 − τ̂iτI )PiτI Iiτ + τ̂τ        δ
                                                                                                        τ̂isτ PisI Iis
                 τ =t   s=t                                                                          s=1
    {Iiτ }∞
          τ =t


                                                        11
s.t Ji0 , (2) and (1).

To ensure that this problem is well defined, I assume that the following regularity con-
dition holds for each sector along all the possible sample paths:
                                                Pit Aαiti Zit
                                            lim               =0                                     (6)
                                           t→∞ P I Πts=1 Rs
                                                 it


The associated first order condition equalizes the marginal cost from investing one ad-
ditional unit and the expected marginal benefit. It is useful to rewrite this first order
condition recursively by applying the law of iterated expectations.13
                  "               "∞                        ##
                                   X¡           ¢
              PitI 1 − τ̂itI − Et    Πv−1    −1
                                      s=t+1 Rs
                                                        δ
                                                  τ̂v τ̂itv                           (8)
                                 v=t
                       ·
                                              Yiτ +1
           = Ait+1 Rt−1 (1 − τ̂t+1 )αi Piτ +1
                                              Jiτ +1
                          "       £                £P∞     ¡ v−1       ¢           ¤¤ ##
                              I            I                        −1         δ
                            Pit+1   1 − τ̂it+1 −     v=t+1  Π     R
                                                             s=t+2 s     τ̂ τ̂
                                                                           v it+1v
             +(1 − δi )Et
                                                      Ait+2


A rational expectations equilibrium is a policy function for investment at each sector
such that a) the implied sequences of Jelly capital satisfy equation (2), b) the associated
sequences of value added at each sector together with the stocks of capital satisfy the
sequence of first order conditions (8), and c) expectations are taken rationally.

This equilibrium can be inverted using data on investment, output, taxes and some of
the parameters to recover the actual series for embodied and disembodied productiv-
  13
     Note that this optimality condition can be related to the user cost of capital (cit ) that now is
augmented to incorporate uncertainty about the exogenous variables and, most importantly, embodied
productivity of capital. Formally, equation (8) can be rewritten as:
                                                        Pit+1 Yit+1
                                             cit = αi
                                                           Jit+1
where
                                        "              "∞                          ##
                          Rt PitI                        X¡                 ¢
                                               I                v−1      −1     δ
             cit   =                     1 − τ̂it − Et        Πs=t+1 Rs τ̂v τ̂itv
                     Ait+1 (1 − τ̂t+1 )                  v=t
                                   £ I £          I
                                                         £P∞        ¡ v−1     −1
                                                                                 ¢       δ
                                                                                               ¤¤¤
                                Et Pit+1   1 − τ̂it+1  −     v=t+1 Πs=t+2 Rs       τ̂v τ̂it+1v
                     −(1 − δi )                                                                      (7)
                                                        Ait+2 (1 − τ̂t+1 )




                                                        12
ity. In the next section, I formalize this idea by building an operator in the space of
bounded sequences whose fixed point is the sequence of embodied productivity and use
this technology to present the tests of the mismeasurement hypothesis.


3.1     Identification and mismeasurement

Let (S, ρ) be the space of bounded infinite sequences {xk } with xk ∈ R+ , ∀k, with the
supnorm (i.e. ∀x, y ∈ S, k x − y k= supk |xk − yk | ). This is a Banach space (i.e. a
complete normed vector space). Let’s define the following mapping (Q(x)) in this space:


                               "        "                 "∞                    ## #
                                                           X¡           ¢
           [Q(x)] (t + 1) =      PitI   1−   τ̂itI   − Et     v−1    −1      δ
                                                             Πs=t+1 Rs τ̂v τ̂itv Rt
                                                                v=t
           "
                                                     Yit+1
             (1 − τ̂t+1 )αi Pit+1                    t+1    Pτ
                               Ji0 (1 − δi ) + v=0 Iiτ −v xτ +1−v (1 − δi )τ −v
                         "       £             £P∞     ¡ v−1        ¢             ¤¤ ##−1
                             I          I                        −1          δ
                           Pit+1  1 − τ̂it+1 −   v=t+1  Π      R
                                                          s=t+2 s     τ̂v τ̂it+1v
            +(1 − δi )Et                                                                  , ∀t         (9)
                                                   xt+2



where the sequences of prices, output, investment, taxes, interest rates and the depre-
ciation rate and capital share are fixed, and the expectations are taken rationally by
agents that know their distribution. This mapping is an operator because if x ∈ S so
does Q(x).
                                                               ££                 £P∞ ¡ v−1             ¢           ¤¤¤
To simplify the notation in what follows, let’s denote PitI 1 − τ̂itI − Et            v=t  Π s=t+1 Rs
                                                                                                     −1
                                                                                                          τ̂v τ̂ δ
                                                                                                                itv
                                                     P
                           q
by P̂itI and let’s define Jit+1 as Ji0 (1 − δi )t+1 + tτ =0 Iit−τ +1 (1 − δi )τ qt−τ +1 for any q ∈ S.

I impose three restrictions on the parameters and stochastic processes that govern the
variables that define the operator Q. The first two conditions are suﬃcient (but not
necessary) for the operator Q to be a contraction mapping. Condition 3 restricts the
stochastic process that governs the ratio P̂itI /Ait+1 and is necessary to derive the neu-
trality results.
                                                         ·               t+1
                                                                               ¸
                                                             I R I¯
                                                           P̂it t it (1−δi   )
Condition 1: Let I¯it ≡ sup0≤τ ≤t Iiτ . Then, supt∈[0,∞) δi αi (1−τ̂t )Pit Yit ≤ 1.


                                                           13
                        t t ( it+1 /(xt+2 (xt+2 +a)))
                     I R E P̂ I
                   P̂it
Condition 2:                  · I
                                P̂
                                        ¸ · I
                                             P̂
                                                     ¸   < 1, ∀t, i, a > 0, Ωt , where Ωt is the informa-
                     (1−δi )Et x it+1+a
                                         E t  x
                                                it+1
                                t+2           t+2
tion set as of time t.

Let Et [Xt+1 cVt ] denote the expected value of Xt+1 as of t without conditioning on the
value of variable Vt .
                    h I       © I ªt i       h I                  i      h I i        h I                 i
                     P̂                       P̂it+1         t            P̂it+1       P̂it+1         t
Condition 3: Et xit+1   t+2
                            c  Piτ τ =0 = Et   xt+2
                                                     c {Piτ }τ =0   = Et   xt+2
                                                                                 = Et   xt+2
                                                                                              c {Ziτ }τ =0 .


Lemma 1: If conditions 1 and 2 hold, Q : S → S is a contraction mapping.

Proof: See Appendix. 2

Since S is a complete metric space, and Q : S → S is a contraction mapping with
modulus β, we can apply the Contraction Mapping Theorem to derive proposition 1.

Proposition 1: a) (Existence and Uniqueness) Q has exactly one fixed point, A, in S.

                   b) For any A0 ∈ S, kQn (A0 ) − Ak ≤ β n kA0 − Ak, n = 0, 1, 2, ...

Part b) of this proposition implies that for any initial guess of the sequence of embodied
productivity, the iteration of the operator Q will converge to the fixed point (i.e. the
true sequence of embodied productivity). Moreover, from part a), this fixed point is
unique. The following three results follow from the proposition.

Corollary 1: (Identification) If the third equality in condition 3 holds, the series of
embodied productivity can be identified following the algorithm described by proposition
1.

This is possible because all the variables needed to build the mapping Q are observable,
and in particular, Q is independent of the sequence of disembodied productivity ({Zit }) .

Corollary 2: (Neutrality to Pit ) If nominal output in sector i (i.e. Pit Yit ) is properly
measured and the second and third equalities in condition 3 hold, the series of embodied
productivity identified using the algorithm described in proposition 1 are neutral to any
mismeasurement of the price deflator at sector i.

This result follows from the fact that the operator Q is built only using nominal vari-
ables. The economic intuition is quite transparent from equation (8). The Cobb-Douglas


                                                         14
production function implies that the marginal product of capital is linear in value added;
perfect competition, implies that firms take as given the output price in the sector. As a
results of these two assumptions, the revenue marginal product of capital is proportional
to the nominal output in the sector. Therefore, the series of embodied productiv-
ity recovered from the first order conditions are neutral to any mismeasurement of the
output price at the sector (i.e. Pit ) as long as the nominal value added is properly
measured.14

Corollary 3: All the mismeasurement of output shows up in the disembodied component.

Proof: From the production function (1), we can isolate Zit to identify the series of
disembodied productivity.
                                          Yit
                                Zit = αi 1−αi                                    (10)
                                      Jit Lit
Since the sequence of embodied productivity is neutral to the mismeasurement of the
output deflators, so is the series for Jelly capital. Therefore the mismeasurement of real
output aﬀects one to one the estimate of disembodied productivity. 2

The operator Q is built using another price variable, namely, the price of investment
goods (PitI ). It is interesting to consider the eﬀect that the mismeasurement of this price
has on the identified series of embodied and disembodied productivity. Proposition 2
gives a suﬃcient condition for this form of mismeasurement to show up only in the
recovered series of embodied productivity.

Proposition 2: (Neutrality of Jelly capital to mismeasurement of investment)
If sectorial nominal investment is properly measured and Condition 3 holds, the mismea-
surement of the investment deflator is transmitted one-to-one into the recovered series of
embodied productivity {Ait+1 }. Furthermore, the Jelly capital that results from plugging
the recovered series for {Ait+1 } into equation (2) is neutral to the mismeasurement of
the price of investment.

Proof: Suppose that the nominal investment level is properly measured but that the
price of investment reported by the BEA is P̃itI = ζPitI , where PitI is the true price level
of investment. Then, the BEA level of investment is mismeasured by a factor 1/ζ (i.e.
  14
    Perfect Competition is not a critical condition for the renevue marginal product of capital to be
linear in nominal output. That still holds for a monopolistic producer, for example, if the demand she
faces is isoelastic. In that case the revenue marginal product is augmented by a constant markup.


                                                 15
I˜it+1 = Iit+1
           ζ
               ). To show the result, I construct a series of Ait that satisfies the equilibrium
conditions such that the stock of jelly capital is neutral to mismeasurement. That is
suﬃcient to prove the proposition because, from proposition 1, the sequence of Ait that
solves the system is unique.

Ceteris paribus, equation (8) describes a linear relationship between PitI and Ait+1 . This
means that if the other variables that aﬀect the firm’s investment behavior are not
altered, the recovered level of embodied productivity Ãit+1 is mismeasured by the same
factor (i.e. Ãit+1 = ζAit+1 ). Indeed, these other variables are not aﬀected. First, since
the eﬃciency of investment is not aﬀected by mismeasurement the capital stock is neutral
to mismeasurement. To check this just note that the measured stock of capital is equal
to Jit+1 = Jit (1 − δi ) + Ãit+1 I˜it+1 = Jit (1 − δi ) + ζAit+1 Iit+1
                                                                    ζ
                                                                        = Jit (1 − δi ) + Ait+1 Iit+1 .
Second, From Condition 3, the expectational term in the RHS of (9) is unaﬀected by
the mismeasurement of PtI . 2

Corollary 4, concludes the analysis of the consequences of price mismeasurement on the
estimates of embodied and disembodied productivity.

Corollary 4: The recovered sequence of disembodied is neutral to the mismeasurement
of investment.

These propositions are useful to investigate the pervasiveness of output mismeasurement.
We know from Griliches [1994] and many other sources that there are sectors where
output growth is harder to measure and others where it is relatively easy. Interestingly,
with the possible exception of finance, the level of nominal value added in all of these
sectors is probably quite accurate. It follows from corollary 3 that, if output price
mismeasurement is a key determinant of the productivity growth diﬀerentials across
sectors, we should observe a lower growth rate of the disembodied component in the
hard- than in the easy-to-measure sectors. Further, we know from corollary 4 that
output price mismeasurement is the only relevant form of mismeasurement for the cross-
sectional variation in the rate of disembodied productivity growth.

This same line of reasoning may be applied to examine the hypothesis that a worsening
of the mismeasurement problems is the cause of the observed productivity slowdown. It
also follows from Corollaries 3 and 4 that if mismeasurement problems of the hard-to-
measure sectors have become worse in the last thirty years, we should observe, ceteris


                                                  16
paribus, a larger decline in the growth rate of disembodied productivity in those sectors
that suﬀer more severe mismeasurement problems.

The next section contains the decomposition of productivity for several US sectors and
the tests for the role of output price mismeasurement in the cross-sectional patterns of
productivity.



4     Empirical implementation

In the development of the identification strategy and the neutrality propositions, I have
assumed that we know the level of initial jelly capital (i.e. Ji0 ). Obviously, we only know
the real capital stock estimated by the BEA which may not be perfectly quality-adjusted.
Specifically, Ji0 = Āi0 Ki0 , where Āi0 is the unmeasured quality of the initial capital stock.
It is easy to verify from equation (9) that the growth rate of Ait is independent of Ji0 .
To show this property of the operator Q, note that if we increase Ji0 and each element
in the sequence {xt } by a factor of λ, [Q(x)] (.) also increases by λ. This implies that
we can identify up to a scale factor the sequence of embodied productivity setting Āi0
equal to an arbitrary value (say 1).

However, for any given sequence of embodied productivity and investment levels, the
mismeasurement of the initial average level of embodied productivity (Āi0 ) biases the
average growth rate of jelly capital and of disembodied productivity. Therefore, we
must find a way to pin down the value of Āi0 . This is not possible with the current
system because we only have T equations to determine T + 1 unknowns. The additional
restriction comes from Nelson [1964]’s approximation of the quality of capital. Nelson
shows that the quality adjusted stock of capital can be approximated quite accurately
by the following expression:


                                   Jit ' (1 + γAi )(t−Git ) Kit ,

where γAi is the average growth rate of the quality of capital and Git denotes the average
age of capital at time t. This approximation implies that Āi0 = KJi0i0 ' Ai1 (1+γAi )−Gi0 . In
this way, we can substitute Ji0 by Āi0 Ki0 in the operator Q(.), where Āi0 is approximated
       ³        ´ −GT i0
         AiT +1
by Ai1 A1                .

                                                17
                                                                                       P̂ I
In order to build the operator Q(.), it is necessary to specify a process for Ait+1     it
                                                                                           . I have
tried several alternatives andhthe results
                                     i      are robust. For concreteness, I restrict this
                                  I
                                P̂it
analysis to the case where Et Ait+1 = ci0 + ci1 t + ci2 t2 + ci3 t3 , where ci0 , ci1 , ci2 and ci3
are sector specific parameters.


4.1     Data

The implementation of this algorithm requires data on prices (Pit , PitI ), nominal interest
rates (Rt ), real output (Yit ), investment (Iit ), initial capital stock (Ki0 ) and average
age of capital (Gi0 ), depreciation rates (δi ), capital shares (αi ), labor (Lit ) and taxes
(τ̂τ , τ̂itI , τ̂itv
                 δ
                     ). These data are available from various sources for the 2-digit sectors in
the US starting in 1960. The measure of labor used in the analysis is adjusted for the
quality diﬀerentials of the labor force and comes from the Jorgenson KLEM data set.
Unfortunately, these series only run through 1997 and this is why I restrict the analysis to
the period 1960-1997. The BEA compiles most of the other variables with the exception
of the tax rates and the interest rates. The tax rates are computed from data compiled
by Jorgenson and Stiroh [2000]. For the interest rates, I explore various alternatives
that yield surprisingly similar conclusions. The complete list of rates used includes the
returns on BAA corporate bonds, the expected value weighted stock returns where the
predicted values are obtained by fitting an ARMA (1,1) process to the historical series
since 1960, a weighted average of these two series where the weights are the sector specific
debt-asset ratios,15 and two series of hurdle rates that are 36 and 41 percent higher than
this last series. The data necessary to build the discount rate series come from the
Federal Reserve, Compustat, Summers [1986] and Bernanke and Campbell [1988].


4.2      Cross-sectional decomposition

The first question that we can address with the technology developed so far is whether
output mismeasurement is a key determinant of the variation in productivity growth
observed across the diﬀerent sectors. Corollary 3 implies that an important upward bias
  15
    More exactly, I take the sector specific debt- asset ratios that Bernanke and Campbell [1988]
compute from the Compustat data set and then I rescale that for the aggregate debt asset ratios. For
finance and agriculture they do not report any sector specific ratio and I use the aggregate ratio.



                                                18
in the output deflators of the hard-to-measure sectors shows up as a lower growth rate
of disembodied productivity in these sectors. In the rest of the section, I report the
growth rate of disembodied productivity when these series are identified under various
specifications for the discount rate. For comparison purposes, the first column of table
2 contains the average annual growth rate of TFP for each sector in the sample period.
This column illustrates that total factor productivity has grown more slowly in the hard-
to-measure sectors. Indeed, with the exception of trade, TFP has not grown in the last
40 years in the hard-to-measure sectors.

Column 2 reports the average annual growth rate of the disembodied component when
the interest rate is given by the rates of the BAA corporate bonds. Two facts stand
out from the comparison of columns 1 and 2. First, the gap in the growth rate of
Z between the hard-to-measure and the easy-to-measure sectors is much smaller than
the diﬀerential in the growth rate of TFP. Second, the growth rates of disembodied
productivity identified with the BAA bond rates are much higher than the TFP growth
rates. As illustrated in the first column of table 3, the counterpart of the high growth
rate of Z is that the growth rates of A are negative and large in absolute value. This
implies that the BEA grossly overmeasures the eﬃciency of the new capital used in
production. The magnitude of the implied mismeasurement is just too troubling. Most
likely, these large negative growth rates of A indicate that the discount rates used by the
representative firms are higher than the BAA corporate bond rate. There are several
reasons for these higher discount rates. First, issuing debt is just one of the possible
ways to finance investment. Firms can also issue equity and then the relevant discount
rate considered should be the expected stock returns. Second, many firms -specially
the small ones- may face liquidity constraints that increase their eﬀective discount rate.
Finally, in an uncertain environment with irreversible investment the relevant discount
rate used by the firms is augmented by the value of the option to wait until uncertainty
is resolved. In line with these arguments, Summers [1986] reports that, according to a
survey conducted on 95 of the top 200 corporations in the Fortune 500, firms evaluate
their projects using discount rates that range from 8 to 30 percent with a mean rate
of 17 percent. This is about 30 percent higher than the expected rate of return of the
US stock markets in 1986 and 36 percent higher than the weighted average between the
expected stock returns and the BAA bond rates in 1986.

Columns 3, 4 and 5 of table 2 report the average annual growth rates of Z identified


                                            19
when the relevant discount rates are given by the expected stock returns (column 3),
the average between the bond and expected stock returns weighted by the debt-asset
ratio (column 4) and a hurdle rate that is 36 percent higher than this rate (column 6).
There we can see that, as we increase the discount rates, the diﬀerential in the growth
rate of Z between the hard-to-measure and the easy-to-measure diminishes. Indeed, in
column 6 the average growth rate of Z is higher in the hard-to-measure sector and in
all three columns the growth rate of Z is higher in the hard-to-measure sectors than in
the non-manufacturing-easy-to-measure sectors. The intuition for this finding is quite
simple. As the discount rate rises, investment is more costly and to induce the observed
investment rates the productivity embodied in new capital must also be higher. The
higher is the investment rate, the larger is the revision in the growth rate of A associated
with the new discount rates. In figure 1, we observed that the investment rate in the non-
manufacturing-easy-to-measure sectors has been substantially larger than in the rest of
the economy. Hence, the growth rate of embodied productivity associated with the new
discount rates will be substantially higher in the non-manufacturing-easy-to-measure
sectors and, as anticipated in section 2, this eﬀect is suﬃciently strong to reverse the
cross-sectional pattern for the growth rate of productivity.

Columns 2 to 4 of table 3 report the average growth rate of A associated with the
higher discount rates. Though the magnitude of the implied BEA mismeasurement in
the eﬃciency of new capital declines substantially, an annual 3 percent bias for the
private economy is probably beyond what is reasonable indicating that the model is still
misspecified.

A natural way to correct the misspecification consists on introducing costs of adjustment
to new investment. That is going to make more costly the installation of new capital
and will boost the required increase in the eﬃciency of new capital necessary to account
for the observed investment rates. I have experimented with several specifications for
the adjustment costs and the results are quite robust. The one presented here is based
on Bessen [2002]. He assumes that adjustment costs represent a diversion of output. At
time t
                                     Yt = Yt∗ (1 − ct )
where Y is actual output, Y ∗ is potential output, and c is the percentage rate of ad-
justment costs. The absolute magnitude of the adjustment costs in terms of the sector’s
output is ct Yt∗ . Bessen assumes that ct is equal to γIit /Kit with an estimate for γ of

                                            20
about 0.2. This implies that for each additional unit of investment, output is reduced
about 0.18 units.

The introduction of the adjustment costs aﬀects the operator Q(x) that now is defined
as follows:
                              h                i
                                 I
          [Q(x)] (t + 1) = P̂it + γPit Yit /Kit Rt                                        (11)
          "                                      "                              ##−1
                                                      I
                                Yit+1              P̂it+1 + γPit+1 Yit+1 /Kit+1
            (1 − τ̂t+1 )αi Pit+1 x + (1 − δi )Et                                     , ∀t
                                Jit+1                         xt+2

From this expression it is quite clear that the biases in the output deflators are not
going to aﬀect the identified series of embodied productivity and that corollaries 2 and 3
are still valid. However, the mismeasurement of the investment deflator now aﬀects the
uncovered series of disembodied productivity invalidating proposition 2. This aﬀects the
algorithm because now we must identify simultaneously the series for A and the initial
level of Jelly capital.

Column 6 of table 2 and column 5 in table 3 report the average growth rate of Z and A
once we introduce the adjustment costs with discount rates 36 percent higher than the
weighted average between the BAA rates and the expected stock returns. The ranking
in the growth rates of Z is very robust. The hard-to-measure sectors have experienced a
larger growth rate than the non-manufacturing-easy-to-measure sectors. Basically, with
the exception of manufacturing, agriculture and services, the growth rate of disembodied
productivity in every hard-to-measure-sector is higher than in every easy-to-measure
sector.

The introduction of adjustment costs increases substantially the uncovered growth rates
of embodied productivity. Now, the average growth rate for the private economy is -1.61
percent. This implied bias is half of the bias without adjustment costs. Interestingly,
this magnitude is very sensitive to the particular parameterizations of the adjustment
costs. In columns 7 of table 2 and 6 of table 3, I report the growth rates of Z and A
when the parameter γ in the adjustment cost specification is equal to 0.3 and when the
interest rates are 41 percent higher than the weighted average between the BAA rates
and the expected stock returns. With this new parameterization, the growth rate of
A for the private economy is -0.4 percent and the growth rate of Jelly capital is 3.21
percent, higher than the growth rate of physical capital (3.04 percent).

                                             21
By trying these various specifications for the discount rates and adjustment costs, we
have been able to establish the robustness of the higher growth rate of disembodied pro-
ductivity in the hard-to-measure sectors than in the non-manufacturing easy-to-measure
sectors. This fact is important because corollary 3 showed that the upward bias in the
output deflators reduces one for one the growth rate of the disembodied component.
Since the hard-to-measure sectors are more susceptible to experience such a bias, this
finding implies that factors other than price mismeasurement are more important to
explain the observed variation in productivity growth across sectors.


4.3     Mismeasurement and the productivity slowdown

Now we turn to the time series dimension and analyze whether a worsening of the
mismeasurement problems has caused an artificial productivity slowdown in the BEA
measures. In principle, the worsening of the price mismeasurement could come from
three channels. First, from a change in the composition of output towards the hard-
to-measure sectors. Second, from a general worsening of the ability to measure quality
improvements that aﬀected both easy- and hard-to-measure sectors. Third, from a
worsening of the existing mismeasurement problems in the hard-to-measure sectors.
The first channel has been shut down by Sichel [1997] by showing that the compositional
change in favor of the hard-to-measure sectors can account for a very minor fraction of
the productivity slowdown. Channel number two is also likely to be quite weak. First,
the productivity slowdown has been substantially larger in the hard- than in the easy-to-
measure sectors. Moreover, any attempt to put the hard- and easy-to-measure sectors
in the same bag can be challenged by the fact that in the former there is no sign of an
acceleration in TFP, while in the easy-to-measure sectors the slowdown in the seventies
was followed by an impressive recovery during the eighties and nineties. Second, the
most important improvements in the BEA measures of the output deflators during the
last thirty years have taken place in manufacturing, transportation and communications
(Mohr [1992]). In the first, the BEA has introduced new hedonic price indices for an
important set of goods (computers, semiconductors, motor vehicles, among others).16 In
the last two, the BEA has moved to double deflation methods to compute constant-dollar
GNP at the industry level. Finally, as argued by Baily and Gordon [1988], the outputs
  16
    See Moulton [2001] for a description of the expanding role of hedonic methods in the US oﬃcial
statistics.


                                               22
of the easy-to-measure sector are to a larger extent intermediate goods than those of the
hard-to-measure sectors. In this sense, failing to account for the quality improvement of
a durable good is not going to help us understand the aggregate productivity slowdown.

The only remaining channel for a worsening of the price mismeasurement problems to
explain a large fraction of the slowdown is a within eﬀect in the hard-to-measure sec-
tors. Some authors have noted that indeed, some important quality improvements in
the finance, insurance (Baily and Gordon [1988] and Bresnahan [1986]) and health-care
(Dranove, Shanley and White [1991]) sectors in the last twenty five years have not
been captured by the oﬃcial statistics. From corollary 3, we know that these mismea-
surements of the output deflators pass on completely to the disembodied component.
Hence, if the decline in measured productivity growth is the result of a worsening of
the mismeasurement problems in the hard-to-measure sectors, we should observe that
the disembodied productivity has slowed down more in those sectors than in the sectors
where output growth is easy to measure.

Table 4 tests this prediction by computing the increase in the annual growth rate of
Z from the period 1960-70 to 1970-1997 for various specifications of the discount rates
and adjustment costs described in the previous section. There are two salient facts
from this table. First, in all the sectors, there has been a decline in the growth rate
of disembodied productivity. Second, for all the various specifications, the decline in
disembodied productivity growth has been larger in the easy-to-measure sectors than in
the hard-to-measure sectors. Since an increase in the bias in the output deflator of the
latter sectors should be reflected in a decline in the growth rate of their disembodied
productivity component, table 4 implies that there are other factors substantially more
important than the evolution of the output deflators biases to understand the variation
across sectors in the size of the productivity slowdown. Moreover, since the only poten-
tially important channel for a worsening of the mismeasurement problems to generate
the productivity slowdown is through the decline in disembodied productivity of the
hard-to-measure sectors and this has been smaller than in the easy-to-measure, the role
of mismeasurement in the slowdown must be quite small.




                                           23
4.4    Robustness to more general production functions

The key assumption for the neutrality of the embodied component to the mismeasure-
ment of the output deflator is that the production function for the diﬀerent sectors is
Cobb-Douglas. If this is not a good approximation, the mismeasurement of the output
prices is going to aﬀect both the embodied and the disembodied components invalidating
the neutrality results that supported the mismeasurement tests. Moreover, the operator
Q will be misspecified.

Two questions arise at this point. First, is the Cobb-Douglas assumption a sensible
one? Second, is it possible to extend the mismeasurement tests to the case where the
production function at the sector level is not Cobb-Douglas?

There is a substantial body of literature that tries to estimate production functions.
Specifically, the emphasis has been placed on the degree of returns to scale and on
the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor. The null hypothesis in all these
analysis is the Cobb-Douglas which displays constant returns to scale and a unit elasticity
of substitution.

Basu [1997] and Burnside, Eichembaum and Rebelo [1995] among others have shown
that the production function for basically every two digit sector (Basu) and for the non-
farm private economy (Burnside, Eichembaum and Rebelo) displays constant returns to
scale once we take into account the cyclical variation in the intensity of utilization of
capital and labor.

With respect to the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor, Berndt [1976]
estimates this parameter assuming a constant elasticity of substitution (CES) production
function for the time series of the manufacturing sector. He uses six diﬀerent economet-
ric specifications that arise from the first order conditions of the firm and finds that the
elasticity of substitution is not statistically diﬀerent from 1. In a recent paper, Antràs
[2001] extends Berndt’s analysis to the US private economy and confirms his results.
Then, Antràs generalizes the production function by allowing diﬀerent forms of techno-
logical progress. He estimates the equation in levels using OLS, GLS and instrumental
variables. He also estimates the model in first diﬀerences using OLS and two stage least
squares. This amounts to (5x6) thirty estimates of the elasticity of substitution between
capital and labor. Out of these thirty, in fifteen cases he cannot reject the null that the

                                            24
elasticity of substitution is statistically diﬀerent from 1 at the five percent significance
level. In two cases he can reject with a point estimate higher than 1, and in thirteen
cases he rejects with a point estimate smaller than one. The odds of rejecting seem more
favorable to the Cobb-Douglas case when we restrict attention to the instrumented re-
gressions. There, out of twelve cases, only in three he can reject the null of unit elasticity,
always with point estimates lower than 1. This indicates that the Cobb-Douglas is a
more than reasonable assumption and that the clear alternative hypothesis is that the
elasticity of substitution between capital and labor is less than unity.

Now, suppose that we adopt the alternative assumption that Jelly capital and labor are
complements. Can we infer anything about the role of mismeasurement in productivity
growth from the growth rate of the disembodied component?

The answer to this question depends on whether the eﬀect of the deflator bias on the
growth rate of Z becomes larger when we increase the complementarity between J and
L. If this is the case, a higher growth rate of disembodied productivity in the hard-to-
measure sectors implies, a fortiori, that mismeasurement is not an important determinant
of the variation in productivity growth across sectors.

To investigate this avenue, consider the following CES production function:
                                 h                          i1/ψ
                                     ψ                    ψ
                           Yit = αJit + (1 − α) (Zit Lit )
where the elasticity of substitution between J and L is equal to ψ/ (1 − ψ).

The new operator Q is defined as:
                 [Q(x)] (t + 1) = P̂itI Rt                                                (12)
                 "                     µ       ¶1−ψ               "        ##−1
                                                                       I
                                         Yit+1                      P̂it+1
                  (1 − τ̂t+1 )αi Pit+1     x
                                                    + (1 − δi )Et               , ∀t
                                         Jit+1                      xt+2

Once the sequence of Ait is recovered from the data, Zit is given by the following
expression:
                                     "              # ψ1
                                       Yitψ − αJitψ
                               Zit =                                          (13)
                                       (1 − α) Lψit

To explore the interaction between the elasticity of substitution and the bias in the
output deflator, I create artificial series of real output that result from introducing a

                                              25
bias in the output deflator keeping unchanged nominal output. Using these artificial
series, I identify the associated series of disembodied productivity for several degrees of
mismeasurement and elasticities of substitution. Table 5 contains the results from this
exercise for the private non-residential sector when the interest rates are equal to the
average of the expected stock returns and the BAA corporate bond rates weighted by
the debt-asset ratio. The conclusions are robust to all the sectors and specifications for
the interest rates and adjustment costs. In the first row, I report the average annual
growth rate of Z when capital and labor are unit elastic for several biases in the output
deflator that range from none (column 1) to an annual upward bias of 1.5 percent. As
indicated by corollary 3, there is a one to one eﬀect of the bias on the growth rate of
Z. The question that we are trying to answer is whether this impact on the growth
rate of Z is larger or smaller as we reduce the elasticity of substitution between capital
and labor. In rows 2 to 7, I report the growth rate of Z when capital and labor have
a higher degree of complementarity. It is quite clear that the lower is the elasticity of
substitution between J and L, the higher is the eﬀect of mismeasurement on the growth
rate of the recovered Z. This can be observed in panel B of table 5 where I subtract the
growth rates of Z for the artificial biases from the “unbiased” series.

This exercise implies that, if the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor is
less than 1 and the hard-to-measure sectors’ output deflator are upwardly biased, we
should observe, ceteris paribus, an even larger diﬀerential in the growth rate of Z in
favor of the easy-to-measure sectors.

This prediction of the mismeasurement hypothesis is tested in table 6 that contains the
annual growth rate of Z for the various sectors and elasticities of substitution. Here, for
brevity, I only report the results for the specification where the interest rates are given
by the average of the expected stock returns and the BAA corporate bond rates weighted
by the debt-asset ratio. By comparing column 1 with the other columns we can observe
that the gap in the growth rate of disembodied productivity increases when we reduce
the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor.17 This may seem shocking since
  17
    In finance, the sequence of Z cannot be recovered when the elasticity of substitution between J
and L is 0.9 or lower because the numerator in the brackets of expression (13) becomes negative. The
range of feasible values of ψ increases when we increase the interest rate. In terms of the cross-sectional
comparison of the growth rate of disembodied productivity, the exclusion of finance does not aﬀect
the fact that as we reduce the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor, the diﬀerence in
favor of the hard-to-measure sectors increases. One could argue that probably the elasticity diﬀers
across sectors in such a way that this inequality can be reversed. This however seems quite unlikely


                                                    26
I have just concluded that by reducing the elasticity we accentuate the eﬀect of the
bias on the disembodied component. The reconciliation of these two facts comes from a
second eﬀect that the elasticity of substitution has on the operator Q, namely that the
complementarity between J and L introduces a higher curvature in the marginal product
of capital. In sectors that invest a lot, A must grow very much to induce the observed
investment rates. As a result, the lower ψ also amplifies the diﬀerences in the growth
rate of embodied productivity. This second eﬀect dominates the first one enhancing the
diﬀerential in the growth rate of Z in favor of the hard-to-measure sectors.

The same exercise can be conducted to evaluate whether the conclusion on the role of
mismeasurement on the productivity slowdown can be extended to production functions
where capital and labor are complements. As in the cross section, it is the case that,
when reducing the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor, the slowdown in
disembodied productivity is even higher in the easy-to-measure sectors relative to the
hard-to-measure sectors. Hence, the conclusions of section 4.2 are also robust to these
more general production functions.



5     Conclusions

This paper has tried to assess the importance of mismeasurement for productivity
growth. If firms observe accurately the relevant prices, we can invert the firm’s in-
vestment decision to identify the diﬀerent components of productivity growth. The
approach proposed in this paper consists in inspecting how mismeasurement aﬀects the
embodied and disembodied components and comparing the implications of the mismea-
surement hypothesis with the cross-section and time series patterns of these components
across the 2-digit sectors. I have shown that both when the production function is Cobb-
Douglas and CES with inelastic substitution between capital and labor, an upward bias
in the output deflator should reduce the growth rate of disembodied productivity. The
decomposition of productivity growth into the embodied and the disembodied compo-
nents has illustrated that both the growth rate and the increase since 1970 in the growth
because, for any vector of elasticities of substitution, the growth rate of disembodied productivity in
the non-manufacturing easy-to-measure sectors is lower than in the hard-to-measure sectors. This
statement holds also for all the easy-to-measure sectors (i.e. including manufacturing) if the elasticity
of substitution is less than unity.



                                                   27
rate of disembodied productivity have been higher in the sectors that are susceptible of
suﬀering biases in the output deflator. These findings indicate that output price mis-
measurement is not a key element in the observed variation across sectors or in the time
series evolution of productivity growth. Future research should identify the real factors
that determine the variation across sectors in the productivity patterns. The analysis
conducted in this paper indicates that there is an important payoﬀ from building and
testing new theories on the determinants of disembodied productivity growth.




                                           28
A      Appendix

In this appendix I prove that under conditions 1 and 2, the operator Q defined in
equation (9) is a contraction mapping.
                                                       ·                t+1
                                                                              ¸
                                                           I R I¯
                                                         P̂it t it (1−δi    )
                    ¯
Condition 1: Let Iit ≡ sup0≤τ ≤t Iiτ . Then, supt∈[0,∞) δi αi (1−τ̂t )Pit Yit ≤ 1.

                       t t ( it+1 /(xt+2 (xt+2 +a)))
                    I R E P̂ I
                  P̂it
Condition 2:                 · I
                               P̂
                                       ¸ · I
                                            P̂
                                                 ¸     < 1, ∀t, i, a > 0, Ωt , where Ωt is the informa-
                    (1−δi )Et x it+1+a
                                        Et xit+1
                               t+2          t+2
tion set as of time t.

Lemma 1: If conditions 1 and 2 hold, Q : S → S is a contraction mapping.

Proof: Blackwell’s Theorem gives two conditions that are suﬃcient for Q to be a
contraction, these are monotonicity and discounting (Stokey, Lucas and Prescott [1989],
p. 54). Formally, monotonicity implies that ∀x, y ∈ S, and such that xt ≤ yt ∀t,
Q(xt ) ≤ Q(yt ). Discounting is satisfied if ∀x ∈ S, a > 0, and t, ∃ β ∈ (0, 1) such that

                                      Q(xt + a) ≤ Q(xt ) + βa.

It’s very straightforward to verify that Q is monotonically increasing in x, therefore it
satisfies the monotonicity condition.

Discounting holds iﬀ ∀x ∈ S, a > 0, and t, ∃ β ∈ (0, 1) such that:

                                       Q(xt + a) − Q(xt )
                                                          ≤ β.                                    (14)
                                               a

Substituting (9) into (14), we obtain that
                              ·                             µ                 ¶
Q(xt + a) − Q(xt )   P̂itI Rt                                   1        1
                   =           (1 − τ̂τ +1 ) αi Pit+1 Yit+1    x
                                                                    − x+a
        a                a                                    Jit+1   Jit+1
                                  " Ã             !        Ã          !##
                                              I                   I
                                           P̂it+1              P̂it+1
                     + (1 − δi ) Et                 − Et
                                            xt+2             xt+2 + a
                     "                                                  "        # "            #
                       [(1 − τ̂τ +1 ) αi Pit+1 Yit+1 ]2                   P̂ I
                                                                                        P̂ I

                                  x      x+a            + (1 − δi )2 Et     it+1
                                                                                  Et      it+1
                                 Jit+1 Jit+1                               xt+2      (xt+2 + a)
                            (1 − δi ) (1 − τ̂τ +1 ) αi Pit+1 Yit+1

                                                       29
                              "                "          #        "            ###−1
                                                      I                    I
                                   1               P̂it+1      1        P̂it+1
                                   x+a    Et                + x Et
                                  Jit+1            xt+2      Jit+1   (xt+2 + a)


It is easy to check that the right hand side of this equation can be expressed as:
                                                           ³                          ´
                         £                ¤          I          I
                            x+a
            1  P̂itI Rt Jit+1         x
                                  − Jit+1        aP̂it Rt Et P̂it+1 / (xt+2 (xt+2 + a)) 
              ς1                           + ς2                  h I i h I i 
            a        αi (1 − τ̂t )Pit Yit           (1 − δ ) E
                                                                    P̂it+1      P̂
                                                                            E it+1
                                                                i   t   xt+2 +a   t   xt+2


where ς1 and ς2 > 0 and ς1 +ς2 < 1.
                                               P
                x+a
Now note that Jit+1   = (1 − δi )t+1 K0 + ts=0 Is (1 − δi )t−s (xs+1 + a) and that Jit+1                  x
                                                                                                                =
         t+1
              P    t             t−s
(1 − δi ) K0 + s=0 Is (1 − δi ) xs+1 , therefore
                                                                               ³                                 ´
                              I
                                  Pt                    t−s        P̂ I
                                                                        R  E     P̂ I
                                                                                        / (x      (x      +   a))
Q(xt + a) − Q(xt )        P̂ Rt s=0 Is (1 − δi )                     it  t   t     it+1       t+2   t+2
                     = ς1 it                                 + ς2                     h I i h I i
          a                     αi (1 − τ̂t )Pit Yit                   (1 − δi ) Et xt+2
                                                                                         P̂it+1         P̂
                                                                                                  Et xit+1
                                                                                             +a            t+2
                                                                                            ³                             ´
                                  P   t                                            I            I
                                                                                P̂it Rt Et P̂it+1 / (xt+2 (xt+2 + a))
                          P̂ I Rt s=0 (1 − δi )t−s sup0≤v≤t Iv
                     ≤ ς1 it                                              + ς2                     h I i h I i
                                        αi (1 − τ̂t )Pit Yit                        (1 − δi ) Et xt+2
                                                                                                     P̂it+1        P̂
                                                                                                               Et xit+1
                                                                                                          +a          t+2
                                Ã            P                                       !
                                  P̂iτI Rτ τs=0 (1 − δi )τ −s sup0≤v≤τ Iv
                     ≤ ς1 sup                                                          +
                             τ                 αi (1 − τ̂τ )Piτ Yiτ
                                                ³                                    ´
                                        I             I
                                  P̂iτ Rτ Eτ P̂iτ +1 / (xτ +2 (xτ +2 + a)) 
                        ς2 sup                         h I i h I i 
                           τ,a>0                           P̂iτ +1         P̂ +1
                                          (1 − δi ) Eτ xτ +2    +a
                                                                     Et xiττ +2


But conditions 1 and 2 imply that the sup terms are strictly lower than 1, therefore
∃β < 1 such that, Q(xt +a)−Q(x
                         a
                              t)
                                 < β, ∀t, a > 0 and x ∈ S. 2




                                                         30
References
 [1] Antràs, P. [2001], “Is the U.S. Aggregate Production Function Cobb-Douglas?
     New Estimates of the Elasticity of Substitution” mimeo MIT

 [2] Baily, M. and R. Gordon [1988], “The Productivity Slowdown, Measurement
     Issues, and the Explosion of Computer Power”,Brookings Papers on Economic Ac-
     tivity, XIX(II), 347-420.

 [3] Berndt, E. [1973], “Reconciling Alternative Estimates of the Elasticity of Sub-
     stitution” Review of Economics and Statistics, 58 No. 1, 59-68.

 [4] Bessen, J. [2002], “Technology Adoption Costs and Productivity Growth: The
     Transition to Information Technology” Review of Economic Dynamics Vol. 5, No
     2, pp 443-469.

 [5] Bresnahan, T. [1986], “Measuring the Spillovers from Technical Advance: Main-
     frame Computers in Financial Services”, The American economic Review, Vol. 76,
     4 (September), 742-755.

 [6] Costa, D. [2001], “Estimating Real Income in the United States from 1888 to
     1994: Correcting CPI Bias Using Engel Curves” Journal of political economy Vol.
     109, No. 6, pp. 1288-1310.

 [7] Griliches, Z. [1992], “Introduction”, in Z. Griliches, ed., Output Measurement
     in the Service Sectors, NBER Studies on Income and Wealth, Vol. 56. Chicago,
     University of Chicago Press, pp. 1-22.

 [8] Griliches, Z. [1994], “Productivity, R&D and the Data Constraint” American
     Economic Review Vol. 84, No. 1, pp. 1-23.

 [9] Dranove, Shanley, and White [1991], “Does the Consumer Price Index Over-
     state Hospital Price Inflation?” Medical Care, XXIX, August, 690-96.

[10] Hamilton, B. [2001], “Using Engel’s Law to estimate CPI Bias” American Eco-
     nomic Review, Vol. 91, pp. 619-30.

[11] Hobijn, B. [1999], “Identifying Sources of Growth” mimeo NYU.



                                        31
[12] Hulten, C. [2002], “Price Hedonics: A Critical Review” mimeo, University of
     Maryland.

[13] Mohr, M. [1992], “Recent and Planned Improvements in the Measurement and
     Deflation of Services Outputs and Inputs in BEA’s Gross Product Originating Es-
     timates”, in Z. Griliches, ed., Output Measurement in the Service Sectors, NBER
     Studies on Income and Wealth, Vol. 56. Chicago, University of Chicago Press,
     pp.25-68.

[14] Moulton, B. [2001], “The Expanding Role of Hedonic Methods in the Oﬃcial
     Statistics of the United States” BEA, mimeo.

[15] Nelson, R. [1964], “Aggregate Production Functions and Medium-Range Growth
     Projections” American Economic Review Vol. 54, 5 (September), p. 575-606.

[16] Sichel [1997], “The Productivity Slowdown: Is a Growing Unmeasurable Sector
     the Culprit?” Review of Economics and Statistics, 79(3), pages 367-70.

[17] Stokey, N. and R. Lucas with E. Prescott [1989], Recursive Methods in Eco-
     nomic Dynamics Harvard University Press, Cambridge.

[18] Solow, R. [1959], “Investment and Technical Change” in Mathematical Methods
     in the Social Sciences, Stanford.

[19] Triplett, J.[1997], “Measuring Consumption: The Post-1973 Slowdown and the
     Research Issues” Federal Reserve Bank of Saint Louis Review. 79, pp. 9-42.”




                                        32
       Table 1. Productivity growth and increase in productivity growth from the periods 1960-70 to 1970-97

                                Variable                         TFP            ∆TFP
               Private Non-Residential                           1.15           -1.21
                 Easy-to-Measure                                 2.01           -0.85
                       Utilities                                 0.58           -4.21
                       Agriculture                                2.8            0.76
                       Mining                                   -0.44           -3.15
                       Communications                            2.24           -1.48
                       Transportation                            1.78           -0.33
                    Non-manuf-
                    Easy-to-measure                              1.49           -1.66
                    Manufacturing                                2.34           -0.34
                 Hard-to-Measure                                 0.17           -1.35
                       Construction                             -0.26            -0.4
                       Wholesale Trade                            2.1           -0.66
                       Retail Trade                              0.96           -1.41
                       Finance                                  -0.73           -1.72
                       Services                                 -0.22           -1.57

Column 1: Average annual percentage growth rate of total factor productivity in each sector. Column 2: Increase in the
average annual percentage growth rate of total factor productivity from the period 1960-70 to 1970-97. Source: BEA and
author’s calculations.
             Table 2: Percentage annual growth rate of Z between 1960 and 1997.

               Variable                 TFP         Z           Z              Z           Z           Z           Z

            Interest rates                        BAA    Expected    Weighted           Hurdle      Hurdle      High
                                                 bonds stock returns average             rate        rate     Hurdle rate
          Adjustment costs                         -         -          -                  -         low         High
   Private Non-Residential               1.15     3.35        2.74           2.86        2.04         1.61       1.12
     Easy-to-Measure                     2.01     3.60        2.71           2.90        1.69        1.26        0.67
           Utilities                     0.58      2.8        1.06            1.6        -0.54       -0.41       -0.89
           Agriculture                    2.8     4.55        3.31           3.54         1.91        1.65       1.03
           Mining                       -0.44     2.56        0.68           1.01        -1.82        -1.6        -2.3
           Communications                2.24       3         1.94           2.26        0.78        0.77        0.37
           Transportation                1.78     3.81        2.03           2.52         0.08       -0.14       -0.98
        Non-manuf-
        Easy-to-measure                  1.49     3.33        1.83           2.21         0.17       0.14        -0.45
        Manufacturing                    2.34     3.78        3.26           3.34         2.65       1.97         1.38
     Hard-to-Measure                     0.17     2.99        2.50           2.60         1.97       1.20         0.52
           Construction                 -0.26     3.11        2.81           2.87         2.51       1.34         0.45
           Wholesale Trade                2.1     4.44        4.06           4.14         3.52       1.88         0.62
           Retail Trade                  0.96     2.16        1.79           1.85         1.34       0.62         0.03
           Finance                      -0.73     3.89        3.17           3.31         2.53       2.34         1.99
           Services                     -0.22     1.67        1.25           1.33          0.7       -0.2        -0.96

Average growth rate of TFP (first column) and disembodied productivity (second to seventh columns) during the period
1960-97 for the different sectors in the private non-residential economy. The growth rate of disembodied productivity is
computed as the residual in labor productivity after taking into account the contribution of Jelly capital (equation (11)).
To identify embodied productivity, I use the following parameterizations for the discount rate: the rate of return on BAA
bonds (column 2), the expected stock returns (column 3), the average between the returns to the BAA corporate bonds
and the expected stock returns weighted by the sector specific debt-asset ratio (column 4), a hurdle rate that is 36 percent
higher than the rate used in column 4 (columns 5 and 6), and a hurdle rate that is 41 percent higher than the rate used in
column 4 (column 7). In columns 6 and 7, I introduce adjustment costs as in Bessen [2002] with a coefficient γ of 0.2 in
column 6 and 0.3 in column 7.
                Table 3: Percentage annual growth rate of A between 1960 and 1997.

                  Variable                A           A              A            A          A            A

               Interest rates            BAA    Expected    Weighted           Hurdle     Hurdle      High
                                        bonds stock returns average             rate       rate     Hurdle rate
             Adjustment costs             -         -          -                  -        low         High
      Private Non-Residential           -6.09        -4.5          -4.77        -3.35      -1.61        -0.4
        Easy-to-Measure                 -4.72       -1.08          -2.85        -0.71       1.45        3.04
              Utilities                  -4.3       -1.08          -1.91         0.84       1.44        2.21
              Agriculture                -3.3       -1.15          -1.51         0.58       1.68         2.7
              Mining                    -4.48       -1.15          -1.64         1.41       2.18        3.12
              Communications            -2.11        0.86           0.12         2.83       3.72        4.67
              Transportation            -3.81       -0.81          -1.56         1.38       2.93        4.32
           Non-manuf-
           Easy-to-measure               -0.70      -0.11          -0.24        0.30        0.50        0.70
           Manufacturing                 -5.51      -3.65           -3.9        -2.11        0.8         2.75
        Hard-to-Measure                  -8.29      -6.88          -7.11        -5.82      -1.80        1.70
              Construction              -14.22      -13.2         -13.38        -12.5      -7.02        -3.77
              Wholesale Trade            -8.99      -7.56          -7.83        -6.25       1.22         6.06
              Retail Trade               -6.52      -4.52           -4.8        -2.84       1.54        -4.31
              Finance                    -6.75      -5.84          -5.99        -5.36      -4.79         3.84
              Services                   -8.97      -7.24          -7.54        -5.93      -0.36         3.06
Average growth rate of embodied productivity during the period 1960-97 for the different sectors in the private non-
residential economy. To identify embodied productivity, I use the following parameterizations for the discount rate: the
rate of return on BAA bonds (column 1), the expected stock returns (column 2), the average between the returns to the
BAA corporate bonds and the expected stock returns weighted by the sector specific debt-asset ratio (column 3), a hurdle
rate that is 36 percent higher than the rate used in column 3 (columns 4 and 5), and a hurdle rate that is 41 percent higher
than the rate used in column 3 (column 6). In columns 5 and 6, I introduce adjustment costs as in Bessen [2002] with a
coefficient γ of 0.2 in column 5 and 0.3 in column 6.
      Table 4: Increase in the annual growth rate between the periods 1960-70 and 1970-97.

                  Variable                 TFP        Z           Z              Z            Z           Z

               Interest rates                        BAA    Expected    Weighted           Hurdle      High
                                                    bonds stock returns average             rate     Hurdle rate
             Adjustment costs                         -         -          -                low         High
      Private Non-Residential             -1.21     -1.08       -1.11          -1.09       -1.63         -1.8
        Easy-to-Measure                   -0.85     -1.33       -1.37          -1.35       -1.85        -1.94
              Utilities                   -4.21     -4.69       -4.98          -4.88       -5.96        -6.22
              Agriculture                  0.76     -0.54       -0.28          -0.31       -0.64        -0.68
              Mining                      -3.15     -4.93       -5.64          -5.47       -7.36        -7.69
              Communications              -1.48     -1.47       -1.84          -1.76       -2.23        -2.25
              Transportation              -0.33     -1.75       -1.41          -1.54       -2.13        -2.25
           Non-manuf-
           Easy-to-measure                -1.66     -2.56       -2.72          -2.68       -3.50        -3.64
           Manufacturing                  -0.34     -0.56       -0.51          -0.51       -0.81        -0.87
        Hard-to-Measure                   -1.35     -1.21       -1.03          -1.06       -1.36        -1.45
              Construction                 -0.4     -0.91       -0.74          -0.77       -0.38        -0.08
              Wholesale Trade             -0.66     -0.59       -0.62          -0.62       -1.59         -2.1
              Retail Trade                -1.41     -1.48       -1.48          -1.47       -1.83        -1.93
              Finance                     -1.72     -1.44       -0.99          -1.05       -1.32        -1.44
              Services                    -1.57     -1.17       -1.09           -1.1       -1.28        -1.24

Increase in the annual growth rate of TFP (column 1) and Z (columns 2 to 6) between the periods 1960-70 and 1970-97
for the different sectors in the private non-residential sector. The growth rate of disembodied productivity is computed as
the residual in labor productivity after taking into account the contribution of Jelly capital (equation (11)). To identify
embodied productivity, I use the following parameterizations on the discount rate: the rate of return on BAA bonds
(column 2), the expected stock returns (column 3), the average between the returns to the BAA corporate bonds and the
expected stock returns weighted by the sector specific debt-asset ratio (column 4), a hurdle rate that is 36 percent higher
than the rate used in column 4 (columns 5), and a hurdle rate that is 41 percent higher than the rate used in column 4
(column 6). In columns 5 and 6, I introduce adjustment costs as in Bessen [2002] with a coefficient γ of 0.2 in column 5
and 0.3 in column 6.
Table 5: Disembodied productivity growth with complementarity and mismeasurement.

 Panel A.                                                              Panel B.

  Bias          0       0.5        1       1.5                           Bias         0.5       1       1.5
Elasticity                                                            Elasticity
    1         2.86     2.36      1.86     1.36                            1            0.5      0.5      0.5
  0.95        3.12     2.58      2.06     1.53                          0.95          0.54     0.52     0.53
   0.9        3.45     2.85      2.27      1.7                           0.9           0.6     0.58     0.57
  0.85        3.89      3.2      2.54      1.9                          0.85          0.69     0.66     0.64
   0.8        4.54     3.69      2.89     2.15                           0.8          0.85      0.8     0.74
  0.75        5.63     4.43       3.4      2.5                          0.75           1.2     1.03      0.9
   0.7        8.44     5.87      4.24       3                            0.7          2.57     1.63     1.24

 Panel A: Average growth rate of disembodied productivity in the private non-residential sector for
 several values of the elasticity of substitution between J and L, and several artificial biases in the annual
 growth rate of the output deflator - keeping constant the level of nominal output. Panel B: decline in the
 average growth rate of disembodied productivity due to the “artificial” upward bias in the output deflator.
 In both panels, the identification of embodied productivity is conducted by calibrating the interest rates to
 the average between the returns to the BAA corporate bonds and the expected stock returns weighted by
 the debt-asset ratio.
        Table 6: Disembodied productivity growth across sectors with complementarities.

                        Elasticity of substitution          1          0.95        0.9
                        Private Non-Residential            2.86        2.58       2.85
                          Easy-to-Measure                  2.90        2.42       2.45
                                Utilities                  1.60        0.73        0.41
                                Agriculture                3.54        2.85        2.54
                                Mining                     1.01        0.20       -0.11
                                Communications             2.26        1.39        0.95
                                Transportation             2.52        1.88        1.65
                             Non-manuf-
                             Easy-to-measure               2.21        1.43       1.09
                             Manufacturing                 3.34        3.05       3.30
                          Hard-to-Measure                  2.60        3.28       3.51
                                Construction               2.87        3.89       7.33
                                Wholesale Trade            4.14        4.55       6.16
                                Retail Trade               1.85        1.58       1.86
                                Finance                    3.31        5.20         .
                                Services                   1.33        1.25       1.89

Percentage annual growth rate of disembodied productivity for the period 1960-97 for the different sectors. In order to
identify embodied productivity, I impose a CES production function with several elasticities of substitution between J
and L, no adjustment costs, and a discount rate equal to the average between the returns to the BAA corporate bonds and
the expected stock returns weighted by the sector specific debt-asset ratio.
