NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DIRECT INVESTMENT, RISING REAL WAGES
AND THE ABSORPTION OF EXCESS LABOR IN THE PERIPHERY
Michael P. Dooley
David Folkerts-Landau
Peter Garber
Working Paper 10626
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10626
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2004

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2004 by Michael P. Dooley, David Folkerts-Landau, and Peter Garber. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Direct Investment, Rising Real Wages and the Absorption of Excess Labor in the Periphery
Michael P. Dooley, David Folkerts-Landau, and Peter Garber
NBER Working Paper No. 10626
July 2004
JEL No. F02, F32, F33
ABSTRACT
This paper sets out the political economy behind Asian governments' participation in a revived
Bretton Woods System. The overriding problem for these governments is to rapidly integrate a large
pool of underemployed labor into the industrial sector. The principal constraints are inefficient
domestic resource and capital markets, and resistance to import penetration by labor in industrial
countries. The system has evolved to overcome these constraints through export led growth and
growth of foreign direct investment. Periphery governments' objectives for the scale and
composition of gross trade in goods and financial assets may dominate more conventional concerns
about international capital flows.
Michael P. Dooley
Department of Economics
University of California, Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
and NBER
mpd@ucsc.edu
David Folkerts-Landau
1331 21 Street, NW
Washington, DC 20036
Peter Garber
7 Seaview Drive
Barrington, RI
and NBER
vic2eroy@aol.com

Could the whole (development) problem be solved
simply by increasing the growth rate of manufactured
exports to MDCs (more developed countries), in
substitution for primary products? I shall assume this
cannot be done…..Also I think it cannot be done. W.
Arthur Lewis, Nobel Lecture, 1979.

Lewis’ pessimistic outlook for industrial development in what we now call emerging
markets was based on the view that developed countries allowed access to their markets
only during brief periods of prosperity since “they then have many growing industries
that can take the people displaced by imports.” Otherwise, they act to block access to
manufactured imports from cheap labor countries to protect domestic workers. In this
paper, we will argue that some emerging markets in Asia have found, perhaps by
accident, a way around this fundamental obstacle to industrial and economic
development. The solution has created the basic features of the current international
monetary system. Along the way to making this argument, we will characterize the
exchange rate and other policies designed to eliminate the vast underemployment in Asia
as a solution to an exhaustible resource problem. Notably, the welcoming of FDI is a
solution to Lewis’s conundrum in industrial development. Finally, we will propose a
view that the main features of international finance are organized to overcome such
inherent protectionism, rather than rather than as a solution to an inter-temporal
consumption problem.
International Monetary Systems are Endogenous Solutions
Whatever are the institutions and mechanisms of the international monetary system at any
moment, they have emerged as solutions to a key real economic problem of the time.
The Bretton Woods system was a top-down solution to what were perceived as the
crucial problems of the depression and World War 2. A deal between the US and UK, its
basic features were a compromise between the between the conflicting economic interests
of the two parties. The US viewed the competitive devaluations of the 1930s and the
subsequent discriminatory trading blocs as detrimental to stability and especially harmful
to US trade. A creditor country with intact capital and promising exports, it was
interested in currency stability and non-discriminatory, open trading systems. The UK
was determined not to sacrifice internal balance to maintain external balance. It wanted
currency flexibility. With its huge sterling debt and its unbalance war mobilization, it
was interested also in maintaining controls and channeling of trade within the sterling
bloc. Finally, it wanted access to official credit in large amounts if it was to maintain
fixed rates. The compromise was to have fixed exchange rates but with flexibility within
the rules, a gradual lifting of controls, and access to credit as a function of official quotas.
This basic outline of the system lasted for the next 25 years.

The current system is also one of fixed exchange rates, the accumulation of dollar
reserves, and is based on an effort to keep trade flows open. However, it is an ad hoc,
bottom-up system, the sum of independent policy choices across and within countries.
But it likewise has emerged to solve the fundamental real economic problem of our time:
the emergence of 200 million underemployed workers into the global industrial economy.
Revived Bretton Woods
In a series of papers, we have characterized the international monetary system that has
evolved to facilitate this development strategy in some periphery countries as a revival of
the Bretton Woods system.1 The revival has been contemporaneous with rapid
deterioration of the net international investment position of the United States, and this has
raised concerns about the stability of the system.2 We have argued that the reluctance of
private investors to increase their net claims on the United States has, as conventional
analysis suggests, contributed to a depreciation of the dollar against floating currencies,
but that this has not even started to force an adjustment of the US international
investment position.
The reason is no mystery; governments in Asia are providing the necessary financing.
The issue now is how long this can continue. The conventional view is that the Asian
governments can fill the gap for only a short interval and, when the wheels fall off, the
adjustment costs for the world economy will be very heavy.3 The mechanism for the
disaster is familiar. Expectations for the large exchange rate change “needed” to
“correct” current imbalances generate massive private capital flows to the periphery.
Capital controls and financial repression are no match for a determined private sector. If
inflows are not sterilized, the monetary base explodes and the “needed” real exchange
rate adjustment comes through inflation. Faced with this unpleasant reality central banks
give up and revalue nominal exchange rates.
The conventional argument is a good description of the final days of the original Bretton
Woods system. It is relevant for countries that are ready to graduate to the center. But it
ignores the fact that the system lasted for two decades. To be sure, the original Bretton
Woods system was not asked to finance a US current account deficit until its closing
days, but the periphery did benefit from rapid growth of trade and financed a substantial
1

Dooley, Folkerts-Landau, and Garber (2003a, 2003b, 2004a, 2004b).
The discomfort with the current situation was carefully set out several years ago (Mann, 1999; Obstfeld
and Rogoff, 2000). The logic is that although international capital markets were much larger and more
resilient than in the past they could not support a US current account deficit of 5% of GDP for long.
Moreover, even a mild withdrawal of credit from the US—for example a reduction in financing that
required a return to current account balance—would generate a very large and sudden depreciation in the
real value of the dollar. The sensitivity of real exchange rates to changes in current accounts is related to
the limited integration of goods markets across countries. A related concern then and now is that the low
level of private and government savings in the US is generating a perverse flow of world savings to the
United States. Summers (2004) has recently argued, for example, that the single engine for world recovery,
US growth and US fiscal deficits, is a recipe for disaster both for the US and the rest of the world.

2

3

See Rogoff (2003). As Rogoff puts it, flying on one engine is easy as compared to landing on one wheel

increase in US direct and long term investments abroad. Moreover, most governments in
the periphery did not decide that the system was no longer in their interests. They were
forced to abandon the regime by private capital flows. The erosion of the effectiveness of
capital controls and domestic financial repression that made this possible followed the
development of international trade and domestic financial markets, and this process took
many years.
The current version of the Bretton Woods system presents the periphery with similar
policy choices.4 We argue below that expansion of the volume of trade in goods and
services and the volume of two way trade in financial assets is the backbone of a
successful industrialization/development strategy. If the price to be paid for this strategy
includes financing a large US current account deficit governments in the periphery will
see it in their interest to provide financing even in circumstances where private
international investors would not.
The catastrophic losses and abrupt price breaks forecast by the conventional wisdom of
international macroeconomics arise from a model of very naïve government behavior. In
that model, periphery governments stubbornly maintain a distorted exchange rate until it
is overwhelmed by speculative capital flows. In our view a more sensible political
economy guides governments in Asia. The objectives are the rapid mobilization of
underemployed Asian labor and the accumulation of a capital stock that will remain
efficient even after the system ends.
The mechanism that regulates the mobilization is a cross-border transfer to countries like
the United States that are willing to restructure their labor markets to accommodate the
rapid growth of industrial employment in Asia. Net imbalances like those now observed
for the United States may or may not be a byproduct of this system. But such imbalances
are only one of the constraints on the system, and for considerable periods of time may
not be as binding a constraint as in conventional theories.

What Force Drives the Global System?
China has about 200 million unemployed or underemployed workers to bring into the
modern labor force. For political stability, there is a need for 10-12 million net new jobs
per year in the urban centers. A growth rate of around 8+% has served to employ about
10 million new workers each year. About 3 million have been in the export sector.5

4

This policy has been criticized as wrongheaded in that FDI should be the source of global finance for a
deficit on current account. The principle behind this argument seems to be that the external accounts
should be properly balanced as a priority over the internal balance. See Goldstein and Lardy (2003). The
alternative argument is that being a net capital exporter seems to work.
5

Exports generate 10% of value added in GDP. The export sector grows twice as fast as the rest of the economy. So 25% of all

growth is from the export sector. Because of a lower capital-labor ratio than in the rest of the economy, the export sector accounts for
about 30% of employment growth.

If the world can absorb politically only the output of an additional 10 million workers per
year (3 million in the export sector), then simple arithmetic indicates that this surplus is a
force for twenty years more in the global system. If it can absorb the surplus faster, say
at a rising absolute rate that will keep the Chinese growth rate constant at 8% until the
surplus is eliminated, then straightforward compounding and linearity assumptions
indicate that this will drive the global system ever more relentlessly for the next 12
years).
We do not take a stand on how long this force will drive the global system. But twelve to
twenty years has defined an era for any recent international monetary system.
Political Economy of Export Led Growth
Our analysis of government behavior has some surprising implications. Perhaps the most
important is the idea that there is a trade off between objectives for inter-temporal trade,
objectives for net international investment positions, and objectives for growth in gross
trade in goods and financial instruments. In the framework we develop, governments
have well defined objectives for export growth and for the pattern of international
financial intermediation. Within limits, they are willing to finance net capital flows when
net flows are a byproduct of this development strategy. The limits are likely to be much
less of a constraint on the international system than is suggested by conventional analysis.
Our framework does not, for example, explain the source of the US current account
deficit. But it does provide an explanation for the relative willingness of Asian
governments to finance that deficit.
Governments care about gross trade and capital flows because both generate important
externalities that are not captured by private firms and investors. Domestic production of
traded goods subjects firms to the discipline of international competition and world
prices, a discipline not imposed by distorted domestic markets for goods and services.
Domestic capital formation by foreign direct investors financed in international capital
markets bypasses distorted domestic financial markets. A sensible development strategy
provides strong incentives for foreign direct investors to utilize unemployed domestic
labor to produce for export markets. The emerging market is in effect “borrowing” the
right relative prices and financial incentives from world markets to guide capital
formation during a transition to full participation in the world economy.
But, as Lewis suggested, access to import markets comes at a price. Penetration of
markets in industrial countries will generate a protectionist response. We do not argue
that imports “cause” unemployment in the importing country, but it is clear to us that
industrialization of the periphery requires a fundamental restructuring of the labor force
in the center. While this creates tremendous aggregate benefits for both countries,
established industries and their workers in the center are displaced. No country has found
a workable way to compensate its own losers. So a surplus must be generated and
properly allocated to provide additional incentives to overcome protection. In short, we
believe in gains from trade but also believe that gains from trade are not enough to insure

that mutually beneficial trade will automatically occur. Our conjecture is that this
distortion alone is sufficient to keep labor in the periphery in domestic zero marginal
product activities.
The recent reduction of private capital inflows to the United States and the appreciation
of the euro and other floating currencies provide an opportunity for fixed rate emerging
markets to replace European exports to the United States without changing the rate at
which US labor markets absorbs total imports. Even if governments weigh the same
risks of financing net deficits as do private investors, governments also see benefits of
accelerating their development strategies. It follows that the US will, other things equal,
be able to maintain larger increases in its net international debt over time.
Exhaustible Resources
The economics underlying the current international monetary system is best viewed
through the lens of an exhaustible resource model. The exhaustible resource is the pool
of Asian labor that is underemployed by industrial country standards.
Left
underemployed, it is politically dangerous and socially costly. Once employed it
produces a stream of product marginally valued at the global real wage and contributes to
social and political stability. So the government would like to employ labor in the
industrial sector as quickly as possible. The government also wants to insure that at the
end of the transition period the capital stock should be capable, when combined with
domestic labor paid the world real wage, of producing goods going forward that are
competitive with those produced in other countries. This is a crucial constraint: makework projects or great leaps forward will not do because the history of development has
shown repeatedly that this is the way to end-game crisis.
There are two reasons that employment is increasingly costly in the rate of employment
growth. First, we make the usual assumption that investment installation costs rise in the
rate of investment over time, the usual bottleneck argument. It follows that a more rapid
adjustment requires a greater cost of capital per worker.
Second, investors have to make transfers to offset the political power of displaced
workers in the importing country. Again, it seems likely that the adjustment costs in the
country restructuring its labor market are increasing in the rate of import penetration. Put
another way, a larger piece of the new product stream must be paid to the importing
country the faster is the absorption of the unemployed pool.
In the current global system, benefits are shared with importing countries by initially
giving foreign capital access to Asian labor at a low domestic real wage relative to the
world real wage. This gives the capitalist excess profits for some time period and
provides the resources for the capitalist to utilize to keep home country import markets
open. The trick is to set the real wage (real exchange rate) low enough and to adjust it
gradually upward to the expected real wage in the rest of the world until the excess labor
pool is exhausted, all at a minimum cost.

Chart 1. Real Wages and Adjustment

Real Wage

W

W1

W2

B

D

T1

T2

A

C

Time

The optimal strategy for the government is to set the initial wage and the rate of change
in the wage in order to employ fully the stock of unemployed labor at a minimum cost.
Consider first the rate of change for the real wage. An additional unit of labor employed
provides a nonnegative yield to the government b. A unit of unemployed labor costs
government a yield of –r. The yield b can be thought of as tax revenue or political
support for the government. The yield –r might be transfers to the unemployed or
political opposition.
The incentive with which the government sweetens the provision of labor to investors is
the present value of the difference between the domestic real wage and the world real
wage. Suppose the government kept this present value constant for two consecutive time
periods. A constant incentive generates a constant flow of new employment. If the
incentive in the first period was set slightly higher than in the second period, less
unemployed labor will be carried over into the second period. The carryover is costly so
a constant incentive cannot be optimal. The government can get the same increase in
employment at a lower cost by frontloading the adjustment.
Since it is in the government’s interest to reduce the incentive over time, the present
value of the sequence of market wages must be expected to rise. While there are some
complicated interactions between marginal costs of extraction and the optimal adjustment

path in any real world application, the result that the wage rises monotonically to the
equilibrium level is quite general.6
Paths AB and CD in Chart 1 satisfy this rate of change condition. Path AB starts from
w1, a relatively high initial real wage, and increases at the optimal rate . Path CD begins
with w2 and rises at the same rate. The full solution to the Hotelling (1931) problem
requires that the government sets the initial wage so that the initial stock of labor is
employed when the domestic wage rises to the world wage. Clearly, a lower initial real
wage path CD generates more total employment over the interval from t0 to T2 as
compared to path AB from t0 to T1. It follows that the integral of employment increases
as the initial wage declines and only one initial wage fully employs the initial labor
supply.
It also follows that a country with a very large stock of labor to employ will want to set a
real exchange rate that appears to be grossly undervalued by conventional measures.7
Moreover, the adjustment period is determined by the equilibrium adjustment path and,
other things equal, is longer the larger the initial stock of labor to be employed. Without
government coordination individual workers could not internalize the benefits from rapid
capital accumulation and open export markets. They would therefore demand higher
wages and live with slower employment growth and a longer adjustment period.
We can summarize this section as follows. The optimal exchange rate and inflation
policy are derived from the exhaustible resource problem. For a fixed exchange rate
regime only one initial real exchange rate is optimal and only one rate of inflation
generates the optimal path for the real wage over time. The length of the adjustment
period is determined and at its end the following conditions hold:
•
•
•
•

The domestic real wage equals the world real wage in the manufacturing sector.
The initial pool of surplus labor is employed.
The capital stock has increased to match the world capital/labor ratio in
manufacturing.
The political costs of adjusting displaced labor and capital in the importing
country have been compensated. This co-opts attempts to use commercial policy
to freeze out the exports that are vital to the development policy.

An Indeterminacy: Adjust Nominal Wages or Nominal Exchange Rates?
The optimal adjustment path for the real wage allows the authorities to choose a path for
the nominal wage rate or the nominal exchange rate but not both independently. In fact
Asian authorities use both techniques. For a fixed exchange rate regime, the central bank
6

See Devarajan and Fisher (1981)
It follows that the shadow exchange rate, that is the exchange rate that would prevail if the government set
the rate at its optimal level to a point in time but then withdrew from the market, would always be above
the optimal exchange rate. In this sense the optimal exchange rate might appear to be undervalued relative
to the shadow rate.

7

manages the inflation rate in order to regulate the dollar value of domestic wages and
prices. In this case we would expect wage inflation to be above that in the center so that
domestic real wages rise over time. The alternative would be to set domestic wage and
price inflation at or below that in the center and then allow the nominal exchange rate to
appreciate over time but at a controlled rate.
As long as private market participants understand that policy is driven by the objectives
set out above—the optimal path for the real wage rate--the same pattern of real private
capital flows and trade account will be generated by either a fixed or managed float
exchange rate arrangement. From the balance-of-payments accounting identity, it follows
that the path of real and nominal official intervention is invariant to whether a fixed rate
or managed float regime is chosen. Those who argue the necessity of switching to a
managed appreciation because of the large accumulation of official reserves are missing
the basic policy problem and its resolution. Moreover, switching from fixed to managed
floating, perhaps in the face of political pressure from the center, would not alter the real
nature of the transition.
The Key Role of Financial Repression
A key to this regime is the ability of the government to repress real wages for an
extended period of time. In our framework, this is equivalent to controlling the rate of
inflation and the nominal exchange rate. Given a foreign rate of inflation and an
international interest rate, this requires that the link between domestic and international
interest rates be broken. In our view, China has more than adequate controls on domestic
and international financial transactions to make this possible.
•
•
•
•

Purchases of international bonds are strictly controlled.
State owned or controlled banks provide all the claims available for domestic
savers.
The government sets the interest rate on these bank liabilities and rations bank
credit to the private sector.
Growth in the foreign part of the monetary base is determined by the current
account surplus plus targeted net direct investment inflows.

In this repressed domestic financial system, growth in domestic credit from the banking
system is a residual, that is, the difference between desired money base growth,
(determined by the desired rate of inflation), the growth in the demand for money and the
growth in the foreign part of the base.
Domestic savings not purchased by the banking system are absorbed by sales of domestic
treasury or central bank securities to households and firms. Note that as long as the real
interest rate that clears this market is not above the return on US treasury securities or
other forms of investing the fx reserves, the government can absorb domestic savings and
intermediate into foreign bonds while booking an accounting profit.

The government rations credit to the private sector by forcing the banks to buy
government securities through liquidity and reserve requirements and then rations the
remaining credit to the private sector at fixed lending rates. This of course sets up strong
incentives for private lenders and borrowers to go offshore or to alternative domestic
intermediaries. We assume that the government is an effective counterforce to such
financial innovation for the requisite amount of time.
Internal Balance
The macro management problem for the government in implementing this policy is
daunting but simple enough to set out. In pursing the employment objective, a distorted
real exchange rate will create imbalances in the economy that require an additional policy
instrument. As noted above, the bottom line is that the government must be able to
manage the domestic real interest rate throughout the adjustment period to keep the
domestic economy in balance. The good news is that the problems are large but diminish
over time.
To make this argument, assume the economy, aside from the 200 million, is in full
employment equilibrium with effective capital controls, no initial net international
investment position, and an exchange rate that balances trade. To set the problem in
motion, now imagine that 200 million unemployed people appear from the provinces. As
discussed above, the path for the real exchange rate that solves the absorption problem
involves a sudden real depreciation that is gradually eliminated. The exchange rate path
that solves the absorption problem therefore subsidizes exports relative to imports and the
trade balance initially moves from balance to surplus.8
The initial current account surplus must equal the amount by which domestic
(government plus private) savings exceeds domestic absorption. It follows that a rise in
the domestic interest rate is needed to reduce absorption relative to savings. But what
happens to the interest rate that insures internal balance over time?
During the adjustment period the trade surplus as a share of GDP will decline and may
move into deficit as the real exchange rate appreciates and domestic income grows more
rapidly than foreign income. A surplus on the service account will appear and grow as
net asset accumulation generates net capital income. But the overall current account as a
percent of domestic GDP will fall for any reasonable set of parameters. It follows that
the domestic interest rate will fall over time as a smaller share of domestic absorption is
crowded out by net transfers abroad. This mitigates the interest differential pressure on
capital controls.

8

An important mitigating factor is that adjustments in commercial policy are likely to encourage imports.
For example, the initial condition for China is a large gap between the effective exchange rate for imports
and exports. In fact, China has not run a large overall trade surplus to date. In part, this probably reflects
large declines in tariffs associated with ascension to the WTO.

Sterilization and Inflation
The relevant capital flow “problem” in the face of expected revaluation is large private
capital inflows. If private capital inflows augment the monetary base and in turn increase
domestic inflation, real wage growth will be too rapid; and the transition will be too short
to accomplish the government’s objectives. However, if capital inflows are sterilized,
and if domestic financial repression allows the government to finance reserve creation by
issuing low interest domestic securities, the inflationary impact is eliminated.
This is an empirical issue. Capital controls and financial repression do not last forever
but neither does the regime we are describing. We simply observe that to date Asian
governments have been very successful in hitting aggressive inflation targets. In the case
of China, for example, some observers have suggested that overheating and an
inflationary spiral are already underway. In our view, that is more of a prediction than an
observation. Time will tell, but we would point out that there are many reasons why
inflation may have increased in recent months. In general, a growth rate of 8+% has not
generated inflation in China. In our view increases in reserve requirements last year, a
form of sterilization, have already reduced the growth in money and credit. Moreover
this has been accomplished with no increase in administered interest rates.

If the capital account is liberalized, expectations of appreciation that are a central feature
of the regime discussed below will generate capital inflows. Moreover, marketdetermined domestic interest rates would make sterilization expensive and so inflation
would be the eventual result. But we do not expect opening of the capital account or
deregulation of domestic interest rates. It follows that the economic linkages between
exchange rate policy and inflation clearly relevant for capital account countries do not
now exist, and we do not expect them to materialize for many years.

The Transfer to Foreign Capital
The regime set out so far encourages capital formation in export industries and makes
room for this new investment in the domestic market. But it does not suggest that
nonresident direct investors are the best placed to do the investing. Recall however that
the investor has to expect that the foreign markets for exports remain open and that the
political costs of displaced workers in the importing countries must be compensated.
A transparent but unrealistic example will help make the point. Suppose the right to
supply capital is allocated by the government through licenses on a project-by-project
basis. The gap between the domestic and world real wage would then be captured by
selected capitalists9. Moreover, the government could lend through domestic balance
sheets to the direct investor and finance this by sales of securities to the domestic market.
The government can reduce the political costs to foreign governments associated with
rapid export growth by allocating some of this capital to foreign investors that are adept
at penetrating countries that allow the rapid growth of imports. In the present context,
with the US absorbing much of the exports, this allocation would go to those FDI
investors who can push goods into the US. This provides an economic rent until the
convergence of real wages at T, which is not competed away because entry into foreign
direct investment is rationed by the Chinese government.
The foreign investors then become a well-financed and effective lobby to counteract the
resistance to the restructuring of the US labor force away from import substitutes.10 Each
time a worker is matched with foreign capital, the direct investor gets a benefit equal to
the discounted value of the wage differential plus the normal return to capital. The
excess returns are implicitly paid by the Chinese workers accepting the low but rising real
wage. Indeed, from the US balance sheet perspective, there is no real export of capital
from the US to China. All is financed by directed Chinese savings, both the US current
account deficit and the onshore loans to the foreign investor. The US balance sheet taken
as a whole simply intermediates between low yielding Chinese deposits and high yielding
FDI investments.
But perhaps this method of local intermediation is too transparent and difficult politically.
Instead, the government could sell the same domestic security mentioned above but,
rather than make a loan to a direct investor, purchase international reserves in the direct
investor’s home credit market. This acquisition of foreign assets favors the importing
country in general rather than just the foreign investor. The foreign investor then has to
borrow in the importing country at his own normal cost of funds, and then buy yuan to
make the investment. Part of the subsidy to the foreigner is then given to the importing
country as a whole, part to the FDI investor in the form of rents from access to low real
wage labor. Again, no real capital flows from the US to China—both the US current
9

We refer to “foreign investors” and not “foreign direct investors” because in this example they are
financed by Chinese saving intermediated through domestic balance sheets.
10
We refer to “foreign investors” and not “foreign direct investors” because in this example they are
financed by Chinese saving intermediated through domestic balance sheets.

account deficit and the measured FDI outflow are financed by Chinese savings. Whether
it is booked as FDI or investment managed by foreigners is irrelevant.
Politically, this is perhaps better because there is an arms length relationship between the
government and the financing of the foreign investor. With this more competitive
mechanism we would expect that the surplus generated by access to low wages in China
would be absorbed by adjustment costs. In this case direct investors from countries with
open import markets might enjoy a competitive advantage over other foreign and
domestic investors because they can more effectively mobilize profits to make transfer
payments to their fellow residents.
At this point we do not understand well the mechanism that allocates investment in the
export sector, its profitability or the distribution of those profits.11 It is also quite possible
that direct investment is restricted and/or the risk that the regime might end prematurely
requires excess profits in order to insure entry. The net profitability of direct investment
is an important ingredient in the evolution of net international investments positions
during the transition. Data on profitability of direct investment in China is anecdotal at
best. We can make a reasonable guess about the gap between the real wage and marginal
product of labor, but we do not have much information about the distribution of the
implied surplus. This is an important topic for further research.
What about the accumulating balance sheet positions?
Headline numbers for reserve accumulation and the US current account deficits seem to
suggest that the main end game problem is the accumulated net international investment
position of the center and the periphery. But net positions are the difference between two
much larger gross assets and liabilities. Just as in the original Bretton Woods System,
official intervention, that is, large official capital outflows from the periphery are largely
associated with private capital inflows to the periphery. In our view the financial
intermediation and the capital gains and losses generated will substantially mitigate
problems associated with the net international investment positions generated by export
led growth.
At the end of the transition period Asian governments will hold a large stock of US
treasury and other securities on which it has earned a relatively low but positive rate of
return. It will also have incurred a large stock of liabilities to domestic claimants. But at
the end of the game, both of these will carry the same international interest rate. The US
will hold a large stock of direct investment which pays the world equity rate going
forward but which has paid a much higher rate during the adjustment interval.
It may be instructive to take another look at the end of the original Bretton Woods system
with these two points in mind. While a careful historical comparison is beyond our
resources at the moment it is clear that the United States did not run large trade deficits
leading up to the 1971-73 crisis that ended the regime. The “balance of payments deficit”
11

See Razin and Sadka (2002) for an interesting discussion of the allocation of rents.

that observers focused on at the time was the liquidity balance, a concept that put short
term capital inflows below the line. As Depres, Kindleberger and Salant (1966) pointed
out in their celebrated letter to the Economist, this concept of a deficit ignores the
legitimate role of financial intermediation in international financial arrangements. To be
sure, financial intermediation can lead to instability and crises. But the problem is much
more subtle and the “lessons” from countries that have run large and persistent current
account deficits may not be of much use in evaluating the new Bretton Woods.
Conclusions
What makes this perpetual motion machine run is, of course, the assumed zero (actually
negative) product of the pool of excess labor that we are implicitly associating with the
outcome of a market-determined real exchange rate and allocation of domestic and
international savings. This provides a free lunch that everyone can share through current
Asian policies.
We have done some simulations with plausible rates of accumulation and returns and find
that the transition to the new steady state need not imply a large continuing net transfer.
So the system ends with a smooth adjustment. The government of China for example
would have a more productive capital stock and will have managed to employ 200
million people in world-level wage jobs. The US will own a nice chunk of the Chinese
capital stock, and will have made a fine excess return during its accumulation. There are
even mutually offsetting cross-border claims against each other that can serve as escrow
against confiscation.
During the adjustment period, many dimensions of this development program are
distorted in the periphery. But one thing that is not distorted is the knowledge that at the
end of the transition capital invested in traded-goods industries will have to compete on
an equal basis with capital invested in other countries. We see no practical alternative to
imposing this discipline on an emerging market and at the same time accelerating the
absorption of a large and politically dangerous pool of labor. The feasibility of
maintaining an undervalued exchange rate through monetary policy and controls on
domestic and international capital markets for a long time can, of course, be questioned.
But this is an empirical question. At the moment we do not see a mechanism in the case
of many Asian countries for significant circumvention of their financial arrangements and
regulations.

References
Devarajan, Shantayanan and Anthony Fisher (1981), “Hotelling’s Economics of
Exhaustible Resources: Fifty Years Later,” Journal of Economic Literature, 19, 65 – 73.
Despres, Emile, Charles P. Kindleberger and Walter S. Salant (1966) “The Dollar and
World Liquidity—A Minority View”, The Economist 5th February; reprinted in

Kindleberger, Charles Poor (1981 ed.) International Money. A Collection of Essays ,
London, George Allen and Unwin: pp. 42-52.
Dooley, Michael, David Folkerts-Landau, Peter Garber, “Dollars and Deficits: Where Do
We Go From Here?”, (June 18, 2003a), “An Essay on the Revived Bretton Woods
System”, September 2003b, “The Cosmic Risk: An Essay on Global Imbalances and
Treasuries”, (February, 2004a), “Asian Reserve Diversification: Does it Threaten the
Pegs?”, (February, 2004b), Deutsche Bank, Global Markets Research.
Goldstein, Morris and Nicholas Lardy (2003), “Two-Stage Currency Reform For China”
Asian Wall Street Journal, September 12.
http://www.iie.com/publications/papers/goldstein0903.htm
Hotelling, Harold, (1931) “The Economics of Exhaustible Resources,” Journal of
Political Economy 39, 137-175.
Mann, Cathrine (1999). Is the U.S. Trade Deficit Sustainable, Washington, DC : Institute
for International Economics,
McKinnon, Ronald and Gunther Schnable, (2003a), “A Return to Exchange Rate
Stability in East Asia? Mitigating Conflicted Vitue,” mimeo, October.
-------------------------------------------, (2003b) “The East Asian Dollar Standard, Fear of
Floating and Original Sin,” mimeo, September.
Nurkse, Ragnar (1945) "Conditions of Monetary Equilibrium," Princeton Essays in
International Finance, Spring.
Razin, Assaf and Efraim Sadka, (2002), “Gains from FDI Inflows with Incomplete
Information,” NBER Working Paper No. w9008, June.
Rogoff , Kenneth (2003), “World Economic Outlook Press Conference, September 18,
2003” in http://www.imf.org/external/np/tr/2003/tr030918.htm
Smarzynsk, Beata and Shang-Jin Wei (2000), “Corruption and Composition of Foreign
Direct Investment: Firm-Level Evidence,” NBER WP w7969, October.
Summers, Lawrence (2004), “The United States and the Global Adjustment Process,”
Third Annual Stavros S. Niarchos Lecture , Institute for International Economics, March.
http://www.iie.com/publications/papers/summers0304.htm

