NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SPENDING LESS TIME WITH THE FAMILY:
THE DECLINE OF FAMILY OWNERSHIP IN THE UK
Julian Franks
Colin Mayer
Stefano Rossi
Working Paper 10628
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10628
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2004

This paper has been written for the National Bureau of Economic Research Programme on the History of
Corporate Ownership: The Rise and Fall of Great Business Families. We are grateful for helpful suggestions
on this and a companion paper (“The Origination and Evolution of Ownership and Control”) from participants
at conferences at the American Finance Association meetings in Washington DC, January 2003, the National
Bureau of Economic Research Programme on the Evolution of Family Ownership conference in Boston,
INSEAD and Lake Louise, the Political Economy of Financial Markets Conference at Princeton, September
2003 and the RIETI Conference on Comparative Corporate Governance: Changing Profiles of National
Diversity in Tokyo, January 2003, and at seminars at the Bank of England, the Bank of Italy, Cambridge
University, the London Business School, the London School of Economics, SNS, Stockholm, the Stern
School, New York University, Université Libre de Bruxelles, University of Bologna and UCLA. We have
received helpful comments from Brian Cheffins, Barry Eichengreen, Charles Hadlock, Leslie Hannah, Cliff
Holderness, Gregory Jackson, Kose John, Hideaki Miyajima, Randall Morck, Hyun Song Shin, Oren
Sussman, Elu von Thadden and Xavier Vives. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Julian Franks, Colin Mayer, and Stefano Rossi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Spending Less Time with the Family: The Decline of Family Ownership in the UK
Julian Franks, Colin Mayer, and Stefano Rossi
NBER Working Paper No. 10628
July 2004
JEL No. G32
ABSTRACT
Family ownership was rapidly diluted in the twentieth century in Britain. The main cause was equity
issued in the process of making acquisitions. In the first half of the century, it occurred in the
absence of minority investor protection and relied on directors of target firms protecting the interests
of shareholders. Families were able to retain control by occupying a disproportionate number of
seats on the boards of firms. However, in the absence of large stakes, the rise of hostile takeovers
and institutional shareholders made it increasingly difficult for families to maintain control without
challenge. Potential targets attempted to protect themselves through dual class shares and strategic
share blocks but these were dismantled in response to opposition by institutional shareholders and
the London Stock Exchange. The result was a regulated market in corporate control and a capital
market that looked very different from its European counterparts. Thus, while acquisitions facilitated
the growth of family controlled firms in the first half of the century, they also diluted their
ownership and ultimately their control in the second half.
Julian Franks
London Business School
jfranks@london.edu
Colin Mayer
University of Oxford
colin.mayer@said-business-school.oxford.ac.uk
Stefano Rossi
London Business School
srossi@london.edu

Entrebrawneurial Britain
I strut around my stately life
Hand in hand with lover and wife.
I even own a share or two
In a family firm my father grew.
Of course I have not the slightest view
On what this firm is supposed to do.
Nor have I any reason to care
Since in absentia I sit in a Chair,
Of a Board that yesterday I chose to hire
And tomorrow I’ve decided that I will fire.

1

Introduction

The UK is a strange country. It does not have concentrated ownership; most countries
do. It does not have pyramid structures; most countries do. Family ownership is of
limited significance; in most countries it is extensive. There are few dual class shares;
in many countries they are extensive. It has an active market in corporate control;
elsewhere, it is largely non-existent.
By way of a measure of its peculiarity, Becht and Mayer (2001) report that in a
majority of listed Austrian, German and Italian firms there is a single voting block of
shares that commands a majority of votes in these companies. Families account for
45% of blocks in Austria, 32% in Germany and 30% in Italy. The average size of the
blocks is 26% in Austria, 27% in Germany and 20% in Italy. In the UK, on average
the largest voting block will usually cast under 10% of votes, while less than 5% of
blocks are attributable to families and the average size of their blocks is only 5%.
There is a stark contrast in the significance of families in corporate control between
the UK and the rest of Europe.
Even by the standards of the US, the UK is odd. Dual class shares are by no means
absent from the US. Powerful families established some of the largest corporations in
the US and pyramids were at least at one stage widespread. The US may be odd but
Britain is even more peculiar.
Why is the UK so different? Was it always so deviant? The British business history
literature would seem to suggest not. Family ownership has been a dominant theme in

1

British business history. Alfred Chandler developed a thesis of comparative industrial
performance around differences between managerial capitalism in North America and
family organizations in Europe. He argued that the UK was held back at the turn of
the century by a continuing reliance on family as against professional managerial
capitalism.

Successes were restricted to industries in which there were modest

investment requirements, most notably branded packaged goods. Companies such as
Beechams, Cadbury, Colman, Reckitt and Rowntree were dominated by their owners
and had little professional management. The consequences were most seriously felt in
those industries that required large-scale investments – chemicals, electrical
equipment and metals; these declined markedly in relation to their German and US
competitors.

David Landes (1965, pp 536-64) described the stereotypical image of

the British family firm as being an organization founded by fanatical fathers and
succeeded by squabbling siblings who “worked at play and played at work”.
According to this view, at the beginning of the 20th century, as in most other
countries, powerful families dominated the British corporate sector. They may have
been incompetent but at least they were there and presumably their extinction was a
consequence of their incompetence. As a result, the origins of the British corporate
system are quite conventional and its current anomalous status is a consequence of the
normal workings of market forces.
Plausible though this story is, we argue in this paper that it is probably not an accurate
and certainly not a complete description of what transpired. At the very least it does
not capture the rich interaction that occurred between financial markets and
companies in the UK.
There are many aspects of this that are misleading. The first is that while families
were important at the beginning of the twentieth century, their significance did not in
general derive from long-term large-scale ownership of British companies. By way of
ownership, families were rapidly marginalized. The pattern of ownership, which we
report above as characterizing corporate Britain today, emerged early in the twentieth
century.

2

Instead, the significance of family influence claimed by Chandler comes from a
different source. While families rapidly relinquished ownership, they retained control
through their positions on the boards of directors. They often held the all-important
position of chairman of the board and even if they did not then their board
representation was frequently disproportionate to their ownership stakes. This is quite
different from the pattern observed in Continental European countries of extensive
family ownership with delegated managerial control. In Britain families exerted
power without responsibility whereas in most countries they had responsibility with at
least limited power.
Still more interesting than the nature of ownership and control was the process by
which it came about. Family ownership did not for the most part decline because
families sold out. They did not typically abandon firms through company flotations
or share sales. Instead, their holdings were diluted in the process of issuing shares to
finance growth. In a sample of firms that we will describe below, we estimate that
issues of shares associated with acquisitions, rights issues and placings accounted for
almost two-thirds of the decline in directors’ shareholdings over the period 1900 to
1950. A majority of this issuance arose from one particular activity of firms, namely
acquisitions. More than half of the dilution (36.2%) of the 61.6% is associated with
issues of shares for acquisitions. Shares were not primarily issued to finance internal
investments but rather to acquire other firms.
The changing pattern of ownership of British firms during the century was primarily a
product of the immense amount of takeover activity that occurred during the 20th
century. Hannah (1976), for example, documents the three major merger waves that
occurred around 1900, 1920 and 1930. Many of these mergers were consolidations of
several companies, establishing the corporate groupings that dominated the rest of the
century.
What is remarkable about this process of ownership dilution is that it occurred in
largely unregulated equity markets with little protection to minority investors. In this
paper we explore this acquisition process. We document how it went through various
stages. In the first half of the twentieth century there was no market for corporate
control. All mergers were the result of an agreement between the two or more boards
3

of the merging companies. Often a holding company was created to buy all the shares
of the combining firms, with the old boards of directors forming a new board.
Mergers were the result of co-operation rather than competition between companies
for a target in an auction market.
During the 1940’s and 1950’s there were important changes in the UK capital
markets. First, following a number of scandals, minority investor protection was
strengthened at the end of the 1940’s. Disclosure was improved and anti-director
provisions were introduced.

Second, there was a sharp increase in institutional

ownership. By 1960, institutions were the largest shareholder in more than a third of
the companies in our sample. Third, and most significantly, a market for corporate
control emerged: “for the first time it became popular for the ownership of public
companies to be determined simply by stock market transactions and for control to
pass thereby to parties previously unconnected with the firm” (Roberts (1992) p.183).
Charles Clore launched the first hostile takeover in 1953 for a large shoe chain called
J. Sears Holdings. This bid introduced the concept of paying a significant premium
for the shares of target firms. Whereas before 1950 there was little difference in cost
between partial and full acquisitions, the emergence of hostile takeovers substantially
increased the cost of acquiring full ownership. As a consequence, it became attractive
to make partial rather than full bids for companies.
Companies responded by attempting to protect themselves and their minority
shareholders against the takeover threat. We estimate that within a period of 15 years
about 7.5% of listed companies had issued dual class shares with discriminatory
voting rights. In others, they sought protection under the wing of a friendly parent. In
particular, in the brewing industry, Whitbread provided protection through large
stakes to several local brewers under what became known as ‘the Whitbread
umbrella’.
Partial acquisitions, dual class shares and strategic block holdings gave rise, at least
temporarily, to shareholding patterns that are currently commonplace on the Continent
but were previously rare in the UK. This is a particularly interesting stage in the
development of the British corporation because it could at this point have switched
4

into Continental European mode with dual class shares and pyramids. In Japan,
similar takeovers threats in the post WW2 period prompted the erection of elaborate
defences in the form of cross-shareholdings that have persisted until today. But this
did not happen in Britain. Financial institutions had become steadily more influential
investors in equities by the 1950s and 1960s, and with the agreement of the stock
exchanges they were able to deny these firms access to the capital markets. The result
was the dismantling of the protective measures until they were virtually extinguished
by the 1980’s. The elimination of dual class shares and pyramids in the UK was
therefore due to the dominance of institutional investors.

In other countries,

corporations were more significant holders of corporate equity1 and derived benefits
from the retention of mechanisms such as pyramids and dual class shares for
sustaining control.
Instead, the more enduring response to the emergence of a market for corporate
control was regulatory. The Takeover Panel was established in 1968. Its first rules
included mandatory bid and equal price requirements ensuring offers be made at the
same price to all shareholders once 30% of a target had been purchased. These two
rules had the effect of both preventing discriminatory price offers and the build up of
large share blocks.
By the beginning of the 1970’s the key features of current UK corporate ownership
and control were in place: substantial institutional shareholdings, a hostile takeover
market and extensive minority investor protection. Together they had the effect of
establishing active markets in corporate control.
In a companion paper, we have documented that dilution of family ownership has
been a feature of the whole of the twentieth century, in large part due to share
acquisitions. But not only was acquisition the main cause of the dilution, it was also
its main effect. At the start of the century families could expect to retain control over
extended periods as directors if not owners of their firms and their approval was
required before changes in control through takeover could take place. By the end of
the century, family board representation was not sufficient to ensure continuity of

1

See, for example, Franks and Mayer (2001) for data on corporate holdings in Germany.
5

control in the face of hostile takeovers. This had two consequences. Firstly, the
feature that Chandler had noted of the dominance of management by families was less
evident by the end of the century. Secondly, dilution of ownership had control as well
as cash flow consequences for families. Management had therefore become more
professional and families were unable to preserve the continuity of control that they
enjoyed in the first half of the century.
As Davies and Hopt (2004) note, despite similarities in the structure of their capital
markets and the common law nature of their legal systems, the UK and US today
allocate decision rights regarding takeover offers in very different ways. In the UK
they reside with the target shareholders, whereas in those state jurisdictions in the US
that are sympathetic to the use of poison pills as takeover defences, most notably in
Delaware, they reside with the target management.

The exposure of target

management to hostile takeovers in the UK is not therefore simply a product of its
common law or dispersed ownership system. Politics, in the guise of the growing
influence of institutional investors in the second half of the 20th century, may have
been at least as important in establishing the UK’s unusually active market in
corporate control.
In Section 2 we describe the data sets that we employ in this chapter. In Section 3, we
record the evolution of family ownership, board representation and the rise of
institutional share ownership. Section 4 describes the merger and acquisitions process
in the first of the century. Section 5 looks at how a takeover market emerged in the
second half of the twentieth century. Section 6 concludes the chapter and examines
the implications of these developments for family control of British companies.

6

2

Data

We employ three data sets in this chapter. The first comprises individual firm data on
the ownership and board representation of samples of firms incorporated around 1900
and 1960. There were 20 firms that were incorporated or (re-) incorporated between
1897 and 1903 and were still in existence in 2001 and 20 firms that were incorporated
between 1958 and 1962 and were still in existence in 2001; we have collected data on
all of these. To avoid the obvious bias that might arise from the greater longevity of
the 1900 than the 1960 sample, we collected a third sample of 20 firms incorporated
around 1900 that are no longer in existence today. We compare the evolution of
ownership and control of the 1960 sample with both the surviving and non-surviving
1900 samples.
The data have been assembled from (i) archives of company accounts and share
registers (including names and size of shareholdings) stored at Companies House in
Cardiff, and at the Public Records in Kew, Richmond (Surrey)2 (ii) new issue
prospectuses at the Guildhall Library in London, (iii) annual issues of the Stock
Exchange Year Book which lists names of directors and the sources of any changes in
issued capital, and (iv) Official Lists of trading of securities from the British Library
in London. Share registers provided evidence of annual ownership changes and the
annual returns to Companies House gave details of resignations of existing directors
and appointments of new directors.
From these data, we collected names of directors, their shareholdings (including those
of their families), the date and amounts of capital issued in acquisitions, new share
issues via public and private placements, and other changes in share capital, such as
capitalisations of reserves.

We traced the founding family ownership from

incorporation until the last family member left the board by recording shareholdings
and place of residence of family members taking account of name changes across
2

Since the beginning of the 20th century, firms in the UK have been required to file information at a
central depository called Companies House now situated in Cardiff, Wales. This is a remarkable and
largely unique long-run source of data on firms. However, it suffers from one deficiency: Companies
House retains complete records on all firms that are still in existence today but discards information on
most but not all dead companies. We therefore supplemented data from Companies House with a
second source of public information from the Public Records in Kew, Richmond (Surrey), which keeps
some information on dead companies.
7

generations, when for example the daughter of a founder married. We also traced
shareholdings through intermediary firms. For outside shareholdings, we limited
ourselves to stakes greater than 1% of ordinary capital. We used newspaper archives
to document evidence of tender offers and trading in provincial Stock Exchanges,
especially in the early 1900s.
The second data set collected for this study includes information on anti-takeover
defences (dual class shares, voting right restrictions and insider block holdings) for
about 1800 listed firms in two LSE industry classifications, Breweries and Industrials
and Commercials.
The third data set comes from Hannah’s (1974a) list of takeovers over the period 1919
to 1939 and includes announcement dates of takeovers from the Financial Times
newspaper, the medium of exchange, dividend changes and board turnover from the
Stock Exchange Year Book, and share prices from the Daily Official List (at the
Guildhall Library).

Newspaper archives are used to document evidence on the

hostility of takeover activity, particularly during the 1950s and early 1960s.
3

Ownership and Board Representation

3.1

Ownership

According to Rajan and Zingales (2003), the UK has had one of the largest stock
markets in the world throughout the twentieth century. Table 1 reports the number of
companies listed on the London Stock Exchange (LSE), and the market value of listed
securities for the period 1853 to 1939.

As the Stock Exchange did not collect

aggregate statistics over this period, several other sources have had to be used.
According to Killick and Thomas (1970) and Michie (1999), around 1850, provincial
stock exchanges had more listed companies than the LSE - 490 as against 200. Hart
and Prais (1956) record a large expansion of listed companies on the LSE over the
period 1885 to 1939 though their data only refer to industrial and commercial
companies. From 1963, the LSE has kept a continuous series of aggregate equity
market values, including preference and dual class shares. One of the most striking

8

features is the marked decline in the number of listed firms that has occurred over the
past 40 years (see Table 1).

Table 2 records family shareholdings of a sample of 20 companies incorporated
around 1900 and 20 incorporated around 1960 that were still in existence in 2001 (the
“survivors”) and a sample of 20 companies incorporated around 1900 that died during
the century (“non-survivors”). It documents the number of companies where the
founding family’s shareholding passes a particular threshold of 25%, 50% and 75% of
equity.

Franks, Mayer and Rossi (2004) report that insider ownership declined

rapidly and at similar rates in the first and second half of the centuries. Rates of
ownership dispersion were similar in samples of companies incorporated in 1900 and
1960. Table 2 confirms that family ownership was rapidly diluted throughout the
century. By 1940, forty years after incorporation, the number of firms in which
families owned more than 25% of shares had declined from 13 to 4 amongst the
survivors. Family ownership was initially even less pronounced amongst the nonsurvivors (9 out of 20 companies passed the 25% threshold) but pro-rata to the
number of survivors it then declined less rapidly to 4 out of 12 survivors in 1940.
Table 2 shows that this dilution of family ownership was even more noticeable in the
1960 than in the 1900 sample. For example, forty years after incorporation, there was
no company in the 1960 sample in which family ownership passed the 25% threshold.
Family ownership therefore diminished rapidly throughout the century but much more
so in the second half of the century.
Table 3 documents how financial institutions emerged to take the place of families as
dominant owners of corporate Britain around the middle of the twentieth century. It
reports the number of cases where a financial institution was the largest shareholder of
our sample of firms. Forty years after incorporation, there were 4 cases in the 1900
survivor sample where a financial institution was the largest shareholder compared
with 13 in 1990 for the 1960 sample. The average size of institutional stakes was also
larger in the second half of the century.

The average stake of the 4 financial

institutions that were the largest shareholders in the 1900 sample was 5.9% in 1940,
compared with an average stake of 16.2% in the 13 companies in the 1960 sample in

9

2000. Thus, in the first half of the century institutional shareholdings were largely
absent, and where they were present they were quite small. In contrast, in the second
half of the century, there were a larger number of stakes held by institutions and they
were much more significant in size.
In summary, family ownership declined rapidly in the first half of the 20th century and
institutions emerged to take the place of families from the middle of the century
3.2

Board representation

Table 4 shows that family representation on boards persisted for much longer than
their ownership. It documents the profile of board representation for the two samples
of firms at ten yearly intervals. Over forty years from 1900 to 1940, the percentage of
board seats held by outside (non-family) shareholders in the sample of survivor firms
(panel A1) increased from 46% in 1900 to 64% in 1940. The proportion of firms in
which families occupied the position of CEO of the board declined from 80% (i.e. 16
out of 20) to 50% (i.e. 10 out of 20). As Table 2 recorded, the proportion of survivor
firms in which families held more than 25% of shares declined much more rapidly by
45% from 65% (i.e. 13 out of 20) in 1900 to 20% (i.e. 4 out of 20) in 1940. Family
representation on the boards did not therefore decline as rapidly as their ownership.
Table 5 provides a summary measure of this.

It reports separation of family

ownership and control as measured by the difference between family representation
on the boards of firms and family ownership of shares. A positive number means that
family board representation is disproportionate to their ownership. Table 5 shows that
at the beginning of the century, family ownership was in excess of their board
representation but by 1940 it had become disproportionately high.
Panel A2 of Table 4 reports lower family board representation amongst the 1900 nonsurvivors than the survivors. Family board representation was only 32% in 1900 in
comparison with 55% amongst the survivors and it declined to 7% in 1940. There
was therefore less family ownership and less family board representation amongst the
non-survivors than the survivors in 1900 and families failed to retain board positions
amongst non-survivors to the degree that they did in survivors. Table 5 confirms that
10

family board representation did not increase to the same extent relative to ownership
amongst non-survivors as amongst survivors. So families retained neither ownership
nor board positions amongst non-survivors. Whether the decline of families on the
boards as well as in the ownership of non-survivors was a cause or a consequence of
their demise is not a question to which we attempt to provide an answer here. All we
do is to note that the difference in family ownership and board representation amongst
surviving and non-surviving firms may be an interesting approach to evaluating the
contribution of families to corporate performance.
In the second half of the century, family representation on boards declined more
rapidly. Forty years after incorporation, a family member was chairman/CEO in three
companies in the 1960 sample in comparison with 10 in the 1900 survivors.
Likewise, the proportion of seats on the boards occupied by families declined to 16%
forty years after incorporation in the 1960 sample in comparison with 36% in the
1900 sample.

Thus, family representation on boards as well as ownership declined

more rapidly in the second than in the first half of the century.
Table 4 shows that relative to their ownership stakes, family representation on boards
moved in a very similar way in the 1960 to the 1900 survivors, starting from slightly
more ownership than board representation in 1960 and ending with markedly more
board representation than ownership 40 years after incorporation in 2000. Thus,
families did not match the very rapid decline in their ownership in the second half of
the century with their share of seats on boards of firms.
In summary, dilution of family ownership occurred rapidly throughout the twentieth
century. As the next section describes, this was primarily due to growth through
acquisition. However, in the first half of the century families were able to retain
control in surviving firms through representation on the boards of firms. In the
second half, board control as well ownership was rapidly extinguished. A new form
of ownership, institutions, emerged in the middle of the century to replace families,
and, as we document in Section 5, a new form of corporate control, the hostile
takeover, appeared to replace that exerted by families.
4

Mergers and acquisitions in the first half of the century
11

Franks, Mayer and Rossi (2004) argue that the main cause of dispersion of ownership
during the twentieth century was equity issuance. In particular, their sample of firms
grew rapidly through acquisition and in the process issued equity to outside
shareholders thereby diluting insiders’ shareholdings. Franks, Mayer and Rossi report
that insider holdings were diluted over the period 1900 to 1950 at an average rate of
12.6% per annum. Of this, none was attributable to IPOs, 4.6% to rights issues,
20.8% to placings and 36.2% to mergers and acquisitions.3
During the first half of the century mergers and acquisitions were usually made by the
bidder approaching the directors and agreeing to purchase their shares. “An approach
through the directors, followed by controlled stock transfers on the recommendations
of the directors (rather than contested takeover raids) remained the norm in these
years”. (Hannah (1974b), p. 68). A price was negotiated and management wrote to
the shareholders stating that “the offer has been unanimously accepted by the
Directors of your company for the whole of their individual shares, and they have no
hesitation in recommending its acceptance to the shareholders.”4 The same terms
were offered to outside shareholders as the directors.
As Hannah (1974b) has noted, “the loyalty of shareholders to directors was strong,
and the directors of other companies had a natural aversion to challenging it. Even if
a direct bid were to be made, the directors of the victim firm remained in a strong
position relative to their own shareholders.

In practice the shareholders would

recognize the superiority of the directors’ information and tend to take their advice on
the true value of the company in relation to the bid price.” (p. 70-71) “Directors felt a
responsibility to recommend offers to their shareholders when the bid price was
pitched reasonably.” (p. 68-69). It is therefore unsurprising that there was a complete
absence of hostile takeover bids in the first half of the century.

3

In the first half of the century shares were often traded without a prospectus. Shares would simply be
issued and sold directly by the company to subscribers or be sold through advertisements in the press.
The IPO event was much more formal after 1948 when prospectuses were compulsory and their
content strictly regulated prior to trading on recognized stock exchanges such as the LSE.
4
Quote from Financial Times, Monday 19 January 1920.
12

The continuing presence of families on boards, in particular in the position of
chairman, even in the absence of ownership, may have been important in upholding
reputations. So too were titled directors. Florence (1953) reports that there were 654
English peers as active members of city firms in 1932.

Titled directors were

particularly common in the largest companies. “At a rough estimate almost half the
titled directors inherited their title or acquired it by prowess in the fighting services or
sport and not in business” (Florence (1953), p 245). “One well-known insurance
company in 1937 had among sixteen directors, three knights, one baron, one marquis,
one earl and two dukes” (p 245). Likewise, May (1939) reports that of 654 British
peers, 189 of them were directors of companies and held 562 directorates between
them. “Sometimes a man with a “good name”, knowing nothing about the business
and even without residence in the country, is set up as chairman with the principal
duty of reading the annual speech, which has been written out for him, to the
shareholders” (May (1939), p. 145). As Lord Justice Scrutton said in the Court of
Appeal in the judgement on Combined Pulp and Paper Mills Ltd 1932 “the company
promoter wants a man whose name will appeal to the public and who does not know
too much about the business. The name will attract capital – the company promoter
will do the rest” (pp. 35-36 of the transcript).
In Tables 6 and 7 we examine the workings of the acquisitions market in the first half
of the century. We undertook a series of tests on bid premia, changes in boards,
dividend responses of targets similar to those that are now routinely performed on
recent acquisitions in the UK and US. We report data on 41 M&As in the UK over
the period 1919 to 1939. This is the entire population of M&As that met three
criteria: the market value of target assets exceeded £I million pounds, the targets were
listed on the LSE and they were classified by the LSE as being in one of three
industries - breweries and distilleries, industrial and commercial, or iron, coal and
steel.
Table 6 shows the proportion of target directors who were retained on the board after
the merger, the number of cases in which the chairman was removed and the change
in dividends around the announcement of the mergers. On average, two-thirds of the
target directors remained on the target’s board after the acquisition. In 14 of 41 cases
(approximately one-third of the total), the chairman was removed. In comparison, in
13

a study of 35 successful hostile takeovers in 1985 and 1986, Franks and Mayer (1996)
report that 90% of directors were replaced within two years of the bid being
consummated. The equivalent figure for 35 accepted bids was 50%. Board turnover
was appreciably lower in the first half of the century in comparison with both
accepted and hostile bids in the second.5
Table 6 also shows very little change in dividends in the year of the bid compared to
the previous year in the 1919 to 1939 sample. In comparison, Franks and Mayer
(1996) report that dividends were increased in a substantial proportion of both hostile
and accepted takeovers in 1985 and 1986. They were increased in 76% of targets of
successful hostile takeovers in the year before the bid and in 73% of targets two years
before the bid.
But it is in relation to bid premia that the differences are most pronounced. Panel A
of table 7 records that in the sample of 40 targets target shareholders received bid
premia of –0.9% during the month of the bid (i.e. ‘month 0’), calculated on an equal
weighted basis. These bid premia are raw equity returns with no adjustment for
market movements or risk. Bid premia for months –4 to +1 on the same basis were
4.9%. Bid premia were therefore little different from zero. In contrast, Franks and
Mayer (1996) report bid premia of between 20 and 30% for hostile and agreed bids
during 1985 and 1986 in the UK.
The picture that emerges is one of cooperative consolidations between merging firms
in the first half of the century. The support of management was required for approval
by shareholders. Bid premia were low, the medium of exchange usually involved
share exchanges, management was frequently kept on the target board and dividend
changes were modest.

Since acquisitions frequently involved share exchanges,

acquiring firms avoided the devaluation of their currency that dual class shares would
have entailed. The absence of dual class shares in the first half of the century may
therefore have been intimately linked to the importance of takeovers and their form of
financing.

5

This might indicate greater private benefits accruing to target directors in the early part of the century.
14

This picture of cooperation and little competition was dramatically altered in the
1950s, as we will describe in Section 6.
5

Three Case Studies

This section describes three cases that illustrate the way in which three prominent
British firms expanded during the 18th, 19th and 20th centuries, the contribution of
acquisitions to their growth, the changing nature of family ownership and board
representation, and the contribution of incorporation and mergers to that process.
5.1

GKN

Dowlais Iron Company was set up in 1759 in the village of Dowlais near Merthyr
Tydfil in South Wales. John Guest was appointed as manager of Dowlais in 1767,
and his grandson became the company’s sole owner in 1851. The Dowlais Iron
Company was at this stage the largest iron works in the world, operating 18 blast
furnaces and employing more than 7,300 people. The business was the first licensee
of the Bessemer process, constructing the world’s most powerful rolling mill in 1857,
and producing its first Bessemer steel in 1865.
The Keen family established the Patent Nut and Bolt Company in 1856 in Smethwick,
England. In July 1900, Guest, Keen and Company Limited was incorporated in
Birmingham with the purpose of taking over the Dowlais Iron Company and the
Patent Nut and Bolt Co., Ltd. The shareholders of the two companies received
250,000 ordinary shares. At the same time, 400,000 ordinary shares were issued via
public subscription and the company was floated with 546 ordinary shareholders and
more than 2000 preference shareholders. Both classes of shares were traded on the
London and Birmingham Stock Exchanges. There was no evidence of the company
being dispersed before 1900: the company history suggests that both Dowlais Iron Co.
and the Patent Nut and Bolt were 100% owned by directors and their families.
Evidence for this comes from a comparison of directors’ holdings with the
shareholdings of the two companies before the merger.

Since directors’ holdings

after the flotation were 33.6% of the ordinary shares, and the newly issued shares

15

were 400,000, compared with a pre-issue total of 250,000 we can compute a lower
bound of directors’ ownership pre-issue of 87.3%.
In 1902 the company acquired Nettlefold and Company, one of the world’s leading
manufacturers of screws and fasteners set up in Smethwick in 1854, by issuing
315,000 new ordinary shares. The new company name was then called Guest, Keen,
and Nettlefolds Limited, and Mr Edward Nettlefold joined the board. By 1910, the
directors held 26.4% of issued ordinary shares. In 1920, shares in Guest, Keen and
Nettlefolds Ltd. (GKN) were quoted at Birmingham, Bristol, Cardiff, Edinburgh,
Glasgow, Liverpool, Manchester and Sheffield, while the prices of the transactions
were marked (i.e. reported) on the official list of the London Stock Exchange.
A crucial decade in the evolution of ownership and control of GKN was then about to
begin. First, the company acquired John Lysaght Limited of Bristol (also quoted in
Bristol and London) in one of the largest tender offers of the decade.6 GKN then
undertook two other major tender offers in November 1923, acquiring D Davis and
Sons and Consolidated Cambrian of Cardiff.
As a consequence of these acquisitions there was a huge increase in the number of
shareholders: GKN had about 1,000 shareholders before 1920, and more than 20,000
in 1924. At this stage, GKN was one of the largest manufacturing businesses in the
world, involved in every stage of manufacturing from coal and ore extraction to iron
and steel making and finally to finished products including the nuts, bolts, screws, and
fasteners for which it was renowned during this period.
GKN formally listed on the London Stock Exchange on June 14, 1946. By then the
directors owned a negligible stake and the largest shareholder of the period was the
Royal Bank of Scotland with 2.37% of issued ordinary shares. In the second half of
the century, Prudential Assurance, Norwich Union Life Insurance, Schroder
Investment Management, and Scottish Widows Investment Management among

6
Details of the deal are as follows: in January 1920, GKN issued 1,989,919 new ordinary shares and
2,652,331 preference shares. Ordinary shareholders of John Lysaght Ltd were offered 4 new 2nd
preference and 3 new ordinary shares in GKN for every 3 ordinary shares held.

16

others alternated as the largest shareholders with stakes varying from 3% to 5.25% of
issued equity capital.
The picture that emerges from GKN is of a firm whose shares were initially traded on
local provincial exchanges, that expanded rapidly through acquisitions, broadened its
shareholder base both numerically and geographically in the process, and that by the
beginning of the second half of the twentieth century was widely held primarily by
institutional shareholders.
5.2

Case Study of Schweppes

In 1783, 43-year-old German born Jean Jacob Schweppe invented an efficient system
for the manufacture of mineral water. In 1790, he entered a partnership to expand the
business and established a factory in London, UK. Around 1800 he changed his and
the business name to Schweppes, while continuing to expand on a national scale. By
1831, J. Schweppes & Co. becomes the Supplier of Soda Water to the Royal
Household. In 1834, John Kemp-Welch and William Evill bought J. Schweppes &
Co., and extended the product range to include flavoured soda drinks such as
lemonade. The following year the firm was awarded the Royal warrant by Queen
Victoria, and in 1851 it won the contract to supply “Temperance” beverages at the
Great Exhibition in the UK. By 1870, the firm’s product range included Tonic Water
and Ginger Ale. The former rapidly became popular with the British in India, as it
contained quinine, which was used as a preventive measure against malaria. In 1877
the firm opened its first factory in Sydney, Australia, and seven years later a factory in
Brooklyn, NY.
The sudden death of John Kemp-Welch in 1885 precipitated the formation of
Schweppes as a limited company in the following year. Although no direct evidence
exists on the ownership structure at this stage, it would appear that the company was
100% owned by the directors until its public flotation in London on March 6, 1897.
After flotation the directors and their families held collectively 27.2% of the 300,000
ordinary shares. The new company, Schweppes plc, was incorporated to acquire the
business of J. Schweppe and Co. established in 1783, and a total of £1,250,000 new
capital (of which £300,000 was perpetual debenture stock issued to the directors, and
17

£950,000 was a public subscription, in the form of 300,000 ordinary shares, 300,000
preference shares and 350,000 deferred shares).
The public flotation was extremely successful and over-subscribed. At the end of
1897, there were more than 1650 ordinary shareholders and 750 preference
shareholders. There was evidence of the company’s shares being traded in
Manchester.
In 1919 the Kemp-Welch family relinquished the chairmanship (although two
members remained on the board until the early 1940s), and under the new chairman,
Sir Ivor Phillips, the company started a new period of expansion. Overseas
development was conducted through a newly formed fully owned subsidiary,
Schweppes (Colonial and Foreign) Ltd. The strategy was to manufacture locally in
the overseas countries, in order to reduce the group’s reliance on exports. At the end
of Sir Phillips chairmanship in 1940, the company had more than 2,700 ordinary
shareholders, and it was formally listed on the London Stock Exchange in December
19, 1942.
During the 1950s there were several major acquisitions paid in shares: L. Rose and
Co. acquired in 1957 with 1,544,400 new ordinary shares, and Chivers & Sons, W.P.
Hartley, and W. Moorhouse all acquired in 1959 with together 4,000,000 new
ordinary shares. In 1969, Schweppes PLC merged with the Cadbury Group to form
Cadbury-Schweppes.
5.3

Case Study of Cadbury

In 1794, Richard Cadbury a prominent Quaker moved from the West Country in
Britain to Birmingham. Thirty years later his son John opened a shop at 93 Bull
Street, then a fashionable part of Birmingham, to sell tea, coffee, hops, mustard, and a
new sideline – cocoa and drinking chocolate, which John prepared himself using a
mortar and a pestle.
In 1847 John Cadbury took his brother Benjamin into partnership in 1847, changing
the name of the business to Cadbury Brothers of Birmingham, and renting a new
18

factory in Bridge Street in the centre of Birmingham. Thanks to a reduction in tax on
imported cocoa beans, the business expanded and received the first of a series of
Royal Warrants of appointment by Queen Victoria.
The Cadbury Brothers moved their manufacturing operations to Bournville, UK, and
established the Bournville factory and village, which became an important addition to
the UK industrial landscape. By the time that Cadbury Brothers was incorporated as a
limited company in June 16 1899, the Bournville factory had 2,600 employees. At
that stage, Richard and George Cadbury, the sons of the late John Cadbury, owned
100% of the ordinary shares.
1919 was a crucial year in the company history when Cadbury Brothers merged with
JS Fry & sons of Bristol, whose product range (e.g. Turkish Delight) complemented
Cadbury’s chocolates. After the merger, the new company was registered as British
Cocoa & Chocolate in May 19, 1919, with a capital of £2,500,000. The two families
shared both board seats and company ownership, with the Fry’s holding 4 seats on the
board as well as the chairmanship and 45.44% of ordinary shares, and the Cadburys
holding the rest (6 seats on the board, and 54.56% of ordinary shares). Another
former director of Fry also sat on the board.
As the companies operations expanded, and factories opened around the world, the
Fry family board representation declined, while Cadbury’s increased. Shortly before
the merger with Schweppes plc in 1969, the Cadbury family held the chairmanship
and 7 of the 13 seats of the board of directors, while only one Fry remained on the
board. The Cadbury family held slightly more than 50 percent of the ordinary shares,
while the Fry family held just over 10%. The rest was dispersed among more than
200 ordinary shareholders. There was evidence of trade on both London and
Birmingham Stock Exchanges of ordinary and preference shares before the merger
with Schweppes in 1969.
These three case studies illustrate the speed with which ownership was dispersed and
how much of the dilution of the original family’s ownership was due to acquisitions
for share exchanges. They also show how one of the founding families came to

19

dominate the merged entity even where the merger was apparently between equals.
This dominance persisted as the ownership of the founding family dwindled.

5

Takeovers in the second half of the century

In the Spring of 1953, Charles Clore, a self-made millionaire from business and
property ventures, launched a bid for J. Sears & Co., the parent company of a shoe
shop chain-store, Freeman, Hardy and Willis. Instead of following the conventional
approach of negotiating with target management, Clore mailed offer documents direct
to Sears’ shareholders over the heads of management. “The Sears directors, who were
taken entirely unawares, retaliated by announcing the tripling of the dividend.
Shareholders were astonished by this sudden largesse, which was perceived as a
desperate and irresponsible act on the part of the management. Faith in the incumbent
board being thoroughly undermined, there was a rush to sell to Clore, who quickly
acquired control of the company. ‘We never thought anything like this would happen
to us’, were the Parthian words of the outgoing Sears’ chairman.” (Roberts (1992), p.
186).
The unconventional nature of the approach was reflected in exceptional financial
features of the bid. In contrast to the observation made above that dividends did not
in general change around acquisitions, the Sears’ directors responded to the bid by
tripling the value of their dividend. While the average value of bid premia had
historically been around zero, the bid premium for Sears was 90% in the month of the
bid and 122% in the five months from month –4 to +1.
As Table 7 shows, there were then several bids that recorded bid premia that were
very large by previous standards. In the case of the bid by Land Securities Investment
Trust in autumn 1953 for the Savoy Hotel Co., owners of the Savoy, Claridge’s and
Simpson’s in the Strand, the bid premium was 19% in the month of the bid and 87%
in the five months around the bid. In the bid for British Aluminium by Reynolds
Metals of Virginia in 1958, the month zero bid premium was 17% and the five months
bid premium was 17%.

20

It is not entirely clear why the takeover market emerged at this juncture in Britain.
Alfred Chandler associates the emergence of a market for corporate control in the US
with the rise in institutional shareholding (Chandler (1990)). But, as Table 3 shows,
in the UK the market for corporate control predated the accumulation of most
institutional shareholdings. A more plausible explanation is that the tighter financial
disclosures required of company accounts by the 1948 Companies Act provided the
basis on which corporate predators could for the first time make reasonably accurate
estimates of asset values and earnings, and thus launch bids without the co-operation
of the target (Hannah (1974b)). In Charles Clore’s takeover of Sears, Roberts (1992)
reports that “Clore launched his attack on being informed by a partner in the estates
agent Healey & Baker that Sears’ balance sheet under-estimated the real estate value
of the firm’s 900 high street stores by £10 million” (page 186).
The response of the corporate sector was to seek protection against the rapidly
emerging takeover market.

It initially received a sympathetic ear from the

government and the Bank of England, which were concerned about the impact of
hostile acquisitions on the corporate sector and the government’s policy of dividend
restraint (Roberts (1992)). All levels of government were involved including in the
case of the bid for the Savoy, the Prime Minister, Winston Churchill, who was
worried about the possible impact of the bid on his favourite dining club at the Savoy.
But while it found this form of buccaneering capitalism distasteful and
ungentlemanly, the government felt impotent to do much about it and in any event, by
the time of the next merger wave at the end of the 1950’s, it had come round to the
view that “Mr Clore appears to have improved the retail shoe trade of the country”.
Unable to gain protection from the government, the corporate sector began to erect its
own defences. Table 8 reports incidence of anti-takeover measures in three years:
1950, 1965 and 1975. In the case of 1965 and 1975 the table also shows changes
(adoptions of anti-takeover defences in existing companies, emergence of new
companies with anti-takeover defences and abandonment by existing companies) from
1950 and 1965 respectively. Anti-takeover measures are said to exist if any of the
following are present: dual class shares, voting restrictions or share blocks by insiders
in excess of 50%. Statistics are reported for three London Stock Exchange sector

21

classifications: Commercial and Industrial, Breweries and Distilleries, and Iron, Coal
and Steel, which totals more than 2000 companies.
Table 8 reports that the number of companies with anti-takeover measures increased
from 73 in 1950 to 249 in 1965. This represents an increase in incidence of antitakeover measures from 3.7% of the sample to 11.1% between 1950 and 1965. There
were 100 new adoptions by companies that were already in existence in 1950 and 92
new companies were formed with anti-takeover defences.7 The incidence of takeover
defences therefore increased substantially during the 1950’s and 1960’s.8
A further form of takeover defence that emerged was to seek protection under the
wing of a friendly company. The brewing industry was particularly fragmented with
a large number of small local brewers. Whitbread took share stakes in several of
these as a way of providing protection against hostile bidders.
For a brief period during the 1950’s and 1960’s, the landscape of corporate Britain
began to resemble that of Continental Europe. There was an unregulated takeover
market with the potential for acquiring control through purchases of partial share
stakes and discriminatory offers. Companies responded by introducing dual class
shares and voting right restrictions and pyramid structures emerged as companies
sought protection under the wing of others.
But these takeover defences met with stiff opposition from an influential quarter – the
institutional investors and the London Stock Exchange. They were concerned about
the interference with the takeover process, the ability of management to entrench itself
behind takeover defences and the withdrawal of their voting rights. Under pressure
from the institutions, the Stock Exchange made it known that it disapproved of the use
of dual class shares and would not permit their use in new equity issues.
The intervention of the institutions and the Stock Exchange proved decisive and
during the 1970’s and 1980’s companies steadily withdrew dual class shares. Panel C
7

There is a residual of 16 companies that were delisted.
The companies with anti-takeover measures were non-acquisitive companies and did not therefore
expect to use their own shares to purchase other companies.
8

22

of Table 8 reports that by 1975, the proportion of listed companies with dual class
shares in the three sectors had declined from 11.1% to 7.1%.

The number of

companies in the Commercial and Industrial Sector that dropped dual class shares
between 1965 and 1975 was well in excess of those that adopted them. By the late
1980s there were only a handful of companies with dual class shares left among listed
companies in the U.K.
Meanwhile, under prompting from the Bank of England, in 1959 the City established
a working party to produce a code of conduct for takeovers. This initially yielded a
series of ineffectual recommendations but, in the face of several prominent takeover
scandals9 and under the looming threat of legislation, in 1967 it produced the City
Code on Take-overs and Mergers and created the Panel on Take-overs and Mergers to
enforce it.10 This in due course established the principle of equal treatment of all
shareholders, the requirement of acquiring firms to disclose their shareholdings and
reveal their intentions, and the obligation to make offers for all shares at highest prices
once 30% of the target firm’s shares had been acquired. In other words, it recreated
by self-regulation the equal price treatment that had prevailed by convention without
regulation in the first half of the century before hostile takeovers.
What is striking about these developments is the fact that the political process was not
at the end of the day guided by the interests of the corporate sector which sought to
limit hostile bids and to erect takeover defences but by those of the financial
institutions. It was the institutions that prevented firms from implementing dual class
shares and the institutions that drew up the rules by which takeovers were
subsequently conducted. It was therefore the financial sector that prevented the UK
from drifting into a Continental style corporate structure with dual class shares,
pyramids and limitations on takeovers and set the ground rules by which an active
market in corporate control could develop. Through the takeover code and panel, the
financial sector also prevented the corporate sector from erecting the takeover
defences, in particular poison pills, that became commonplace in the US. The distinct
nature of the UK corporate sector is therefore in part a consequence of the dominance
9

One example of this was the Jasper Affair in 1959, involving take-over malpractice and the misuse of
building society funds.

23

of equity institutions that placed shareholder returns above the private interests of
either corporate shareholders or management.
6

Conclusions

This paper has documented the rapid erosion of family ownership of UK corporations
during the 20th century.

The dispersed ownership which characterizes the UK

corporate system today emerged early in the 20th century. The UK did not start off
life in the 20th century like Germany or Italy today.

In terms of ownership

concentration and the involvement of families, it looked more like the UK today than
Germany or Italy.
The observations on the dominance of families in the running of firms are a reflection
of their board representation rather than their ownership. Board participation by
families became disproportionate to their ownership stakes. There were good reasons
for being concerned about this development. The divergence between ownership and
control undermined the efficient running of corporations, as documented by Chandler.
But what was remarkable about this was the process by which it came about. The
decline in family ownership was not for the most part a consequence of families
selling out but a result of equity issues. These equity issues were not primarily used
to finance internal growth (there was rather little use of equity for this purpose in the
first half of the 20th century) but to acquire other companies.

Equity financed

acquisitions accounted for a high proportion of the dilution of family holdings.
What is equally striking is the fact that these substantial equity issues took place
against the background of informal, largely unregulated stock markets. Nevertheless,
shareholders trusted directors to uphold principles of equal price treatment for all.
There was little evidence of the partial share offers and price discrimination that
characterizes the takeover market in many countries today.

10

The power of the Panel to sanction firms that do not comply with the Code has proved to be highly
effective.
24

Why directors abided by this and were not tempted to accept cheaper partial offers at
the expense of minority investors is not entirely clear. But one clue comes from the
significance of acquisitions and equity issuance to the growth of corporations. Large
British companies were particularly reliant on the stock market to fund growth. This
may reflect the absence of a local banking system of a type that exists in many other
countries and through which companies in those countries are able to establish close
relations and borrow on an ongoing basis. To be able to access the stock market,
companies in the UK had to sustain the trust of their shareholders, which in part
revolved around ensuring that they were equally treated in new share issues.
Discriminatory offers might reduce the costs of particular acquisitions but these were
more than offset by the higher cost of using equity in subsequent acquisitions.
Regulation was not therefore required since it was in the self-interest of directors to
ensure the fair treatment of their shareholders.
The non-discriminatory treatment of shareholders in takeovers also goes someway
towards explaining the absence of pyramids in the UK. Acquirors were not able to
purchase the partial share stakes in companies that would have allowed them to create
pyramids. Target firms were absorbed into the merged company and essentially
disappeared as separate listed entities.
However, this collaborative arrangement broke down in the middle of the century in
the face of a hostile takeover market. Target directors were no longer in a position to
enforce equal price rules since acquirors could go behind their back and appeal
directly to controlling shareholders. Directors initially tried to protect themselves and
their minority investors by erecting takeover defences. For a brief period, the UK
took on the appearance of Continental Europe with dual class shares, pyramids and
discriminatory price acquisitions. But the takeover defences incurred the wrath of the
institutions, which mounted a successful attack on them through the Stock Exchange
and succeeded in devising the rules by which takeovers were to be conducted.
Once again the development of the UK corporate sector was determined by the
interests of shareholders to a degree that probably did not occur in most other
countries. At an optimistic level, the reason for the oddity of the UK noted at the start
is the well-developed and efficient nature of its stock market and the dominance of
25

financial institutions that eschewed the private benefits of Continental Europe.
Equally plausibly, it is a consequence of its centralized banking system and the
unusual reliance of its corporate sector on the stock market during the 20th century.

26

Table 1 – The number of companies and market capitalization of companies listed on the London
Stock Exchange
This table reports London Stock Exchange statistics on number of listed companies and market capitalization from various
sources. Panel A reports various sources pre–1950, and Panel B reports London Stock Exchange data from 1963 to 2000.
Panel A – Various sources, pre-1950
Date
1847
1853
1913

No. listed
companies, LSE

No. listed companies, Provincial

Source

4902

Killick and Thomas, 1970
Michie
Rajan & Zingales, 2003

200
1,700

1885
701
1907
5711
1939
1,7121
1
Industrial companies only (Hart and Prais).
2
Manchester, Newcastle, Liverpool, and Leeds.

Hart & Prais, 1956
Hart & Prais, 1956
Hart & Prais, 1956

Panel B – London Stock Exchange data from 1963
UK

Date
1963
1970
1980
1990
12000

International
Market
No. of
No. of equity Market value GDP current development
(GDP/MV) No. of companies Market value (£/M)
companies securities.
(£/M)
prices
4,409
4,064
32,204
.
.
3,418
3,197
37,793
387
57,135
44,200
0.86
2,747
2,283
86,720
394
183,846
201,000
0.43
2,006
2,081
450,544
553
1,124,131
479,000
0.94
1,904
2,272
1,796,811
501
3,525,701

Source: London Stock Exchange

27

Table 2 – Family shareholdings and ownership thresholds
This table reports the number of companies in our sample where the founding family owns more than 25%, 50%, and 75% of
issued ordinary share capital, respectively. Panel A refers to the 1900 sample, and reports results separately for survivors and
non-survivors. Panel B refers to the 1960 sample.
Panel A: Number of companies where founding family shareholdings exceed 25%, 50%, and 75% of issued ordinary share
capital for selected years, 1900 sample
Survivors

Non Survivors

25%

50%

75%

N.

25%

50%

75%

N.

N. Obs.

1900

13

9

8

20

9

8

6

20

40

1910

10

7

7

20

9

8

5

20

40

1920

11

8

7

20

8

6

4

17

37

1930

7

4

3

20

8

4

3

16

36

1940

4

3

3

20

4

4

3

12

32

1950

3

3

2

20

4

3

3

10

30

1960

2

1

1

20

3

2

1

4

24

1970

0

0

0

20

2

1

1

3

23

1980

0

0

0

20

1

1

1

2

22

1990

0

0

0

20

0

0

0

1

21

2000

0

0

0

20

0

0

0

0

20

Panel B: Number of companies where founding family shareholdings exceeds 25%, 50%, and 75% of issued ordinary share
capital for selected years, 1960 sample
25%

50%

75%

N. Obs.

1960

16

15

7

20

1970

8

5

3

20

1980

7

2

1

20

1990

1

1

0

20

2000

0

0

0

20

Source: Own calculations

28

Table 3 – Is the largest shareholder an institution?
This table reports the number of companies where the largest shareholder is an institution, along with the average size of these
largest block holdings. Panel A refers to the 1900 sample, and reports results separately for survivors and non-survivors. Panel
B refers to the 1960 sample.
Panel A: Number of companies where the largest shareholder is an institution and block size for selected years, 1900 sample
Survivors

Non Survivors

Largest shareholder is an institution Block Size N. Obs. Largest shareholder is an institution Block Size N. Obs.
1900

0

.

20

0

.

20

1910

1

5.00

20

0

.

20

1920

0

.

20

0

.

17

1930

0

.

20

1

6.90

16

1940

4

5.89

20

1

0.90

12

1950

7

3.73

20

3

8.95

10

1960

8

4.18

20

0

.

4

1970

9

5.35

20

0

.

3

1980

8

6.46

20

0

.

2

1990

16

10.77

20

1

11.70

1

2000

17

12.85

20

0

.

0

Panel B: Number of companies where the largest shareholder is an institution and block size for selected years, 1960 sample
Largest shareholder is an institution

Block Size

N. Obs.

1960

0

.

20

1970

4

4.88

20

1980

5

16.27

20

1990

10

15.39

20

2000

13

16.20

20

Source: Own calculations

29

Table 4– Board composition
This table reports board size and the percentage of board members that do not come from the founding family. Panels A1 and
A2 refer to the 1900 sample for survivors and non-survivors respectively. Panel B refers to the 1960 sample.
Panel A1: Board composition for selected years, 1900 sample, survivors
Board size
Mean

Family CEO
Median

Board members outside founding family (%)
Mean

N. Obs.

Median

1900

5.40

5.00

16

45.46

41.45

20

1910

5.80

5.00

17

44.48

52.75

20

1920

5.95

5.00

13

59.75

66.60

20

1930

6.45

6.00

10

64.37

72.35

20

1940

6.65

6.00

10

64.16

71.55

20

1950

6.90

6.50

9

71.10

87.50

20

1960

7.20

7.00

4

76.15

100.00

20

1970

9.15

8.00

2

81.88

100.00

20

1980

7.95

7.00

2

86.71

100.00

20

1990

8.25

8.00

2

90.68

100.00

20

2000

7.90

7.00

2

92.51

100.00

20

Mean

7.05

7.91

70.66

Source: Own calculations

30

Panel A2: Board composition for selected years, 1900 sample, non survivors
Board size
Mean

Family CEO
Median

Board members outside founding family (%)
Mean

Median

N. Obs.

1900

4.93

4.00

11

68.23

100.00

20

1910

5.33

5.00

10

76.44

100.00

20

1920

5.92

5.50

9

70.34

72.90

17

1930

5.82

5.00

8

72.82

77.70

16

1940

4.86

6.00

5

92.84

100.00

12

1950

3.50

3.50

3

95.83

100.00

10

1960

9.67

8.00

3

100.00

100.00

4

1970

5.50

5.50

2

100.00

100.00

3

1980

7.00

7.00

2

100.00

100.00

2

1990

4.00

4.00

0

100.00

100.00

1

2000

.

.

0

100.00

100.00

0

Mean

5.06

7.74

79.42

Panel B: Board composition for selected years, 1960 sample
Board Size

Family CEO

Mean

Median

1960

2.80

3.00

1970

5.55

1980

Board members outside founding family (%)

N. Obs.

Mean

Median

16

43.15

41.65

20

5.00

12

66.48

77.50

20

6.47

6.00

8

74.94

86.65

20

1990

7.35

7.00

4

82.55

100.00

20

2000

7.00

6.00

3

83.62

100.00

20

Mean

5.83

10.90

70.15

Source: Own calculations

31

Table 5– Separation of ownership and control
This table reports mean and median separation of ownership and control. Separation is defined as the difference between the
proportion of founding family members on the board and family shareholdings. A negative value indicates that there is a
greater proportion of family ownership than board representation. Panel A refers to the 1900 sample, and reports results
separately for survivors and non-survivors. Panel B refers to the 1960 sample.
Panel A: Separation of ownership and control for selected years, 1900 sample
Survivors

No. of Survivors

Non-survivors

No. of Nonsurvivors

Full sample

N. Obs.

1900

–1.16

20

5.69

20

1.86

40

1910

6.78

20

2.00

20

4.67

40

1920

–7.87

20

9.88

17

–1.00

37

1930

8.97

20

14.25

16

10.91

36

1940

15.60

20

6.17

12

13.16

32

1950

13.15

20

4.02

10

11.04

30

1960

14.99

20

0.00

4

12.45

24

1970

15.04

20

0.00

3

12.60

23

1980

12.03

20

0.00

2

11.13

22

1990

9.15

20

0.00

1

8.71

21

2000

6.69

20

.

0

6.69

20

Mean

8.50

6.94

8.13

Panel B: Separation of ownership and control for selected years, 1960 sample
Mean

N. Obs.

1960

–1.52

20

1970

3.13

20

1980

6.70

20

1990

10.50

20

2000

11.94

20

Mean

6.15

Source: Own calculations

32

Table 6– Takeovers in the U. K., 1919–1939: Target board turnover and dividend changes
This table reports the proportion of target directors that resign after a takeover, the number of target companies where the
chairman resigns and the proportion of target companies keeping the dividend constant 2 years prior to the takeover for a
sample of 40 takeovers over the period 1919–1939.

Time period
1919–1923
1924–1928
1929–1933
1934–1939
Total

Proportion of target board
resigning after takeover
5.36%
33.76%
16.68%
57.80%
30.28%

Chairman resigned

Dividend constant

N. Obs.

0
3
2
9
14

10
11
7
8

11
12
7
10
40

Source: Hannah (1974) and own calculations

33

Table 7 – Bid premia in the UK
This table reports the bid premia for the UK in the twentieth century. Panel A considers 40 UK takeovers over the period
1919–1939 and computes premia as the raw (unadjusted) stock returns for targets over the periods (–4 to +1) months and
month 0, where month 0 is the announcement month. Panel B refers to the first three hostile takeover bids of the 1950s, as
reported in Roberts (1992), and computes premia as in Panel A. Panel C refers to 1,463 UK takeovers in the period 1955–1985,
and computes premia as the market–adjusted stock returns for targets over the periods (–4 to +1) months and month 0, where
month 0 is the announcement month. The source for Panel C is Franks and Harris (1989).
Panel A – Bid Premia in the U. K.: 1919–1939

Time Period
1919–23
1924–28
1929–33
1934–39
Mean

Months –4 to +1
EW
–10.02%
+14.69%
– 2.45%
+14.84%
+ 4.93%

No.
11
12
7
10

Month 0
EW
–3.34%
+0.55%
–1.13%
+0.22%
–0.90%

Total Market Value
(£/millions)
31.5
43.3
19.0
26.6

Source: Hannah (1976) and own calculations

Panel B – Bid Premia in the U. K.: Hostile Takeovers 1953–1958

Year
1953
1958
1958
Mean

Target
J. Sears
Savoy Hotel
British Aluminium

Months –4 to +1
EW
122.22%
87.00%
39.53%
82.92%

Month 0
EW
90.48%
19.53%
17.47%
42.49%

Source: Own calculations

Panel C – Bid Premia in the U. K.: 1955–1985

Time Period
1955–59
1960–64
1965–69
1970–74
1975–79
1980–84
Mean

No.
151
190
262
196
383
281

Months –4 to +1
EW
VW
28%
25%
24%
26%
27%
24%
35%
41%
38%
34%
27%
27%
30%
30%

Month 0
EW
16%
18%
19%
25%
30%
25%
22%

VW
11%
14%
12%
23%
22%
30%
19%

Source: Franks and Harris (1989)

34

Total Market Value
(£/billions)
0.5
1.4
3.7
2.8
3.8
10.0

Table 8 –Incidence of anti–takeover measures
This table reports the incidence of anti-takeover measures (dual class voting, voting restrictions and insider ownership greater
than 50%) in the U.K in 1950 in Panel A, 1965 in Panel B and 1975 in Panel C.
Panel A – 1950

Commercial and Industrial
Breweries and Distilleries
Iron, Coal and Steel

No of companies
56
13
4

% of listed companies
3.60%
6.30%
1.82%

73

3.68%

Total
Panel B – 1965

Commercial and Industrial
Breweries and Distilleries
Iron, Coal and Steel
Total

Static Analysis
% of listed
No of companies
companies
236
11.80%
10
10.20%
3
2.21%
249

11.15%

Dynamic Analysis (since 1950)
Adoptions
98
2
0

New companies
86
4
2

Delisting
4
9
3

100

92

16

Panel C – 1975

Commercial and Industrial
Breweries and Distilleries
Iron, Coal and Steel
Total

Static Analysis
% of listed
No of companies
companies
145
7.25%
6
6.06%
1
2.08%
152

7.08%

Source: Own calculations

35

Dynamic Analysis (since 1965)
New
Adoptions companies
Dropped
Delisting
18
7
32
84
1
0
1
4
0
0
1
1
19

7

34

89

References
Becht, Marco, and Colin P. Mayer, 2001. “Introduction” in Barca, Fabrizio, and
Marco Becht, (eds.), 2001, The Control of Corporate Europe. Oxford University
Press, Oxford.
Chandler, Alfred D., 1990. Scale & Scope: The Dynamics of Industrial Capitalism.
Harvard University Press, Cambridge: MA.
Davies Paul, and Klaus J. Hopt, 2004. “Control transactions”, Ch. 7 in Kraakman,
Reinier, Gerard Hertig, Paul Davies, Henry Hansmann, and Klaus J. Hopt, The
Anatomy of Corporate Law. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Florence, P. Sargant, 1953. The logic of British and American industry. Routledge &
Kegan Paul, London.
Franks, Julian R., and Robert S. Harris, 1989. Shareholder wealth effect of corporate
takeovers. The U.K. experience 1955-1985. Journal of Financial Economics, 23 225249.
Franks, Julian R., and Colin P. Mayer, 2001. Ownership and control of German
corporations. Review of Financial Studies 14, 943-977.
Franks, Julian R., and Colin P. Mayer, 1996. Hostile takeovers and the correction of
managerial failure. Journal of Financial Economics 40, 163-181.
Franks, Julian R., Colin P. Mayer, and Stefano Rossi, 2004. Ownership: Evolution
and regulation. Mimeo, London Business School and Saïd Business School,
University of Oxford.
Hannah, Leslie, 1974a. Mergers in British manufacturing industry 1880-1918. Oxford
Economic Papers 26, 1-20.
Hannah, Leslie, 1974b. Takeover bids in Britain before 1950: An exercise in business
‘pre-history’. Business History 16, 65-77.
Hannah, Leslie, 1976. The rise of the corporate economy. Methuen, London.
Hart, P.E. and Prais, S.J., 1956. The analysis of business concentration: a statistical
approach. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society 119, 150-191.
Landes, David, 1965. “Technological change and development in Western Europe
1750-1914”, in H.J. Habakkuk and M. Postan (eds), Cambridge Economic History of
Europe, Vol VI: The Industrial Revolution and After. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.
May, Wilfred, 1939. Financial regulation abroad: The contrasts with American
technique. Journal of Political Economy 47, 457-496.

36

Michie, Ranald C., 1999. The London Stock Exchange: A History. Oxford University
Press, Oxford.
Rajan, Raghuram G., and Luigi Zingales, 2003. The great reversals: The politics of
financial development in the 20th Century. Journal of Financial Economics, 69, 5-50.
Roberts, Richard, 1992. Regulatory responses to the rise of the market for corporate
control in Britain in the 1950s. Business History 34, 183-200.

37

