NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE DESIGN OF FINANCIAL SYSTEMS:
TOWARDS A SYNTHESIS OF FUNCTION AND STRUCTURE
Robert C. Merton
Zvi Bodie
Working Paper 10620
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10620
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2004

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2004 by Robert C. Merton and Zvi Bodie. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

The Design of Financial Systems: Towards a Synthesis of Function and Structure
Robert C. Merton and Zvi Bodie
NBER Working Paper No. 10620
June 2004
JEL No. G1, G2
ABSTRACT
This paper proposes a functional approach to designing and managing the financial systems of
countries, regions, firms, households, and other entities. It is a synthesis of the neoclassical, neoinstitutional, and behavioral perspectives. Neoclassical theory is an ideal driver to link science and
global practice in finance because its prescriptions are robust across time and geopolitical borders.
By itself, however, neoclassical theory provides little prescription or prediction of the institutional
structure of financial systems – that is, the specific kinds of financial intermediaries, markets, and
regulatory bodies that will or should evolve in response to underlying changes in technology,
politics, demographics, and cultural norms. The neoclassical model therefore offers important, but
incomplete, guidance to decision makers seeking to understand and manage the process of
institutional change. In accomplishing this task, the neo-institutional and behavioral perspectives
can be very useful.
In this proposed synthesis of the three approaches, functional and structural finance (FSF),
institutional structure is endogenous. When particular transaction costs or behavioral patterns
produce large departures from the predictions of the ideal “frictionless” neoclassical equilibrium for
a given institutional structure, new institutions tend to develop that partially offset the resulting
inefficiencies. In the longer run, after institutional structures have had time to fully develop, the
predictions of the neoclassical model will be approximately valid for asset prices and resource
allocations. Through a series of examples, the paper sets out the reasoning behind the FSF synthesis
and illustrates its application.
Robert C. Merton
Harvard Business School
Morgan Hall 397
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
rmerton@hbs.edu

Zvi Bodie
Department of Finance and Economics
Boston University
595 Commonwealth Avenue
Boston, MA 02215
zbodie@ifltd.com

Design of Financial Systems: Towards a Synthesis of Function and Structure*
Robert C. Merton and Zvi Bodie
Revised June 22, 2004

I. Introduction
This paper explores a functional approach to the design of a financial system in which
financial functions are the “anchors” or “givens” of such systems and the institutional
structure of each system and its changes are determined within the theory.1 The term
“institutional structure,” as used here, includes financial institutions, financial markets,
products, services, organization of operations, and supporting infrastructure such as
regulatory rules and the accounting system. The financial functions may be provided by
private-sector, governmental and family institutions.

The proposed framework can be

applied both as a descriptive theory to predict the design structure of existing financial
systems and as a prescriptive one to explore how such systems should be designed.
For nearly three decades, the science of finance, largely based on neoclassical finance
with its assumptions of frictionless markets and rational behavior, has had a significant
impact on the global practice of finance, as highlighted in Section II. Prospectively we see
that influence continuing and indeed expanding into a broader domain of applications.
However, as outlined in Section III, the neoclassical paradigm, as an effective abstraction
from complex reality, is being challenged by two alternative paradigms, the new institutional
(or neo-institutional) finance and behavioral finance.
Instead of examining each as competing alternatives, our central methodological thesis
for implementing a functional theory of financial institutions is a synthesis of the
neoclassical, the new institutional, and the behavioral perspectives on finance. We call this
attempt to synthesize these three perspectives, Functional and Structural Finance (“FSF”).
Section IV. frames that functional synthesis by offering a number of examples to illustrate
the basic approach. Section V. offers an overview of the key elements of Functional and

*

First presented orally by the first author as a keynote lecture at the European Finance Association Annual

Meeting, Barcelona, Spain, August 2001. The first written version with the same title circulated as Harvard
Business School Working Paper # 02-074, May 2002.
1

That is, in this theory, financial functions are exogenous factors and the institutional structure is endogenous.

The Design of Financial Systems

Page 2

Structural Finance. The concluding section of the paper discusses the significant influence
of a well-functioning financial system on long-term economic growth as further motivation
for the systematic examination of financial system design.
Although the manifest purpose of the paper is to explore the design of the financial
system and the synthesis of behavioral and transaction cost finance with traditional
neoclassic finance, the analysis has direct implications for the process of investment
management and for prospective evolution of the asset management industry. Indeed several
of the finance examples used to illustrate this approach to a functional synthesis are drawn
from investment management.
The attempt at synthesis offered here is surely far from a complete and axiomatic
development of FSF. Nonetheless, we harbor the hope that this first pass will stimulate
further thought along these lines.

II. On the Impact of Finance Science on Finance Practice
New financial product and market designs, improved computer and telecommunications
technology, and advances in the theory of finance over the last generation have led to
dramatic and rapid changes in the structure of global financial markets and institutions. The
scientific breakthroughs in finance theory in this period both shaped and were shaped by the
extraordinary innovations in finance practice that coincided with these revolutionary changes
in the structure of world financial markets and institutions. The cumulative impact has
significantly affected all of us—as users, producers, or overseers of the financial system.
Finance science has informed practice across a wide spectrum of finance applications,
with powerful prescriptions for valuation, asset allocation, performance measurement, risk
management, and corporate financial decision-making. Surely the prime exemplifying case
is the development, refinement and broad-based adoption of derivative securities such as
futures, options, swaps and other contractual agreements.

Practitioner innovations in

The Design of Financial Systems

Page 3

financial-contracting technology have improved efficiency by expanding opportunities for
risk sharing, lowering transaction costs, and reducing information and agency costs. Those
innovations would not have been possible without the Black-Scholes option-pricing
methodology, which was developed entirely within the academic research community.2
Indeed, in providing the means for pricing and risk measurement of derivative securities,
finance science has contributed fundamentally to the remarkable rate of globalization of the
financial system. Inspection of the diverse financial systems of individual nation-states
would lead one to question how much effective integration across geopolitical borders could
have taken place, since those systems are rarely compatible in institutional forms,
regulations, laws, tax structures, and business practices. Still, significant integration did take
place.
Derivative securities designed to function as adapters among otherwise incompatible
domestic systems were important contributors to effective integration.

In general, the

flexibility created by the widespread use of derivatives as well as specialized institutional
designs provided an effective offset to dysfunctional country-specific institutional rigidities.
Furthermore, derivative-security technologies provide efficient means for creating crossborder interfaces without imposing invasive, widespread changes within each system.
An analogy may prove helpful here. Imagine two countries that want to integrate their
pipelines for transporting oil, gas, water, or anything else. Country A has a pipeline that is
square, while country B’s pipeline is triangular.

Country A’s plan for integrating the

pipelines is to suggest to B that it replace its triangular pipeline with a square one. This, of

2

For an overview of the impact of option pricing on finance theory and practice, see Merton (1998) and

Scholes (1998).

The Design of Financial Systems

Page 4

course, will require a very large and disruptive investment by B. Decision makers in country
B, not surprisingly, have an alternative—country A should tear up its square pipeline and
replace it with a triangular one.
But rarely would either of those two plans make sense. Almost always, the better
solution is to design an efficient adapter which connects the two existing pipelines with
minimum impediments to the flow across borders.
This pipeline analogy captures much of what has been happening during the past twenty
years in the international financial system. Financial engineers have been designing and
implementing derivative contracts to function as efficient adapters that allow the flow of
funds and the sharing of risks among diverse national systems with different institutional
shapes and sizes.
More generally, financial innovation has been a central force driving the financial system
toward greater economic efficiency. Both scholarly research and practitioner experience
over that period have led to vast improvements in our understanding of how to use the new
financial technologies to manage risk.
As we all know, there have been financial “incidents,” and even crises, that cause some
to raise questions about innovations and the scientific soundness of the financial theories
used to engineer them. There have surely been individual cases of faulty engineering designs
and faulty implementations of those designs in finance just as there have been in building
bridges, airplanes, and silicon chips. Indeed, learning from (sometimes even tragic) mistakes
is an integral part of the process of technical progress.3

3

For a detailed exposition of this view see Henry Petrosky (1992). See also Draghi et al (2003, pp. 27-35) for

application of financial science and technology to anticipating and managing macro financial crises.

The Design of Financial Systems

Page 5

However, on addressing the overall soundness of applying the tools of financial
engineering, it is enough to note here the judgment of financial institutions around the world
as measured by their practice. Today no major financial institution in the world, including
central banks, can function without the computer-based mathematical models of modern
financial science. Furthermore, the specific models that these institutions depend on to
conduct their global derivative pricing and risk-management activities are based typically on
the Black-Scholes option pricing methodology.
So much for the past: What about the impending future?
With its agnosticism regarding institutional structure, neoclassical finance theory is an
ideal driver to link science and global practice because its prescriptions are robust across
time and geopolitical borders. Future development of derivative-security technologies and
markets within smaller and emerging-market countries could help form important gateways
of access to world capital markets and global risk sharing. Financial engineering is likely to
contribute significantly in the developed countries as well; as for instance in the major
transitions required for restructuring financial institutions both in Europe and in Japan.4
But will the same intense interaction between the science and practice of finance
continue with respect to the new directions of scientific inquiry?

III. The Challenge to Neoclassical Finance
With its foundation based on frictionless and efficient markets populated with atomistic
and rational agents, the practical applicability of the neoclassical modeling approach is now
challenged by at least two alternative theoretical paradigms.

4

One, New Institutional

For early applications of the FSF approach to bank reform and pension reform, see Merton and Bodie(1993)

and Bodie and Merton (1993), respectively.

The Design of Financial Systems

Page 6

Economics, focuses explicitly on transaction costs, taxes, computational limitations, and other
frictions.5

The other, Behavioral Economics, introduces non-rational and systematically

uninformed behavior by agents.6 In contrast to the robustness of the neoclassical model, the
prescriptions and predictions of these alternatives are manifestly sensitive to the specific
market frictions and posited behavioral deviations of agents.7 Perhaps more latent is the
strong sensitivity of these predictions to the institutional structure in which they are
embedded.
There is a considerable ongoing debate, sometimes expressed in polar form, between the
proponents of these competing paradigms. Those who attack the traditional neoclassical
approach assert that the overwhelming accumulation of evidence of anomalies flatly rejects
it.8 They see a major paradigm shift to one of the new alternatives as essential for progress.
Defenders of the neoclassical paradigm respond that the alleged empirical anomalies are
either not there, or that they can be explained within the neoclassical framework, and that in
either case, the proposed alternatives do not offer a better resolution.9 That debate so framed
is best left to proceed anomaly by anomaly and we say no more about it here.

5

See International Society for New Institutional Economics, www.isnie.org. Transaction Cost Economics is a
central part of the paradigm, see Williamson (1998).
6
Behavioral Economics has its intellectual roots in the work of Kahneman and Tversky (1982). Barbaris and
Thaler (2003) provide a recent and comprehensive survey on behavioral finance. A very different approach to
behavioral finance is to study the relations between emotions and rational financial decision-making by
measuring physiological characteristics. See, for example, Lo and Repin (2002).
7
Intersecting Transactions Cost Finance and Behavioral Finance is Experimental Finance, which takes explicit
account of learning by market participants and its effects on financial market price paths and derives and tests
behavior in laboratory experiments. Cf., Bossaerts (2002) and Bossaerts and Plott (forthcoming) and the
Caltech Laboratory for Experimental Finance, www.hss.caltech.edu/~pbs/LabFinance.html.
8

See the papers by Hall (2001), Hirshleifer (2001), Lamont and Thaler (2003), Shiller (1999), Shleifer (2000),

and Thaler (1993, 2000).
9

See the papers by Fama (1998), Ross (2002), Rubinstein (2001), and Schwert (2003).

The Design of Financial Systems

Page 7

Instead we take a different approach. Rather than choose among the three competing
theoretical perspectives, we believe that each, although not yet of the same historical
significance, can make distinctive contributions to our understanding and each has its
distinctive limitations.
In neoclassical theory, institutions “do not matter” in the sense that equilibrium prices and
the allocation of resources are unaffected by specific institutional structures. As long as
markets are efficient and frictionless, one can use almost any convenient financial system in
a model for analyzing asset demands and the derived equilibrium asset prices and risk
allocations will be the same as in models with more realistic and more complex financial
systems.
In criticizing neoclassical theory, proponents of both neo-institutional and behavioral
finance often posit the same simple financial institutional structure in their models, and then
proceed to show how the introduction of market frictions and deviations from rationality can
cause significant changes in equilibrium allocations and asset price behavior. But this is not
a valid argument. Unlike the frictionless and rational neoclassical case, there is no longer the
invariance of optimal asset demands to institutional specifications.

Hence, proper

assessments, theoretical and empirical, of market allocational and informational efficiency
and interpretations of apparent distortions on capital asset pricing from behavioral and
transactional dysfunctions cannot be undertaken without explicit reference to a realistic
modeling of the institutional environment.

Thus, as major changes take place in the

institutional structure for trading financial assets and allocating risks, one would expect that
the impact of such frictions on asset prices would change. Indeed, from the FSF perspective,
the particular institutions and organizational forms that arise within the financial system are

The Design of Financial Systems

Page 8

an endogenous response to minimize the costs of transaction frictions and behavioral
distortions in executing the financial functions common to every economy.10

As a

consequence, in well-functioning financial systems, high transaction costs and dysfunctional
cognitive dissonance among individuals may not have a material influence on equilibrium
asset prices and risk allocations.

Therefore, from this perspective, market-friction and

behavioral predictions may not provide reliable insights about observed asset prices and
resource allocations, but they will be centrally important—along with technological
progress—in explaining the actual institutional structure of the financial system and the
dynamics of its change.

IV. The Functional Synthesis
The central conclusion of FSF is that in well-developed financial systems, predictions of
the neoclassical theory of finance will be approximately correct for asset prices and resource
allocations, after the endogenous changes in institutional structure have taken place.11
Furthermore, FSF can be used to predict likely changes in institutional structure and to
identify targeted changes in that structure that might lead to more efficient allocations.
Many of the issues facing decision makers around the world today are about institutional
change. In China, for example, decentralization and privatization of large parts of the
economy during the past decade have produced remarkable improvements in standards of
living. Public officials and business leaders now see an urgent need to create a financial
infrastructure to support continued economic development.

10

In Japan, officials are

Fama (1980), Fama and Jensen (1983a, b), Jensen and Meckling (1976) and Ross (1973) also provide a

theory of endogenous determination of organization design and institutions, driven by minimizing agency costs.
11

That approximation becomes precise asymptotically as the underlying system approaches a complete market

functionally.

The Design of Financial Systems

Page 9

considering fundamental changes in the structure of their banking system to overcome
economic stagnation. And in Europe and the United States, pension and Social Security
reform has become a top priority. A critical issue everywhere is controlling the risk of
default by financial institutions.
Neoclassical theory generally serves as a good starting point in addressing such policy
issues. It can identify properties of an efficient equilibrium resulting from the assumptions
of rational optimizing behavior and perfect competition.

In the posited frictionless

environment of neoclassical models, however, multiple alternative institutional structures are
possible to support the same equilibrium asset prices and risk allocations.12
For example, the celebrated Coase theorem shows that in the absence of transaction
costs, a variety of organizational structures can result in optimal resource allocation.13 In
such an environment there would be no reason for firms to exist, since the simpler
neoclassical structure of atomistic agents interacting directly in competitive markets would
work just as well. As Coase shows, however, when transaction costs are brought into the
analysis, then organizational structure matters. Some economic activities are best undertaken
in large hierarchical firms, while other activities are best organized through atomistic
markets.

12

Thus, since the actual institutional environment does not matter with respect to its predictions about asset

prices and resource allocations, the frictionless neoclassical model should be treated as a reduced-form model,
not a structural one. As noted earlier in the text, that same institutional robustness does not apply to predictions
of asset price behavior in transaction-cost and behavioral models.
13

See Coase (1937, 1960).

The Design of Financial Systems

Page 10

Another well-known example of neoclassical assumptions leading to indeterminacy in
structural form is the celebrated M&M Propositions regarding the capital structure of firms.14
Modigliani and Miller prove that in the absence of transaction costs, agency costs, and taxes,
firms would be indifferent with respect to their financing mix between debt and equity.
When these frictions are taken into account, however, a firm’s capital structure can matter a
great deal.15
In both examples—the Coase Theorem and the M&M Propositions—the neoclassical
model serves as a starting point for analysis of institutional structure.

However, the

neoclassical model alone cannot in general identify the most efficient structure. The new
institutional and behavioral theories can be used to help identify features of the environment
that may make one structure superior to another in a particular setting at a particular time.
Thus, the neoclassical model by itself offers some limited guidance to decision makers
seeking to understand and manage the process of institutional change. In FSF, neoclassical,
institutional, and behavioral theories are complementary rather than competing approaches to
analyzing and managing the evolution of financial systems. By employing all three modes of
analysis, FSF can perhaps help policy analysts to choose among competing structural
solutions to real-world problems.

14

See Modigliani and Miller (1958).

15

In offering their proposition, Modigliani and Miller did not assert that capital structure “doesn’t matter” in the

real world. Instead by identifying sufficient conditions, they isolate where to look to explain why it does
matter.

The Design of Financial Systems

Page 11

Instead of attempting a highly formal development of FSF, which is still quite tentative,
we frame its synthesis of the different schools of thought using a series of illustrative
examples.
The two fundamental tenets of FSF are:
•

Neoclassical theory is approximately valid for determining asset prices and resource
allocations (albeit as a reduced-form model), but offers little to explain which
organizational structures for production and performing various financial functions and
which particular market instruments and financial intermediaries will evolve.

•

Neo-institutional and behavioral theories are centrally important in analyzing the
evolution of institutions including market instruments and financial intermediaries, but
are unlikely to provide significant and stable explanations of asset prices and resource
allocations.16

Example 1. Transaction Costs and Option Pricing
A quarter century ago, Nils Hakansson (1979) wrote about the “Catch 22” of the option
pricing model. His point was that if the conditions for Black-Scholes pricing are satisfied,
then the option is a redundant security with no social purpose; and if the conditions are not
satisfied, then the pricing model is wrong.17 The seeming paradox can be resolved, however,
by considering transaction costs.

16

Gilson and Kraakman (2003) reach a similar conclusion on relative importance with respect to behavioral

finance from a different analytical framework.
17

The formal derivation of the Black-Scholes model assumes that all agents can trade continuously without
cost. Under some further restrictions on asset price dynamics, there exists a dynamic trading strategy in the
underlying stock and the risk-free asset that would exactly replicate the payoffs to the option. Hence, by ruling
out arbitrage, the option price is determined.

The Design of Financial Systems

Page 12

In reality most investors face substantial transactions costs and cannot trade even
approximately continuously. But in a modern, well-developed financial system, the lowestcost transactors may have marginal trading costs close to zero, and can trade almost
continuously. Thus the lowest-cost producers of options can approximate reasonably well
the dynamic trading strategy, and their cost of replicating the payoffs to the option is
approximately the Black-Scholes price.18
As in any competitive-equilibrium environment, price equals marginal cost. As is typical
in analyses of other industries, the equilibrium prices of financial products and services are
more closely linked to the costs of efficient actual producers than to inefficient potential ones.
The result in this context is that high-trading-cost individuals can become customers of lowtrading-cost financial intermediaries and buy options at nearly the same price as if those
individuals could trade continuously without cost.
The underlying force driving the development of efficient institutional structures is Adam
Smith’s “invisible hand”—firms seeking to maximize their profits in competitive product
markets. Potential customers have a demand for the contingent payoffs associated with
options, and profit-seeking financial firms compete to supply the options using the lowestcost technology available to them. As marginal trading costs for the financial firms approach
zero, equilibrium option prices approach the Black-Scholes dynamic-replication cost. Thus,
we should find that with an efficient, well-developed financial system, over time the
neoclassical model gives the “correct” pricing as a reduced form, but options and other

18

The case is further strengthened by taking into account the fact that such intermediaries only need to
dynamically hedge their net exposures after offsetting them within the firm. See Merton (1989).

The Design of Financial Systems

Page 13

derivative financial instruments and the institutions that produce them are certainly not
redundant.19
Example 2. Continuous-Time Portfolio Theory
Our second example is closely related to the first one, but carries it a step further.
Consider the Intertemporal CAPM and the assumptions of frictionless markets and
continuous trading used in deriving it.20 It is well known that by introducing transaction
costs into a model with an institutional structure in which individuals all trade for themselves
directly in the markets, one can get very different portfolio demand functions and thus very
different equilibrium prices.21 But in the presence of substantial information and transaction
costs it is not realistic to posit that the only process for individuals to establish their optimal
portfolios is to trade each separate security for themselves directly in the markets. Instead,
individuals are likely to turn to financial organizations such as mutual and pension funds that
can provide pooled portfolio management services at a much lower cost than individuals can
provide for themselves. Equilibrium asset prices will therefore reflect the lower marginal
transaction costs of those financial-service firms and not the higher transaction costs of the
individuals.
Neoclassical portfolio theory also offers some guidance in identifying the likely nature of
the services to be provided by financial intermediaries. The theory of portfolio selection tells
us that in the absence of transaction costs and with homogeneous expectations, individuals
would be indifferent between choosing individually among all assets and choosing among a
small number of optimized portfolios. This is the classic “separation” theorem of portfolio

19

For further discussion, see Merton (1989, pp. 251-254, 1992, pp.466-467) on “quasi-dichotomy.”

20

Merton (1973, 1992).

21

Constantinides (1986).

The Design of Financial Systems

Page 14

theory.22 But in the presence of significant information and transaction costs, the separation
theorem turns into an elementary theory of financial intermediation through mutual funds.
Mutual funds are the investment intermediaries that specialize in producing optimized
portfolios by gathering the information needed (expected returns, standard deviations, and
correlations among the full set of risky assets) and combining them in the right proportions
(the efficient portfolio frontier). Because of economies of scale in gathering information,
processing it, and trading securities, the transaction costs for mutual funds will be
significantly lower than for individuals, so individuals will tend to hold mutual funds rather
than trade in the individual securities themselves.
This view also addresses the issue of heterogeneous expectations in the Capital Asset
Pricing Model by offering a justifying interpretation for its standard assumption of
homogeneous beliefs: Namely, investors in mutual funds in effect “agree to agree” with the
return-distribution estimates of the professionals who manage those funds. Furthermore,
since professional investors tend to use similar data sets and methods of statistical analysis,
their estimates may be more homogeneous than would otherwise be the case if individuals
were gathering data and making forecasts directly for themselves.23
In more realistically complete models of lifetime portfolio selection, individuals may
have complex optimal dynamic strategies. Here too, neoclassical theory offers a useful
starting point for a theory of financial structure. As shown in Merton (1989), for every
dynamic trading strategy there exists an equivalent contingent contract or derivative
security. Black, Merton, and Scholes derived the option pricing model by showing that there

22

Cass and Stiglitz (1970), Markowitz (1952), Tobin (1958), and Merton (1971, 1973, 1992).

23

As evidence for this convergence in data sources, consider the ubiquitous CRSP data or COMPUSTAT.

The Design of Financial Systems

Page 15

is a dynamic trading strategy which replicates the payoffs from a call option. That same
approach applies to any derivative security.24 The contingent-claim-equivalence to dynamic
portfolio strategies can be derived by running the option-pricing derivation “in reverse.”25
From contingent-claim-equivalence it follows that a low-transaction-cost financial
intermediary can sell to high-transaction-cost customers fully hedged (“immunized”)
contracts that have the contingent payoffs associated with an optimized portfolio strategy.
The intermediary pursues the dynamic trading strategy at its lower transaction costs and
provides the specified contractual payoffs to its customers.26
Note that under this view of the process of financial intermediation, the products
traditionally provided by investment management firms tend to merge with the long-term
contracts traditionally produced by the life insurance industry.

This convergence

transformation has been going on for many years in the market for variable annuities in the
United States, although it has largely been motivated by the tax-deferral advantages of
annuities.

24

See Merton (1992, Chapter 13).

25

This type of procedure is developed in Haugh and Lo (2001) and in Merton (1989, pp.250-54; 1992, pp.450-

464). See also Merton (1995, pp.477-479; 2002, pp.62-63) for its application to central bank open-market
operations.
26

A more accurate assessment of the real-world impact should also take into account other risk-management

tools that intermediaries have to reduce transaction costs. For instance, as developed in analytical detail in
Merton (1992, pp.450-457), intermediaries need only use dynamic trading to hedge their net derivative-security
exposures to various underlying assets. For a real-world intermediary with a large book of various derivative
products, netting can vastly reduce the size and even the frequency of the hedging transactions necessary.
Beyond this, as part of their optimal risk management, intermediaries can “shade” their bid and offer prices
among their various products to encourage more or less customer activity in different products to help manage
their exposures. The limiting case when the net positions of customer exposures leaves the intermediary with
no market exposure is called a “matched book.”

The Design of Financial Systems

Page 16

If this view is correct, then as transaction costs continue to decline, financial
intermediaries will produce more complicated-to-produce products that combine features of
investments and insurance. They will be customized to provide easy-to-understand, seamless
solutions to complex life-cycle risk management needs of households.
Households today are called upon to make a wide range of important and detailed
financial decisions that they did not have to in the past. For example, in the United States,
there is a strong trend away from defined-benefit corporate pension plans that require no
management decisions by the employee toward defined-contribution plans that do. There are
more than 9,000 mutual funds and a vast array of other investment products. Along with
insurance products and liquidity assets, the household faces a daunting task to assemble these
various components into a coherent effective lifetime financial plan.
Some see this trend continuing with existing products such as mutual funds being
transported into technologically less-developed financial systems. Perhaps so, especially in
the more immediate future, with the widespread growth of relatively inexpensive Internet
access to financial “advice engines.”

However, the creation of all these alternatives

combined with the deregulation that made them possible has consequences: Deep and wideranging disaggregation has left households with the responsibility for making important and
technically complex micro financial decisions involving risk—such as detailed asset
allocation and estimates of the optimal level of life-cycle saving for retirement—decisions
that they had not had to make in the past, are not trained to make in the present, and are
unlikely to execute efficiently in the future, even with attempts at education.
The availability of financial advice over the Internet at low cost may help to address
some of the information-asymmetry problems for households with respect to commodity-like

The Design of Financial Systems

Page 17

products for which the quality of performance promised is easily verified. However, the
Internet does not solve the “principal-agent” problem with respect to more fundamental
financial advice dispensed by an agent. That is why we believe that the future trend will
shift toward more integrated financial products and services, which are easier to understand,
more tailored toward individual profiles, and permit much more effective risk selection and
control.27
Production of the new brand of integrated, customized financial instruments will be made
economically feasible by applying already existing financial pricing and hedging
technologies that permit the construction of custom products at “assembly-line” levels of
cost. Paradoxically, making the products more user-friendly and simpler to understand for
customers will create considerably more complexity for their producers. The good news for
the producers is this greater complexity will also make reverse engineering and “product
knockoffs” by second-movers more difficult and thereby, protect margins and create
franchise values for innovating firms.

Hence, financial-engineering creativity and the

technological and transactional bases to implement that creativity, reliably and costeffectively, are likely to become a central competitive element in the industry.
These developments will significantly change the role of the mutual fund from a direct
retail product to an intermediate or “building block” product embedded in the more
integrated products used to implement the consumer’s financial plan. The “fund of funds” is
an early, crude example. The position and function of the fund in the future will be much
like that of individual traded firms today, with portfolio managers, like today’s CEOs, selling

27

For more detailed discussions, see Aaron (1999), Bodie (2003), Bodie, Hammond, and Mitchell (2001) and

Merton (2002, 2003).

The Design of Financial Systems

Page 18

their stories of superior performance to professional fund analysts, who then make
recommendations to “assemblers ” of integrated retail financial products.
Example 3. Irrational Pessimism/Optimism
Having given two examples of how transaction costs can endogenously determine
financial structure and the production process while neoclassical models remain valid as
reduced-form predictors of equilibrium asset prices and allocations, we now offer an
example of how behavioral factors can have similar effects. As we know from the empirical
studies done by Kahneman, Tversky, and other behavioral scientists, people’s financial
behavior can differ systematically from the neoclassical assumptions of rationality. In
particular, it has been shown that when individual choices depend on probabilities,
subjective estimates of these probabilities are often subject to large biases. It does not
necessarily follow, however, that the market prices of products whose demand depends on
probability estimates—products such as insurance—will reflect those biases. To see why,
consider the market for life insurance.
Suppose that people systematically underestimate their life expectancies. Then if they
are risk-averse (or even risk-neutral) the price they will be willing to pay for life insurance
will be “too high” relative to the actuarially fair price. For example, suppose that the
actuarially fair annual price is $20 per $10,000 of insurance, but people would be willing to
pay $40 as their “reservation” price. What would be the likely institutional dynamics of
price formation in this market?
Life insurance firms that enter this market early might earn large profits because they
can charge the reservation price of $40 while their underwriting cost will be the $20
expected loss. But others will examine the mortality data, calculate the spread between
price charged and the objective costs of supplying life insurance, and soon discover the

The Design of Financial Systems

Page 19

profit opportunity available. If there are no effective barriers to the entry of new firms,
price competition will drive the price to the zero excess-profit point.28
Thus in the long-run competitive equilibrium, life insurance prices will reflect the
rational unbiased probabilities of mortality, even though every buyer of life insurance has
biased estimates of these probabilities. The institutional structure of providers of this riskintermediating function and its dynamics of evolution may be greatly affected by this
behavioral aberration even though asymptotically it has no effect on equilibrium price and
once again neoclassical pricing obtains, as a reduced form.29
Example 4. Home Bias
Now consider the well-documented “home-bias” effect in portfolio selection.30 Several
rational explanations for this effect have been proposed in the economics and finance
literature—for example, higher information costs for foreign vs. domestic shares.31 But
suppose that the reason is indeed an irrational bias against investing abroad. Thus, U.S.
residents prefer to invest in the shares of U.S. corporations just because they are domiciled
in the United States. They therefore invest far less abroad than is optimal according to the
neoclassical model of optimal diversification.

28

See Coval and Thaker (forthcoming) for a prime demonstration with a formal model of the role of

institutionally rational intermediaries in bridging the dysfunctional behavior between irrationally optimistic
individual entrepreneurs and irrationally pessimistic individual investors.
29

For an alternative, “Neo-Austrian” view of the dynamic adjustment process in which asset prices tend to

move toward an inefficient but stable equilibrium, see Benink and Bossaerts (2001) and Benink et al (2004).
30

See for examples, Coval and Moskowitz (1999), Cronqvist and Thaler (2004), Hong, Kubik, and Stein

(2004), Huberman (1999) and Lewis (1998).
31

More generally, see Merton (1987) for a portfolio and asset pricing model in which passive indexing

investment strategies are permitted but active investors trade only in firms they know about, and the cost of
information limits the number of firms an active investor knows about.

The Design of Financial Systems

Page 20

Does the posited behavioral “aberration” result in an equilibrium allocation different
from the neoclassical prediction?
Not necessarily. If U.S. corporations were to invest only in U.S. capital projects, then
with investor home bias the equilibrium cost of capital and expected return on shares for
U.S. companies would be lower than in the neoclassical equilibrium, and higher for nonU.S. projects and firms. However, with value-maximizing managers and absent legislative
restrictions on investment, this equilibrium is not sustainable. With the lower cost of capital
for the shares of U.S. corporations, U.S. firms will find that direct investments abroad will
have higher net present value than domestic ones. Asymptotically in the limiting case of no
other imperfections except investor home bias, U.S. corporations would end up issuing
shares in the United States and investing overseas until they reach an asset allocation and
cost of capital that is the same as predicted in a neoclassical no-home-bias equilibrium.
Thus, the final equilibrium asset prices and allocations will be as predicted by
neoclassical finance theory. However, the institutional structure in which specific financial
functions are executed may be materially determined by investor home bias. Of all possible
institutional structures that are consistent with the neoclassical equilibrium, FSF looks for
the one which most effectively mitigates the distortionary effects of home bias. Thus,
instead of mutual funds and other investment intermediaries exclusively serving the
function of international diversification on behalf of U.S. residents, home bias may cause
domestically based manufacturing and service companies to perform this diversification
function through direct investment.
Much the same story would be true at a more micro level for regional biases within a
country’s borders.

For example, Huberman (1999) reports that people invest

The Design of Financial Systems

Page 21

disproportionately in the shares of their local Bell Operating Systems. Again, we argue that
this behavior does not necessarily lead to a distortion in equilibrium prices of shares relative
to the neoclassical prediction. However, this behavior would lead one to predict that Bell
operating companies located in more investor-rich regions might branch out and invest
directly in operating companies in other less wealthy regions. Cross-regional diversification
would thus be performed by the operating telephone companies themselves rather than by
mutual funds and other “pure” financial intermediaries.
Note the operation here of the “invisible hand.” Each individual investor retains his/her
home-biased behavior, and firm actions are driven by the motive of maximizing net present
value, without requiring any explicit awareness of that behavior.
Recognition that endogenous institutional changes may affect the influence of home bias
on asset prices, if that bias is behaviorally driven, suggests some interesting time series tests
which compare the amounts of stock of companies held directly by “locals” who are not
managers of the firms in the 1950s, 1970s, and 1990s. One might expect that the much
larger institutional holdings of stocks in the latter periods would mitigate the home bias
effect.32 Much the same tests could be applied to investments in local mutual fund groups
that over time have moved into investing in shares of foreign companies.

32

Although a time series test has not yet been undertaken, the findings of Hong, Kubik, and Stein (2004) appear

to support this view in a cross-sectional analysis of firms.

The Design of Financial Systems

Page 22

Example 5. Regret Aversion33
Now consider another example from investing to illustrate how institutions might
respond to an irrational behavior pattern by creating new financial instruments. Suppose
that people do indeed have an aversion to feeling sorry after-the-fact for earlier investment
decisions they made. If this behavioral trait is widespread, then we might expect to find a
demand in the market for “look-back” options. A look-back call option gives its owner the
right to buy an underlying security at the lowest price at which it traded during the term of
the option. Similarly a look-back put option gives its owner the right to sell the underlying
security at the highest price at which it traded during the term of the option.34 Thus, by
paying a fixed insurance-like premium, the investor is assured of no regret from his
investment decisions during the subsequent period covered by the option, because he will
buy the stock at the lowest price (or sell it at the highest price) possible. There is of course
a prospect for regret from paying for the option itself, if the ex post gain from the option
does not exceed its cost. However, such regret, if any, may well be minimal because the
premium is fixed in advance (bounding the amount of regret) and the “base” price for
comparison (if the investor had sold or bought at some point instead of purchasing the
option) is likely to be “fuzzy.” Furthermore, if the marketing of the option frames it
psychologically as “regret insurance,” then investors may be no more at risk of realizing
regret from paying the premium than from the purchase of other standard forms of
insurance, such as fire and theft protection on a house or car.

33

Regret Aversion is the tendency to avoid taking any action due to a fear that in retrospect it will turn out to be

less than optimal.
34

Look-back options are a particular version of exotic options, a major financial industry line of products.

The Design of Financial Systems

Page 23

Those regret-averse investors who would otherwise hold sub-optimal portfolio strategies
because of strong regret aversion may well be willing to pay a premium price for such an
option.

The theory laying out the production technology and production cost for an

intermediary to create look-back options first appeared in the scientific literature more than
two decades ago.35 Today, look-back options are available widely over-the-counter from
investment and commercial banks.
The point of this example is to suggest that if regret aversion is indeed a significant
behavioral phenomenon, then FSF theory predicts an institutional response in the form of
creating products like look-back options.

If regret is so widespread that it affects

equilibrium prices, then at a given point in time, one investor’s regret concern about selling
a security is likely to mirror another investor’s regret concern about buying that security. If
so, a properly designed institution or market may be able to “pair off” these offsetting
demands and neutralize the regret effect on asset demands. Thus, the theoretically predicted
incremental effect that this behavioral phenomenon might have had on equilibrium asset
prices and allocations in an institutional environment without look-back options or another
functionally equivalent institution can be mitigated or eliminated entirely with their
inclusion by institutionally rational intermediaries.36

35
36

Goldman et al, 1979. See more recently, Shepp and Shiryaev (1993).

A similar approach could be taken for mitigating other types of psychological factors that may also
influence investment decisions dysfunctionally. For a convenient listing of those factors affecting investing,
see http://www.altruistfa.com/behavioralinvestingpitfalls.htm. Thaler and Benartzi (2004) provide a realworld example of correcting the economic impact of cognitive errors with a product designed to use precommitment to offset the dysfunctional behavior affecting individual retirement saving. Another example is
found in Miller (2002) who shows how collective non-cooperative behavior in markets can learn to avoid
bubbles.

The Design of Financial Systems

Page 24

Example 6. Organizational Design
In this example we move from financial products to consider how organizational design
itself might offset dysfunctional individual behavior and produce an end result that is in line
with neoclassical predictions. For example, suppose that when making investment decisions
individually, analysts tend to be optimistic and overconfident in their forecasts for the
securities they study.37 Let us suppose further that when individual analysts, each of whom
has studied a different security, are brought together in a group and asked to form a group
consensus regarding all of the securities, the bias is mitigated or altogether eliminated.
FSF theory would predict a strong tendency for asset-management and other financialservice firms to organize investment selections as a group process including creating
investment committees to evaluate the recommendations of individual security analysts and
portfolio managers. The committees would have the effect of mitigating the bias of the
individual analysts. Consequently there would be little or no impact of this individual bias
on actual investment choices and equilibrium asset market prices.
Example 7. Don’t change behavior; solve with institutions
Now suppose it were possible to change the behavior of individuals to make them less
optimistic and overconfident when analyzing individual securities. Although such a change
in behavior would eliminate the bias, it might be better not to tinker with the behavior of
individuals. The reason is that although optimism and overconfidence are dysfunctional in
the domain of security analysis, they may be functional in other domains vital to individual

37

Thaler (2000) writes: “We all tend to be optimistic about the future. On the first day of my MBA class on

decision-making at the University of Chicago, every single student expects to get an above-the-median grade,
yet half are inevitably disappointed.”

The Design of Financial Systems

Page 25

success. That is, there can be unintended and unanticipated consequences of this action. By
eliminating a person’s optimism and overconfidence in general, we may therefore do more
harm than good. Thus, it may be considerably better to rely on investment committees as a
means of offsetting the individual bias caused by overconfidence than to attempt to alter the
behavior of the individual analyst.
Example 8. Sociological Elements of Behavioral Finance38
The preceding examples of behavioral distortions of efficient risk allocation and asset
pricing all involve cognitive dissonance of individual agents. However, there is another
dimension of potential behavioral effects that is sociological in nature in that it derives from
the social structure of the financial system. Sociological behavior is neither under the control
of individuals within that social structure nor a direct consequence of simple aggregation of
individual cognitive dysfunctions. A classic instance within finance is the Self-Fulfilling
Prophecy (“SFP”),39 applied for instance to bank runs: A bank would remain solvent
provided that a majority of its depositors do not try to take their money out at the same time.
However, as a consequence of a public prophesy that the bank is going to fail, each depositor
attempts to withdraw his funds and in the process of the resulting liquidity crisis, the bank
does indeed fail. Each individual can be fully rational and understand that if a “run on the
bank” does not occur, it will indeed be solvent. Nevertheless, as a consequence of the public
prophesy, each depositor decides rationally to attempt to withdraw his savings and the
prophecy of bank failure is fulfilled. As we know, one institutional design used to offset this
dysfunctional collective behavior is deposit insurance. There are of course others.

38

See Smelser and Swedberg (1994) and Swedberg (2003) for an overview of economic sociology.

39

See R. K. Merton (1948, 1957).

The Design of Financial Systems

Page 26

“Performativity” or Performing Theory has been employed as a mode of analysis with
respect to the accuracy of the Black-Scholes option pricing model in predicting market prices
of options, exploring whether the model’s widespread public dissemination and use by
option traders may have actually caused market pricing to change so as to make the model’s
predictions become more accurate.40 Other recent work applying sociological analysis to
finance issues includes studies of the sociology of arbitrage and understanding the
development of derivative and other financial markets.41

V. Elements of Functional and Structural Finance
In this section we review the main analytical elements of FSF as exemplified by the cases
of the preceding section.
Functions are the “anchors”
When studying the dynamics of financial systems, it is best to adopt an analytical
framework that treats functions rather than institutions as the conceptual anchors.42 In this
analytical framework the functions are exogenous, and the institutional forms are
endogenously determined.

40

See MacKenzie (forthcoming) and Mackenzie and Millo (2003). The distinction between Performativity and

a SFP is subtle but significant. Performativity implies that the widespread belief in the model causes pricing in
the market to change toward greater conformity with the model than before. The concept of a SFP applies only
if the prophesized event —in this case the model-predicted option pricing—would not have occurred in the
absence of its public proclamation, usually suggesting that the proclamation (the model) was dysfunctionally
“unjustified.” Hence, even if widespread public knowledge of the model’s adoption leads others to use it, it is
not a SFP if the model is economically valid or would be justified, even in the absence of its public
proclamation. See Merton (1992, p. 471).
41

See MacKenzie (2000, 2003, forthcoming).

42

See Merton (1993) on the functional perspective. The functional analytical framework presented here is

developed in Crane et al (1995). Financial functions for financial institutions are also used in a different
analytic framework that originates from the important work of Diamond and Dybvig (1986).

The Design of Financial Systems

Page 27

The point of departure is the neoclassical paradigm
When analyzing changes in parts of the financial system, a useful point of departure is
the neoclassical paradigm of rational agents operating opportunistically in an environment of
frictionless markets. If existing prices and allocations fail to conform to the neoclassical
paradigm, it is helpful to focus on why. The possible causes of such a failure might be:
o Existing institutional rigidities, in which case we might consider applying
institutional design techniques to circumvent their unintended and dysfunctional
aspects or abolish them directly, if the institutional sources are no longer needed.
o Technological inadequacies, which innovation may disappear over time as a result
of innovation.
o Dysfunctional behavioral patterns that cannot be offset by institutional changes.
Theory as a predictor of practice
As technology progresses and transaction costs continue to fall, finance theory is likely to
provide increasingly more accurate predictions and prescriptions for future product
innovations. Combining behavioral theory with neoclassical theory, together with existing
theory within New Institutional Economics, should produce better predictions and
prescriptions for the kinds of institutional changes to expect.43

43

As discussed in footnote 40 for pricing models, Performativity can apply as well to the evolution of

institutional change. If a better theory of institutional dynamics starts to become more widely adopted, its
predictions about those dynamics will become more accurate as its adoption spreads and more players use it to
make decisions about institutional changes.

The Design of Financial Systems

Page 28

Institutional rationality vs. individual irrationality
Even when individuals behave in ways that are irrational, institutions may evolve to
offset this behavior and produce a net result that is “as if” the individuals were behaving
rationally. This is a version of Adam Smith’s “invisible hand.” Structural models that
include transactions costs, irrational behavior, or other “imperfections” may give distorted
predictions when framed in a neoclassical “minimalist” institutional setting of atomistic
agents interacting directly in markets. It is therefore essential to include the endogenous
institutional response. Studies of the impact of transactions costs or irrational behavior
patterns would be greatly enhanced if as a matter of format, they included a section on
institutional designs that have the potential to mitigate the effects of these patterns on prices
and allocations. The resulting institutional design, if not already in place, can be seen as
providing either a prediction about the dynamics of future institutional change or as a
normative prescription for innovation.
Synthesis of public and private finance
The FSF approach has no ideological bias in selecting the best mix of institutions to use
in performing financial functions. It treats all institutions, whether governmental, privateenterprise or family based, as potential solutions.

The same techniques of financial

engineering apply whether the financial system is dominated by governmental institutions or
by private-sector ones or by a balanced mix of the two. FSF seeks to find the best way to
perform the financial functions for a given place at a given time.
For example, consider alternative systems for financing retirement. In recent years there
is great interest around the world in this subject, and big changes are occurring in the
institutional means for providing this essential financial function. In some countries where
the economy is primarily based on traditional agriculture, retirement income is provided

The Design of Financial Systems

Page 29

almost entirely by the retiree’s family. In other countries it is provided by government, or by
a mix of government and private-sector pension plans.
This is not by accident. The best institutional structure for providing income to the
retiree population varies from country to country, and within a single country it changes over
time.

That best structure depends on a country’s demographics, its social and family

structure, its history and traditions, and its stage of economic development. And it changes
with changes in technology.
These changes in retirement systems are sometimes treated as exogenous events or
framed as the result of policy mistakes of the past. Instead, we propose that they be viewed
systematically as part of a dynamic process of institutional change that can be analyzed
and improved using the latest financial technology.44

The Financial Innovation Spiral45
The evolution of retirement systems, and indeed the financial system as a whole, can be
viewed as an innovation spiral, in which organized markets and intermediaries compete with
each other in a static sense and complement each other in a dynamic sense. That
intermediaries and markets compete to be the providers of financial products is widely
recognized. Improving technology and a decline in transactions costs has added to the
intensity of that competition. Inspection of Finnerty’s (1988, 1992) extensive histories of
innovative financial products suggests a pattern in which products offered initially by
intermediaries ultimately move to markets. For example:

44

Bodie (2000).

45

See Merton (1993, pp. 27-33). The description here draws heavily on Merton and Bodie (1995).

The Design of Financial Systems

Page 30

o The development of liquid markets for money instruments such as commercial paper
allowed money-market mutual funds to compete with banks and thrifts for household
savings.
o The creation of “high-yield” and medium-term note markets, which made it possible
for mutual funds, pension funds, and individual investors to service those corporate
issuers who had historically depended on banks as their source of debt financing.
o The creation of a national mortgage market allowed mutual funds and pension funds
to become major funding alternatives to thrift institutions for residential mortgages.
o Creation of these funding markets also made it possible for investment banks and
mortgage brokers to compete with the thrift institutions for the origination and
servicing fees on loans and mortgages.
o Securitization of auto loans, credit-card receivables, and leases on consumer and
producer durables, has intensified the competition between banks and finance
companies as sources of funds for these purposes.
This pattern may seem to imply that successful new products will inevitably migrate
from intermediaries to markets. That is once a successful product becomes familiar, and
perhaps after some incentive problems are resolved, it will become a commodity traded in a
market. Some see this process as destroying the value of intermediaries. However, this
“systematic” loss of successful products is a consequence of the functional role of
intermediaries and is not dysfunctional. Just as venture-capital firms that provide financing
for start-up businesses expect to lose their successful creations to capital market sources of
funding, so do the intermediaries that create new financial products expect to lose their
successful and scalable ones to markets. Intermediaries continue to prosper by finding new

The Design of Financial Systems

Page 31

successful products and the institutional means to perform financial functions more
effectively than the existing ones, all made possible by the commodization of existing
products and services.
Thus, exclusive focus on the time path of individual products can be misleading, not only
with respect to the seemingly secular decline in the importance of intermediation, but with
respect to understanding the functional relations between financial markets and
intermediaries. The evolution of the financial system can be viewed as an innovation spiral,
in which organized markets and intermediaries compete with each other in a static sense and
complement each other in a dynamic sense.
Financial markets tend to be efficient institutional alternatives to intermediaries when the
products have standardized terms, can serve a large number of customers, and are wellenough understood for transactors to be comfortable in assessing their prices. Intermediaries
are better suited for low-volume customized products. As products such as futures, options,
swaps, and securitized loans become standardized and move from intermediaries to markets,
the proliferation of new trading markets in those instruments makes feasible the creation of
new custom-designed financial products that improve “market completeness,” to hedge their
exposures on those products, the producers (typically, financial intermediaries) trade in these
new markets and volume expands; increased volume reduces marginal transaction costs and
thereby makes possible further implementation of more new products and trading strategies
by intermediaries, which in turn leads to still more volume. Success of these trading markets
and custom products encourages investment in creating additional markets and products, and
so on it goes, spiraling toward the theoretically limiting case of zero marginal transactions
costs and dynamically complete markets.

The Design of Financial Systems

Page 32

Consider, for example, the Eurodollar futures market that provides organized trading in
standardized LIBOR (London Interbank Offered Rate) deposits at various dates in the future.
The opportunity to trade in this futures market provides financial intermediaries with a way
to hedge more efficiently custom-contracted interest-rate swaps based on a floating rate
linked to LIBOR. A LIBOR rather than a U.S. Treasury rate-based swap is better suited to
the needs of many intermediaries’ customers because their cash-market borrowing rate is
typically linked to LIBOR and not to Treasury rates.
At the same time, the huge volume generated by intermediaries hedging their swaps has
helped make the Eurodollar futures market a great financial success for its organizers.
Furthermore, swaps with relatively standardized terms have recently begun to move from
being custom contracts to ones traded in markets. The trading of these so-called “pure
vanilla” swaps in a market further expands the opportunity structure for intermediaries to
hedge and thereby enables them to create more-customized swaps and related financial
products more efficiently.
As an example consider the following issue faced by smaller countries with funded
pension plans sponsored by either the government or by private institutions. Currently these
pension funds invest almost entirely in domestic securities—debt and equity issued by local
firms, municipalities, and other entities. Although there would appear to be significant
potential benefits from international risk-sharing by pension funds, this has not yet happened
to any significant extent.
One way for such international risk-sharing to occur is for the small-country pension
funds to invest abroad and for foreign financial institutions to offset this flow of funds by
investing in the small country. However, there are significant barriers to such international

The Design of Financial Systems

Page 33

flows of investment funds. Small country governments fear that the outflows will not be
matched by inflows of funds, and therefore impose restrictions on the amount that pension
funds can invest abroad. At the same time, investors in large countries are reluctant to invest
in smaller countries for fear of manipulation and expropriation of their investments.
To circumvent many of these obstacles and obtain better international diversification,
pension funds may rely increasingly on international swap contracts.46 A swap contract
consists of two parties exchanging (or “swapping”) a series of payments at specified intervals
(say, every 6 months) over a specified period of time (say, 10 years). The payments are
based upon an agreed principal amount (called the “notional” amount), and there is no
immediate payment of money between the parties. Thus, as in forward and futures contracts,
the swap contract itself provides no new funds to either party. The size of each swap
payment is the difference between the actual value of the item specified in the contract (e.g.,
an exchange rate or an interest rate) and the value specified in advance in the contract.
International pension swaps would enable a small country to diversify internationally without
violating restrictions on investing capital abroad.47
Swap contracts provide an excellent example to illustrate the importance of institutional
details that are routinely ignored in neoclassical analysis. As mentioned earlier in this paper,
the neoclassical theory of derivatives focuses on the equivalences among various
combinations of derivatives and the underlying assets. Thus in a frictionless perfect-market
environment, leveraged cash market positions, swaps, forward contracts, and futures
contracts all perform fundamentally the same economic function of risk-transfer, and their

46

Bodie and Merton (2002).

The Design of Financial Systems

Page 34

prices are all linked to each other by a pricing relation that rules out arbitrage profits. In this
limited sense, given cash or forward or futures contracts, swaps are “redundant.”
But in the actual world of contemporary international finance, small differences in the
institutional details can have material implications for the speed of implementation. Futures
contracts are multilateral-party exchange-traded instruments, whereas swap contracts are
bilateral and are almost never traded on an exchange. To introduce a new type of futures
contract requires a formal process of approval by the governing body of the exchange,
representing a consensus of the exchange members, which can number in the hundreds. In
sharp contrast, to introduce a new type of swap contract requires only consensus between the
two counterparts to the contract. This difference makes it possible to innovate and execute
new types of swap contracts in a fraction of the time required to introduce a new futures
contract.
Today’s swap contracts also differ from a series of back-to-back loans or forward
contracts. Like swaps, forward contracts are flexible bilateral instruments, but they lack a
uniform standard. Modern swap contracts follow a standard format developed during the
early 1980s by the International Swap Dealers Association (ISDA). The ISDA’s standard
contract has been tested in a variety of jurisdictions around the world. Over the years the
document has been amended and has evolved to meet legal and regulatory requirements
virtually everywhere.
Now that the legal infrastructure has been thoroughly tested and practitioners and
regulators have developed confidence in it, the pace of swap innovation is likely to proceed

47

This swap innovation, including with capital controls, is set forth in Merton (1990).

The Design of Financial Systems

Page 35

at a much faster rate and with much lower transaction costs.48 With the infrastructure in
place, the cost of implementing new types of swaps involving other underlying securities,
commodities, economic indexes, and the like, will be relatively low.
A well-established legal and transactional infrastructure for swaps together with the
enormous scale of such contracts outstanding49 set conditions for the prospective use of
swaps and other contractual agreements to manage the economic risks of whole countries in a
non-invasive and reversible fashion.50

Thus, countries can modify their risk exposures

separately from physical investment decisions and trade and capital flow policies. This
application of financial technology offers the potential for a country to mitigate or even
eliminate the traditional economic tradeoff between pursuing its comparative advantages,
which by necessity requires it to focus on a relatively few related activities and achieving
efficient risk diversification, which requires it to pursue many relatively unrelated activities.

VI. Conclusion: Finance and Economic Growth
We have framed and illustrated by examples the FSF approach to the design of financial
systems.

We conclude here with some observations connecting the design and

implementation of a well-functioning financial system with the broader economic issues of
promoting long-term economic growth.
Nearly a half century ago, Robert Solow’s fundamental work on the long-run
determinants of economic growth concluded that it was technological progress, not high rates

48

The cost of doing a standard interest-rate swap is today about ½ of a basis point—that is only $5,000 on a

notional amount of $100 million!
49

It has been estimated that the notional amount of derivative contracts outstanding globally is $170 trillion.

Some large banking institutions have several trillion each on their balance sheets.
50

See Draghi et al (2003, pp. 37-44) and Merton (1999, 2002, pp. 64-67, 2004) for development of this idea.

The Design of Financial Systems

Page 36

of saving or population growth, that account for the vast bulk of growth. Subsequent studies
have tried to reduce the unexplained residual by adding other measurable inputs. A large
body of recent research work suggests that well-functioning financial institutions promote
economic growth. These conclusions emerge from cross-country comparisons,51 firm-level
studies,52 time-series research,53 and econometric investigations that use panel techniques.54
And in their historical research, North (1990), Levine (2002), Neal (1990), and Rousseau and
Sylla (2003) have all concluded that those regions—be they cities, countries, or states—that
developed the relatively more sophisticated and well-functioning financial systems were the
ones that were the subsequent leaders in economic development of their times.
An integrated picture of these findings suggests that in the absence of a financial system
that can provide the means for transforming technical innovation into broad enough
implementation, technological progress will not have a significant/substantial impact on the
economic development and growth of the economy. Therefore, countries like China or even
Japan, that need to undertake restructuring of their financial systems, should consider not
only their short-run monetary and fiscal policies, and not only the impact of these policies on
national saving and capital formation, but also how changes in their financial institutions will
affect their prospects for long-term economic development.
But substantial changes and adaptations in the institutional implementation will be
necessary in different countries. There are at least two reasons: (1) National differences in
history, culture, politics, and legal infrastructure, and (2) Opportunities for a country that is

51

See King and Levine (1993a, b) and Demirguc-Kunt and Levine (2001).

52

See Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic (1998, 1999).

53

See Rousseau and Wachtel (1998, 2000).

54

See Levine, Loayza and Beck (2000).

The Design of Financial Systems

Page 37

in the midst of restructuring its financial system to “leap frog” the current best practices of
existing systems by incorporating the latest financial technology in ways that can only be
done with “a clean sheet.”
There is not likely to be “one best way” of providing financial and other economic
functions. And even if there were, how does one figure out which one is best without
assuming an all-knowing benevolent ruler or international agency? One must take care to
avoid placing the implementation of all economic development into one institutionally
defined financial channel.
Fortunately, innovations in telecommunications, information technology, and financial
engineering offer the practical prospect for multiple channels for the financing of economic
growth. Multiple channels for capital raising are a good idea in terms of greater assurance of
supply at competitive prices. They also offer the prospective benefits of competition to be
the best one in a given environment at a given point in time.
Much of the traditional discussion of economic policy focuses on its monetary, fiscal,
currency management aspects and on monitoring capital and trade flows.

These are

important in the short run, and thus also in the long run, in the sense that one does not get to
the long run without surviving the short run. However, if financial innovation is stifled for
fear that it will reduce the effectiveness of short-run monetary and fiscal policies (or will
drain foreign currency reserves), the consequences could be a much slower pace of
technological progress. Furthermore, long-run policies that focus on domestic saving and
capital formation as key determinants of economic growth do not appear to be effective.
Policies designed to stimulate innovation in the financial system would thus appear to be
more important for long-term economic development.

The Design of Financial Systems

Page 38

References
Aaron, Henry (ed.) (1999), Behavioral Dimensions of Retirement Economics, Brookings
Institution, Washington, DC.
Barberis, Nicholas and Richard H. Thaler (2003), “A Survey of Behavioral Finance” in
Handbook of the Economics of Finance, edited by George M. Constantinides, Milton
Harris, and Rene’ Stultz, Elsevier Science, B.V.
Beck Thorsten, Asli Demirguc-Kunt, and Ross Levine (2001),“Law, Politics, and Finance,”
World Bank Working Paper, #2585, (April).
Beck, Thorsten, Ross Levine, and Norman Loayza (2000), “Finance and the Sources of
Growth,” Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 58, No. 1-2 (January): 261-300.
Benink, Harald and Peter Bossaerts (2001), “An Exploration of Neo-Austrian Theory
Applied to Financial Markets,” Journal of Finance, Vol. LVI, No. 3 (June): 1011-1028.
____________, Jose’ Luis Gordillo, Juan Pablo Pardo, and Christopher Stephens (2004), “A
Study of Neo-Austrian Economics using an Artificial Stock Market,” Rotterdam School
of Management, Erasmus University, (March).
Bodie, Zvi (2000), “Financial Engineering and Social Security Reform,” in Risk Aspects of
Investment-Based Social Security Reform, edited by John Campbell and Martin Feldstein,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
__________ (2003), "Thoughts on the Future: Life-Cycle Investing in Theory and Practice,"
Financial Analysts Journal, Vol. 59, No. 1 (January/February): 24-29.
______________, P. Brett Hammond and Olivia S. Mitchell (2001), “New Approaches to
Analyzing and Managing Retirement Risks,” Benefits Quarterly, Vol. 17, No. 4: 72-83.
____________ and Robert C Merton (1993), “Pension Benefit Guarantees in the United
States: A Functional Approach,” in The Future of Pensions in the United States, edited
by Raymond Schmitt, Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.

_________________________________(2002), “International Pension Swaps,” Journal of
Pension Economics and Finance, Vol. 1, No. 1 (January): 77-83.
Bossaerts, Peter (2002), The Paradox of Asset Pricing, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
_____________ and Charles Plott (forthcoming), “Basic Principles Of Asset Pricing Theory:
Evidence From Large-Scale Experimental Financial Markets,” Review of Finance.

The Design of Financial Systems

Page 39

Cass, David, and Joseph E. Stiglitz (1970), “The Structure of Investor Preferences and Asset
Returns, and Separability in Portfolio Allocation: A Contribution to the Pure Theory of
Mutual Funds,” Journal of Economic Theory, Vol. 2 (June): 122-60.
Coase, Ronald (1937), “The Nature of the Firm,” Economica, Vol. 4 (November): 386-405.
___________ (1960), “The Problem of Social Cost,” Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 2,
University of Chicago Press: 1-44.
Constantinides, George (1986), “Capital Market Equilibrium with Transactions Costs,” Journal
of Political Economy, Vol. 94 (October): 842-862.
Cronqvist, Henrik and Richard H. Thaler (2004), “Design Choices in Privatized Social Security
Systems: Learning from the Swedish Experience,” American Economic Review, Vol. 94, No.
2 (May).

Coval, Joshua D. and Tobias J. Moskowitz (1999), “Home Bias at Home: Local Equity
Preference in Domestic Portfolios,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 54 (December):2045-2073.
______________ and Anjar V. Thaker (forthcoming), “Financial Intermediation as a BeliefsBridge Between Optimists and Pessimists,” Journal of Financial Economics.
Crane, Dwight, Kenneth A. Froot, Scott P. Mason, André F. Perold, Robert C. Merton, Zvi
Bodie, Eric R. Sirri, and Peter Tufano (1995), The Global Financial System: A
Functional Perspective, Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli and Ross Levine (2001), Financial Structure and Growth: A CrossCountry Comparison of Banks, Markets, and Development, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
_________________ and Vojislav Maksimovic (1998), “ Law, Finance, and Firm Growth,”
Journal of Finance, Vol. 53, No. 6 (December): 2107-2137.
______________________________________(1999),”Institutions, Financial Markets and
Firm Debt Maturity,” Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 54, No.3 (December): 295336.
Diamond, Douglas W. and Philip Dybvig (1986), “Banking Theory, Deposit Insurance, and
Bank Regulation,” Journal of Business, Vol. 59, No. 1 (January): 55-68.
Draghi, Mario, Francesco Giavazzi, and Robert C. Merton (2003), Transparency, Risk
Management and International Financial Fragility, Vol. 4, Geneva Reports on the World
Economy, International Center for Monetary and Banking Studies.
Easterly, William and Ross Levine (2001), “It’s Not Factor Accumulation: Stylized Facts
and Growth Models,” World Bank Economic Review, Vol. 15, No. 2: 177-219.

The Design of Financial Systems

Page 40

Fama, Eugene (1980), “Agency Problems and the Theory of the Firm,” Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 88, No. 2 (April): 288-307.
____________ (1998),”Market Efficiency, Long-Term Returns, and Behavioral Finance,”
Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 49, No. 3 (September): 283-306.
_________ and Michael Jensen (1983a), “Separation of Ownership and Control,” Journal of
Law and Economics, Vol. 26 (June): 301-326.
__________________________ (1983b), “Agency Problems and Residual Claims,” Journal
of Law and Economics, Vol. 26 (June): 327-349.
Finnerty, John (1988), “Financial Engineering in Corporate Finance: An Overview,”
Financial Management, Vol. 17 (Winter): 14-33.
Gilson, Ronald J. and Reinier Kraakman (2003),”The Mechanisms of Market Efficiency
Twenty Years Later: The Hindsight Bias,” Columbia Law Economics Working Paper
No. 240 (October).
Goldman, M. Barry, Howard B. Sossin and Lawrence A. Shepp (1979), “On Contingent
Claims that Insure Ex-Post Optimal Stock Market Timing,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 34
(May): 401-13.
Hakansson, Nils (1979), “The Fantastic World of Finance: Progress and the Free Lunch,”
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, Vol. 14 (Proceedings Issue): 717-34.
Hall Robert E. (2001), “Struggling to Understand the Stock Market,” American Economic
Review Papers and Proceedings, Vol. 91 (May): 1-11.
Haugh, Martin, B., and Andrew W. Lo (2001), “Asset Allocation and Derivatives,”
Quantitative Finance, Vol. 1, No. 1, (January): 45-72.
Hirshleifer, David (2001), “Investor Psychology and Asset Pricing,” Journal of Finance,
Vol. 56, No. 4 (August): 1533-1597.
Hong, Harrison, Jeffrey D. Kubik, and Jeremy C. Stein (2004), “The Only Game in Town:
Stock-Price Consequences of Local Bias,” mimeo (June).
Huberman, Gur (1999), “Familiarity Breeds Investment,” The Review of Financial Studies,
Vol. 14, No. 3, (Fall): 659-680.
Jensen, M.C. and W.C. Meckling, (1976) “Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior,
Agency Costs and Capital Structure,” Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 3
(October):305-360.
Kahneman, Daniel, Paul Slovic and Amos Tversky (1982), Judgment Under Uncertainty:
Heuristics and Biases, Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

The Design of Financial Systems

Page 41

King, Robert G. and Ross Levine (1993a), “Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might Be
Right,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 153 (August): 717-38.
____________________________ (1993b), “Finance, Entrepreneurship, and Growth:
Theory and Evidence,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 32 (December): 513-42.
Lamont, Owen A. and Richard H. Thaler (2003), “Anomalies: The Law of One Price in
Financial Markets,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 17, No. 4 (Fall): 191-202.
Levine, Ross (2002), “Bank-Based or Market-Based Financial Systems: Which is Better?,”
Journal of Financial Intermediation, Vol. XI (February): 398-428.
___________, Norman Loayza and Thorsten Beck (2000), “Financial Intermediation and
Growth: Causality and Causes,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 46 (August): 3177.
Lewis, Karen (1998), “International Home Bias in International Finance and Business
Cycles,” NBER Working Paper No. W6351 (January).
Lo, Andrew W. and Dmitry V. Repin (2002), “The Psychophysiology of Real-Time
Financial Risk Processing,” Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, Vol. 14, No. 3: 323-339.
MacKenzie, Donald (2000), “Fear in the Markets,” London Review of Books, April 13: 13.
________________(2003), “Long-Term Capital Management and the Sociology of
Arbitrage,” Economy and Society, Vol. 32, No. 3 (August): 349-380.
________________(forthcoming), An Engine, Not a Camera: Finance Theory and the
Making of Markets, Cambridge: MIT Press.
________________ and Yuval Millo (2003), “Negotiating a Market, Performing Theory:
The Historical Sociology of a Financial Derivatives Exchange,” American Journal of
Sociology, Vol. 109: 107-145.
Markowitz, Harry (1952), “Portfolio Selection,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 7 (March): 77-91.
Merton, Robert C. (1971), “Optimum Consumption and Portfolio Rules in a ContinuousTime Model,” Journal of Economic Theory, Vol. 3 (December): 373-413.
_______________(1973), “An Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing Model,” Econometrica,
Vol. 41 (September): 867-87.
_______________ (1987), “A Simple Model of Capital Market Equilibrium with Incomplete
Information,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 42 (July): 483-510.

The Design of Financial Systems

Page 42

_______________ (1989), “On the Application of the Continuous-Time Theory of Finance
to Financial Intermediation and Insurance,” The Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance,
Vol. 14, No. 52 (July): 225-262.
_______________ (1990), “The Financial System and Economic Performance,” Journal of
Financial Services Research, Vol. 4 (December): 263-300.
_______________ (1992), Continuous-Time Finance, Revised edition, Oxford: Basil
Blackwell.
_______________ (1993), “Operation and Regulation in Financial Intermediation: A
Functional Perspective,” in Operation and Regulation of Financial Markets, edited by
Peter Englund, Stockholm: The Economic Council.
_______________ (1995), “Financial Innovation and the Management and Regulation of
Financial Institutions,” Journal of Banking and Finance, Vol. 19 (July): 461-481.
_______________ (1998), “Applications of Option-Pricing Theory: 25 Years Later,”
American Economic Review, Vol. 88, No. 3 (June): 323-349.
________________ (1999), “Commentary: Finance Theory and Future Trends: The Shift to
Integration,” Risk, (July): 48-50.
_______________ (2002), “Future Possibilities in Finance Theory and Finance Practice,” in
Mathematical Finance - Bachelier Congress 2000, edited by Helyette Geman, Dilip
Madan, Stanley Pliska and Ton Vorst, Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
_______________ (2003), “Thoughts on the Future: Theory and Practice in Investment
Management,” Financial Analysts Journal, Vol. 59, No. 1 (January/February): 17-23.
_______________ (2004), “On Financial Innovation and Economic Growth,” Harvard
China Review, (Spring): 2-3.
______________and Zvi Bodie (1993), “Deposit Insurance Reform: A Functional
Approach,” in Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, Volume 38,
edited by Alan Melzer and Charles Plosser (June).
_____________________________(1995), “A Conceptual Framework for Analyzing the
Financial System,” Chapter 1 in Crane et al.
Merton, Robert K. (1948), “The Self-Fulfilling Prophecy,” Antioch Review, (Summer):193210.
_______________ (1957), Social Theory and Social Structure, revised and enlarged edition,
Glencoe, IL: Free Press.

The Design of Financial Systems

Page 43

Miller, Ross M. (2002), “Can Markets Learn to Avoid Bubbles?,” The Journal of Behavioral
Finance, Vol. 3, No. 1.
Modigliani, Franco and Merton Miller (1958), “The Cost of Capital, Corporation Finance
and the Theory of Investment,” American Economic Review, Vol. 48 (June): 261-97.
Neal, Larry D. (1990), The Rise of Financial Capitalism: International Capital Markets in
the Age of Reason, Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
North, Douglass (1990), Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic Performance,
Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Petrosky, Henry (1992), To Engineer is Human: The Role of Failure in Successful Design,
New York: Vintage Books.
Ross, Stephen (1973), “The Economic Theory of Agency: The Principal's Problem,”
American Economic Review, Vol. 63, No. 2 (May): 134-139.
___________ (2002), “A Neoclassical Look at Alternative Finance: The Case of the Closed
End Funds,” European Financial Management (June): 129-135.
Rousseau, Peter L. and Richard Sylla (2003), “Financial Systems, Economic Growth, and
Globalization,” in Globalization in a Historical Perspective edited by Michael Bordo,
Alan Taylor and Jeffrey Williamson, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
________________and Paul Wachtel (1998), “Financial Intermediation and Economic
Performance: Historical Evidence from Five Industrialized Countries,” Journal of
Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 30, No. 4 (November): 657-678.
_______________________________ (1999), “Equity Markets and Growth: Cross Country
Evidence on Timing and Outcomes: 1980-1995,” Journal of Banking and Finance, Vol.
24, No. 12 (December): 1933-1957.
Rubinstein, Mark (2001), “Rational Markets: Yes or No? The Affirmative Case,” Financial
Analysts Journal, Vol. 57, No. 3 (May/June): 15-29.
Scholes, Myron S. (1998), “Derivatives in a Dynamic Environment,” American Economic
Review, Vol. 88, No. 3 (June): 350-370.
Schwert, G. William (2003), “Anomalies and Market Efficiency,” in Handbook of the
Economics of Finance, edited by George M. Constantinides, Milton Harris, and René
Stultz, Elsevier Science, B.V.: 937-972.
Shepp, Larry and A. N. Shiryaev (1993), “The Russian Option: Reduced Regret,” The
Annals of Applied Probability, Vol. 3, No. 3: 631-640.

The Design of Financial Systems

Page 44

Shiller, Robert (1999), “Human Behavior and the Efficiency of Financial Markets,” in
Handbook of Macroeconomics, Vol. 1, edited by John B. Taylor and Michael Woodford,
Holland:Elsevier:1305-40.
Shleifer, Andrei (2000), Inefficient Markets: An Introduction to Behavioral Finance, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Smelser, Neil J. and Richard Swedberg, Eds. (1994), The Handbook of Economic Sociology,
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Swedberg, Richard (2003), Principles of Economic Sociology, Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Thaler, Richard, H., editor (1993), Advances in Behavioral Finance, New York: Russell
Sage Foundation.
_______________ (2000), “From Homo Economicus to Homo Sapiens,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, Vol. 14, No. 1 (Winter): 133–141.
_______________ and Shlomo Benartzi (2004), “Save More Tomorrow: Using Behavioral
Economics to Increase Employee Saving,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 112, No. 1
(February): S164-S187.
Tobin, James (1958), “Liquidity Preference as Behavior Towards Risk,” Review of Economic
Studies, Vol. 25 (February): 68-85.
Williamson, Oliver E. (1998), “Transaction Cost Economics: How It Works; Where It is
Headed,” De Economist, Vol. 146, No. 3:23-58.

