                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          SPECIALIZATION, FACTOR ACCUMULATION AND DEVELOPMENT

                                         Doireann Fitzgerald
                                         Juan Carlos Hallak

                                        Working Paper 10638
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w10638


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2004




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2004 by Doireann Fitzgerald and Juan Carlos Hallak. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Specialization, Factor Accumulation and Development
Doireann Fitzgerald and Juan Carlos Hallak
NBER Working Paper No. 10638
July 2004
JEL No. F1, F11, O14, O40
                                        ABSTRACT

We estimate the effect of factor proportions on the pattern of manufacturing specialization in a

cross-section of OECD countries, taking into account that factor accumulation responds to

productivity. We show that the failure to control for productivity differences produces biased

estimates. Our model explains 2/3 of the observed differences in the pattern of specialization

between the poorest and richest OECD countries. However, because factor proportions and the

pattern of specialization co-move in the development process, their strong empirical relationship is

not sufficient to determine whether specialization is driven by factor proportions, or by other

mechanisms also correlated with level of development.

Doireann Fitzgerald
Department of Economics
UC Santa Cruz
Social Sciences 1
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
dfitzger@ucsc.edu

Juan Carlos Hallak
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
Lorch Hall
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
hallak@umich.edu
1      Introduction1

The Heckscher-Ohlin (H-O) theory states that di¤erences in the pattern of specialization

across countries are determined by di¤erences in their factor endowments. It answers the

crucial question of what explains trade between countries by focusing on the determinants of

sectoral specialization. In this paper we investigate the empirical relationship between factor

endowments and specialization. We show that failure to control for the independent in‡uence

of productivity di¤erences on output leads to omitted variable bias, in particular since

productivity a¤ects incentives to accumulate factors. Our empirical approach eliminates

this bias. We show that di¤erences in factor endowments within the OECD can explain

two thirds of the di¤erence in the pattern of specialization between the relatively poor and

the relatively rich countries in the group. But we also show that, since the identifying

variation in relative factor endowments comes from di¤erences across countries in level of

development, any economic mechanism that links the pattern of specialization to the stage

of development could generate these results.

    This paper is related to an extensive empirical literature that estimates the e¤ect of

changes in factor endowments on the pattern of specialization. Two main approaches char-

acterize this literature, yielding results that have quite di¤erent empirical implications.

We provide for the …rst time a unifying framework that explains why the results of the

two approaches are di¤erent. The …rst approach assumes that all countries have access to

the same technology. The majority of these studies motivate their estimation strategy by

focusing on a very particular case of the H-O theory which yields a linear relationship be-

tween sectoral output levels and aggregate factor endowments - the Rybczynski equations

[Harrigan (1995), Davis and Weinstein (1998), Reeve (1998), and Bernstein and Weinstein

(2002)]. Other studies [Leamer (1987) and Schott (2003)] are less restrictive, but maintain

the assumption that technology is identical everywhere. All of these studies …nd a striking
    1 We   are particularly grateful to Elhanan Helpman and Kenneth Rogo¤ for their guidance and encour-

agement. We also thank Julio Berlinski, Fernando Broner, Alan Deardor¤, John Di Nardo, James Harrigan,

Edward Leamer, Greg Mankiw, Marc Melitz, Jaume Ventura, two anonymous referees, and seminar partic-

ipants at Di Tella, Harvard, MIT, Purdue and San Andres for helpful comments.



                                                     2
regularity: increases in the capital stock are estimated to have a positive and statistically

signi…cant impact on output levels in almost all manufacturing sectors. In the words of

Harrigan (2001), “Capital is manufacturing’s friend.” The second approach is represented

by Harrigan (1997) and Harrigan and Zakrajšek (2000). Their empirical framework di¤ers

from the other studies in that they derive loglinear estimating equations that relate sectoral

shares of output to relative factor proportions from a translog approximation to the revenue

function. Their speci…cation allows productivity levels to di¤er across countries. They …nd

that the e¤ect of increases in the relative stock of capital on sectoral output shares is not

uniformly positive across sectors. This implies that, as a country accumulates capital, some

manufacturing sectors will expand while some others will contract as a share of total output.

   In the second section of the paper, we lay out the particular case of the H-O theory used

to derive a linear relationship between sectoral output and aggregate factor endowments.

We explain how failure to account for cross-country productivity di¤erences leads to a mul-

tiplicative form of omitted variable bias in the estimation of these equations. The bias is

likely to be important because productivity levels and factor endowments are strongly cor-

related. We derive productivity-adjusted Rybczynski equations and estimate alternatively

standard and productivity-adjusted Rybczynski equations for 25 manufacturing sectors us-

ing a cross-section of 21 OECD countries in 1988. We …nd that the omission of productivity

tends to bias upwards the estimated coe¢ cient on capital. This goes a substantial way

towards explaining the apparent inconsistency between the results of the two approaches

just described.

   In the third section of the paper, we transform the linear Rybczynski equations, relating

them to a reduced form that expresses output shares as a linear function of factor pro-

portions. This solves the problem that in the standard Rybczynski equations, there is no

relevant null hypothesis against which to test the e¤ect of relative factor endowments on

specialization. We estimate the reduced form and …nd that a substantial fraction of the

di¤erence in patterns of specialization between countries at di¤erent stages of development

can be explained by di¤erences in factor proportions. The estimated coe¢ cients are con-




                                              3
sistent with evidence on factor intensities across sectors, even if we are not always able to

estimate with precision the independent e¤ects of particular factor ratios on specialization.

    In the fourth section of the paper we interpret these results, taking into account the

links between development, accumulation and specialization. We note that our evidence

of a strong relationship between factor proportions and specialization does not prove that

specialization is driven by di¤erences in factor proportions as in the H-O model. Since factor

endowments are correlated with level of development through the process of accumulation,

any model that links specialization to level of development will predict such an empirical

relationship. We brie‡y describe two plausible alternatives to the H-O model that make

this prediction, and we o¤er suggestions about how future research could test the empirical

validity of these alternatives. We point to the relationship between our estimated coe¢ cients

and actual sectoral factor intensities as a potentially important piece of evidence.



2     Rybczynski equations and productivity bias

The standard framework used to investigate the empirical relationship between sectoral

output and aggregate factor endowments comes from a very special case of the Heckscher-

Ohlin theory. Here, we describe and estimate this special case. We show that the failure to

control for productivity di¤erences across countries biases the estimated relationship.


2.1    Rybczynski equations

Assume gross output of sector j in country c, yjc , can be written as a neoclassical constant

returns to scale function of factor inputs and intermediate inputs:


                                      yjc = fjc v
                                                ejc ; mcj                                 (1)


      ejc is a vector of factor inputs and mcj a vector of intermediate inputs. Given perfect
where v

competition in input and output markets, the solution to the unit cost minimization problem

for producers in sector j and country c can be expressed as:


                                       zcj = gjc (w
                                       e          e c ; pc )                              (2)

                                                4
      zcj is the vector of unit input requirements, w
where e                                             e c is the vector of factor prices and pc is

the vector of goods prices (including intermediate goods).

   Assume also that technology is identical in all countries (fjc = fj and gjc = gj ), the

law of one price holds in goods markets (pc = p), and there is factor price equalization

 e c = w). Then, e
(w               zcj = e
                       zj . That is, unit factor input requirements and unit intermediate

input requirements are the same across countries. Denote by ebf j the unit input requirement
                                                                                           e
of factor f in sector j. Stacking, we get the unit direct factor input requirement matrix, B,

common to all countries. Market clearing requires that

                                            e c=v
                                            By  ec                                          (3)


hold in every country, where yc is the vector of gross output of country c and v
                                                                               e c is its

vector of factor endowments. Assume that there are the same number of goods and factors
                   e is invertible. Let B
(J = F ), and that B                    e     1
                                                  = R. This yields


                                            yc = Re
                                                  vc                                        (4)


That is, there is a linear relationship between gross output and factor endowments. These

are known as Rybczynski equations. Since prices and unit input requirements of both direct

factors and intermediate inputs are common across countries, in each sector the share of

value added in gross output is also common across countries. This implies that (3) also
                                                                                           e
holds when yc is the vector of sectoral value added instead of gross output. In that case, B

is the matrix of direct factor input requirements per unit of value added.

   Rybczynski equations can be empirically implemented by estimating


                             yjc = rj0 + rj1 v1c + : : : + rjF vFc + "cj                    (5)


for each sector j, where the dependent variable is either gross output or value added. Given

that in the data there are more sectors than factors (in our data, we have 25 sectors and four

factors: capital, skilled labor, unskilled labor and arable land), the structural interpretation

of the constant is the mean e¤ect of omitted factors, and the interpretation of the error

term is the deviation from the mean e¤ect of omitted factors. In order for estimates to be


                                                  5
unbiased, it must be the case that endowments of omitted factors are uncorrelated with

endowments of observed factors.


2.2     Productivity di¤erences and econometric bias

A central assumption of the classic Heckscher-Ohlin model is that technology is identical

across countries. However, there is overwhelming evidence that technology di¤erences across

countries are important [e.g. Conrad and Jorgenson (1995) and Hall and Jones (1999)]. So

far, the empirical literature based on Rybczynski equations has failed to take account of

these productivity di¤erences. We show that this failure leads to biased estimates of the

relationship between specialization and factor endowments.

    Suppose that di¤erences in technology across countries can be represented as Hicks-

neutral productivity di¤erences, identical across sectors within a country.2 Then one unit

of factor f in country c is equivalent to ac units of that factor in a numeraire country. The

variables with tildes in Section 2.1 can be reinterpreted as corresponding to factors measured

                         ejc = ac vjc where vjc is the vector of unadjusted factors, and the
in e¢ ciency units. Then v

                                                   e c . Assume that the law of one price
vector of returns to e¢ ciency units of factors is w

holds. Following Tre‡er (1993), assume that conditional factor price equalization holds.

That is, it is rewards to e¢ ciency units of factors that are equalized across countries: i.e.

e c = w = wc =ac . Then, e¢ ciency-equivalent unit input requirements for each industry,
w
ebf j , are the same across countries. These ebf j can be stacked to form B,
                                                                          e the unit direct

e¢ ciency-equivalent factor input requirement matrix, common to all countries. Denoting
  e
R=B      1
             , we obtain a linear relationship between output and e¢ ciency-equivalent factors.

This is the system of productivity-adjusted Rybczynski equations: yc = Re
                                                                        vc = Rac vc .

They can be estimated by regressing sectoral output on e¢ ciency-equivalent factors:


                               yj = rj0 + rj1 ac v1c + : : : + rjF ac vFc + "cj                        (6)
  2 Tre‡er   (1995) and Davis and Weinstein (2001) …nd that accounting for productivity di¤erences signif-

icantly improves predictions of the factor content of trade, and that Hicks-neutrality is a good …rst-order

approximation to these technological di¤erences.




                                                      6
   When productivity di¤erences across countries are ignored, estimates of the Rybczynski

coe¢ cients are subject to a multiplicative form of omitted variable bias as we now demon-

strate. Suppose we estimate the misspeci…ed model:


                                              yj = V s0j +       j                                    (7)


when the true model is

                                              yj = AV r0j + "j                                        (8)

where A is the diagonal matrix with the productivities ac on the diagonal. The OLS estimate

s0j of the parameter vector is given by
^

                                               1                           1
                             s0j = (V 0 V )
                             ^                     V 0 AV r0j + (V 0 V )       V 0 "j                 (9)


The expected di¤erence between the estimated parameter vector and the true Rybczynski

coe¢ cients r0j is

                                  h                              i
                                                   1                                    1
                       s0j
                     E ^     r0j = (V 0 V )            V 0 AV   I r0j      E (V 0 V )       V 0 "j   (10)


Even if we assume that "j is uncorrelated with V , unless A = I, i.e. unless there are no

productivity di¤erences across countries, this expected di¤erence is non-zero. That is, the

          s0j of the Rybczynski coe¢ cients are biased.
estimates ^

   In general, it is not possible to sign this bias. If the ac s were randomly drawn from a

distribution with mean 1, independent of factor endowments V , the expected bias would

be zero. However, A and V are likely to be correlated. A standard result in traditional

growth models is that more productive countries face greater incentives to accumulate capital

(physical and human) relative to their labor endowments. If, as the evidence suggests,

productivity di¤erences are persistent, countries which are now more productive will have

been more productive in the past and as a result will have accumulated more capital relative

to other factors. This would imply that in the cross-section, more productive countries

should be more capital-abundant. We do indeed observe in the data that endowments V

and productivity A are correlated. This implies that the bias we identify is likely to be

important. We note further that this type of bias is not speci…c to linear models of the

                                                          7
relationship between specialization and endowments. More generally, it may occur in any

speci…cation linking specialization and endowments where productivity di¤erences are not

appropriately taken into account.


2.3      Data and estimation results

Here we brie‡y describe the data we use. The details are given in Appendix A. All data

are for 1988. Our sample consists of 21 OECD countries.3 We restrict ourselves to OECD

countries because many of the assumptions of the Rybczynski framework, such as FPE and

the absence of trade costs, are less plausible for a larger sample than they are for the OECD.

GDP data come from the OECD, and sectoral production data from UNIDO. Our sectoral

production data consist of gross output and value added in 25 3-digit ISIC manufacturing

sectors, converted into dollars using market exchange rates. We choose value added as our

baseline measure of output, but we also check robustness using gross output. In most cases,

the results are very similar.

    There are four factors in our data set: capital, skilled labor, unskilled labor and arable

land. We use non-residential capital, from the Penn World Tables (PWT), as our measure

of the capital stock. The labor force is also from the PWT. It is divided into skilled and

unskilled labor using data from the OECD on educational attainment. Workers who have

at least some senior cycle second level education are considered skilled.4 The rest of the

labor force is considered unskilled. Arable land comes from FAO.

    We need a measure of Hicks-neutral TFP di¤erences (ac ) across countries to estimate (6).

We construct a TFP measure that is consistent with the hypothesis of conditional factor price

equalization.5 Conditional factor price equalization and Hicks-neutrality together imply that

for any factor f , wfc = ac wfU S , where wfU S are returns to factor f in the numeraire country

(the US), for which aU S = 1. Within the set of countries for which conditional FPE holds,
  3 We   use all countries in the OECD in 1988, except for Iceland and Luxemburg, excluded because of their

size, and Switzerland, excluded because sectoral production data are very incomplete.
   4 The OECD classi…cation “Senior cycle second level” corresponds approximately to those who have


attended beyond 10th grade in the US education system.
   5 We obtain very similar results using alternative measures that do not rely on conditional FPE.




                                                     8
and for given goods prices, the revenue function is linear in factor endowments.
                                            F
                                            X                      F
                                                                   X
                                     Yc =          vfc wfc = ac           vfc wfU S :
                                            f =1                   f =1

Hence, with information on factor returns in the US, we can calculate ac as

                                                              Yc
                                             ac =                                            (11)
                                                       P
                                                       F
                                                              vfc wfU S
                                                       f =1

To calculate factor returns for the US, we divide total factor income for each factor by the

relevant factor endowment. The details are described in Appendix B.

   Summary statistics of sectoral value added shares are reported in Table 1. They show

that there are indeed cross-country di¤erences in production structure. Endowment data

unadjusted for productivity di¤erences are reported in Table 2 in the form of factor abun-

dance ratios vfc =vfw = (Y c =Y w ), where Y denotes GDP, and the superscript w denotes the

world (i.e., all the countries in the sample). We report the FPE-consistent measure of TFP

in Table 2. More productive countries appear to be scarce in all factors because output

is high relative to endowments. Less productive countries appear to be abundant in all

factors because output is low relative to endowments. This is Tre‡er’s (1995) “endowments

paradox.”

   We …rst estimate (5), the unadjusted Rybczynski equations, sector by sector. Since all

variables are in levels, we weight each observation by the inverse of GDP to correct for

size-related heteroskedasticity. Table 3 shows the results. We reproduce the only …nding

that is consistent across all studies using the linear Rybczynski framework: the coe¢ cient

on capital is systematically positive, and frequently signi…cantly positive [Harrigan (1995),

Davis and Weinstein (1998), Reeve (1998), and Bernstein and Weinstein (2002)]. As noted

in the introduction, this is also true in studies that work with larger samples of countries,

and do not assume a uni-cone model [Leamer (1987) and Schott (2003)].6

   Using the productivity measure to obtain factor endowments in e¢ ciency units, we

then estimate (6), the productivity-adjusted Rybczynski equations, implementing the same

heteroskedasticity correction as before. The results are reported in Table 4. They are
  6 Schott   (2003) …nds this for the only cone with a substantial number of observations.


                                                         9
strikingly di¤erent from those in Table 3 in one main respect: the coe¢ cient on capital is no

longer systematically positive, indeed it is more often negative than positive. This con…rms

our priors about the existence of a productivity bias. In addition, the striking di¤erence

between the two sets of estimates indicates that the magnitude of the bias is not trivial.7

     Three independent additional pieces of evidence are consistent with the existence of this

bias. First, Bernstein and Weinstein (1998) estimate equation (5) for both a sample of OECD

countries and for Japanese regions. In the case of the OECD (in contrast to the Japanese

regions), the coe¢ cient on capital is positive and signi…cant in most manufacturing sectors.

Since technology di¤erences across Japanese regions (in contrast to OECD countries) are

probably small, the bias is also small. Second, Harrigan (1997) and Harrigan and Zakrajšek

(2000) examine the role of factor endowments as determinants of production allowing for

productivity di¤erences. They do not …nd systematically positive and signi…cant coe¢ cients

on capital in most manufacturing sectors. Finally, Turkey is an outlier in our sample in terms

of productivity. When we exclude it in the estimation of (5), the strong pattern of positive

and signi…cant coe¢ cients on capital is considerably reduced. But when we exclude it from

the estimation of (6), the results do not change.



3      Heckscher-Ohlin reduced form

Despite the simplicity of their linear form, Rybczynski equations, whether corrected for

productivity di¤erences or not, are still a knife-edge result derived under very strong as-

sumptions. In particular, they require an equal numbers of goods and factors, absence of

trade costs, and (conditional) factor price equalization. The reason for their popularity with

empirical trade researchers is that the Heckscher-Ohlin theorem, in its classic generalized

formulation (see Deardor¤ (1982)), does not provide a clear alternative since it does not

yield empirical predictions at the sectoral level.
    7 Harrigan   (1995) gets positive and signi…cant coe¢ cients on capital when he runs the Rybczynski regres-

sion on a panel with …xed e¤ects. In this case, there is probably a cyclical correlation between factors and

omitted productivity.




                                                       10
   However, the restrictiveness of the assumptions used to derive them is not the only

problem with the empirical implementation of Rybczynski equations as presented above.

First, the estimated coe¢ cients are hard to interpret in the spirit of the H-O theorem because

they are silent on how di¤erences in factor proportions a¤ect the pattern of specialization,

(i.e. the relative importance of each sector in total GDP). For example, a Rybczynski

coe¢ cient of rjf for capital in the Beverages sector indicates that an increase of one unit

in the absolute level of the capital stock induces an increase of rjf in the absolute level of

production in that sector. But this information alone cannot say whether, as a result of

capital accumulation, the production of Beverages will increase or decrease as a share of

GDP. Second, without appropriate rescaling, Rybczynski equations fail to nest the obvious

alternative hypothesis that sectoral output levels depend on country size alone: if larger

countries have larger factor endowments and tend to produce larger quantities in every

sector, we will still estimate some positive and possibly signi…cant coe¢ cients on endowments

in (6), even if relative endowments play no role as determinants of specialization. The

estimated coe¢ cients will just capture this size e¤ect.

   The approach we take to these problems is to propose and estimate a reduced form rela-

tionship between sectoral output and endowments that captures more closely the intuition

of the H-O theory, but still preserves a close relation to the Rybczynski estimates. This re-

duced form relates relative sectoral output (i.e. specialization) to relative factor abundance

(i.e. factor proportions):

                        yjc                     Kc          Sc          Ac     c
                             =    j0   +   jK      +   jS      +   jA      +   j          (12)
                       GDP c                    Lc          Lc          Lc

where Lc = S c + U c is total labor in country c. Note that for four factors, there are only

three measures of relative factor abundance. This speci…cation has the distinct advantage

over the standard Rybczynski equations that it nests a meaningful alternative hypothesis

to the Heckscher-Ohlin theory: if the level of output depends on size alone, this should be

captured by the constant term, while the coe¢ cients on the factor proportions should be

zero. In addition, as long as productivity di¤erences are Hicks-neutral and identical across

sectors and factors within a country, (12) does not su¤er from productivity bias of the type


                                                 11
described in the previous section.8 Lastly, (12) has the desirable feature that it is very

similar to a transformation of the Rybczynski equations (6). To see this, drop the constant

term in (6)9 and divide by ac Lc to obtain


                           yjc         Kc        Sc        Uc        Ac
                                = r jK    + r jS    + r jU    + r jA    + "cj :                          (13)
                          ac Lc        Lc        Lc        Lc        Lc
Since S c =Lc + U c =Lc = 1 there is no independent variation between these two regressors.10

We can solve for U c =Lc and substitute into (13) to obtain:
                         yjc      c       Kc                        Sc      Ac
                         c   c
                               = rjU + rjK c + (rjS         rjU )    c
                                                                       + rjA c + "cj                     (14)
                        a L               L                         L       L

There are two points to note about (14). First, the results from estimating (14) can be

recovered from (6) if this last equation is estimated omitting the constant and using weights

proportional to adjusted labor. Second, (14) and (12) are identical except for the denomina-

tor of the dependent variable. Empirically, the two speci…cations yield very similar estimates

as the correlation between ac Lc and GDP c is 0.9987. This implies that a transformation of

the Rybczynski coe¢ cients and their standard errors can be given a reduced form interpre-

tation in the spirit of the H-O theorem. It is this feature that motivates us to work with

this particular reduced form. Alternative speci…cations are otherwise equally plausible, and

it is not our goal here to assess which …ts the data best.11


3.1     Reduced form estimates

The results from estimating (12) are reported in Table 5. We do not report the results

from estimating (14), but they are very similar. When we use gross output instead of value
   8 With   forms of productivity di¤erences other than Hicks-neutrality, the productivity adjustment would

not necessarily cancel out in factor endowment ratios.
    9 For most sectors, inclusion or exclusion of the constant term does not signi…cantly a¤ect the results.
  1 0 This particular restriction is an artifact of the factors we use. But taking into account that aggregate


output depends on factor endowments, rescaling by GDP c instead of ac Lc would also result in linear

dependence among all four independent variables.
  1 1 Harrigan and Zakrajšek (2000) estimate a similar (loglinear) speci…cation derived from a translog ap-


proximation to the revenue function that is not subject to any of the problems that we have pointed out so

far. The qualitative results from estimating the log-linear version of (12) using our data are very similar to

those from estimating (12).


                                                     12
added as the dependent variable, the results are also almost unchanged. No one country

drives the results. In particular, when Turkey is excluded the results do not change, except

for a loss of precision on average. We test for the presence of nonlinearities by including

quadratic terms for each variable (we do not have su¢ cient degrees of freedom to include

also interaction terms). For only one sector can we reject (at the 10% level) the restriction

that the coe¢ cients on the non-linear terms are jointly zero.

   Except in the 2-good, 2-factor case, the Heckscher-Ohlin theory does not guarantee

a monotonic relationship between the sector-speci…c coe¢ cients we have estimated and

sectoral factor intensities. However, we …nd that an interesting empirical relationship does

in fact exist. Sectoral factor intensities for US manufacturing are reported in Table 6.

Considering only those sectors with coe¢ cients signi…cantly di¤erent from zero, the sign of

the estimated coe¢ cient on a particular factor in a particular sector in Table 5 tends to match

the actual intensity of factor use in that sector. Most of the positive signi…cant coe¢ cients on

S=L are in sectors that use skilled labor intensively. The two negative signi…cant coe¢ cients

on S=L are in Leather Products and Footwear, two of the sectors with the lowest skill

intensity. For K=L, most of the negative signi…cant coe¢ cients are in sectors with low

capital intensity, while the only positive and signi…cant coe¢ cient is in Non-ferrous metals,

a capital intensive sector. Figure 1 is a scatter-plot of the estimated coe¢ cients on S=L

against the actual skill intensity in the US. The relationship between the coe¢ cients we

estimate and sectoral factor intensities is in fact very strong. Figure 2 graphs the estimated

coe¢ cient on the K=L ratio against the sectoral capital intensity. Capital intensive sectors

do not tend to have positive estimated coe¢ cients on the K=L ratio.

   The basic mechanism of the H-O theory suggests that the more abundant is a country in

a particular factor, the lower is the autarky price of that factor, the cheaper is the autarky

price of goods intensive in that factor, and hence the stronger the comparative advantage and

specialization of the country in those goods. However, despite its appeal, this intuition need

not always carry through for all goods [See Deardor¤ (1979) and Aw (1983)]. Examining

the match between estimated coe¢ cients and factor intensities tests not the H-O theory, but




                                               13
something stronger. The existence of a strong positive correlation for the share of skilled

labor poses a challenge for future research: Are there stronger versions of the H-O theory

that can explain this …nding?12


3.2     Prediction

As the R-squared indicates, the ability of variation in relative factor endowments to explain

variation in the share of total output in individual sectors di¤ers a lot across sectors. We want

a measure of the ability of relative factor endowments to explain the pattern of specialization

as a whole. In our cross-section data-set, most of the variation in relative factor endowments

across countries is between relatively poor and relatively rich countries. As a summary

measure of the ability of relative factor endowments to explain the pattern of specialization

across the OECD, we compare the actual di¤erence in pattern of specialization between rich

and poor countries with that which would be predicted by the model, conditional on the

endowments of rich and poor countries. The exercise is performed as follows. We rank our

sample of countries by GDP per capita, and select the bottom quartile (Turkey, Portugal,

Greece, Spain, and Ireland) and the top quartile (Japan, Norway, Sweden, Finland, and

the US). For each of these two groups, we calculate the group average of the three factor

abundance ratios. For the resulting two groups, “poor” and “rich”, we use the estimated

model (12) to predict the expected share of GDP in each manufacturing sector. We can then

predict how the pattern of manufacturing specialization would change if a “poor” country

were to grow and become “rich”.

    The results are shown in Table 7. The …rst two columns of the table show the average

of the observed sectoral shares of GDP for the two groups of countries. Column 3 shows

the observed di¤erence. Poor countries have larger GDP shares than rich countries in 13

sectors and smaller GDP shares than rich countries in 12 sectors. On average, sectors

that grow as countries become richer double as a share of GDP and sectors that shrink as
  1 2 Romalis   (2003) provides a model with imperfect competition, trade costs, and two types of countries. In

this case, the Heckscher-Ohlin link between factor abundance, factor intensities and trade (or specialization)

applies not only as an average across sectors, but also to individual sectors.




                                                       14
countries become richer shrink by half. Column 4 gives the prediction of the model for the

expected di¤erence in the shares and column 5 the standard error of this prediction. The

sign of the predicted change matches the sign of the actual change in all sectors except one.

The predicted change is signi…cantly di¤erent from zero (at the 10% level) in 16 of the 25

sectors. Focusing on these sectors, the model predicts that as a “poor” country becomes

“rich” – within the development range of these countries – it shifts production towards

Wood, Furniture, Paper and publishing, Plastic products, Non-ferrous metals, Fabricated

metal products, Electrical machinery, Non-electrical Machinery and Transport equipment.

On the other hand, it shifts production away from Textiles, Apparel, Leather products,

Footwear, Glass, and Other non-metallic mineral products.

    The last three columns of the table examine how well the observed change in specializa-

tion pattern is predicted by the factor proportions model. Column 6 gives the absolute value

of column 3. The sum of the entries in column 6 is a measure of the implied inter-sectoral re-

allocation of output shares in manufacturing if a “poor”country grows and becomes “rich.”

Of the observed inter-sectoral reallocation (13.44 percent of GDP), the model explains 8.83

percentage points. Prediction error accounts for the remaining 4.61 percentage points. That

is, the model is able to explain two thirds (66%) of the observed di¤erence in sectoral allo-

cation between the poor and rich quartiles. These results suggest that di¤erences in what

countries produce are strongly correlated with di¤erences in their factor proportions even

among OECD countries. This is in spite of the fact that di¤erences in factor proportions

and output specialization in the OECD are small compared with those in broader samples

of countries.



4     Specialization and development

4.1    Factor accumulation and development

As we mentioned when discussing the productivity bias, the growth literature both predicts

and …nds a systematic relationship between relative factor endowments and per capita in-



                                             15
come. This is true for our sample of OECD countries. Figures 3, 4, 5 and 6 plot TFP and

the three measures of factor abundance against GDP per capita. These plots are consistent

with di¤erent OECD countries being at di¤erent points along similar paths of development.

As GDP per capita rises countries accumulate capital and skilled labor, the capital-labor

ratio rises, the share of skilled labor in total labor rises and TFP also increases. We can-

not take a stand on the causal links between these variables. But we note some profound

implications for the interpretation of our results that arise from their comovement. First,

our independent variables are not linearly dependent, but there is nevertheless a systematic

relationship between them. In particular, the correlation between K=L and S=L is 0.74.

Given this correlation and the small sample size, it is not surprising that we cannot always

identify with precision the independent e¤ect of changes in K=L and changes in S=L on the

pattern of specialization in Table 5. What we identify is the common e¤ect of moving along

a similar path of development.

   In fact, it turns out that the variation in relative factor endowments that is correlated

with di¤erences across countries in level of development is the main source of identi…cation

for almost all sectors. This can be shown by including GDP per capita as an independent

variable in our reduced form speci…cation:

                   yjc     c             Kc          Ac          Sc     Yc       c
                       =   jU   +   jK      +   jA      +   jS      +        +   j          (15)
                   Yc                    Lc          Lc          Lc   P OP c

In Table 8 we report the estimated coe¢ cients and t-statistics on GDP per capita. In only

two sectors does GDP per capita add explanatory power after relative factor endowments

have been controlled for. We also report the F-statistics and p-values for the joint restriction

that the estimated coe¢ cients on K=L, S=L and A=L are all zero. In only 5 sectors can

we reject this joint restriction at the 10% level or lower. When both factor proportions and

GDP per capita are included, we cannot estimate with precision the independent e¤ect of

each, because they are strongly correlated. But when sectoral shares are regressed on each

independently, the estimated e¤ect on specialization of both factor proportions and GDP

per capita is statistically signi…cant in a number of sectors. In unreported results, we …nd

that for factor proportions, we can reject the restriction that the coe¢ cients on all regressors


                                                 16
in (12) are equal to zero in 12 sectors. Similarly, the coe¢ cient on GDP is signi…cant in 12

sectors when we regress sectoral value added shares on GDP per capita alone.

   The existence of a strong relationship between GDP per capita and pattern of special-

ization has been noted for decades [e.g., Chenery (1960), Leamer (1974), Harrigan and

Zakrajšek (2000)]. However, so far it has not explicitly been noted that this relationship

calls into question whether the power of factor proportions to predict specialization can be

used as evidence in favor of the Heckscher-Ohlin theory of specialization. Using (15) alone,

it is not possible to say whether specialization and relative factor endowments are each

independently determined by the level of development, or whether the level of development

determines relative factor endowments, and these in turn drive the pattern of specialization.

We now develop this argument.


4.2    Alternative hypotheses linking specialization and development

Any model in which both factor accumulation and specialization are systematically related

to development will generate a reduced form similar to (12). We suggest two plausible

alternatives to the Heckscher-Ohlin theory that make similar predictions. First, suppose

that as countries become richer, TFP increases and physical and human capital accumulate.

Suppose also that there are inter-sectoral non-homotheticities in consumption [e.g. as in

Hunter and Markusen (1988)]. That is, more developed (i.e. richer) countries have higher

expenditure shares in some sectors than low-income countries, and vice versa. If countries

trade very little relative to their total consumption (e.g. because of trade costs), produc-

tion structure will necessarily be correlated with consumption patterns. In such a world,

we would observe a correlation between the pattern of specialization and relative factor

endowments, even without any Heckscher-Ohlin mechanism at work.

   A model of specialization based on Ricardian productivity di¤erences alone could also

generate a correlation between factor endowments and specialization. Suppose that richer

countries are on average more productive than poorer countries, but that the productivity

di¤erential is not uniform across sectors. Then richer countries will have a comparative



                                             17
advantage (driven by Ricardian di¤erences) in the sectors with the highest productivity

di¤erentials, and they will tend to specialize in these sectors. At the same time, since richer

countries have a higher aggregate productivity, they will be more capital and skilled-labor

abundant. As a result, there will be a systematic correlation between factor endowments

and specialization even if there is no causal link between the two.

    Since both of these models (and potentially others) can generate correlations between

specialization and factor endowments similar to those in a Heckscher-Ohlin world, the …nding

that factor proportions are good predictors of specialization does not allow us to distinguish

between these alternative theories. Identi…cation must come from testing predictions that

di¤er across di¤erent alternative hypotheses. For example, if non-homotheticities in con-

sumption drive specialization, sectors in which rich countries specialize should have high

income elasticities of demand, and sectors in which poor countries specialize should be in-

come inelastic. Alternatively, if Ricardian technology di¤erences are the driving mechanism,

sectors in which rich countries specialize should be those with relatively large productivity

di¤erences between countries at di¤erent stages of development. Finally, we note that the

preferred theory of specialization should be able to explain the positive correlation demon-

strated in Figure 1: Is it a coincidence that the sectors in which rich countries specialize are

more skilled-labor intensive? We see this as a promising direction for future research.



5     Conclusion

This paper addresses an old question: How do relative factor endowments a¤ect specializa-

tion? In the trade literature, in contrast to the growth literature, relative factor endowments

are usually taken as given. But they are in general the outcome of an accumulation process.

We explicitly take this endogeneity into account. This a¤ects both our choice of empirical

speci…cation and our interpretation of the results. We …rst show that the results of an im-

portant part of the empirical literature are biased by the failure to control for productivity

di¤erences across countries. The bias is exacerbated because productivity a¤ects factor ac-

cumulation, and hence di¤erences in productivity are correlated with di¤erences in factor


                                              18
endowments. We adjust the classic Rybczynski framework to take account of productivity

di¤erences. This eliminates the productivity bias. We further transform this speci…cation

to arrive at an estimating equation that is a reduced-form approximation to a more gen-

eral relationship between specialization and relative factor endowments. We show that the

identi…cation of this empirical model comes through cross-country di¤erences in levels of

development. Since factor proportions are systematically related through the development

process, regressions of specialization on relative factor endowments are unable to distinguish

between the Heckscher-Ohlin model of specialization and some other plausible alternatives

that we outline. However, our signi…cant coe¢ cients are consistent with evidence on factor

intensities across sectors. The factor proportions model also does a good job of predict-

ing the pattern of specialization. In particular, it predicts 2/3 of the actual di¤erence in

manufacturing specialization between poor and rich OECD countries.



A         Appendix: Data sources and construction

A.1       Endowments

The capital stock in 1988 comes from the PWT. Investment series for di¤erent types of

capital are converted into million dollars using the corresponding investment PPPs. To

estimate the capital stock, we use the perpetual inventory method with the depreciation

rates used by the PWT: 3.5% for construction, 15% for machinery and 24% for transport

equipment.

    The labor force in 1988 also comes from the PWT. It is measured in thousand persons.

To obtain skilled and unskilled labor, we use data on educational attainment from the

OECD publication Education at a Glance (1992 and 1993).13 For most countries, the data

refer to 1989, but for some they refer to 1987, 1988 or 1990. We de…ne as skilled all those

workers who have at least some upper-cycle second level education. We combine information
 1 3 We   believe that the Barro-Lee data-set, though standard in the literature, mismeasures vocational

education and as a result underestimates educational attainment in European countries which form an

important part of our sample.



                                                   19
on educational attainment of the total population aged 25-64 (Table C.1 in Education at

a Glance) with information on labor force participation rates by educational attainment

(Table C.5) to obtain percentages of the labor force in each category.

   The stock of arable land in 1988 is from the FAO Statistical Yearbook (FAO). It is

measured in thousand hectares.


A.2    Output

Sectoral output data (gross output and value added) for 1988 come from the UNIDO In-

dustrial Demand-Supply Balance Database, 3-digit ISIC Codes. We exclude three sectors

from our sample. One is a residual category. The other two are Petroleum re…neries and

Miscellaneous petroleum and coal products. We exclude them because many countries do

not report data on these sectors. GDP data come from OECD National Accounts - De-

tailed Tables, 1983-1995 (OECD-DT). To get GDP at factor cost, we sum Consumption of

…xed capital, Compensation of employees paid by resident producers, and Operating surplus

(Table 1). To be consistent with our exclusion of residential construction from the capital

stock, we additionally subtract Gross rent (GR) from GDP (line 9, Table 2). This compo-

nent represents on average 11% of GDP. Three countries do not report data on GR, but

on a slightly more aggregated item, Gross Rent, Fuel, and Power (GRFP). For them, we

impute the ratio of GR to GRFP in the other countries. For Turkey (which reports neither

GR nor GRFP), we use the average ratio of GR to GDP for all other countries to impute

GR. We call this measure Adjusted GDP (AGDP). This is the measure of GDP we use in

the paper.

   All output measures are converted to thousand US dollars using the average yearly

market exchange rate for 1988 from International Financial Statistics (IFS). This conversion

implicitly assumes that the law of one price holds for manufacturing output (already assumed

for FPE). In converting this way, we follow the convention in the trade literature.




                                            20
A.3     Factor prices and factor intensities

To construct our productivity indices, we use data on factor prices. Here, we describe the

data sources. We take the functional distribution of income from OECD-DT. We take the

share of self-employed in the labor force from the Yearbook of Labor Statistics (ILO). We

estimate the ratio of skilled to unskilled wages for the US from the Integrated Public Use

Microdata Series (IPUMS) for 1990. This is a 1% sample of the 1990 US Population Census.

From Ball et al. (1999), we obtain data on the total value of arable land in the US, and

its rental price in 1988. Data to estimate income to land in all other countries come from

OECD-DT

    Factor intensities by sector are for the US. The capital stock for each sector is calcu-

lated from UNIDO current-price data on sectoral gross …xed capital formation (de‡ated

by the de‡ator for total gross …xed capital formation in the US) using the perpetual in-

ventory method with rate of depreciation 10% per annum. The initial year used is 1963

and the …nal year used is 1987. Labor force is employment in each sector in 1988, also

from UNIDO. Capital-labor ratios are expressed relative to the average capital-labor ratio

across all included sectors. So in Table 4, a value of 0.82 in the Food products sector means

that the capital-labor ratio in Food products is 82% of the average capital-labor ratio across

manufacturing sectors. Skilled and unskilled shares are derived using the 1988 March CPS.

Employed workers are assigned to 3-digit ISIC sectors according to the industry they work

in (correspondence available on request). Those employed in a particular sector who are not

high school graduates are considered unskilled. Those with high school diplomas or above

are skilled.



B      Appendix: Productivity estimates

We calculate productivity levels as in (11). We require data on factor prices for the numeraire

country, the US. From OECD-DT, we divide AGDP into the compensation of employees and

a residual. We then divide the compensation of employees into the compensation of skilled

labor and the compensation of unskilled labor. We do this by taking the ratio of average


                                              21
skilled wages to average unskilled wages. This ratio is 1.63. So if wu is the compensation of

unskilled, and ws is the compensation of skilled workers, then wu U + 1:63 (wu ) S = Total

compensation of labor. From this we can back out wu and hence ws . We divide the residual

of AGDP into the compensation of capital and the compensation of land. From Ball (1999)

we take the total compensation of land. Dividing this by the stock of land, we obtain the

return to land, wl . We subtract the total compensation of land from the residual of AGDP

to get the total compensation of capital. We divide this by the stock of non-residential

capital to obtain the return to capital, wk . For the US in 1988, we estimate factor prices of

$ 15877 for unskilled labor (wu ), $ 25952 for skilled labor (ws ), $ 143 per hectare for arable

land, and $ 0.266 per dollar of capital stock, inclusive of depreciation.



References

 [1] Aw, B.-Y., 1983. The interpretation of cross-section regression tests of the Heckscher-

    Ohlin theorem with many goods and factors. Journal of International Economics, 14

    (2), 163- -167.

 [2] Ball, V. E., Bureau, J.-C., Butault, J.-P., Nehring, R., 1999. Levels of farm sector

    productivity: An international comparison. USDA, mimeo.

 [3] Bernstein, J., Weinstein, D., 2002. Do endowments predict the location of production?

    Evidence from national and international data. Journal of International Economics 56

    (1), 55- -76.

 [4] Chenery, H., 1960. Patterns of industrial growth. American Economic Review 50 (4),

    624- -654.

 [5] Conrad, K., Jorgenson, D., 1995. Sectoral productivity gaps between the United States,

    Japan and Germany, 1960-1979, in: Jorgenson, D., (Ed.), Productivity: International

    Comparisons of Economic Growth, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, pp. 333- -345.




                                              22
 [6] Davis, D., Weinstein, D., 1998. Does economic geography matter for international spe-

    cialization? NBER Working Paper 5706.

 [7] Davis, D., Weinstein, D., 2001. An account of global factor trade. American Economic

    Review 91 (5), 1423- -1453.

 [8] Deardor¤, A., 1979. Weak links in the chain of comparative advantage. Journal of

    International Economics 9 (2), 197- -209.

 [9] Deardor¤, A., 1982. The general validity of the Heckscher-Ohlin theorem. American

    Economic Review, 72 (4), 683- -694.

[10] Hall, R., Jones, C., 1999. Why do some countries produce so much more output per

    worker than others? Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114 (1), 83- -116.

[11] Harrigan, J., 1995. Factor endowments and the international location of production:

    Econometric evidence from the OECD, 1970-1985. Journal of International Economics,

    39 (1/2), 123- -141.

[12] Harrigan, J., 1997. Technology, factor supplies and international specialization: Testing

    the neoclassical model. American Economic Review, 87 (4), 475- -494.

[13] Harrigan, J., Zakrajšek, E., 2000. Factor supplies and specialization in the world econ-

    omy. NBER Working Paper 7848.

[14] Harrigan, J., 2001. Specialization and the volume of trade: Do the data obey the laws?

    NBER Working Paper 8675.

[15] Hunter, L., Markusen, J., 1988. Per-capita income as a determinant of trade, in: Feen-

    stra, R., (Ed.), Empirical Methods for International Trade, MIT Press, Cambridge MA,

    pp. 89- -109

[16] Leamer, E., 1974. The commodity composition of international trade in manufactures:

    An empirical analysis. Oxford Economic Papers, 26, 350- -374.




                                             23
[17] Leamer, E., 1987. Paths of development in the three-factor, n-good general equilibrium

    model. Journal of Political Economy, 95 (5), 961- -999.

[18] Reeve, T., 1998. Explaining Industrial Structure, Harvard University, mimeo.

[19] Romalis, J., 2003. Factor proportions and the structure of commodity trade. Chicago

    GSB, mimeo.

[20] Schott, P., 2003. One size …ts all? Theory, evidence and implications of cones of diver-

    si…cation. American Economic Review, 93 (3), 686- -708.

[21] Tre‡er, D., 1993. International factor price di¤erences: Leontief was right! Journal of

    Political Economy, 101 (6), 961- -987.

[22] Tre‡er, D., 1995. The case of the missing trade and other mysteries. American Economic

    Review, 85 (5), 1029- -1046.




                                             24
          Table 1. Summary statistics of output data;
           Avg. and variation of value added shares
                   across 21 OECD countries
                                         Average Coeff. of
Sectora        Description                   shareb   variation
   311         Food products                  2.97      0.52
   313         Beverages                      0.72      0.52
   314         Tobacco manufactures           0.41      0.90
   321         Textiles                       1.09      0.64
   322         Wearing apparel                0.53      0.40
   323         Leather products               0.08      0.66
   324         Footwear                       0.14      0.81
   331         Wood products                  0.61      0.62
   332         Furniture, exc. Metal          0.42      0.55
   341         Paper and products             1.19      0.84
   342         Printing and publishing        1.38      0.44
   351         Industrial chemicals           1.59      0.53
   352         Other chemicals                1.31      0.62
   355         Rubber products                0.28      0.47
   356         Plastic products               0.63      0.47
   361         Pottery, china, earth.         0.13      0.84
   362         Glass and products             0.26      0.48
   369         Other non-met.min.pr.          0.90      0.33
   371         Iron and steel                 1.06      0.54
   372         Non-ferrous metals             0.55      0.67
   381         Fabricated metal prod.         1.59      0.38
   382         Machinery, exc. elect.         2.63      0.65
   383         Machinery electric             2.29      0.68
   384         Transport equipment            2.20      0.64
   385         Prof. & scient. equip.         0.42      1.15
a
    3-digit ISIC code
b
    Sectoral value added as a share of GDP
                                 Table 2. Factor Abundance and TFP
                                      The endowments paradox
Country                        Capitala Skilleda Unskilleda          Landa     TFPb   GDP/Popc
JAP                               0.986    1.016     0.708             0.051     0.98    19.81
NOR                               1.206    0.811     0.723             0.331     1.04    18.52
SWE                               0.962    0.820     0.782             0.546     1.10    18.38
FIN                               1.221    0.815     1.010             0.864     0.98    16.82
USA                               0.932    1.089     0.377             1.353     1.00    16.44
GER                               1.071    1.038     0.437             0.364     0.99    15.74
DEN                               1.081    0.935     1.199             0.945     0.92    15.61
CAN                               1.238    1.104     0.672             3.496     0.86    14.92
FRA                               1.082    0.814     1.321             0.699     0.97    13.45
AUT                               1.108    1.093     0.880             0.426     0.88    13.28
NET                               0.940    0.865     1.036             0.134     1.03    12.92
BEL                               1.068    0.646     1.564             0.179     1.03    12.75
ITA                               0.918    0.458     1.937             0.368     1.14    12.48
AUS                               1.288    1.028     1.249             6.752     0.80    12.43
UK                                0.810    1.311     1.201             0.320     0.81    11.12
NZE                               1.394    1.154     1.553             2.268     0.72    10.07
IRE                               0.949    0.871     2.364             0.976     0.82      8.20
SPA                               1.097    0.548     3.144             1.567     0.83      7.55
GRE                               1.512    1.118     3.857             1.526     0.56      5.53
POR                               1.095    0.467     9.258             1.728     0.45      3.95
TUR                               2.193    2.599   22.061              9.577     0.16      1.42

Coef. of variation                 0.254        0.444        1.769     1.440    0.270     1.933
a
    Factor abundance is calculated as: (vfc/vfw) / (Yc/Yw)
b
    TFP is calculated as described in Equation 10
c
    In thousands of 1988 US$
                                                   Table 3. Unadjusted Rybczynski equationsa
                                     b
Sector                 Capital           t         Skilledb t        Unsk.b t        Arableb            t           Cons.b    t         N  R2c
Food products             2.63           0.27       839.55 1.81 * -209.42 2.52 **       -3.88           0.07         1290    3.98   **  21 0.64
Beverages                 1.42           0.51       179.80 1.35       -33.45 1.40       -5.66           0.34           94    2.63   **  21 0.57
Tobacco manuf.           -0.64           0.27       227.38 2.03 *      27.28 1.36      -19.42           1.40          -11    0.14       21 0.64
Textiles                  9.85           2.73   ** -128.72 0.75      117.70 3.82 *** -35.37             1.66           18    0.15       21 0.79
Wearing apparel           4.42           2.48   **  -11.97 0.14         0.01 0.00       -3.28           0.31           36    0.61       21 0.72
Leather products          1.44           3.29   *** -37.23 1.83 *       1.36 0.38       -2.17           0.86            3    0.20       20 0.56
Footwear                  2.77           3.24   *** -85.54 2.15 **      8.06 1.14       -5.16           1.05           -2    0.07       20 0.50
Wood products             6.09           2.13   **  -34.76 0.26       -57.47 2.35 **    10.98           0.65           61    0.64       21 0.63
Furniture, exc. Metal     3.91           2.27   **   57.81 0.71       -29.50 2.01 *    -10.91           1.07          -48    0.83       21 0.76
Paper and products       13.28           1.61       -53.10 0.14       -70.75 1.00      -15.47           0.32            3    0.01       21 0.46
Printing and publ.        5.93           1.30       435.54 2.01 * -130.58 3.36 *** -11.56               0.43           65    0.42       21 0.81
Industrial chemicals      9.35           1.37       437.58 1.35        27.30 0.47      -89.04           2.21   **    -204    0.90       21 0.72
Other chemicals          -2.21           0.34       679.80 2.17 ** -61.38 1.09         -37.21           0.96          329    1.50       21 0.55
Rubber products           1.74           1.60        69.77 1.36         1.18 0.13       -9.33           1.46          -51    1.40       21 0.77
Plastic products          2.65           1.07       221.47 1.93 *     -42.62 2.10 *    -14.77           1.04          -26    0.32       20 0.78
Pottery, china, earth.    1.67           2.39   **  -26.37 0.83        21.11 3.80 *** -10.19            2.61   **     -25    1.10       19 0.71
Glass and products        0.89           0.78        66.71 1.26         5.91 0.63       -8.76           1.34           21    0.56       20 0.65
Oth. non-met.min.pr.      4.76           1.67       161.96 1.22        -2.29 0.10      -26.42           1.61           74    0.80       20 0.77
Iron and steel            8.84           2.60   ** 230.99 1.43         23.88 0.82      -45.02           2.21   **    -385    3.39   *** 20 0.87
Non-ferrous metals        7.08           3.05   *** -61.88 0.56       -49.34 2.49 **    18.04           1.30         -110    1.42       20 0.78
Fab. metal prod.         11.24           2.44   ** 372.25 1.74        -97.74 2.57 ** -40.47             1.53         -156    1.05       20 0.87
Mach. exc. elect.         2.28           0.17      1424.35 2.32 ** -149.10 1.37       -141.63           1.87   *      165    0.39       20 0.69
Machinery electric        4.09           0.34      1232.36 2.22 ** -75.39 0.77        -152.51           2.22   **     -95    0.25       20 0.69
Transport equipment      19.97           1.92   *   524.91 1.09       -99.37 1.16      -74.40           1.25         -826    2.47   *   20 0.78
Prof. & sci. equip.      -3.33           0.87       368.01 2.08 *     -44.21 1.41      -13.10           0.60          132    1.07       20 0.41
    * indicates significant at the 10% level, ** at the 5% level and *** at the 1% level
a
    Dependent variable is sectoral value added. Observations are weighted by the inverse of GDP to correct for heteroskedasticity.
b
    Constant is divided by 1000000, other coefficients by 1000.
c
    R-squared = 1-SSR/SST where SSR is sum of squared residuals, SST is n times sample variance of dep. variable, calculated from weighted model
                                             Table 4. Productivity-adjusted Rybczynski equations a
                                     b                                                                                                    2c
Sector                 Capital            t        Skilledb t        Unsk.b t         Arableb t         Cons.b t                      N R
Food products            -3.82           -0.32         117 2.05 *        -28 -0.12        24.2 0.37       118 3.91 ***                21 0.68
Beverages                -2.40           -0.71          33 2.07 *         69 1.00          5.6 0.30        21 2.48 **                 21 0.63
Tobacco manuf.           -5.58           -1.57          42 2.44 **      148 2.03 *       -12.9 -0.66        0 -0.01                   21 0.51
Textiles                 -9.29           -2.72 **       55 3.34 ***     652 9.33 ***       0.9 0.05        -5 -0.55                   21 0.89
Wearing apparel          -1.71           -0.92          21 2.35 **      159 4.20 ***      13.5 1.32         2 0.37                    21 0.82
Leather products          0.69            1.26           -1 -0.52         25 2.36 **      -0.2 -0.08        0 0.10                    20 0.60
Footwear                  0.76            0.76           -2 -0.34         65 3.37 ***     -0.3 -0.06       -1 -0.48                   20 0.61
Wood products             4.79            1.38            3 0.18         -68 -0.95        24.6 1.28        10 1.18                    21 0.68
Furniture, exc. Metal     2.43            1.13          12 1.15            4 0.09         -4.4 -0.37       -3 -0.57                   21 0.77
Paper and products       10.29            0.99            9 0.18         -81 -0.38         7.8 0.14        12 0.45                    21 0.49
Printing and publ.       -0.62           -0.13          75 3.22 ***      -33 -0.33        15.3 0.57         6 0.48                    21 0.87
Industrial chemicals     -4.87           -0.63         101 2.70 **      410 2.57 **      -69.0 -1.60      -22 -1.08                   21 0.78
Other chemicals         -13.45           -1.83 *       118 3.36 ***     180 1.20         -15.1 -0.37       22 1.18                    21 0.67
Rubber products          -1.72           -1.50          20 3.66 ***       92 3.93 ***     -1.9 -0.31       -6 -2.09 *                 21 0.85
Plastic products         -2.92           -1.12          46 3.75 ***       62 1.23         -0.9 -0.06       -4 -0.66                   20 0.86
Pottery, china, earth.   -0.63           -1.07            5 1.93 *        97 8.56 ***     -7.0 -2.23 **    -4 -2.57 **                19 0.87
Glass and products       -1.98           -1.64          18 3.12 ***       85 3.62 ***     -3.6 -0.55        0 0.15                    20 0.77
Oth. non-met.min.pr.     -4.09           -1.43          50 3.72 ***     220 3.97 ***      -6.6 -0.43        4 0.64                    20 0.87
Iron and steel           -2.08           -0.45          64 2.85 **      342 3.59 ***     -25.7 -0.99      -37 -3.08 ***               20 0.85
Non-ferrous metals        5.50            1.69           -1 -0.09        -22 -0.33        32.4 1.78 *      -5 -0.60                   20 0.75
Fab. metal prod.          1.40            0.29          80 3.53 ***       71 0.75        -12.3 -0.48      -11 -0.91                   20 0.92
Mach. exc. elect.        -7.17           -0.46         194 2.67 **        36 0.12       -130.1 -1.57       14 0.37                    20 0.75
Machinery electric      -14.08           -1.04         207 3.25 ***     272 1.03        -132.0 -1.82 *    -14 -0.41                   20 0.77
Transport equipment      -4.47           -0.40         152 2.87 **      408 1.86 *       -11.3 -0.19      -82 -3.01 ***               20 0.85
Prof. & sci. equip.      -6.00           -1.28          52 2.36 **       -23 -0.25        -7.3 -0.29        9 0.81                    20 0.48
    * indicates significant at the 10% level, ** at the 5% level and *** at the 1% level
a
    Dependent variable is sectoral value added. Observations are weighted by the inverse of GDP to correct for heteroskedasticity.
b
    Indep. vars are raw factors multiplied by TFP. Const. is divided by 10000000, coeffs. on capital, unskilled and arable by 1000, on skilled by 10000.
c
    R-squared = 1-SSR/SST where SSR is sum of squared residuals, SST is n times sample variance of dep. variable, calculated from weighted model
                                                                                           a
                                                      Table 5. Reduced form specification
                                      b
Sector                            K/L          t           S/Lb       t        A/Lb       t     Constantb   t      N     R2
Food products                      -0.386    0.68            13.34 0.52          0.713 0.26         32.9 2.69 **    21   0.03
Beverages                          -0.149    1.11              3.35 0.55         0.153 0.23           9.6 3.31 ***  21   0.08
Tobacco manuf.                     -0.205    1.65              7.29 1.29        -0.495 0.82           6.7 2.48 **   21   0.18
Textiles                           -0.478    3.50   ***      -7.99 1.28          0.067 0.10         29.8 10.10 ***  21   0.73
Wearing apparel                    -0.130    2.10   *        -0.40 0.14          0.433 1.44           9.0 6.75 ***  21   0.40
Leather products                    0.007    0.40            -1.51 1.80 *       -0.001 0.01           1.5 3.84 ***  20   0.25
Footwear                           -0.004    0.11            -2.87 1.83 *        0.019 0.11           3.1 4.33 ***  20   0.35
Wood products                       0.150    1.25              0.76 0.14         0.693 1.20           0.4 0.15      21   0.27
Furniture, exc. Metal               0.048    0.64              3.30 0.96        -0.149 0.41           1.0 0.61      21   0.22
Paper and products                  0.345    0.99              1.88 0.12         0.137 0.08           0.3 0.04      21   0.14
Printing and publ.                 -0.103    0.60            21.68 2.79 **       0.411 0.50           4.1 1.12      21   0.44
Industrial chemicals               -0.302    1.09            17.73 1.41         -2.201 1.65         17.2 2.89 **    21   0.22
Other chemicals                    -0.610    2.37   **       27.62 2.35 **      -0.463 0.37         16.3 2.92 ***   21   0.28
Rubber products                    -0.094    2.17   **         3.69 1.86 *      -0.078 0.37           3.7 3.89 ***  21   0.23
Plastic products                   -0.176    2.02   *        13.22 3.34 ***     -0.024 0.06           4.0 2.20 **   20   0.42
Pottery, china, earth.             -0.045    1.74            -1.66 1.42         -0.197 1.63           3.8 7.18 ***  19   0.64
Glass and products                 -0.097    2.38   **         2.10 1.13        -0.121 0.63           4.5 5.29 ***  20   0.33
Oth. non-met.min.pr.               -0.234    2.42   **         5.27 1.20        -0.223 0.49         13.2 6.60 ***   20   0.33
Iron and steel                     -0.154    0.76            10.49 1.13         -0.886 0.89         10.3 2.37 **    20   0.11
Non-ferrous metals                  0.190    1.76   *        -1.12 0.23          0.910 1.73          -0.6 0.26      20   0.39
Fab. metal prod.                   -0.090    0.55            23.63 3.22 ***     -0.489 0.64           5.5 1.65      20   0.54
Mach. exc. elect.                  -0.443    0.84            57.52 2.40 **      -4.176 1.68         11.2 1.03       20   0.39
Machinery electric                 -0.729    1.61            59.92 2.92 **      -4.115 1.93 *       14.9 1.59       20   0.44
Transport equipment                -0.434    0.93            48.12 2.27 **      -0.398 0.18           7.8 0.81      20   0.29
Prof. & sci. equip.                -0.254    1.58            17.37 2.39 **      -0.232 0.31           2.0 0.61      20   0.27
    * indicates significant at the 10% level, ** at the 5% level and *** at the 1% level
a
    Dependent variable is sectoral value added as a share of total value added
b
    All coefficients are divided by 1000.
                       Table 6. Factor intensities by sector
                                  Unskilled         Skilled                K/L
                                              a                 a
           Sector                     share             share              ratiob
Food products                                     28                72              0.82
Beverages                                         17                83              1.96
Tobacco manuf.                                    28                72              2.41
Textiles                                          40                60              0.51
Wearing apparel                                   47                53              0.12
Leather products                                  35                65              0.28
Footwear                                          41                59              0.19
Wood products                                     36                64              0.56
Furniture, exc. Metal                             34                66              0.25
Paper and products                                20                80              1.89
Printing and publishing                           18                82              0.50
Industrial chemicals                               8                92              3.51
Other chemicals                                    9                91              1.16
Rubber products                                   24                76              0.77
Plastic products                                  26                74              0.62
Pottery, china, earth.                            39                61              0.40
Glass and products                                21                79              1.12
Other non-met.min.pr.                             25                75              1.02
Iron and steel                                    27                73              1.69
Non-ferrous metals                                25                75              1.37
Fabricated metal prod.                            24                76              0.53
Machinery, exc. elect.                            14                86              0.75
Machinery electric                                17                83              0.93
Transport equipment                               18                82              0.97
Prof. & scient. equip.                            12                88              0.47
a
    Shares of total employment in the sector in the US, 1988.
b
    Expressed relative to the K/L ratio for US manufacturing as a whole.
                                                       Table 7. Level of Development and Specialization
                                                      Difference: Top 5 countries and Bottom 5 countries
                                             Observed Sharesa                Predicted Sharesa       Abs. Value Contrib. Of Abs. value error
           Sector                  Bottom Quartile Top Quartile Difference Difference Std.Dev.        Obs. Dif. Prediction   of pred. Dif
Food products                                3.43         2.50       -0.93      -0.21       0.86           0.93        0.21             0.72
Beverages                                    1.03         0.52       -0.50      -0.16       0.20           0.50        0.16             0.34
Tobacco manuf.                               0.55         0.26       -0.28      -0.09       0.19           0.28        0.09             0.19
Textiles                                     1.93         0.64       -1.29      -1.35       0.21 ***       1.29        1.23             0.06
Wearing apparel                              0.70         0.38       -0.32      -0.29       0.09 ***       0.32        0.29             0.03
Leather products                             0.11         0.05       -0.06      -0.05       0.03 *         0.06        0.05             0.01
Footwear                                     0.20         0.06       -0.14      -0.14       0.05 **        0.14        0.14             0.00
Wood products                                0.41         0.94        0.53       0.34       0.18 *         0.53        0.34             0.19
Furniture, exc. Metal                        0.19         0.37        0.18       0.25       0.11 **        0.18        0.11             0.07
Paper and products                           0.71         2.11        1.40       0.80       0.53           1.40        0.80             0.60
Printing and publishing                      0.78         1.90        1.12       0.76       0.26 ***       1.12        0.76             0.36
Industrial chemicals                         1.41         1.36       -0.05       0.20       0.42           0.05       -0.20             0.24
Other chemicals                              1.64         1.23       -0.41      -0.02       0.39           0.41        0.02             0.39
Rubber products                              0.31         0.26       -0.06      -0.03       0.07           0.06        0.03             0.03
Plastic products                             0.47         0.64        0.17       0.23       0.13 *         0.17        0.11             0.06
Pottery, china, earth.                       0.20         0.07       -0.13      -0.17       0.04 ***       0.13        0.09             0.04
Glass and products                           0.35         0.21       -0.14      -0.11       0.06 *         0.14        0.11             0.03
Other non-met.min.pr.                        1.12         0.76       -0.36      -0.25       0.14 *         0.36        0.25             0.11
Iron and steel                               0.86         1.18        0.32       0.16       0.31           0.32        0.16             0.16
Non-ferrous metals                           0.35         0.66        0.30       0.33       0.16 *         0.30        0.28             0.03
Fabricated metal prod.                       0.98         1.84        0.86       0.88       0.24 ***       0.86        0.83             0.03
Machinery, exc. elect.                       1.89         3.30        1.41       1.71       0.77 **        1.41        1.10             0.31
Machinery electric                           1.80         2.58        0.78       1.23       0.66 *         0.78        0.34             0.44
Transport equipment                          1.33         2.76        1.43       1.27       0.68 *         1.43        1.27             0.16
Prof. & scient. equip.                       0.35         0.64        0.28       0.26       0.23           0.28        0.26             0.02
                                                                                                Sum:      13.44        8.83             4.61
                                                                                                                       66%              34%
    * indicates significant at the 10% level, ** at the 5% level and *** at the 1% level
a
    All values are expressed as percentages.
         Table 8. Reduced form specification including GDP per capita a
                           Coeff. on     t-value       Test of joint restrictions
Sector                     GDP/Pop                      F-value      P-value
Food products                 -0.084        0.41            0.16       0.919
Beverages                     -0.060        1.30            0.51       0.682
Tobacco manuf.                -0.091        2.35 **         2.69       0.081 *
Textiles                      -0.007        0.15            2.39       0.107
Wearing apparel               -0.023        1.08            0.48       0.699
Leather products              -0.004        0.62            0.57       0.641
Footwear                       0.001        0.12            0.81       0.510
Wood products                  0.036        0.84            0.94       0.446
Furniture, exc. Metal         -0.007        0.26            0.39       0.765
Paper and products             0.083        0.67            0.10       0.959
Printing and publishing        0.113        2.06 *          2.19       0.129
Industrial chemicals          -0.051        0.52            1.60       0.230
Other chemicals                0.040        0.43            2.17       0.131
Rubber products                0.006        0.36            1.63       0.221
Plastic products               0.032        1.09            3.04       0.062 *
Pottery, china, earth.         0.011        1.32            5.24       0.012 **
Glass and products             0.001        0.06            1.57       0.239
Other non-met.min.pr.          0.006        0.19            1.60       0.231
Iron and steel                 0.049        0.68            0.65       0.595
Non-ferrous metals            -0.049        1.32            3.41       0.045 **
Fabricated metal prod.         0.069        1.28            1.79       0.192
Machinery, exc. elect.         0.169        0.95            1.86       0.180
Machinery electric             0.120        0.78            3.19       0.054 *
Transport equipment            0.198        1.29            1.25       0.326
Prof. & scient. equip.         0.048        0.87            1.67       0.217
    * indicates significant at the 10% level, ** at the 5% level and *** at the 1% level
a
    Dependent variable is sectoral value added as a share of total value added. Relative
factor endowments are included as dependent variables but coefficients are not reported.
                                                                      351
                    92.3445
                                                                                     352

                                                                      385

                                                                                                                          382

                                              313
                                                                                                                            383
                                                                                                                  384
                                                                             342
                                             341
                                             362
skill intensity




                                              355                              381
                                       372      369
                                                                356
                                                          371
                                                    314         311




                                             332
                                       323
                                          331

                                       361
                               321
                                      324




                                        322
                    53.4231
                              -7990                                                                                       59920
                                                                            coeff. on S/L


                                                                      Figure 1.

                                                                       351
                    3.50645




                                                                                   314
capital intensity




                                                                                         313
                                                                                                                            341

                                                                                         371


                                                                                                                    372

                                        352                                                    362
                                                                              369
                               383                        384
                                                                311
                                                          382                                  355
                                                                                     356
                                                                                                381               331
                                                    321                      385               342
                                                                                                      361
                                                                                                         323332
                                                                                                        324
                                                                                           322
                    .120932
                              -729                                                                                         345
                                                                            coeff. on K/L


                                                                      Figure 2.
                                                         ITA                                                                                                                          NOR
      1.13822                                                                                             46.562
                                                                                   SWE

                                                          BEL
                                                          NET                      NOR                                                                                          FIN
                                                                       GERUSA
                                                                            FIN           JAP
                                                               FRA
                                                                                                                                                                       CANGER
                                                                       DEN
                                                               AUT                                                                                                                    SWE
                                                                     CAN                                                                                   AUS
                                  SPAIRE                                                                                                                    BEL
                                                    UK   AUS                                                                                    NZE             FRA
                                                                                                                                                               AUT       DEN USA             JAP
                                                                                                                                                             NET
                                              NZE                                                                                                          ITA




                                                                                                   K/L




TFP
                                                                                                                                     SPA
                            GRE                                                                                                GRE
                                                                                                                                       IRE
                      POR                                                                                                                             UK




                                                                                                                         POR
                TUR                                                                                                TUR
      .163134                                                                                               7.52
            1.41964                                                                19.8063                     1.41964                                                                19.8063
                                           GDP per capita                                                                                    GDP per capita




                                                                         USA                                                                               AUS
      .860412                                                          GER                               6.00988
                                                                     CAN
                                                                                          JAP
                                                               AUT
                                                    UK                              NOR
                                                                                   SWE
                                                           NET
                                                         AUS                 FIN
                                              NZE                      DEN

                                                               FRA
                                                                                                                                                                       CAN

                                                          BEL




S/L
                                                                                                   A/L



                                     IRE

                            GRE
                                                         ITA
                                                                                                                                                NZE
                                                                                                                                                                               USA
                                  SPA
                                                                                                                   TUR               SPA
                                                                                                                                                                         DEN    FIN
                TUR
                                                                                                                               GRE     IRE                       FRA                  SWE
                                                                                                                         POR                                             GER
                                                                                                                                                           ITA AUT                     NOR
                                                                                                                                                      UK    BEL
                      POR                                                                                                                                    NET                             JAP
      .097082                                                                                            .053975
            1.41964                                                                19.8063                     1.41964                                                                19.8063
                                           GDP per capita                                                                                    GDP per capita




                                                                                    Figures 3, 4, 5 and 6.
