                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                AUCTIONS WITH RESALE WHEN
                              PRIVATE VALUES ARE UNCERTAIN:
                              THEORY AND EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE

                                            Andreas Lange
                                             John A. List
                                            Michael K. Price

                                          Working Paper 10639
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10639


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2004




Thanks to Bill Howard who provided the Canadian timber auction data. Also, numerous discussions with
several Canadian officials, including, but not limited to, Bruce McRae, Michael Stone, and Bill Howard,
considerably enhanced this paper. John Staub provided excellent research assistance. Leandra DiSilva and
Christine Dobridge also provided excellent assistance during the data-gathering process. Larry Ausubel, Peter
Cramton, Glenn Harrison, Liesl Koch, and Tigran Melkonyan provided useful suggestions during the
discovery process. Seminar participants at several universities provided comments that improved the
manuscript. Andreas Lange gratefully acknowledges funding by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(DFG) under grant LA 1333/2-1. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Andreas Lange, John A. List, and Michael K. Price. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Auctions with Resale When Private Values are Uncertain: Theory and Empirical Evidence
Andreas Lange, John A. List, and Michael K. Price
NBER Working Paper No. 10639
July 2004
JEL No. L4, L7
                                       ABSTRACT

Auction theory is one of the richest areas of research in economics over the past three decades. Yet

whether and to what extent the introduction of secondary resale markets influences bidding behavior

in sealed bid first-price auctions remains under researched. This study begins by developing theory

to explore auctions with resale when private values are uncertain. We put our theory to the test by

examining both field data and experimental data from the lab. Our field data are from a unique data

set that includes nearly 3,000 auctions (over 10,000 individual bids) for cutting rights of standing

timber in British Columbia from 1996-2000. In comparing bidding patterns across agents who are

likely to have resale opportunities with those who likely do not, we find evidence that is consistent

with our theoretical predictions. Critical evaluation of the reduced-form bidding model, however,

reveals that sharp tests of the theoretical predictions are not possible because several other

differences may exist across these bidder types. We therefore use a laboratory experiment to

examine if the resale opportunity by itself can have the predicted effect. We find that while it does

have the predicted effect, a theoretical model based on risk-averse bidders explains the overall data

patterns more accurately than a model based on risk-neutral bidders. More generally, the paper

highlights the inferential power of combining naturally occurring data with laboratory data.

Andreas Lange                                         Michael Price
University of Maryland                                University of Maryland
Centre for European Economic Research                 mprice@arec.umd.edu
Mannheim, Germany
alange@arec.umd.edu

John A. List
Department of Economics and AREC
2200 Symons Hall
University of Maryland
and NBER
jlist@arec.umd.edu
I. Introduction
        Auctions have a long and storied past. From the human slave auctions carried out

in ancient Egypt to the marriage auctions for brides in Asia Minor to the Praetorian

Guard auctioning off the Roman Empire in A.D. 193, auctions have been used to allocate

goods and services.          While auctions have certainly served an important purpose

throughout history and are now used to sell almost anything one can imagine – vintage

wines, Treasury bills, pollution permits, baseball cards, etc. – economists have only

recently begun to explore rigorously the theoretical underpinnings of various auction

formats. The seminal work is due to Vickrey, who made several contributions – deriving

the Nash equilibrium bidding strategy for first-price auctions, demonstrating revenue

equivalence, and proposing the second-price auction as strategically equivalent to the

English auction – in his 1961 study.1

        An extensive literature examining the optimal design and application of auctions

has since developed. Our point of departure in this study is to relax the maintained

assumption that individual valuations are known with certainty at the time of the first-

price sealed bid auction.2 By relaxing the assumption of known use values and allowing

secondary (resale) markets, we find ourselves in an environment that is quite common in

practice.     U.S. Forest Service timber auctions, the procurement of governmental

contracts, estate auctions, art auctions, FCC auctions and the like all fit in this general



1
  This third contribution has recently been called into question by Lucking-Reiley (2000), who argues that
stamp auctioneers were using second price auctions some 65 years before Vickrey’s seminal work.
2
  It is well established in the literature that when bidders receive multi-dimensional or uncertain signals,
auctions may generate inefficient allocations (Pesendorfer and Swinkels (2000), Jehiel and Moldovanu
(2001), Goeree and Offerman (2003)). Efficiency and bidding strategies in such an environment are
dependent upon the weight individual bidders assign to both the private and common value components of
a signal and upon the number of participants in a given market. However, this literature has not considered
the effects of secondary markets.


                                                    -2-
class of allocation mechanisms.3 Unlike the traditional auction literature that assumes

independent private values (IPV) that are known with certainty, when bidders have ex

ante uncertainty about independent private values and anticipate resale opportunities,

equilibrium bidding strategies are dependent upon option values conveyed from the

secondary market. Intuitively, bidder behavior in this case is fundamentally linked to the

existence and structure of potential resale markets.

        Our study attempts to make both theoretical and empirical advances in this area.

Theoretically, we advance Haile (2001, 2003) by relaxing the maintained assumption of

risk-neutral preferences. With known valuations in an IPV first price auction, it is well

documented that risk-averse agents will submit bids that first-order stochastically

dominate those of risk-neutral counterparts. In the context of a symmetric, common-

value auction, it is well documented that risk-averse agents submit bids that are first-

order stochastically dominated by a risk-neutral counterpart. Since the auction markets

considered herein contain features of both common and independent private values, we

are a priori unable to predict the effects of risk aversion on bidder behavior without first

developing an extension of extant theory. By allowing symmetric agents with CARA

preferences, we derive several testable implications.

        Our main empirical objectives are to (i) evaluate the validity of our theoretical

model of auctions with resale, and (ii) provide empirical evidence of behavior in such

markets that can aid in the design and implementation of efficient mechanisms for the

allocation of goods and services. To achieve these objectives, we combine insights from


3
  There is a growing theoretical literature that examines the impacts of such resale opportunities on bidder
behavior and a seller’s optimal choice of auction format (see, for example, Bikhchandani and Huang
(1989), Gupta and Lebrun (1999), Haile (2000, 2001, 2003), Troger (2003), and Garratt and Troger
(2003)).


                                                    -3-
naturally occurring data with insights gained from a controlled laboratory experiment.

One benefit of our approach is that it enables a comparison of behavior across two

different environments with varying levels of control and realism.

       Our naturally occurring data are drawn from nearly 3,000 timber auctions (over

10,000 individual bids) from the Small Business Forest Enterprise Program (SBFEP) for

the interior region of British Columbia (BC) for the period 1996-2000. These data can be

viewed as extending the empirical findings in Haile (2001), who used U.S. timber auction

data to explore bidding behavior before and after a federal regulation that allowed resale.

Unlike his temporal identification strategy, our identification rests on static comparisons

between bidding patterns of three very different bidder groups: loggers on the coast and

interior of BC and mills located in the BC interior. While we find evidence consonant

with our theoretical predictions and in line with Haile’s (2001) findings, we are cautious

to make strong inference because exact comparisons cannot be unequivocally made. As

in Haile’s (2001) study, where several identification assumptions are necessarily

imposed, in our case variations in the underlying valuations, risk posture, and structure

(nature) of secondary markets are largely unobserved and therefore may frustrate

appropriate inference. This fact highlights the difficulty of evaluating the impacts of

resale on bidder behavior using uncontrolled field data.

       One way to approach this quandary is to make use of a laboratory experiment. By

studying artificial markets that differ only in whether a secondary market is available, we

are permitted a unique insight into whether the resale market by itself can lead to such

predicted consequences. Experimental methods thus allow us to study the effects of

resale possibilities that would be difficult to identify in naturally occurring data. Keeping




                                            -4-
an eye toward designing a laboratory setting that resembles naturally occurring markets

while maintaining a strong theoretical link, we designed an experiment using the first-

price auction with both a second stage optimal auction (OA) as well as an English auction

(EA) continuation game of complete information. This particular design choice allows a

controlled test of existing theory and a useful benchmark for making inference from field

data, since the secondary market in BC most likely lies within these two market extremes.

       The lab results are broadly in line with theoretical expectations. We find that

experimental subjects submit bids that are significantly higher in markets with resale

organized by an optimal auction than in those without such opportunity (or with

secondary markets organized by an EA). An interesting data pattern not anticipated by

extant theory is that over lower ranges of the signal space, realized bids are less than the

risk-neutral theoretical predictions, while over higher ranges of the signal space, realized

bids are greater than the risk-neutral theoretical predictions. Yet these tendencies are

consonant with our theory of bidding by agents with CARA preferences.

       The remainder of the paper is crafted as follows. Section II provides an overview

of the SBFEP auction market and our strategy for identifying resale differences using

reduced-form bid functions. Section III develops a theory of bidding by agents with

CARA preferences in auction markets that parallel our laboratory setting. Section IV

discusses the laboratory experiment and results. Section V concludes.

II. The SBFEP Auction Market

The SBFEP Auction – Background and Predictions

       Our naturally occurring data are drawn from nearly 3,000 timber auctions (over

12,000 individual bids) from the British Columbia SBFEP for the period 1996-2000 – the




                                            -5-
identical data set that BC is using to begin its new pricing approach under the changed

circumstance agreement for the U.S.-Canadian softwood lumber dispute.4 To examine

the effects of ex post resale opportunities on bidder behavior, we compare reduced-form

bid functions across distinct subsets of bidders that face different market conditions. Our

general approach is in the spirit of, for example, Porter and Zona (1999), in that we

employ reduced-form methods to infer the nature of resale effects from differences in

bidding patterns across subsets of bidders.

           SBFEP auctions in BC allocate standing timber of less than 50,000 metric board

feet cubed (mb3) to small logging companies and contractors. SBFEP timber sales

account for approximately 13 percent of the harvested timber in the province. About half

of this timber is allocated via sealed bid tenders to the highest bidder under section 20 of

the province’s Forest Act. These auctions are subdivided into two types: Category 1 and

Category 2, where Category 1 auctions include only market loggers. Category 2 auctions

are open to both registered market loggers and registered owners of processing facilities.

           Category 1 bidders purchase timber cutting rights and sell harvested timber to end

users. In the interior of BC almost all harvested timber is sold to either major forest

license holders or local sawmills. Ex ante, bidders contract with a prospective buyer to

arrange an agreement in principle to sell/buy if they win the auction. The bidders then

submit bids and the winner consummates the agreement in principle and chooses to lock

in the stumpage price he bid. In the coastal region of BC, Category 1 bidders ex ante

contract with prospective buyers to deliver a portion of harvested timber and sell the




4
    See Price and List (2004) for a discussion of the solution to the trade dispute.


                                                        -6-
remaining harvested timber on the Vancouver log market.5 Category 2 bidders purchase

timber cutting rights to obtain raw materials for their processing operations. Bidders

either process harvested timber or trade it to obtain needed materials. Since both loggers

along the coast and processing facilities are actively engaged in the ex post buying and

selling of harvested logs whereas loggers in the interior contract ex ante to deliver all

harvest to a given buyer, we believe that resale might enter into the bidding strategies of

the former but not the latter. Intuitively, since the former set of bidders have an outside

option to sell logs on a spot market whereas the latter do not have such an option, one

would expect that loggers from the coast and processing facilities would provide an upper

envelope on the observed bids of loggers from the interior. It is thus hypothesized that

bids should differ across these groups in the direction that theory predicts. To identify

whether this effect holds, we rely upon cross sectional variation.6

Identifying Resale Effects from Reduced-Form Bid Functions

         A bidding strategy Bi ( ⋅) : X → R+ maps characteristics to a bid function.

                                                                                   .
Assuming that firms are risk neutral and “invert” the bid function Bi( ) by defining the set

of all firm characteristics that lead to a bid lower than bi as ϕi ( bi ) = { xi ∈ X | Bi ( xi ) ≤ bi } ,

then the probability of a firm submitting a bid of bi winning an auction is

            Qi ( bi ) = Pr(x j ∈ ϕi (bi ) for all j ≠ i ) = ∏ Fj (ϕ j ( bi ) ) .                       (1II)
                                                            j ≠i




5
  Along the interior region of BC, no spot market for logs has developed due to differences in infrastructure
and associated transportation costs that limit the profitability of spot market exchange.
6
  In this sense, our identification strategy is much different from Haile (2001), who analyzes individual
bids from the U.S. timber auctions and makes use of the temporal variation in the imposition of federal
regulations by examining bids prior to the onset of the regulations that effectively prohibited resale and
comparing them to bids after the regulations took effect.


                                                      -7-
Without resale, firm i’s expected profits depend on its own (expected) value of the good

given its characteristics, t(xi), and are thus given by

                   π i ( bi , xi ; B− i ) = ( ti ( xi ) − bi ) Qi (bi ) .                 (2II)

        A competitive bidder derives an optimal bid strategy conditional upon his likely

valuation and some probability distribution over the valuations (and hence bids) of all

possible competitors. In equilibrium, this imposes a structure on the relationship between

a given firm’s bid and the probability of that bid winning the auction. However, when

bidders have resale opportunities, equation (2) must be adjusted to reflect expected

profits from resale trade. For example, when the second-stage continuation game is an

optimal auction with complete information, the winning bidder obtains in equilibrium a

payoff equal to the highest use value among all players, minus the price paid to the initial

seller. In such an environment, firm i’s expected profits are thus given by

                                      π i ( bi , xi ; B− i ) = ( t1 − bi ) Qi ( bi ) ,   (2II’)

where t1 is the highest use value among all bidders in the auction and Qi(bi) is again the

probability that bidder i wins the auction. Haile (2003) examines bidder behavior in such

situations and shows that optimal bid strategies in first-price auctions with resale

represented by an OA continuation game differ from those of an equivalent first-price

auction without resale.           Across all signal (valuation) ranges, bids in the former

environment weakly dominate those in the latter.

        To identify resale effects, we employ a general approach that is in the spirit of, for

example, Porter and Zona (1993, 1999). We employ reduced-form methods to infer the

nature of resale effects by differences in bidding patterns across subsets of firms facing

different outside options. Our identification strategy characterizes equilibrium bidding


                                                           -8-
behavior as a function of both observed and unobserved auction-specific and firm effects

assumed to affect firm i’s valuation and/or probability of winning a given auction. Once

an equilibrium bid function has been specified, a pooled regression model for the set of

coastal Category 1, interior Category 1, and Category 2 bids is estimated using

interaction effects for these distinct subsets of bidders. Theoretically, if resale effects are

present in the Category 2 and coastal bids, then parameter estimates from the interaction

of these groupings with observed auction covariates should differ from those of the

model covariates for interior loggers. In particular, we should observe that the estimated

comparative static effect of competition on observed bids is smaller for interior Category

1 auctions than it is for otherwise equivalent Category 2 or coastal Category 1 auctions.

        Specifically, assume that equilibrium bidding behavior for symmetric, risk-neutral

agents in a first-price sealed bid auction follows the linear specification

                                Pij = βX ij + ε ij ,                                     (3II)

where Pij is the ith bidder’s bonus bid in auction j. Xij is a set of regressors underlying the

ith firm’s valuation for tract j plus a set of interaction terms between these regressors and

dummy variables for coastal loggers and mills; εij = αi + uij; E[αi] = 0, E[αi2] = σα2,

E[αiαk] = 0 for i ≠ k; αi and uij are orthogonal for all i and j. αi is a random effect

assumed to capture heterogeneity that would be left uncontrolled in a standard cross-

sectional model.

The SBFEP Auction Data - Empirical Results

        We observe 2,671 (247) SBFEP sealed-bid tender first-price auctions conducted

in the interior (coast) of British Columbia for the period January 1996 through December

2002.   These auctions provide more than 11,500 individual bids, from which we



                                                 -9-
eliminate any bids submitted in auctions with only a single bidder, any bids submitted by

a suspected cartel firm, any bids submitted in an auction with an estimated net cruise

volume of less than 1,000 mb3, and any bids submitted in an auction employing a format

other than a first-price sealed tender. This results in a sample of nearly 1,300 firms that

submit nearly 5,700 bids for the interior and a sample of nearly 475 firms that submit

nearly 1500 bids on the coast.7

        To generate the data for the empirical model, we combine information from a

number of sources. First, a list of all bidders currently registered to participate in SBFEP

timber auctions was provided by the Ministry of Forests (MOF) in BC. This listing was

used to generate unique identification codes for each bidder in the data set. Second, the

MOF provided bid sheets for each of the 2,918 auctions.                       The bid sheets provide

information on (i) the regional office holding and date of the auction, (ii) the estimated

net cruise volume of timber on the plot, (iii) the announced upset rate for the auction, and

(iv) the identity and bonus bid per metric board feet cubed for each participant in the

auction. Finally, the MOF provided a database that contains detailed information on the

characteristics of each plot.8

        To condition behavior on observed auction characteristics in tests for resale

effects, we estimate a series of reduced-form bid functions. Specifically, we assume that

equilibrium bidding behavior follows the linear specification in equation (3), and

therefore estimate

                                    Pij = βX ij + ε ij ,                                             (4II)



7
 Collusion was evident among a subset of firms (Price and List 2004), thus we exclude these observations.
8
 Due to differences in how data is reported across the coastal and interior regions, the information on plot
characteristics was used largely to fill in any missing information from the bid sheets.


                                                    -10-
where all variables are as defined above. Auction covariates included in the vector of

regressors include:

    •    Mills – dummy variable that equals 1 if the bidder is a mill
    •    Coast – dummy variable that equals 1 if the bidder is from the coast
    •    Upset – the announced upset rate per mb3
    •    Upset2 – the square of the upset rate
    •    Bidders – the number of bidders in auction j
    •    Bidders2 – the square of the number of bidders
    •    NCV – the announced net cruise volume in mb3
    •    NCV2 – the square of the announced net cruise volume
    •    Coast_upset – an interaction of the coastal dummy and the upset rate
    •    Coast_upset2 – an interaction of the coastal dummy and upset2
    •    Coast_bidders – an interaction of the coastal dummy and bidders
    •    Coast_bidders2 – an interaction of the coastal dummy and bidders2
    •    Coast_ncv – an interaction of the coastal dummy and NCV
    •    Coast_ncv2 – an interaction of the coastal dummy and NCV2

Table 1 provides parameter estimates for equation (4) estimated for the set of 7,185

observations across a number of specifications.

         Empirical results for the pooled model in Table 1 are consistent with economic

intuition. First, since we consider SBFEP auctions as first-price IPV sealed bid tenders,

economic theory predicts that bids should increase in the number of bidders over the

relevant range (n=15 (n=18) is the boundary for the number of auction participants in the

interior (on the coast).9 The positive and significant coefficient on the number of bidders

across all model specifications is consistent with this prediction. Second, bidders respond

positively to the announced upset rate. Since the announced upset rate is correlated with

the value a bidder assigns to a given tract, this finding is consistent with economic theory.




9
  We follow Haile (2001) and Athey and Levin (2001) in assuming these are IPV auctions. This is
intuitively appealing for these data considering that bidders face different capacity constraints (and possibly
possess different technologies), suggesting that idiosyncratic, firm-specific cost factors are more important
than plot-specific, uncertain costs.


                                                    -11-
Finally, there are temporal effects in bidder behavior. Across all model specifications,

the inclusion of fixed year effects improves the overall predictive power of our model.

       Empirical results presented in Table 1 suggest an important difference in the

behavior of mills and loggers along the coast relative to loggers in the interior that are

suggestive of resale for the former set of bidders: measured at the sample means, the

estimated marginal effect of adding an additional bidder in an auction for our fully

interactive model specification (F) with year fixed effects is approximately 47.16 percent

($2.259 to $1.535) greater for Category 2 auctions than it is for Category 1 auctions. For

Category 1 bidders along the coast, this estimated difference is 30.29 percent ($2.00 to

$1.535). These estimates are consistent with resale opportunities for the former set of

bidders and not for the latter. Equilibrium bidding strategies in auctions with resale are

conditioned upon information related to other bidders in the market that is absent in the

strategy of a firm bidding in a market without resale. Hence, we would expect greater

competition in the former case when the secondary market institution is an OA

continuation game of complete information (or a similar analog), as we assume for the

Category 2 mills and Category 1 loggers along the coast. This finding is consonant with

the predictions and analysis employed by Haile (2001) to identify resale effects for U.S.

timber auctions. Combined with other parameter estimates in Table 1 (e.g., the estimated

parametric shifter terms in the model), we take the empirical results to suggest that resale

opportunities influence bidding in the direction that theory would predict.

III. Risk, Resale, and Bidder Behavior – First-Price Auctions

       Although we are able to extend the empirical findings of Haile (2001) and

identify empirical differences across bidders indicative of the predicted comparative




                                           -12-
static effects of resale opportunities on bids, the field data on SBFEP auctions do not

allow us to control properly for many underlying determinants like the (expected) value

from using the good, the division of surplus on the resale market, or the risk-posture of

the firms.10      The effects of resale are inferred from differences in reduced-form

parameters across the subsets of bidders. Such analysis is sensitive to issues of model

specification and the interpretation of estimated parameters. In practice, both the “true”

underlying model specification and its associated interpretation are unknown and/or

unobserved in naturally occurring data.                While one may report empirical evidence

consistent with the predicted comparative static effects of resale, to make more powerful

inference of whether such differences are in fact generated by the existence and nature of

secondary markets, one can examine behavior in a controlled environment. We follow

this line of reasoning and complement the field results with lab experiments. To derive

testable predictions, we first develop a model that allows risk aversion.11

         Consider a first-price auction with resale opportunities with n symmetric, risk-

averse players. We assume that players are risk averse with constant absolute risk

aversion (CARA).            That is, the von-Neumann-Morgenstern utility is given by



10
   For example, there is a possibility that loggers are able to mitigate risk in the field by entering into
contractual relationships with processors and/or logging companies that Category 2 bidders are unable to
mitigate. If so, then one could argue that loggers are less risk averse than are mills. Hence, it is possible
that estimated differences in behavior across these two groups are generated by differences in unobserved
risk posture rather than differences in ex post resale opportunities.
11
   As noted by Haile (2003), auction markets with resale have components of both common and private
value auctions. It is well documented in the experimental literature that in a private value setting risk-
averse agents submit bids that first-order stochastically dominate those of risk-neutral agents. In common
value settings, however, this tendency is reversed. Risk-averse agents in a common value auction submit
bids that are stochastically dominated by risk-neutral counterparts. Given the persistence of risk-averse
behavior on the part of student subjects in the lab, and lacking an a priori theoretical prediction/conjecture
about the effects of risk aversion on behavior in our setting, it is important to develop such theory to enable
us to filter out the effects of risk aversion from those of resale opportunity. Without such theory, empirical
tests are potentially confounded and do not permit a direct test of our desired treatment effect.



                                                    -13-
              1
ρ ( z) = −        exp(−σ z ) . Prior to bidding, each player i receives a signal Xi on her use
             σ

value Ui.          The signals X i ∈ [ xl , xu ] are independently and identically distributed

according to a differentiable and strictly increasing distribution F (⋅) .                  Use values

U i ∈ [ul , uu ] are assumed to follow the conditional distribution G (⋅ | X i ) , which is

differentiable with Gu > 0 on the support [umin ( X i ), umax ( X i )] . Furthermore, we assume

that G (u | x) is continuous and decreasing in x , i.e., G (u | x) stochastically dominates

G (u | y ) if x > y .12 This implies that both umin ( x), umax ( x) are increasing in x .

           We make the following assumption on the probability distributions:

                                               d
Assumption (A1): We assume that                   log G (u | x) is increasing in x.
                                               du

Note that Assumption A1 is satisfied in particular for all uniform distributions:

                  u − umin ( x)              d                       1
G (u | x) =                          . Here,    log G (u | x) =               , which increases in x as
               umax ( x) − umin ( x)         du                 u − umin ( x)

umin ( x) is increasing in x.

Bidder Behavior in Markets without Resale

           In order to provide a reference case, we first reconsider the case in which there is

no secondary resale market. In this case, the distribution of the use value is given by

G (⋅ | X i ) . A player with signal x who wins the auction with a bid of b has expected

utility given by




12
     G(u | x) is assumed strictly decreasing on the interior of the support.


                                                       -14-
                            uu                                     uu
                                                     ρ (0)
                            ∫u ρ (u − b)dG (u | x) = ρ (b) u∫ ρ (u)dG (u | x)
                             l                                       l
                                                                                                            (1)
                                                      ρ (0)
                                                  =         K N ( x)
                                                      ρ (b)

where K N ( x) refers to the expected utility from consuming the good given a signal x .

Given an increasing equilibrium bid function bN (⋅) , the expected utility of a player with

signal x who bids bN ( x% ) is given by

                             1
                                        x%                                              
                                       ∫
                        ρ (bN ( x% )) xl
                                           K N ( x)dF ( z ) n −1 + (1 − F ( x% ) n −1 )  ρ (0)
                                                                                        
                                                                                                .           (2)
                             1                                                       
                       =               K N ( x) F ( x% ) n −1 + (1 − F ( x% ) n −1 )  ρ (0)
                         ρ (bN ( x% ))                                               

Shading by a bidder of type x leads to a tradeoff between earnings and the probability of

winning the auction.

       Maximizing the expected utility with respect to x% and setting x% = x leads to the

following differential equation defining an optimal bidding function bN ( x) :


                                        1              n −1 
                                                  F ( x)  ' =
                                                                    (
                                                               F ( x) n −1 '
                                                                             .
                                                                                  )                         (3)
                                  
                                   ρ (bN  ( x ))              K N ( x  )

From this expression, we obtain the following implicit definition of the optimal bidding

function without resale opportunity:

                                                                             x
                       1                                           1               1
                  ρ (bN ( x))
                                 = −σ exp(σ bN ( x)) =
                                                               F ( x) n −1   ∫K
                                                                             xl   N ( z )
                                                                                          dF ( z ) n −1 .   (3’)


Proposition 1 [corresponds to Theorem 14 of Milgrom and Weber (1982)]: If no resale
is possible, bN ( x) is the unique differentiable symmetric separating equilibrium bid
function.
Proof: (see Appendix A)




                                                        -15-
Using l’Hospital’s rule we obtain the following results. Under risk neutrality, an optimal

bidding function is defined by

                                                x uu
                                      1
                                                ∫ ∫ udG (u | z )dF ( z )          for σ = 0 .
                                                                           n −1
                        bN ( x) =                                                               (4)
                                  F ( x) n −1   xl ul



For infinitely high risk aversion, however, bids converge towards the minimal possible

use value given a signal x, i.e., bN ( x) → umin ( x) for σ → ∞ . Formal derivation of these

results is provided in Appendix A.

Bidder Behavior in Auctions with Resale

       Whenever a player can resell a commodity won at auction on a secondary market,

the value the bidder places on the commodity in the primary auction market depends on

the price at which resale can take place. As discussed in Haile (2003), such prices are

dependent upon the informational structure and trading institution assumed on the

secondary market.

       We first study the case of complete information on a resale market characterized

by an OA continuation game, i.e., we assume that use values are common knowledge

among players and that the seller extracts the entire surplus by selling to the opponent

with the highest use value on the resale market whenever such trade is profitable.

       Let us denote the distribution of use values of a player given that her signal is less

than or equal to y as
                                                        y

                                                        ∫ G(u | z )dF ( z )
                                                        xl
                                      M (u | y ) =                            .
                                                               F ( y)

Further define G1 (u | y ) as the distribution of highest use value of an opponent of a player

given that y is the maximal signal to an opponent. Thus we have


                                                        -16-
                                   G1 (u | y ) = G (u | y ) M (u | y ) n − 2 .

Then, the distribution of highest use value of all players given signal x to one player and y

being the maximal signal to an opponent is given by

                                   G1 (u | x, y ) = G (u | x)G1 (u | y ) .

The expected utility of a player with signal x – facing opponents with maximal signal y –

who wins an auction with a bid of b is given by

                          uu                                      uu
                                                       ρ (0)
                          ∫u ρ (u − b)dG1 (u | x, y) = ρ (b) u∫ ρ (u )dG1 (u | x, y)
                           l                                        l
                                                                                          ,           (5)
                                                 ρ (0)
                                               =       K OA ( x, y )
                                                 ρ (b)

where K OA ( x, y ) refers to the expected utility from consuming the good given a signal x ,

where y is again the maximal signal of all opponents. Not winning the auction yields a

payoff of zero.

       If an English auction is carried out on the resale market, the second highest use

value is decisive. Define G2 (u | y ) as the distribution of second highest use value of an

opponent of a player given that y is the maximal signal to an opponent. Thus we have

             G2 (u | y ) = M (u | y ) n − 2 + (n − 2)G (u | y ) M (u | y ) n −3 [1 − M (u | y ) ] .

Further, G2 (u | x, y ) is the probability that neither the use value of a player with signal x

nor the second highest use value of opponents whose highest signal is y exceeds u.

       Then, the value of the good to a player with signal x – facing opponents with

maximal signal y – who wins an auction with a bid of b is given by his own use value if

he has the highest or second highest use value, or the second highest use value of all

opponents otherwise. The expected utility from winning the auction is therefore given by



                                                     -17-
                  uu                                         uu

                  ∫ ρ (u − b)G (u | y)dG(u | x) + ∫ ρ ( z − b)G( z | x)dG ( z | y)
                  ul
                                  2
                                                              ul
                                                                                            2


                                           uu

                                       = ∫ ρ (u − b)dG2 (u | x, y )
                                           ul
                                                                                                          (6a)
                                                  uu
                                           ρ (0)
                                           ρ (b) u∫
                                       =            ρ (u )dG2 (u | x, y )
                                                   l


                                           ρ (0)
                                       =         K EA ( x, y )
                                           ρ (b)

where K EA ( x, y ) refers to the expected utility from obtaining the good given a signal x

and y being the maximal signal of all opponents.

        If a player does not win the auction, she can acquire the good on the resale market

if she has the highest use value. The expected value from losing the auction is therefore

given by

                       uu
                          u                             uu
                                                                               
                       ∫ u∫
                          
                       ul 
                              ρ (u − z )dG 1 ( z | y ) + ∫u ρ (0)dG1 ( z | y ) dG (u | x)
                                                                                                        (6b)
                           l


                       = LEA ( x, y ) ρ (0)

Using the definitions of K R ( x, y ) and LR ( x, y ) with R ∈ {OA, EA} and LOA ( x, y ) = 1 , we

can now derive the optimal bids for both types of resale markets simultaneously.

        Assuming an increasing bid function bR (⋅) , the expected utility of a player with

signal x who bids bR ( x% ) can be written as

                        1
                                   x%                            xu
                                                                                              
                                   ∫ R                           ∫x% R                         ρ (0) .
                                                          n −1                           n −1
                                     K ( x , z )dF ( z )      +    L  ( x , z )dF ( z )                   (7)
                   ρ (bR ( x% )) xl                                                         

Differentiating with respect to x% and setting x% = x leads to a differential equation for the

optimal bidding function bt ( x) :




                                                         -18-
                            x
               1                                            1
       (              ) ' ∫ K R ( x, z )dF ( z ) n −1 +             K R ( x, x)( F ( x) n −1 ) ' = LR ( x, x)( F ( x) n −1 ) ' , (7’)
           ρ (bR ( x)) xl                               ρ (bR ( x))

which reduces to the following linear equation:

                                                 1           1
                                        (               ) '+           H1 ( x ) = H 2 ( x )
                                             ρ (bR ( x)) ρ (bR ( x% ))                      ,                                   (8)

where H1(x) is given by

                                                               K R ( x, x)( F ( x) n −1 ) '
                                                  H1 ( x ) =    x

                                                               ∫K
                                                               xl
                                                                    R   ( x, z )dF ( z ) n −1


and H2(x) is given by

                                                               ( F ( x) n −1 ) ' LR ( x, x)
                                                  H 2 ( x) =   x
                                                                                                  .
                                                               ∫K
                                                                                           n −1
                                                                    R   ( x, z )dF ( z )
                                                               xl



By a standard solution we thus obtain that an optimal bidding function bR(x) is given by

                             1        x                z                            x              
                                    =  ∫ H 2 ( z ) exp  ∫ H1 ( y )dy  dz  + c1 exp  − ∫ H1 ( z )dz                        (9)
                         ρ (bR ( x))  xl              x                                          
                                                                                        xl             

for some constant c1 . Noting that ρ (ul ) ≤ K R ( x, y ) ≤ ρ (uu ) , there exists a constant c2

                    x                   x
such          that ∫ H1 ( z )dz ≤ c2 ∫ F ( x) '/ F ( x)dz = c2 [ln( F ( x) − ln( F ( xl )] = −∞ .               The       second
                    xl                  xl



summand in (9) therefore vanishes and we arrive at the implicit definition for bR ( x) :

                               z                 y
                                                                                                                      
                           exp  ∫ K R ( y, y ) / ∫ K R ( y, w)dF ( w) n −1dF ( y ) n −1                             
                 1        x    x                                                                                    
                        = ∫                      xl                                     
                                                                                                                       .     (10)
                                                                                                                  n −1
                                                                                            L  ( z , z ) dF ( z )
             ρ (bR ( x))  xl                 z                                              R
                                                                                                                       
                                             ∫x K R ( z, y)dF ( y)
                                                                   n −1
                                                                                                                      
                                             l
                                                                                                                       




                                                                    -19-
Proposition 2: [corresponds to Theorem 2 of Haile (2003)] If the resale market is
organized via an optimal or English auction, bR ( x) ( R ∈ {OA, EA} ) is the unique
differentiable symmetric separating equilibrium bid function.
Proof: See Appendix A

        To derive bR ( xl ) , we note again that K R ( x, y ) converges for x, y → xl to

K R ( xl , xl ) . Therefore, we obtain

                                                                  z                               
                                                           x
                                                              exp  ∫ 1/ F n −1 ( y )dF ( y ) n −1 
                  1         L (x , x )                            x                                dF ( z ) n −1
                           = R l l lim x → xl
              ρ (bR ( xl )) K R ( xl , xl )               ∫x                n −1
                                                                         F ( z)                                      (11)
                                                            l


                                LR ( xl , xl )
                            =
                                K R ( xl , xl )

Consider the limiting case of risk neutrality, i.e., σ = 0 . Applying l’Hospital’s rule for

σ → 0 yields the bidding function for the optimal auction on the resale market (see

Appendix A):

                                                  x uu
                                       1
                                                  ∫ ∫ udG (u | z, z )dF ( z )            for σ = 0 ,
                                                                                  n −1
                        bOA ( x) =                          1                                                        (12)
                                   F ( x) n −1    xl ul



which mimics the optimal bid function derived by Haile (2003) for a first-price auction

followed by an OA continuation game with complete information.

For the English auction continuation we obtain similarly

                         x  uu                     uu u
                                                                                           
                  1
                    n −1 ∫ ∫                        ∫  ∫
   bEA ( x) =                  udG2 (u | z , z ) −       (u − w) dG1 ( w | z )dG (u | z ) dF ( z )
                                                                                                     n −1
                                                                                                          for σ = 0 ,
              F ( x) xl  ul                       ul ul                                  

                                                                                                                     (12’)

which is in line with Haile’s result.

        Furthermore, for agents with preferences characterized by infinitely high risk

aversion, bids converge towards the minimal possible use value given a signal x for both




                                                           -20-
continuation games, i.e., bR ( x) → umin ( x) for σ → ∞ ( R ∈ {OA, EA} ). The proof of this

result is based on l’Hospital’s rule and provided in Appendix A.

Implications for Optimal Bidding Strategies: Resale vs. No Resale

        First, note that for infinitely high risk aversion, bids converge towards the

minimal possible use value given a signal x, i.e.,

                                     bN ( x) = bR ( x) = umin ( x) for σ = ∞ .

Therefore, resale has no effect on bidding strategies if players are infinitely risk averse.

Hence, since a large majority of agents in the population are risk averse, the differences

due to the possibility of resale are generally overstated if only risk neutrality is

considered.
                                                                                        uu

        Further, with a perfectly informative signal umin ( x) = ∫ udG (u | x) = umax ( x) for all
                                                                                        ul



x , resale also has no effect on optimal bids, independent of the level of risk aversion. To

see this, note that K R ( x, y ) = ρ ( x) for x > y and LEA ( x, y ) = 1 . Hence

                            1                             1                           ( F ( x) n −1 ) '
                    (               ) ' F ( x) n −1 +             ( F ( x) n −1 ) ' =                   ,      (3”)
                        ρ (bR ( x))                   ρ (bR ( x))                         ρ ( x)

which coincides with the bid function for markets without resale. The intuition behind

this result is that with resale opportunities an agent wins the auction only if she receives

the highest signal, i.e., she has the largest use value.                               The resale value, therefore,

coincides with the use value without resale opportunity. With an imperfectly informative

signal, however, resale generally increases signals since the expected resale value is not

smaller than the expected use value of an agent.

Implications for Optimal Bidding Strategies: The Effect of Risk Aversion



                                                            -21-
         The qualitative effects of risk aversion depend on whether the risk-neutral bids

exceed or equal the minimal use value given by umin ( x) , which depends on the specific

distributions of use values and signals. However, the following cases might occur for a

treatment t ∈ { N , OA, EA} :

1. Under risk neutrality, bt ( x) > umin ( x) : Risk aversion decreases bids for high degrees
   of risk aversion.
2. Under risk neutrality, bt ( x) < umin ( x) : Risk aversion eventually increases bids.

      In our experimental markets described below, case 1 holds for small signals whereas

case 2 applies to larger signals. The effects of risk aversion therefore qualitatively

change over the range of signals. In our experimental markets, we would thus predict a

crossing of optimal bid functions for both the resale and no-resale treatments for agents

that demonstrate high levels of risk aversion.

Implications for Optimal Bidding Strategies: Minimal Observable Bids

         The minimal bids in both resale and no-resale cases are given by the lowest signal

type. Note that, using l’Hospital’s rule again, the equilibrium bid functions lead to

                                           1            1
                                                    =
                                       ρ (bN ( xl )) K N ( xl )

and

                                          1         L (x , x )
                                                   = R l l .
                                      ρ (bR ( xl )) K R ( xl , xl )

Unless the signal is perfectly informative at X = xl , we have that K R ( xl , xl ) > K N ( xl ) , and

further that LR ( xl , xl ) ≤ 1 . Therefore, the smallest observable bid should be higher if

resale is possible. In our experimental market, signals of X = xl are perfectly informative,

and thus bids in both treatments should coincide at the lowest signal range.



                                                 -22-
IV. Experimental Design and Results

Experimental Design

       A total of 90 subjects participated in our laboratory experiment, which was

conducted during the Fall 2003 and Spring 2004 semesters at the University of Maryland

in College Park. Each session consisted of two experimental parts: a first-price auction

market with or without resale opportunity and the Holt and Laury (2002) experimental

procedure to elicit the risk preference of each participant. Each part of the laboratory

experiment is described below.

Part I: The Auction Market

       Each subject’s experience typically followed four steps: (1) consideration of an

invitation to participate in an experiment, (2) learning the auction rules, (3) actual market

participation, and (4) conclusion of the experiment and completion of the Holt and Laury

(2002) risk-aversion experiment. In Step 1, undergraduate students from the University

of Maryland were recruited using e-mail solicitations and flyers hung in academic

buildings across the campus. Once the prerequisite number of subjects had responded, a

second e-mail was sent to each participant inviting them to participate in an experimental

session to be held at a given date/time. After subjects were seated in a room, in Step 2 a

monitor thoroughly explained the experimental instructions and auction rules (included in

Appendices B and C).

       Before proceeding, a few key aspects of the experimental design should be

highlighted. First, all bidders were informed that earnings from the auction experiment

would be added to earnings from a second, unrelated experiment to determine total

earnings for the session. Second, individuals were informed that they would be bidders




                                            -23-
in the experiment. In each of the 12 rounds (2 practice and 10 that count towards

earnings), they would be given a bidder’s card that contained a number, known only to

that bidder, representing a signal of the value of one unit of the fictitious commodity.

Importantly, all agents were informed that this information was strictly private and that

both signals and use values would change each round. They were also informed about

the number of other bidders in the market (4), that they would bid against the same four

bidders for all ten rounds, and that agents may have different signals (use values).

       Third, the monitor explained how signals were determined in each market period

and how these signals related to the agent’s final reservation (use) value. Subjects were

informed that in each period, they would receive a signal from the interval [$0, $50].

These signals were determined by adding a random integer generated from a uniform

distribution on the interval [-$10, $10] to the agent’s final use value which was itself an

integer value randomly drawn on the uniform interval [$10, $40]. Several examples

illustrated the relationship between a given use value and the range of signals that the

bidder could receive in the first stage, and vice versa.

       Fourth, the monitor explained how earnings were determined. In the baseline, no

resale treatment, the highest bidder earns the difference between their end use value and

their bid. All other bidders earn zero. In the resale treatment with OA continuation

game, the bidder who submits the highest bid earns the difference between the highest

use value of all bidders and the winning bid. All other bidders earn zero. In the resale

treatment with EA continuation game, the bidder who submits the highest bid receives

the maximum of her use value and the second highest use value of all participants minus

her winning bid. The bidder who does not submit the high bid but has the highest use




                                             -24-
value receives the difference between this value and the second highest use value of all

other participants. All other bidders earn zero for the round. Total earnings for each

treatment are computed by summing the earnings across the 10 periods.

         In the resale treatment with OA continuation game, it was publicly announced

that following the completion of each round, ownership of the good would be sold to the

agent with the highest use value in the group at a price equal to her value. In the resale

treatment with EA continuation game, it was publicly announced that following the

completion of each round, ownership of the good would be sold to the agent with the

highest use value in the group at a price equal to the second highest use value of all

agents in the group.13         In the baseline no-resale treatment, several examples were

provided that illustrated the irrationality of bidding more than $10 above a received

signal. In the resale treatments several examples were provided that illustrated the

workings of the resale market and how prices for resale exchange and earnings for each

bidder would be determined.14 Fifth, individuals participated in 2 practice rounds of

bidding to gain experience with the auction market and rules.



13
   Two important features of our experimental design that we should highlight include: i) our choice to limit
participation on the secondary market to bidders from the primary auction market and ii) our decision to
execute trades on the secondary market at the theoretical benchmarks for both the OA and EA game of
complete information. We elected to limit participation on the secondary market to maintain consistency
with theory and our naturally occurring data—the interior secondary market for timber in BC is comprised
of bidders registered to participate in the primary auctions. We elected to execute trade on the secondary
market at the theoretical benchmarks to maintain consistency with our conceptual model. The focus of this
analysis is on first-stage bidding strategies rather than secondary market exchange. Allowing the
endogenous determination of prices on the secondary market would surely have an influence on bidding
strategies, as it is likely that rents would not be divided on the secondary market as predicated by theory.
Anticipating this, bidders would adjust first-stage bidding strategies. We hope that future work analyzes
behavior in markets where prices are endogenously determined on the secondary market and new
participants are allowed to enter the second-stage continuation game.
14
   An important consideration in designing our auction markets was the issue of bankruptcy and bidder
behavior. Theoretically, bankruptcy was not an issue if subjects played the risk-neutral Nash equilibrium.
However, equilibrium payouts in a number of the periods were low enough to raise concern if subjects
determined bids with a degree of error. For reasons outlined in Hansen and Lott (1991), we decided to
employ an unlimited liability rule and allow subjects to have negative earnings for Part I of the experiment.


                                                   -25-
         In Step 3, subjects participated in the market. Each market consisted of 10 rounds

of bidding that lasted about 3 minutes each. After each 3-minute period, a monitor

privately gathered each subject’s bidder card and gave the bidder a second card

containing the subject’s final use value that was within [-$10, $10] of the original signal.

Once all bidder cards were collected, a monitor publicly announced all bids and awarded

the good to the highest bidder. Final use values were publicly announced and, in the

resale treatment, ownership of the commodity transferred to the agent with highest use

value.

         It should be noted that throughout each session careful attention was given to

prohibit communications between bidders that could induce collusive outcomes. Step 4

concluded the experiment – after subjects completed the Holt and Laury (2002)

experiment (described in Part II of this section), they were paid their earnings in private.

         This simple procedure was followed in each of three treatments, which are

summarized in Table 2. Table 2 can be read as follows: row 1, column 2 of Table 2

contains treatment NR, denoting a no-resale auction market with 5 bidders, who each

have unit demand for the good. Table 3 presents buyer induced values and signals for

each market period. All signals were drawn and assigned using the following procedure.

We first drew 50 integer numbers on the uniform distribution between [$10, $40] using

Excel’s random number generator.           We added an integer drawn on the uniform

distribution [-$10, $10] to this number to obtain signal values. These values were then

assigned so that unbeknownst to bidders, in each session (i) every bidder received the

highest signal twice, (ii) each bidder received the highest use value but a lower ordered

signal, and (iii) resale trade was potentially profitable in half of the periods.




                                              -26-
Part II: The Holt-Laury Risk Experiment

        Upon completion of Part 1 of the session, instructions and a decision sheet were

handed out for the second part of the experiment. This second part was designed to elicit

subjects’ risk preferences. In this part of the session, the low-payoff treatment of Holt

and Laury (2002) was used (see Appendix C for instructions).15 The treatment is based

on ten choices between paired lotteries. The paired choices are included in Appendix C.

The payoff possibilities for Option A, $2.00 or $1.60, are much less variable than those

for Option B, $3.85 or $0.10, which was considered the risky option. The odds of

winning the higher payoff for each of the options increased with each decision, and the

paired choices are designed to determine degrees of risk aversion. Holt and Laury (p.

1649) provide a table that will be used to categorize subjects’ CARA risk preference

levels based on their ten decision choices.

        After the instructions were read and questions were answered, the subjects were

asked to complete their decision sheets by choosing either A or B for each of the ten

decisions. The subjects were instructed that one of the decisions would be randomly

selected ex post and used to determine their payoffs. Part of a deck of cards was used to

determine payoffs, cards 2-10 and the Ace to represent “1”. After each subject completed

his or her decision sheet, a monitor would approach the desk and randomly draw a card

twice, once to select which of the ten decisions to use, and a second time to determine


15
   We elected to use the low-payoff treatment of the Holt and Laury (2002) experiment to measure risk
preference since the domain of earnings because this treatment [$0.10 to $3.85] approximates the
equilibrium domain of per period earnings for our auction markets. We also collected data for a higher-
payoff treatment of the Holt and Laury (2002) experiment, where the domain of earnings [$0.40 to $15.40]
approximates the equilibrium domain of earnings at the session level in our auction markets. In what
follows, we report only the empirical results for risk preference based upon individual response to the low-
payoff Holt and Laury (2002) design. However, all tests and results are robust to the use of response to the
higher-payoff experiment.



                                                   -27-
what the payoff was for the option chosen, A or B, for the particular decision selected.

After the first card was selected, it was placed back in the pile, the deck was reshuffled,

and the second card was drawn. For example, if the first draw was an Ace, then the first

decision choice would be used. Suppose the subject selected A in the first row. The

second draw would then be made. If the Ace was drawn, the subject would win $2.00. If

a card numbered 2-10 was drawn, the subject would win $1.60. The subjects were aware

that each decision had an equal chance of being selected.

         After all the subjects’ payoffs were determined, they combined their payoff from

Part 1 with that of Part 2 to compute their final earnings. The final payoffs were then

verified against records maintained by a monitor, and subjects were paid privately in cash

for their earnings. Each of the sessions lasted approximately 75 minutes and average

earnings were roughly $13.

Theoretical predictions for the laboratory auction markets

         Figure 1 provides theoretical predictions for risk-neutral bidders in our

experimental markets conditioned upon the signal. Across all but the lowest range of our

signal space $0.00, bidders in markets with resale opportunities represented by an OA

continuation game are predicted to submit bids that are on average higher than those

submitted by an equivalent bidder in a market without resale options. These differences

range from mere pennies for signals less than $5.00 to a maximum of about $3.40 for

bids submitted in the signal range around $23.16 For signal ranges above $40.00 or below

$20, the predicted differences in bids between the no-resale and resale treatments are less


16
  The optimal bid functions were derived numerically. Using the theory developed in Section III, we first
calculated K R ( x, y ) and LR ( x, y ) on a grid with 0.1 increments. Using interpolating functions, we then
solved the respective differential equations.



                                                   -28-
than $2.75. In resale treatments represented by an EA continuation game, risk-neutral

bidders are predicted to submit bids that are on average higher than those submitted by an

equivalent bidder in a market without resale at ranges of our signal space of less than

$27.00. For signals larger than $27.00, risk-neutral bidders in our resale treatment with

EA continuation game are predicted to submit bids that are on average less than those

submitted by an equivalent bidder in the no-resale treatment. These differences range

from a maximum of $0.70 at a signal of approximately $20.00 to a minimum of $-0.56 at

a signal of approximately $46.00.

Experimental Results

       Table 4 provides summary statistics for the experimental data. Entries in Table 4

are at the period level and include average bid level and its standard deviation, the

average winning bid and its standard deviation, average resale price, and average

earnings for the auction winner and resale buyer. Table 4 can be read as follows: on

average, in period 1 of the No Resale treatment, subjects submit a bid of $20.84 (standard

deviation = 9.32) and the average winning bid is $30.77 (standard deviation = 3.17).

Perusal of the data summary in Table 4 leads to our first two results:

   Result 1: Bids in a first-price auction followed by resale exchange in an OA
   continuation game are greater than those submitted in equivalent markets without
   resale.

   Result 2: Bids in a first-price auction followed by resale exchange in an OA
   continuation game are greater than those submitted in equivalent markets with an EA
   continuation game.

These results can be seen most directly by examining both per period average and

winning bids across our three laboratory treatments. Across all ten market periods, both

average and winning bids in the resale treatment with OA continuation game are greater




                                           -29-
than bids in both the baseline, no-resale treatment and the resale treatment with EA

continuation game. The differences in average bids range from a minimum of $2.68 in

period 4 to a maximum of $8.29 in period 6, with an average difference of $5.84. For the

EA treatment, differences in average bids range from a minimum of $2.84 in period 4 to a

maximum of $8.53 in period 6, with an average difference of $5.63. For the baseline

treatment, the differences in average winning bids range from a minimum of $0.25 in

period 7 to a maximum of $4.91 in period 1, with an average difference of $2.82. For the

EA treatment, the differences in average winning bids range from a minimum of $0.20 in

period 1 to a maximum of $5.16 in period 5, with an average difference of $2.73.

       Figure 2 provides a comparison of bids submitted in our baseline no-resale

treatment and our resale treatment with OA continuation game. The figure illustrates the

first part of result 1: bids in the resale treatment with OA continuation game are greater

than those in the baseline no-resale treatment. Interestingly, these differences are greatest

at lower and intermediate ranges of the signal domain. For signals above $32-35, there is

no discernable difference in bids across the two treatments.

       Further support for these results is provided in Table 5, which presents Mann-

Whitney tests for differences in bids across the various experimental treatments. Column

1 provides average differences in bids at both the individual and session levels along with

differences in average winning bids between our resale treatment with OA continuation

game and the baseline, no-resale treatment. As indicated in the table, average (winning)

bids in the OA treatment are $5.84 ($2.82) greater than those submitted in the baseline

treatment, and these differences are statistically significant at the p < 0.05 level. Column

2 provides average differences in bids at both the individual and session levels along with




                                            -30-
differences in average winning bids between our resale treatment with EA continuation

game and both the baseline, no-resale treatment and the resale treatment with OA

continuation game. As indicated in the table, differences in average and winning bids

between the EA and OA treatments are statistically significant at the p < 0.05 level.

       Our last piece of evidence to support Results 1 and 2 comes from a random

effects bid equation:

                                      Bit = v(Zit)+ εit,                                (17)

where Bit is the bid of the ith buyer in period t. Zit includes treatment dummy variables

and the induced value signal the agent received; εit = αi + uit; E[αi] = 0, E[αi2] = σα2,

E[αiαj] = 0 for i ≠ j; αi and uit are orthogonal for all i and t. The random effects αi

capture important heterogeneity across agents that would be left uncontrolled in a

standard cross-sectional model.

       Columns A-D in Table 6 present regression results which provide support for

Results 1 and 2. For example, parameter estimates in columns A-D suggest that bids in

the OA treatment are 5.847 higher than bids in the baseline treatment (the omitted

categorical variable), a difference that is statistically significant at the p < .05 level.

Furthermore, using a Chow test of coefficient equality, we find that OA bids are larger

than EA bids at the p < .05 level. As columns A-D show, these differences are robust

across several different empirical specifications.

       Empirical results in Tables 5 and 6 suggest that baseline bids and EA treatment

bids are isomorphic. Yet, when bids are analyzed over ranges of signals less than

(greater than) $26, where our theory predicts that bids from the EA treatment are

predicted to be greater than (less than) those submitted in the baseline treatment, we find



                                            -31-
evidence consonant with the theory. From Table 5, we see that over lower ranges of the

signal space, bids from the EA treatment are, on average, $2.73 larger than those from the

baseline treatment, a statistically significant difference at the p < 0.05 level. Over higher

ranges of the signal space, bids from the EA treatment average $2.07 less than those from

the baseline treatment, with these differences statistically significant at the p < 0.05 level.

These data patterns lead to the next result:

   Result 3: Over lower (higher) signal ranges, bidders in a first-price auction followed
   by an EA continuation game submit bids that are higher (lower) than those submitted
   by agents in an equivalent baseline market without resale opportunity.

Figure 3, which provides a comparison of bids submitted in the baseline no-resale

treatment and bids in the resale treatment with EA continuation game, highlights this

result. Over the entire signal domain, there is little discernable difference between bids,

as suggested by the empirical estimates of the pooled data. At lower ranges of the signal

space, however, the highest bids from the EA treatment are greater than the highest bids

from our baseline auction markets. And, at a higher range of the signal space, the lowest

bids from the EA treatment are less than the lowest bids from our baseline market.

       Combined, these first three results lead to our fourth result:

       Result 4: Theoretical predictions of Haile (2003) adequately organize differences
       in bidder behavior across auction markets without resale and equivalent auction
       markets with resale opportunities organized as both an OA and EA continuation
       game of complete information.

Risk Aversion and Bidder Behavior

       Having found general support for the comparative static predictions of Haile

(2003), we now examine more closely the point predictions of the theory by exploring the

data conditioned upon underlying risk preference. Figure 4 provides an illustration of

bids in our baseline no-resale market relative to the theoretical predictions for risk-neutral



                                               -32-
equilibrium bids. As can be seen from the figure, risk-neutral point predictions do not fit

the data well. Over lower ranges of the signal space, realized bids are less than the risk-

neutral theoretical predictions while over higher ranges, realized bids are greater than the

risk-neutral theoretical benchmarks. This pattern of behavior is consistent with our

theoretical model for risk-averse bidders.            Similar patterns, albeit less pronounced,

emerge for both the OA and EA treatments.

        The theoretical model outlined in Section III indicates that there are several

important differences in the equilibrium behavior of risk-averse agents relative to their

risk-neutral counterparts.        From our theory we create Figure 5, which provides

predictions for bids in our baseline markets for various levels of CARA risk preference.

The figure highlights a number of testable hypotheses regarding the behavior of risk-

averse agents relative to risk-neutral agents. First, over all but the highest range of the

signal space (signal > $40), bids for risk-averse agents should be lower than bids of risk-

neutral agents. For signals greater than $40, the bids of risk-averse agents should be

greater than bids of risk-neutral subjects. Second, at the lowest ranges of the signal

domain (signal < $21), the slope of the bid function is shallower for risk-averse agents,

with this difference increasing in the level of risk aversion. Third, at higher ranges of the

signal domain (signals > $21), the slope of the bid function in the signal space is greater

for risk-averse agents, with this difference increasing in the level of individual risk

aversion. Similar patterns of predicted behavior emerge for risk-averse agents in the OA

and EA treatments.17


17
  Of course, unlike our experimental treatments risk posture should not be regarded as something we can
exogenously impose on subjects. Thus, we exercise caution when interpreting the data in that risk posture
could be systematically related to person-specific unobservables that cause the data patterns discussed
below.


                                                  -33-
        Figure 6 presents bids for our baseline no-resale treatment grouped by revealed

risk preference – either risk-neutral or risk-averse.18 A total of 29 bidders are labeled as

risk neutral and 61 are labeled as risk-averse. Figure 6 reveals two general patterns of

behavior consistent with our theory of risk-averse bidding: (i) over lower ranges of the

signal space, agents that are classified as risk-averse submit bids that are lower than those

submitted by a risk-neutral subject, and (ii) over higher ranges of the signal space, agents

that are classified as risk-averse submit bids that are higher than those submitted by a

risk-neutral agent. Similar patterns emerge for risk-neutral and risk-averse agents in the

OA and EA treatments.

        Figures 7 and 8 reveal a number of behavioral differences between risk-averse

agents in the OA (EA) treatments and agents with identical risk preference in the baseline

no-resale treatments. First, over all ranges of the signal domain for the OA treatment,

risk-averse agents submit bids that are greater than those of agents with identical risk

preference in the baseline treatment. Second, for signals less than approximately $20,

these differences are increasing in signals. For signals greater than $20, these differences

are a decreasing function of the signal. Third, across lower ranges of the signal space

(less than approximately $21 for risk-neutral agents and up to approximately $39 for

highly risk averse agents), risk-averse agents in the EA treatment submit bids that are

higher than those submitted by agents with identical risk preference in the baseline, no-




18
  We categorize the level of CARA risk preference for the agent based upon estimates provided on p. 1649
of Holt and Laury (2002). Risk-averse agents are those who select more than 4 of the “safe” choices.
Slightly risk averse agents are those who select between 5 and 7 “safe” choices. Highly risk averse agents
are those who select more than 7 “safe” choices in the Holt and Laury experiment. These categories
correspond to a CARA value of 0.1 ≤ CARA ≤ 0.49 for slightly risk averse agents and 0.5 ≤ CARA ≤ ∞ for
highly risk averse agents.


                                                  -34-
resale treatment. Finally, these differences are an increasing function for signals less than

$20, and a decreasing function for signals above this range.

       To examine these differences in a statistical model, we estimate a random effects

regression model where the absolute difference: |risk neutral predicted bid – actual bid| is

regressed on treatment dummy variables, individual risk preference, and an interaction of

individual risk preference and signals. This estimation leads to the next result:

   Result 5: Risk-averse bidders submit bids that differ more from the theoretical risk-
   neutral benchmarks than do bids of risk-neutral (loving) agents, with the difference
   increasing in the level of observed risk aversion.

Support for Result 5 can be found in Table 7. For example, in column A, rows 4 and 7 of

the table, we see that highly risk averse agents (denoted HRA in Table 7) submit bids

that, on average, diverge from an associated risk-neutral prediction by $5.52, with this

difference decreasing by $0.18 for a dollar increase in signal. Both of these differences

are significant at the p < 0.05 level. These differences decrease to 2.88 and 0.09 when

slightly risk averse agents (denoted SRA in the table) are considered. As a robustness

test, we considered grouping subjects according to their CARA midpoint level. These

estimates are provided in column B and provide similar insights.

       Table 7 reveals that there are statistical differences in the overall levels of

divergence of bids from risk-neutral predictions between risk-averse and risk-neutral

agents that are consistent with our theory of risk-averse bidding.           However, our

theoretical model provides an additional set of testable implications for risk-averse

bidding – these differences should be a decreasing function in observed signals. This

implies that the slope of the bid function in the signal space should be an increasing

function of risk aversion.




                                            -35-
       To evaluate this theoretical prediction, we augment equation (17) by including an

interaction of the individual’s risk preference with his/her induced signal and signal

squared, and an interaction of these values with the treatment dummies.          Empirical

estimates from these models are contained in columns E and F in Table 6. We obtain the

following insight from these results:

   Result 6: Risk averse agents in both the EA and OA treatments submit bids that are
   conditionally more responsive to induced signals than do risk-averse agents in the
   baseline no-resale treatment. Furthermore, these differences decline over the range
   of the signal space greater than $20 for all but slightly risk averse agents in the EA
   treatment.

The first part of Result 6 follows from estimated differences on the coefficients for the

SRA_signal (HRA_signal) variable and the associated interaction of this variable with

the treatment dummies. For example, in Column E of Table 6 the estimated marginal

effect of the induced signal on realized bids of slightly risk averse agents in the baseline

treatment is given by [-0.325 + 0.010*signal], which is significant at the p < 0.05 level.

In contrast, the estimated marginal effect of the induced signal on realized bids for

slightly risk averse agents in the OA resale treatment is given by [0.284 – 0.004*signal] –

the difference in the parameter estimates for SRA_signal and SRA_OA_signal minus the

difference in the parameter estimates for SRA_signal2 and SRA_OA_signal2, and for

slightly risk averse agents in the EA resale treatment the difference is given by [0.042 −

0.001*signal].

       The second part of Result 6 follows from Column F of Table 6, which provides

parameter estimates for our bid function for all observations where the signal received by

the agent was greater than $20. The estimated rate of change in the slope of the bid

function in the signal space for slightly risk averse agents in the baseline treatment is




                                           -36-
0.012. For slightly risk averse agents in the OA resale treatment this rate of change is -

0.006 – the difference in the parameter estimates for SRA_signal2 and SRA_OA_signal2.

V. Conclusions

       Auctions are ubiquitous. Yet whether and to what extent the introduction of

secondary resale markets influences bidding behavior when private values are uncertain

remains largely unknown. We begin by exploring a novel data set that provides insights

into the importance of the resale effect. Reduced-form empirical estimates suggest that

bidding patterns are consistent with theoretical predictions. Yet, akin to many empirical

exercises, the strength of inference is attenuated when one considers the set of maintained

assumptions needed to generate confident conclusions from these field data.

       Our approach to this problem is to make use of a laboratory experiment. Such an

effort gives up much of the realism associated with field data, but it permits us to

investigate whether the resale market by itself can lead to such predicted consequences.

We find that extant theory has considerable predictive power, but the accuracy of the

theory is enhanced if we control for individual risk preferences. Besides their obvious

importance normatively, these results have practical policy significance as well. For

example, a necessary condition to lift the countervailing duty and anti-dumping ruling

against Canadian softwood lumber exporters (who export to the U.S.) is that their auction

markets be robust and not influenced unduly by collusion.              Without a proper

understanding of the resale opportunities of the various bidders, the modeler may very

well earmark bidding disparities among certain bidder types as evidence of collusion

when it is in fact due merely to secondary market considerations.




                                           -37-
                                     References

Athey, Susan and Jonathan Levin “Information and Competition in U.S. Forest Service
        Timber Auctions,” Journal of Political Economy (2001), 109: pp. 422-445.
Bikhchandani, Sushil and Chi-fu Huang “Auctions with Resale Markets: An Exploratory
        Model of Treasury Markets,” The Review of Financial Studies (1989), 2(3), pp.
        311-339.
Garratt, Rod and Thomas Troger, “Speculation in Second-Price Auctions with Resale,”
        (2003) working paper.
Goeree, Jacob and Theo Offerman, “Competitive Bidding in Auctions with Private and
        Common Values,” The Economic Journal (2003), 113(July): pp. 598-613.
Gupta, Madhurima and Bernard Lebrun “First Price Auctions with Resale,” Economics
        Letters (1999), 64(3-4): pp. 181-185.
Haile, Philip “Partial Pooling at the Reserve Price in Auctions with Resale
        Opportunities,” Games and Economic Behavior (2000), 33: pp. 231-248.
Haile, Philip “Auctions with Resale Markets: An Application to U.S. Forest Service
        Timber Auctions,” American Economic Review (2001), 99: pp. 399-427.
Haile, Philip “Auctions with Private Uncertainty and Resale Opportunities,” Journal of
        Economic Theory (2003), 108(1): pp. 72-110.
Hansen, Robert and John Lott, “The Winner’s Curse and Public Information in Common
        Value Auctions: Comment,” American Economic Review (1991), 81(1): pp. 347-
        361.
Holt, Charles and Susan Laury. “Risk Aversion and Incentive Effects”. American
        Economic Review, (2002), 92: 1644-1655.
Jehiel, Phillippe and Benny Moldovanu, “Efficient Design with Interdependent
        Valuations,” Econometrica (2001), 69(5): pp. 1237-1259.
Lucking-Reiley, David “Vickrey Auctions in Practice: From Nineteenth-Century
        Philately to Twenty-First-Century E-Commerce,” Journal of Economic
        Perspectives, (2000), 14(3):183-192.
Milgrom, Paul and Robert Weber, “A Theory of Auctions and Competitive Bidding,”
        Econometrica (1982), 50: pp. 1089-1122.
Pesendorfer, Wolfgang and Jeroen Swinkels, “Efficiency and Information Aggregation in
        Auctions,” American Economic Review (2000), 90(3): pp. 499-525.
Porter, Robert and Douglas Zona “Detection of Bid Rigging in Procurement Auctions,”
        Journal of Political Economy (1993), 101: pp. 518-538.
Porter, Robert H. and Douglas Zona, “Ohio School Milk Markets: An Analysis of
        Bidding,” Rand Journal of Economics (1999) 30: 263-288.
Price, Michael K. and John A. List, “Canadian Softwood Timber Auctions: An
        Examination of Bidding,” (2004) working paper, University of Maryland.
Troger, Thomas “Speculation in First-Price Auctions with Resale,” (2003) working
        paper.




                                        -38-
Table 1: Random Effects Regression Estimates: SBFEP Category 1 and Category 2 Data
                  Model        Model       Model      Model       Model       Model
                   (A)          (B)         (C)        (D)         (E)         (F)
Constant       5.830***     8.8004*** 1.438**      3.938***    1.806***    4.389***
               (0.402)      (0.455)     (0.663)    (0.699)     (0.679)     (0.714)
Mills          1.117**      1.049**
               (0.548)      (0.535)
Coast          1.927***     1.447***
               (0.470)      (0.475)
Upset          0.00064      -0.174**    0.129***   0.160***    0.119***    0.147***
               (0.0085)     (0.009)     (0.025)    (0.025)     (0.028)     (0.028)
Bidders        1.159***     1.168***    2.247***   2.049***    2.108***    1.883***
               (0.043)      (0.042)     (0.174)    (0.172)     (0.178)     (0.175)
NCV            -6.70e-06    -4.25e-06   0.00002    0.00004     0.0001*** 0.0002***
               (0.00001)    (0.00001)   (0.00002)  (0.00003)   (0.00005)   (0.00005)
Upset2                                  -0.002*** -0.003*** -0.002*** -0.003***
                                        (0.0003)   (0.0004)    (0.0004)    (0.0004)
Bidders2                                -0.089*** -0.072*** -0.81***       -0.061***
                                        (0.012)    (0.013)     (0.013)     (0.013)
NCV2                                    -1.31e-10  -4.59e-10   -3.9e-9*** -4.85e-9**
                                        (3.98e-10) (3.91e-10) (1.33e-9)    (1.37e-9)
Coast_bidder                            0.168      0.249*      0.257       0.447**
                                        (0.143)    (0.144)     (0.225)     (0.226)
Coast_NCV                                                      -0.0002** -0.0002**
                                                               (0.00006)   (0.00006)
Coast_upset                                                    -0.103*     -0.121**
                                                               (0.058)     (0.057)
Coast_bidder2                           0.023*     0.009       0.020       0.0011
                                        (0.012)    (0.012)     (0.015)     (0.014)
Coast_ncv2                                                     5.2e-9*** 6.06e-9**
                                                               (1.43e-9)   (1.04e-9)
             2
Coast_upset                                                    0.005***    0.005***
                                                               (0.001)     (0.0009)
Mills_bidder                            0.592      0.650*      2.643***    2.547***
                                        (0.393)    (0.384)     (0.892)     (0.875)
Mills_NCV                                                      9.89e-6     0.00002
                                                               (0.0001)    (0.00001)
Mills_upset                                                    -0.081      -0.0533
                                                               (0.088)     (0.086)
Mills_bidder2                           -0.060     -0.076      -0.321*** -0.320***
                                        (0.069)    (0.067)     (0.115)     (0.113)
Mills_ncv2                                                     1.52e-9     1.55e-9
                                                               (1.83e-9)   (1.80e-9)
            2
Mills_upset                                                    -0.006      -0.0011
                                                               (0.001)     (0.0012)
Time Effects   No           Yes         No         Yes         No          Yes

Likelihood             831.79           1092.19          936.55            1201.88          1043.53          1331.23
Ratio
# Obs                  7185             7185             7185              7185             7185             7185
Note: Cell entries indicate the marginal effect of model covariates (see text for description of covariates) on bid level.



                                                           -39-
Table 2: Experimental Design – Laboratory Markets


        Resale Structure                   Market Summary


           No Resale                                NR
                                                 5 bidders
                                                   N=30

Resale – OA Continuation:                          ROA
 Resale price = High use                         5 bidders
          value                                    N=30

Resale – EA Continuation:                          REA
  Resale price = Second                          5 bidders
    highest use value                              N=30
Notes: Each cell represents one unique treatment in which we gathered
data in different sessions. For example, “NR” in row 1, column 2,
denotes that the no-resale treatment had 30 subjects in groups of 5
competing in auction markets where ex post resale of the commodity
was prohibited. No subject participated in more than one treatment.



Table 3: Bidder Signals and Use Values (in dollars)

           Pd. 1    Pd. 2      Pd. 3     Pd. 4     Pd. 5     Pd. 6     Pd. 7     Pd. 8     Pd. 9    Pd. 10

Buyer       36        9         25        36        14        14        44        32        40        23
  1        (29)      (19)      (26)      (37)      (13)      (21)      (39)      (24)      (33)      (17)

Buyer       17        4         14        42        36        10        25        29        32        44
  2        (27)      (12)      (19)      (32)      (38)      (14)      (34)      (22)      (24)      (40)

Buyer       19        41        20        32        39        32        22        25        22        26
  3        (18)      (36)      (12)      (29)      (31)      (39)      (23)      (17)      (22)      (34)

Buyer       12        34        38        26        29        34        18        29        21        23
  4        (10)      (26)      (37)      (20)      (28)      (34)      (22)      (39)      (17)      (25)

Buyer       37        25        33        6         25        24        23        38        35        28
  5        (36)      (33)      (34)      (13)      (21)      (28)      (14)      (33)      (40)      (23)
Notes: Each cell entry represents the signal received by the bidder in a given period and her induced use
value (in parentheses). For example, buyer #1 received a signal of $36.00 and an induced use value of
$29.00 in market period 1 (column 2, row 2). Each buyer received the high signal in 2 of the market
periods and the high use value in 2 of the market periods. In five of the market periods (4, 5, 6, 8, and 9)
we would ex ante predict resale exchange, as the agent who received the high signal did not receive the
high induced use value.



                                                   -40-
Table 4: Mean Performance Measures—Lab Markets
              Pd        Pd       Pd        Pd        Pd        Pd       Pd       Pd       Pd       Pd
               1        2        3         4          5        6         7        8        9       10
No Resale
 Avg. Bid   $20.84   $20.07    $24.31    $26.42     $27.68   $22.35    $24.80   $29.51   $28.03   $28.31
            (9.32)   (12.74)   (7.13)    (10.02)    (8.12)   (8.89)    (9.56)   (3.40)   (6.17)   (7.36)
 Win Bid    $30.77   $36.63    $33.00    $35.55     $35.47   $32.23    $37.77   $34.10   $34.15   $37.25
            (3.17)    (3.07)   (3.87)     (1.58)    (0.82)   (2.64)    (1.52)   (2.14)   (1.21)   (2.27)
  Resale     N/A       N/A      N/A        N/A       N/A      N/A       N/A      N/A      N/A      N/A
   Price
OA
Avg. Bid    $26.97    $25.86   $30.24    $29.10     $31.80   $30.64    $32.47   $35.57   $33.75   $34.39
            (7.49)    (9.38)   (5.46)    (9.97)     (6.98)   (7.25)    (5.38)   (2.86)   (7.58)   (5.41)
 Win Bid    $35.68    $37.18   $36.92    $36.73     $38.68   $36.55    $38.02   $37.87   $38.15   $39.30
            (4.94)    (2.55)   (3.94)    (2.47)     (1.22)   (2.06)    (1.91)   (1.52)   (1.66)   (1.08)
   Resale    $36       $36      $37       $37        $38      $39       $39      $39      $40      $40
    Price
EA
 Avg. Bid   $24.06   $21.55    $24.11    $26.26     $26.69   $22.11    $26.51   $29.63   $26.77   $26.96
            (9.72)   (12.47)   (10.48)   (9.31)     (7.78)   (10.99)   (7.86)   (6.53)   (7.63)   (9.27)
 Win Bid    $35.48   $36.25    $35.25    $36.27     $33.52   $32.00    $34.68   $36.35   $33.17   $34.67
            (2.94)    (3.97)    (4.37)   (3.34)     (1.54)    (3.74)   (3.25)   (3.48)   (1.75)   (3.22)
   Resale    $29       $33       $34      $32        $32       $34      $34      $33      $33      $34
     Price
Note: Entries in the table provide mean performance measures across our three experimental treatments.
The data are summarized by period and can be read as follows: in period 1 of the No Resale treatment the
average bid was $20.84 with a standard deviation of $9.32. The average winning bid for the round was
$30.77 with a standard deviation of $3.17.




                                                   -41-
Table 5: Non-Parametric Test Results (Mean Performance Measures)
                                       OA                             EA
                                                  All Agents
No-Resale Session Bids              $5.848**                       $0.235
                                      (2.88)                       (0.480)
Resale OA Session Bids                                           -$5.623**
                                                                   (2.882)
                                                  All Agents
No-Resale Individual Bids           $5.848**                       $0.235
                                     (5.574)                       (1.205)
      No Resale (Signal < 26)                                      $2.73**
                                                                   (2.680)
      No Resale (Signal > 26)                                     -$2.07**
                                                                   (2.090)
Resale OA Individual Bids                                        -$5.623**
                                                                   (4.702)
                                              Winning Bids Only
No-Resale Sessions                   $2.82**                         $0.09
                                     (5.102)                       (0.261)
Resale OA Sessions                                                  -$2.73
                                                                   (4.615)
                                        Highly Risk Averse Agents Only
No-Resale Individual Bids             $4.105                       $3.144
                                     (1.155)                       (1.279)
Note: Cell entries represent the difference in mean bid levels between the column and row treatments. Z-
statistics for the Mann-Whitney test are in parentheses. ** Indicates statistical significance at the p < 0.05
level. For example, $5.848 in row 2, column 2, of the table indicates that average bids at the session level
for the resale treatment followed by an OA continuation game are on average $5.85 greater than those
placed in the baseline, no-resale session. This difference is significant at the p < 0.05 level using a Mann-
Whitney test. Tests for differences in bids across highly risk averse agents in the resale and baseline
treatments use the Holt and Laury (2002) measure of implied CARA risk preference.




                                                    -42-
Table 6 – Random Effects Regression Bid Levels
                      Model (A)        Model (B)        Model (C)        Model (D)        Model (E)         Model (F)
                                                                                                          (Signal > 20)
Constant              25.231**         21.928**          8.359**          3.862**          4.415**            1.924
                       (0.648)          (1.024)           (0.965)          (1.421)          (1.513)          (6.173)
OA                     5.847**          5.847**          5.847**          5.847**          5.293**           3.488**
                       (0.916)          (0.916)           (0.894)          (0.884)          (1.355)          (1.446)
EA                      0.235            0.235            0.235             0.235           -0.872          -3.028**
                       (0.916)          (0.916)           (0.894)          (0.884)          (1.374)          (1.448)
Signal                                                   0.561**          0.978**          0.936**           1.244**
                                                          (0.019)          (0.099)          (0.109)          (0.376)
         2
Signal                                                                    -0.008**         -0.007**         -0.013**
                                                                           (0.001)          (0.002)          (0.006)
SRA_signal                                                                                 -0.325**         -0.435**
                                                                                            (0.120)          (0.123)
SRA_signal2                                                                                0.010**           0.012**
                                                                                            (0.002)          (0.003)
HRA_signal                                                                                  -0.204           -0.322*
                                                                                            (0.191)          (0.196)
             2
HRA_signal                                                                                   0.007           0.009**
                                                                                            (0.005)          (0.005)
HRA_OA_sig                                                                                   0.385            0.276
                                                                                            (0.261)          (0.268)
HRA_OA_sig2                                                                                -0.014**           -0.009
                                                                                            (0.006)          (0.006)
SRA_OA_sig                                                                                 0.606**           0.676**
                                                                                            (0.155)          (0.156)
SRA_OA_sig2                                                                                -0.018**         -0.018**
                                                                                            (0.003)          (0.003)
HRA_EA_sig                                                                                 0.736**           0.755**
                                                                                            (0.242)          (0.246)
                 2
HRA_EA_sig                                                                                 -0.020**         -0.019**
                                                                                            (0.006)          (0.006)
SRA_EA_sig                                                                                 0.367**           0.364**
                                                                                            (0.162)          (0.161)
                 2
SRA_EA_sig                                                                                 -0.011**         -0.008**
                                                                                            (0.004)          (0.003)
Period Effects           No               Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes


Sigma_U                 2.344            2.511            2.981             2.944            2.828            2.687
Sigma_E                 8.421            7.927            5.573             5.518            5.333            4.879
Log Likelihood        -3220.605        -3171.527        -2883.937        -2874.892        -2843.842         -2108.307
Note: Cell entries indicate the marginal effect of model covariates (see text for description of covariates) on recorded
bid level. For example, in row 2 of Column E the estimated marginal effect of being in the OA treatment is an increase
of $5.293 on bids, ceteris paribus. SRA (HRA) indicates a slightly (highly) risk averse agent, where the baseline group
is risk neutral agents.



                                                         -43-
Table 7: Random Effects Regression of Absolute Difference in Predicted Risk
Neutral Bid and Actual Bid
                                      Model                        Model
                                       (A)                           (B)
Constant                             5.06**                        5.37**
                                      (0.36)                      (0.438)
SRA                                  2.88**
                                      (0.71)
SRA_mid                                                            2.28**
                                                                   (0.72)
HRA                                  5.52**
                                      (1.09)
HRA_mid                                                            5.01**
                                                                   (1.07)
SRA_signal                          -0.096**
                                     (0.019)
SRA_mid_signal                                                   -0.089**
                                                                  (0.019)
HRA_signal                          -0.180**
                                     (0.033)
HRA_mid_signal                                                    0.181**
                                                                  (0.031)

Log Likelihood                                   -2590.21                              -2589.52
Sigma_U                                            1.47                                  1.48
Sigma_E                                            4.13                                  4.12
Note: The table provides results of a random effects regression model, where the absolute difference in
predicted risk-neutral and observed bids is regressed on treatment effects, individual risk preference, and an
interaction of individual risk preference and signals. Standard errors are in parentheses. **denotes
significance at the 95 percent level. Entries in the table can be interpreted as follows. From Column 1,
Rows 5 and 9, we see that highly risk averse agents submit bids that on average diverge from an associated
risk-neutral prediction by $5.52, with this difference decreasing by $0.18 for a dollar increase in signals.
Both of these differences are significant at the p < 0.05 level.




                                                    -44-
                 40




                 35




                 30




                 25
  Bid (in $'s)




                                                                                  NoResale Theory
                 20                                                               OA Theory
                                                                                  EA Theory


                 15




                 10




                  5




                  0
                      0   10    20                      30        40        50
                                      Signal (in $'s)




Figure 1: Risk-Neutral Predictions for Bids

                 45



                 40



                 35



                 30



                 25                                                              NoResale Theory
 Bid (in $)




                                                                                 OA Theory
                                                                                 NoResale Bid
                 20                                                              OA Bid



                 15



                 10



                  5



                  0
                      0    10        20                      30        40        50
                                            Signal (in $)




                                                    -45-
Figure 2: No Resale vs. OA Bids


              45



              40



              35



              30



              25                                                  NoResale Bid
 Bid (in $)




                                                                  EA Bid
                                                                  NoResale Theory
              20                                                  EA Theory



              15



              10



              5



              0
                   0   10     20                   30   40   50
                                   Signal (in $)


Figure 3: Bids No-Resale vs. EA Treatment




                                            -46-
                 45




                 40




                 35




                 30




                 25
                                                                                             NoResale Theory
    Bid (in $)




                                                                                             CARA infinite
                                                                                             NoResale Bid
                 20




                 15




                 10




                      5




                      0
                          0   5   10   15   20        25          30   35   40    45   50
                                                 Signal (in $)


Figure 4: All Bids No-Resale Treatment
                 45



                 40



                 35



                 30

                                                                                                  Risk neutral
                                                                                                  CARA 0.1
                 25
 Bid (in $)




                                                                                                  CARA 0.5
                                                                                                  CARA 1
                 20                                                                               CARA 2
                                                                                                  CARA infinite


                 15



                 10



                 5



                 0
                      0           10        20                    30         40         50
                                                 Signal (in $)


Figure 5: Predicted Bids No-Resale Treatment by Risk Preference




                                                           -47-
                        45




                        40




                        35




                        30




                        25                                                                                      RN Theory
 Bid (in $)




                                                                                                                CARA infinite
                                                                                                                RA Bid
                        20                                                                                      RN Bid




                        15




                        10




                         5




                         0
                             0   5   10   15   20         25            30        35   40        45   50
                                                     Signal (in $)


Figure 6: Bids by Risk Posture – No-Resale Treatment

                        7



                        6



                        5



                        4
  Diff in Bids (in $)




                                                                                                                    CARA 0.1
                                                                                                                    CARA 0.5
                        3
                                                                                                                    CARA 1.0
                                                                                                                    CARA 2.0

                        2



                        1



                        0
                             0       10         20                           30             40             50


                        -1
                                                        Signal (in $)


Figure 7: Predicted Differences OA vs. No-Resale by Risk Preference




                                                               -48-
                       3.5



                         3



                       2.5



                         2
 Diff in Bids (in $)




                                                                                               RISK NEUTRAL
                       1.5                                                                     CARA 0.1
                                                                                               CARA 0.5
                                                                                               CARA 1.0
                         1                                                                     CARA 2.0


                       0.5



                         0
                              0   5   10   15   20        25          30   35   40   45   50

                       -0.5



                        -1
                                                     Signal (in $)




Figure 8: Predicted Differences EA vs. No-Resale by Risk Preference




                                                               -49-
APPENDIX A. Theoretical Derivations


In the proofs, we use the following characteristic of stochastic dominance:
Lemma 1:
For any given strictly increasing function φ and distributions H1 (u ) and H 2 (u ) on

u ∈ [umin ,umax ] ,      where        H1 (u ) ,        which          stochastically     dominates   H 2 (u ) ,
umax                  umax

 ∫ φ (u )dH (u) > ∫ φ (u)dH
umin
             1
                      umin
                                 2   (u ) whenever the expectation exists.

Proof of Proposition 1 (Optimal bid without resale):
We must ensure that bN ( x) is increasing in x and that the first-order condition describes an
optimum. For the latter (with standard arguments in Haile 2003 and Milgrom and Weber 1982), it
                           ∂ 2 EU
is sufficient to show that        ( x = x% ) > 0 where, EU refers to the expected utility given x and
                            ∂x∂x%
y.

                             bN '( x) > 0
                                                  x
                               d      1                  1
                             ⇔
                               dx F ( x) n −1     ∫K
                                                  xl    N ( z )
                                                                dF ( z ) n −1 < 0

                                                           x
                                  1                         1
                             ⇔          F ( x) n −1 − ∫            dF ( z ) n −1 < 0
                               K N ( x)               xl
                                                         K N ( z )
which follows since K N ( x) is increasing in x (from Lemma 1).
                             ∂ 2 EU
                                    ( x = x% )
                              ∂x∂x%
                                           F ( x) n −1               
                                        = (            ) ' K N '( x)  ρ (0)
                                           ρ (bN ( x))               
                                                  n −1
                                        = ( F ( x) ) '/ K N ( x) K N '( x) {ρ (0)
                                                        123 123
                                                                 <0        ≥0       <0

                                           ≥0

Optimal bid for risk-neutral players without resale as a limit for limσ →0 bN ( x) :




                                                        -50-
                                                      1    x            1                            
              limσ →0 bN ( x) = limσ →0                log  ∫                          dF ( z ) n −1 
                                                     σ      xl ∫ exp(−σ u )dG (u | z )               
                                                                                                     
                           x
                              ∫ exp(−σ u )udG(u | z )
                          ∫                                             dF ( z ) n −1
                            ( ∫ exp(−σ u)dG(u | z) )
                                                                    2
                          xl                                                               x
              = limσ →0        x
                                                                                        = ∫ ∫ udG (u | z )dF ( z ) n −1
                                             1
                               ∫                           dF ( z ) n −1                  xl

                               xl   ∫ exp(−σ u )dG(u | z )
Optimal bid for risk-neutral players without resale as a limit for limσ →∞ bN ( x) :
Analogously to the limit σ → 0 ,
                                    x
                                           ∫ exp(−σ (u − u          ( x)))udG (u | z )
                                    ∫
                                                              min
                                                                                                   dF ( z ) n −1
                                         ( ∫ exp(−σ (u − u                                )
                                                                                               2
                                    xl
                                                              min   ( x)))dG (u | z )
limσ →∞ bN ( x) = limσ →∞                x
                                                                                                                   = umin ( x)
                                                               1
                                         ∫
                                                                                                          n −1
                                                                                               dF ( z )
                                         xl   ∫ exp(−σ (u − umin ( x)))dG(u | z )
Lemma 2: G1 (u | x, y ) and G2 (u | x, y ) are decreasing in x and y .
Proof of Lemma 2:
Since G (u | x) is decreasing in x by assumption, the same property follows immediately for
Gi (u | x, y ) , i=1,2. To see that Gi (u | x, x) is also decreasing in x,
                    ∂
                       G1 (u | y )
                   ∂y
                      ∂                                                              ∂M (u | y )
                   = G (u | y ) M (u | y ) n − 2 + G (u | y )(n − 2) M (u | y ) n −3
                      ∂y                                                                ∂y
where both summands are negative since G (u | y ) and M (u | y ) are decreasing in y.
Similarly, using G (u | y ) ≤ M (u | y ) :
  ∂
     G2 (u | y )
 ∂y
    ∂
 = G (u | y )(n − 2) M (u | y ) n −3 (1 − M (u | y ))
    ∂y
                                                                                                                                 ∂M (u | y )
+G (u | y )(n − 2) M (u | y ) n − 4 [ M (u | y ) + G (u | y )(n − 3) − G (u | y )(n − 2) M (u | y ) ]
                                                                                                                                    ∂y
    ∂
≤      G (u | y )(n − 2) M (u | y ) n −3 (1 − M (u | y ))
    ∂y
                                                                              ∂M (u | y )
+G (u | y )(n − 2) 2 M (u | y ) n − 4 G (u | y ) [1 − M (u | y ) ]
                                                                                 ∂y
≤0



                                                                -51-
                                                                                           d2
Assumption 1 (A1): We assume that G (u | x) satisfies                                          log G (u | x) ≥ 0 .
                                                                                          dxdu

                 G2 (u | x)
Lemma 3:                    is decreasing in u.
                 G1 (u | x)
Proof:
                    G2 (u | x) M (u | x) + (n − 2)G (u | x) M (u | x) [1 − M (u | x) ]
                                        n−2                             n −3

                               =
                    G1 (u | x)                G (u | x) M (u | x) n − 2
                                             1       (n − 2)
                                      =            +          − (n − 2)
                                          G (u | x) M (u | x)
where the first two terms are decreasing in u.



                                             G1 (u | x)
Lemma 4: Given (A1),                  u
                                                                      is decreasing in u.

                                   ul
                                      ∫ ρ '(− z )dG ( z | x)
                                                        1


Proof:
                     d             G1 (u | x)
                          u
                                                                <0
                     du
                          ∫ ρ '(− z )dG ( z | x)
                          ul
                                               1


                                               u
                       d                                                          d
                     ⇔    G1 (u | x) ∫ ρ '(− z )dG1 ( z | x) − G1 (u | x) ρ '(−u ) G1 (u | x)
                       du           ul
                                                                                  du

                            d             u                                               
                          =    G1 (u | x)  ∫ ρ '(− z ) dG1 ( z | x) − G1 (u | x) ρ '(−u )  < 0
                            du             ul 123                                         
                                           < ρ '( − u )                                   

Lemma 5: Let φ1 (u ) and φ2 (u ) be positive and decreasing functions and µ (u ) a positive
function on u ∈ [umin ,umax ] . Then
umax                             umax                  umax                        umax

 ∫
umin
       φ1 (u )φ2 (u ) µ (u )du    ∫
                                 umin
                                          µ (u )du >
                                                        umin
                                                            ∫   φ1 (u ) µ (u )du    ∫ φ (u)µ (u )du whenever the
                                                                                   umin
                                                                                           2


expectations exist.
                                             umax                                                    umax

Proof: Define µ (u ) = µ (u ) /               ∫
                                             umin
                                                    µ ( z )dz and let u% solve φ2 (u% ) =             ∫ φ ( z )µ ( z )dz . Then we
                                                                                                     umin
                                                                                                            2


have




                                                                       -52-
                          umax                                      umax                              umax

                            ∫ φ (u )φ (u )µ (u)du − ∫ φ (u)µ (u )du ∫ φ (u )µ (u)du
                          umin
                                       1         2
                                                                    umin
                                                                               1
                                                                                                      umin
                                                                                                              2


                              umax
                                                      umax
                                                                             
                          = ∫ φ1 (u ) µ (u ) φ2 (u ) − ∫ φ2 ( z ) µ ( z )dz  du
                           umin              
                                             1444       4244443
                                                       umin                  
                                                                         > 0 ⇔ u <u%
                              umax
                                                                       umax
                                                                                                      
                          ≥        ∫       φ1 (u% ) µ (u ) φ2 (u ) −    ∫     φ2 ( z ) µ ( z )dz  du = 0
                              umin                         umin
                                                          1444
                                                                     
                                                              4244443
                                                                         > 0 ⇔ u <u%


              K R ( x, x )                                         K ( x, x )
Lemma 6:                   is increasing in x for R=OA. Given (A1), R         is also increasing in x
              LR ( x, x)                                           LR ( x, x)
for R=EA.
Proof: K R ( x, y ) is increasing in both arguments, whereas LR ( x, y ) is constant for R=OA and
decreases in x but increases in y for R=EA (from Lemma 2). It remains to show that
∂ K R ( x, y )
               | y = x ≥ 0 for R=EA.
∂x LR ( x, y )
For      this,      we                 consider               the       derivative                   w.r.t.       x    and       show        that
∂                                      ∂
   K R ( x, x) LR ( x, x) − K R ( x, x) LR ( x, x) ≥ 0 . Using the definitions of K R and LR , we have:
∂x                                     ∂x
                    uu                                                                  umax ( x )

      K EA ( x, y ) = ∫ ρ (u )dG2 (u | x, y ) = ρ (umax ( x)) −                             ∫        ρ '(u )G (u | x)G2 (u | y )du
                     ul                                                                     ul
                          umax ( x )
  ∂                                                   ∂
  ∂x
     K EA ( x, x) = −         ∫
                              ul
                                           ρ '(u )
                                                      ∂x
                                                         G (u | x)G2 (u | y )du

                    uu
                                u                                            
      LEA ( x, y ) = ∫  ρ '(u ) ∫ ρ '(− z )dG1 ( z | y ) + (1 − G1 (u | y )) dG (u | x)
                        
                     ul        ul                                            
                                                 uu                                umax ( x )
                                                                                                          u                        
                  = ρ '(umax ( x)) ∫ ρ '(− z )dG1 ( z | y ) −                          ∫         ρ ''(u ) ∫ ρ '(− z )dG1 ( z | y ) G (u | x)du
                                                 ul                                    ul               ul                        
  ∂
                          umax ( x )
                                                      u                          ∂
  ∂x
     LEA ( x, x) = −          ∫
                              ul
                                            
                                           
                                              ρ ''(u ) ∫
                                                       ul
                                                          ρ '(− z )dG1 ( z | y )  G (u | x)du
                                                                                  ∂x
and, therefore,




                                                                          -53-
  ∂                                     ∂
    K R ( x, x) LR ( x, x) − K R ( x, x) LR ( x, x)
 ∂x                                     ∂x
                    umax ( x )
                                   ∂               uu                        u                       
 = − ρ '(umax ( x)) ∫ ρ '(u ) G (u | x) G2 (u | x) ∫ ρ '(− z )dG1 ( z | x) − ∫ ρ '(− z )dG1 ( z | x)  du
                      ul
                                  ∂x              ul                        ul                      
     umax ( x ) ∂                      umax ( x )  u                                  
 −σ  ∫ ρ '(u ) G (u | x)G2 (u | x)du   ∫  ρ '(u ) ∫ ρ '(− z )dG1 ( z | x) G (u | x)du 
     ul        ∂x                     ul       ul                                
     umax ( x ) u
                                       ∂              umax ( x )                     
 +σ  ∫ ρ '(u ) ∫ ρ '(− z )dG1 ( z | x) G (u | x)du   ∫ ρ '(u )G (u | x)G2 (u | x)du 
     ul        ul
                                       ∂x             ul                           

We       can         apply       Lemma          5      to      the      last         two        summands   with
                 u
                                                                                   G2 (u | x)
µ (u ) = ρ '(u ) ∫ ρ '(− z )dG1 ( z | y )G (u | x) ,             φ1 (u ) =    u
                                                                                                           and
                ul
                                                                              ∫ ρ '(− z )dG ( z | x)
                                                                              ul
                                                                                            1


            ∂
               G (u | x)
φ2 (u ) = − ∂x           , where we use (A1), Lemma 3, and Lemma 4 to guarantee the required
              G (u | x)
properties Lemma 5. We then obtain:
  ∂                                     ∂
    K R ( x, x) LR ( x, x) − K R ( x, x) LR ( x, x)
 ∂x                                     ∂x
                   umax ( x )
                                   ∂               uu                        u                       
 ≥ − ρ '(umax ( x)) ∫ ρ '(u ) G (u | x) G2 (u | x) ∫ ρ '(− z )dG1 ( z | x) − ∫ ρ '(− z )dG1 ( z | x)  du
                                  ∂x                                                                
                                                                                                   3
                      ul                            ul                        ul
                                             144444444           42444444444
                                                                          > 0 (Lemma 3,4)

 ≥0

         ∂K R
               ( x, y )
Lemma 7: ∂x             is increasing in y for R=EA.
          K R ( x, y )

Proof of Proposition 2 (Optimal bid function with resale)
With standard arguments (Haile 2003 and Milgrom and Weber 1982): Existence and optimality is
                          ∂ 2 EU
given if bR '( x) > 0 and        ( x = x% ) ≥ 0 . We have:
                           ∂x∂x%

                                                             1
                                      bR '( x) > 0 ⇔ (               )' < 0
                                                         ρ (bR ( x))
                                                               K R ( x, x )
                                              ⇔ LR ( x, x) −                >0
                                                               ρ (bR ( x))



                                                       -54-
                                         K R ( x, x )
From Lemma 6 we have that                             is increasing in x. We therefore obtain:
                                         LR ( x, x)
       K R ( x, x )
       ρ (bR ( x))
         x    z                 y
                                                                         K ( z , z )( F ( z ) n −1 ) '
      ≤ ∫ exp  ∫ K R ( y, y ) / ∫ K R ( y, w)dF ( w) n −1dF ( y ) n −1  z R                           LR ( x, x)dz
              x                                                        
                                                                        K R ( z , y )dF ( y )
                                                                          ∫
        xl                       xl
                                                                                                  n −1

                                                                                  xl

                            xl               y
                                                                                      
      = LR ( x, x) 1 − exp  ∫ K R ( y, y ) / ∫ K R ( y, w)dF ( w) n −1dF ( y ) n −1  
                          x                                                        
                                              xl                                     
      < LR ( x, x)

Further, we have to show:
 ∂ 2 EU
          ( x = x% )
  ∂x∂x%
                                                                                                              
           1
                       x
                         ∂K R                            1      ∂K R            ∂LR                    n −1 

       ρ (bR ( x)) x∫l 1
 = (               )'                         n −1
                               ( x, z )dF ( z ) +                    ( x, x ) −     ( x, x )  ( F ( x ) ) '  {ρ (0)
                          ∂4
                           x 243                     ρ (bR ( x)) ∂x              ∂x          
                            >0
                                                                                                               <0
 >0
Optimal auction (R=OA)
                                                                                                              1
The claimed relationship follows immediately as we have already shown that (                                          )' < 0
                                                                                                          ρ (bR ( x))
                          1      ∂K R                ∂L
and further that                      ( x, x) ≤ 0 and R ( x, x) = 0 .
                      ρ (bR ( x)) ∂x                  ∂x


English auction (R=EA)
Using (7’), we have to show that

        x
            ∂K R
        ∫
        xl
             ∂x
                  ( x, z )dF ( z ) n −1
                                         K R ( x, x )                   1      ∂K R           ∂L
                                                      − LR ( x, x)  >               ( x, x ) − R ( x, x ) .
                                 n −1  ρ (bR ( x ))                 ρ (bR ( x)) ∂x             ∂x
           x

           ∫ K R ( x, z )dF ( z ) 144424443
            xl
                                                         <0

                                x
                                     ∂K R                               ∂K R
                                ∫     ∂x
                                          ( x, z )dF ( z ) n −1               ( x, x )
From Lemma 7 we know
                                xl
                                                                      <  ∂x            < 0 . Therefore:
                                     x
                                                                         K R ( x, x )
                                     ∫K
                                    xl
                                          R   ( x, z )dF ( z ) n −1




                                                                  -55-
          x
             ∂K R
         ∫
         xl
              ∂x
                   ( x, z )dF ( z ) n −1
                                          K R ( x, x )                    1      ∂K R           ∂L          
                                                       − LR ( x, x)  −                ( x, x ) − R ( x, x ) 
                                  n −1  ρ (bR ( x ))                  ρ (bR ( x)) ∂x             ∂x
            x
                                                                                                               
            ∫ K R ( x, z )dF ( z ) 144424443
              xl
                                                            <0


                       ∂K R
                             ( x, x )
                                       ∂L
         ≥ − LR ( x, x) ∂x            + R ( x, x )
                        K R ( x, x )    ∂x
         ≥0
where the last inequality was proven in Lemma 6.


Optimal bid for risk-neutral players with resale: limσ →0 bR ( x) and limσ →∞ bR ( x) :
                        z                    y
                                                                                             F ( z ) n −1
                         ∫x                  ∫
Note that exp  K R ( y, y ) / K R ( y, w)dF ( w) n −1dF ( y ) n −1  →                                    for σ → 0 . The proof
                                                                                             F ( x) n −1
                                             xl                                          
is therefore analogous to that of the no-resale case (see above).

limσ →0 bR ( x)
                                                     z                                                 z
                                      ∂                                                                   ∂
                                        LR ( z , z ) ∫ (−σ ) K R ( z , y )dF ( y ) n −1 − LR ( z , z ) ∫    ((−σ ) K R ( z , y ))dF ( y ) n −1
                   x
                      F ( z ) n −1   ∂σ                                                                  ∂σ
                   ∫ F ( x)n−1                                                                                                                   dF ( z ) n −1
                                                    ul                                                ul
                                                                                                              2
                   xl                                                           z                           
                                                                         (−σ ) ∫ K R ( z , y )dF ( y ) n −1 
                                                                                                            
= limσ →0                                                                     ul                            
                                                           x         n −1
                                                              F ( z)                LR ( z , z )
                                                          ∫x F ( x)n−1           z
                                                                                                              dF ( z ) n −1
                                                            l
                                                                           (−σ ) ∫ K R ( z , y )dF ( y ) n −1
                                                                                     ul
                                                                      z
                                  ∂                                      ∂                      
                        limσ →0 ∂σ LR ( z , z )  F ( z ) − ∫ limσ →0 ∂σ (−σ ) K R ( z , y )  dF ( y )
                                                            n −1                                              n −1
   x
           1
=∫
                                                                 ul
                                                                                                                              dF ( z ) n −1
  xl
       F ( x) n −1                                                   F ( z)   n −1




from which one obtains the claimed relationships. The proof for σ → ∞ is similar.




                                                                     -56-
Appendix B: Experimental Instructions – OA Resale Treatment

Welcome to Lister’s Auctions! You have the opportunity to bid in a series of
experimental auctions today and you can earn cash by participating.

Auction Rules:
In this auction you will bid against four (4) other people and the person with the highest
bid is the winner, and pays the amount of their bid for the “fictitious” commodity. The
auction is a sealed bid auction so you don’t know the bids of the other participants. We
will repeat the auction for 10 rounds. At the end of the session, your earnings from this
experiment and another unrelated experiment will be summed and paid to you in cash.

There are six steps in the auction process, each of which are explained in detail below.
The six steps include: (i) determining your signal of the value of the fictitious
commodity, (ii) determining your bid, (iii) determining your use value for the fictitious
good, (iv) determining the winner, (v) the resale market, and (vi) determining your
payouts for the round.

   1. Determining your signal of the good’s value: At the beginning of each period, a
   monitor will hand you a card numbered from zero dollars ($0) to fifty dollars ($50) in
   one dollar ($1) increments. The value on the card handed to you will be a signal of
   your use value for the fictitious good. The other bidders in your auction will have
   their signals determined in exactly the same way. Signals are private and independent
   across buyers, and your signal will change across rounds.

       Signals and Use Values

       Use values, V, in each round are drawn from a uniform distribution on the interval
       [10, 40]. That is, every dollar value between 10 and 40 is equally likely to be
       drawn as your use value. These values are independently drawn for each subject
       and will differ across periods.

       The signal you will receive is determined by adding a random number drawn on
       the interval [-10, 10] to your use value. Again, each dollar value between -10 and
       10 is equally likely to be drawn and added to your use value. Your first-stage
       signal, S, is hence given by:

                                     S = V + random number

       Your signal, S, is thus distributed on the interval [$0, $50].

       Given your signal, you can compute the expected use value. For example, if you
       were to receive a signal of $30 in the first stage, you know that your final use
       value must lie somewhere in the interval [$20, $40]. Since each of these values is
       equally likely to have been selected as your use value, on average your use value




                                            -57-
       is $30. However, any value in this range could have been assigned as your use
       value.

   2. Determining your bid value: After receiving your signal, you will choose your
   bid value for the fictitious good. In order to choose your bid, consider how your
   earnings for each period are calculated. If you are the person with the highest bid you
   are the winner of the auction. Your earnings are equal to your use value minus your
   bid amount if you have the highest end use value:

                    Earnings = your good’s use value (V) – your bid

   If you are the person with the highest bid but do not have the highest use value, your
   earnings are equal to the highest use value of all participants minus your bid amount:

                         Earnings = highest use value – your bid

   If you are not the high bidder in a round, your earnings for the period are zero. If
   there is a tie, the winner will be determined by the flip of a coin (if more than two
   people tie we will draw a card to determine the winner). Your bid can be any amount
   in the range from zero ($0) to forty dollars ($40) in ten cent ($0.10) increments.

   3. Determining your use value: Once all bids have been received, a monitor will
   hand you a second slip of paper numbered from ten dollars ($10) to forty dollars
   ($40) that gives your final use value, V. Your use value will lie within ± $10 of your
   signal, S.

   4. Determining the auction winner: All bids will be publicly announced and
   recorded by a monitor on the blackboard. Your bid will be compared with those of
   the four other participants in the auction. The person with the highest bid amount is
   the winner.

   5. The resale market: In the resale market, each participant can see the use values
   for all other participants. The highest bidder in the auction market will sell the
   “fictitious” commodity to the individual with the highest use value. In this
   experiment this happens automatically. The payoff for the winner is the highest use
   value of all participants minus his/her bid amount. If you did not win the auction,
   your payout for the period will be zero. The payout for the auction winner can be
   positive even if your bid was greater than your use value.

   6. Determining your payouts: If you are the auction winner, you will receive the
   difference between the highest use value and your bid. If you did not win the auction,
   you receive zero for that period. Your total earnings for this experiment is the sum of
   your earnings for each of the 10 periods.

Do you have any questions about the auction process?




                                          -58-
Appendix C: Experimental Instructions for Risk Aversion Experiment

        Record your subject number from the previous part on your decision sheet. Your
decision sheet shows ten decisions listed on the left. Each decision is a paired choice
between OPTION A and OPTION B. You will make ten choices and record these in the
final column, but only one of them will be used in the end to determine your earnings.
Before you start making your ten choices, please let me explain how these choices will
affect your earnings for this part of the experiment.

        We will use part of a deck of cards to determine payoffs; cards 2-10 and the Ace
will represent “1”. After you have made all of your choices, we will randomly select a
card twice, once to select one of the ten decisions to be used, and a second time to
determine what your payoff is for the option you chose, A or B, for the particular
decision selected. (After the first card is selected, it will be put back in the pile, the deck
will be reshuffled, and the second card will be drawn.) Even though you will make ten
decisions, only one of these will end up affecting your earnings, but you will not know
in advance which decision will be used. Obviously, each decision has an equal chance
of being used in the end.

        Now, please look at Decision 1 at the top. OPTION A pays $2.00 if the Ace is
selected, and it pays $1.60 if the card selected is 2-10. OPTION B yields $3.85 if the
Ace is selected, and it pays $0.10 if the card selected is 2-10. The other decisions are
similar, except that as you move down the table, the chances of the higher payoff for
each option increase. In fact, for Decision 10 in the bottom row, the cards will not be
needed since each option pays the highest payoff for sure, so your choice here is
between $2.00 or $3.85.

        To summarize, you will make ten choices: for each decision row you will have
to choose between OPTION A and OPTION B. You may choose A for some decision
rows and B for other rows, and you may change your decisions and make them in any
order. When you are finished, we will come to your desk and pick a card to determine
which of the ten decisions will be used. Then we will put the card back in the deck,
shuffle, and select a card again to determine your money earnings for the OPTION you
chose for that decision. Earnings for this choice will be added to your previous
earnings, and you will be paid all earnings in cash when we finish.

        So now please look at the empty boxes on the right side of the record sheet. You
will have to write a decision, A or B in each of these boxes, and then the card selection
will determine which one is going to count. We will look at the decision that you made
for the choice that counts, and circle it, before selecting a card again to determine your
earnings for this part. Then you will write your earnings in the blank at the bottom of
the page.

        Are there any questions? Now you may begin making your choices. Please do
not talk with anyone else while we are doing this; raise your hand if you have a
question.


                                              -59-
