NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PUBLIC DEBT, FISCAL SOLVENCY AND
MACROECONOMIC UNCERTAINTY IN LATIN AMERICA:
THE CASES OF BRAZIL, COLOMBIA, COSTA RICA AND MEXICO
Enrique G. Mendoza
P. Marcelo Oviedo
Working Paper 10637
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10637
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2004

This paper was prepared for the World Bank’s project on Assessing Fiscal Sustainability in Latin America
and is based on a method to evaluate fiscal sustainability that we developed while visiting the Research
Department of the Inter-American Development Bank. We are grateful to Manuel Amador, Andres Arias,
Guillermo Calvo, Umberto Della Mea, Arturo Galindo, Santiago Herrera, Claudio Irigoyen, Alejandro
Izquierdo, Guillermo Perry, Tom Sargent, Alejandro Werner and participants at the XIX Meeting of the Latin
American Network of Central Banks and Finance Ministries for helpful comments and suggestions. The
views expressed here are the authors’ only and do not reflect those of the World Bank or the Inter-American
Development Bank. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Enrique G. Mendoza and P. Marcelo Oviedo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Public Debt, Fiscal Solvency and Macroeconomic Uncertainty in Latin America: The Cases of
Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica, and Mexico
Enrique G. Mendoza and P. Marcelo Oviedo
NBER Working Paper No. 10637
July 2004
JEL No. F0, F4
ABSTRACT
Ratios of public debt as a share of GDP in Brazil, Colombia, and Mexico were 10 percentage points
higher on average during 1996-2002 than in the period 1990-1995. Costa Rica's debt ratio remained
stable but at a high level near 50 percent. Is there reason to be concerned for the solvency of the
public sector in these economies? We provide an answer to this question based on the quantitative
predictions of a variant of the framework proposed by Mendoza and Oviedo (2004). This
methodology yields forward-looking estimates of debt ratios consistent with fiscal solvency for a
government that faces revenue uncertainty and can issue only non-state-contingent debt. In this
environment, aversion to a collapse in outlays leads the government to respect a "natural debt limit"
equal to the annuity value of the primary balance in a "fiscal crisis." A fiscal crisis occurs after a
long sequence of adverse revenue shocks and public outlays adjust to a tolerable minimum. The debt
limit also represents a credible commitment to be able to repay even in a fiscal crisis but is not, in
general, the same as the sustainable debt, which is driven by the probabilistic dynamics of the
primary balance. The results of a baseline scenario question the sustainability of current debt ratios
in Brazil and Colombia, while those in Costa Rica and Mexico seem inside the limits consistent with
fiscal solvency. In contrast, public debt ratios are found to be unsustainable in all four countries for
plausible changes to lower average growth rates or higher real interest rates. Moreover, sustainable
debt ratios fall sharply when default risk is taken into account.
Enrique G. Mendoza
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
mendozae@econ.umd.edu

Pedro Marcelo Oviedo
Department of Economics
Iowa State University
Ames, IA 50011
oviedo@iastate.edu

1
1.

Introduction
The ratios of public debt to GDP have been rising steadily in the economies of

Latin America. Comparing averages for the period 1996-2002 with those for the period
1990-1995, the average debt ratios of Brazil, Colombia, and Mexico increased by about
10 percentage points in each country. In Costa Rica, the public debt ratio did not change
much, but it was already at a relatively high level of around 50 percent at the beginning
of the 1990s. Given that growing public debt has traditionally been an indicator of
financial weakness and vulnerability to economic crisis in the region, there is concern for
assessing whether these high levels of debt are in line with the solvency of the public
sector or should be taken as a warning signal that requires policy intervention.
The goal of this paper is to assess the consistency of the public debt ratios of
Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica and Mexico with the conditions required to maintain fiscal
solvency. This assessment is based on a variant of the framework proposed by Mendoza
and Oviedo (2004). In particular, we apply their one-sector model with exogenous
government expenditure rules. This methodology produces estimates of the short- and
long-run dynamics of public debt ratios in a setup in which public revenues are subject to
random shocks and the government aims to maintain its outlays relatively smooth in the
face of this uncertainty. The government is handicapped in its efforts to play this
insurer’s role because markets of contingent claims are incomplete. The government can
only issue one-period, non-state-contingent debt.
Mendoza and Oviedo (2004) show that, in this environment with incomplete
contingent-claims markets, a government averse to a collapse in its public outlays and
facing revenue uncertainty will impose on itself a “natural debt limit” (NDL) determined

2
by the growth-adjusted annuity value of the primary balance in a state of “fiscal crisis.”
They define a state of fiscal crisis as the one at which a country arrives after experiencing
a sufficiently long sequence of adverse shocks to public revenues and the government
adjusts its outlays to minimum admissible levels.
An important implication of the NDL is that it allows the government to offer its
creditors a credible commitment to remain able to repay “almost surely” at all times
(including during fiscal crises). It is important to note that this commitment is not an adhoc assumption but an implication of the assumptions that (a) government is averse to
suffering a collapse of its outlays, (b) public revenues are stochastic, and (c) markets of
contingent claims are incomplete. However, the commitment is in terms of an “ability to
pay criterion,” and as such it does not rule out default scenarios that may result from
“willingness to pay” or strategic reasons.
The NDL sets the upper bound for public debt but is not, in general, the same as
the “sustainable” or equilibrium level of debt. The model does not require public debt to
remain constant at the level of the NDL. Instead, the path of “sustainable” or equilibrium
public debt depends on the initial conditions of debt and revenue, the probabilistic
process driving revenues, and the policy rules governing public outlays. In the short-run,
the dynamics of the distribution of public debt are driven by the government budget
constraint. In the long run, depending on alternative sequences of realizations of public
revenues, the government can end up retiring all the debt or hitting the debt limit. This
extreme behavior of the long-run debt dynamics is particular to this basic version of the
Mendoza-Oviedo model. The two-sector general equilibrium variant of their framework

3
with endogenous government outlays features a unique, invariant long-run distribution of
public debt (see Mendoza and Oviedo (2004) for details).
The results suggest that current debt ratios in Brazil and Colombia are near the
natural debt limits that would be consistent with fiscal solvency only if one assumes
perceived commitments to large reductions in non-interest outlays (in excess of 6
percentage points of GDP) in a fiscal crisis. Mexico was also near its debt limit in 1998.
However, in Mexico’s case the reduction in outlays that would have been needed to keep
the government solvent if revenues had continued to suffer adverse shocks was smaller
(at 1.5 percentage points of GDP). Still, in all three cases the implied level of adjustment
in outlays to keep the government solvent in a state of fiscal crisis is more than two
standard deviations below recent averages, indicating that the likelihood that the
countries could produce the required adjustment in outlays if they were called to act on
their perceived commitment is low. In contrast, the model indicates that Costa Rica’s
largest public debt ratio of the last 12 years could be financed in a state of fiscal crisis
with a modest cut in outlays equivalent to 1.2 times the standard deviation of outlays.
The above results are very sensitive to underlying assumptions regarding the
long-run real interest rate and growth rate. Current debt ratios in all four countries are
found to be unsustainable for plausible reductions in growth rates to the averages of the
last 20 years, instead of the average of the last 40 years used in the baseline scenario.
Similarly, the current debt ratios are found to be unsustainable if the long-run real interest
rate is set at 8 percent instead of the 5 percent value of the baseline estimates.
The Mendoza-Oviedo framework was designed as a forward-looking policy tool
that intentionally sets aside the risk of default. This was done because the framework is

4
intended to produce the sustainable debt ratios that a government that does not consider
the option of defaulting on its obligations could support. This is in line with the
assumptions of the traditional approaches to assess debt sustainability based on
deterministic steady-state estimates or empirical applications of the intertemporal
government budget constraint. However, while this approach is the ideal benchmark in a
forward-looking policy analysis, it does have the drawback that it does not take into
account how default risk considerations could affect sustainable debt dynamics. To
address this issue, we study in this paper how estimates of natural debt limits and
simulated debt dynamics vary when the basic Mendoza-Oviedo model is modified to
incorporate exogenous default risk. Introducing default risk results in marked reductions
in the levels of natural debt limits.
We also compare the results of the Mendoza-Oviedo model with those produced
by the conventional methodology based on calculations of steady-state debt ratios (or
“Blanchard ratios”). In the countries where the average of revenues exceeds that of
outlays by a large enough margin (Costa Rica and Mexico), the Blanchard ratio yields
higher debt ratios than the natural debt limits of the Mendoza-Oviedo model. This
finding shows that assessments of sustainable debt based on steady-state calculations that
use averages of revenues and outlays and fail to take into account aggregate, noninsurable fiscal shocks can lead countries to borrow more than what is consistent with
fiscal solvency. In the countries where the averages of revenues and outlays are very
similar (Brazil and Colombia), the Blanchard ratios yield negligible debt ratios. The
Mendoza-Oviedo model can explain high levels of debt in these cases if the government
can commit (credibly) to large enough cuts in outlays in a state of fiscal crisis. To be

5
credible, however, these cuts must not represent unusually large deviations relative to the
historical mean (i.e., they should not be larger than two standard deviations in percent of
the mean).
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 is a short survey of the existing
methods for calculating public debt ratios consistent with fiscal solvency. Section 3
summarizes the one-good variant of the Mendoza-Oviedo model. Section 4 applies the
model to the cases of Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica and Mexico and discusses the results.
This Section includes sensitivity analysis and an extension to incorporate exogenous
default risk. Section 5 reflects on important caveats of the analysis and provides general
conclusions.
2.

Computing Public Debt Ratios Consistent with Fiscal Solvency: A Survey
A central question in fiscal policy discussions is how to determine whether the

stock of public debt is “sustainable,” in the sense of being consistent with the fiscal
solvency conditions implied by current and future patterns of government revenue and
outlays. Developing effective tools for computing these sustainable public debt ratios has
proven a difficult task.
The first problem that studies in this area face is how to give operational content
to the notion of fiscal sustainability. There is a tendency to associate the notion of
unsustainable public debt with failure to satisfy the government budget constraint, or with
the government holding a negative net-worth position. However, from an analytical
standpoint these can be misleading because the “true” government budget constraint (as
an accounting identity relating the overall public sector borrowing requirement to all
sources and uses of government revenue) must always hold. Thus, an analysis that shows

6
that a given stock of public debt fails a “particular” definition of the budget constraint is
ultimately reflecting the fact that the analysis failed to incorporate important features of
the actual fiscal situation of the country under study. How this failure translates into a
judgment about the sustainability of public debt depends on assessments (typically
implicit in the analysis) about the macroeconomic outcomes associated with the different
mechanisms that can be used to maintain fiscal balance. Arguments about sustainability
are therefore implicitly arguments about the pros and cons of these alternative
mechanisms, not about whether the intertemporal budget constraint of the government
holds.
Consider a basic example. In the canonical long-run analysis of public debt
sustainability, we consider long-run, average levels of public revenue and expenditures,
and view as the sustainable debt-output ratio the annuity value of a long-run target of the
primary balance-output ratio. If a government has a large stock of contingent liabilities
because of the high risk of a banking crisis, the stock of public debt may be judged to be
unsustainable because, once these contingent liabilities are added, the debt-output ratio
exceeds the long-run indicator of sustainability. However, the government budget
constraint must hold, and thus if a banking crisis does occur the government will
ultimately have to adjust the primary balance or rely on other “sources” of financing such
as the inflation tax or a debt default. Adjustment via the primary balance is generally
judged as consistent with this canonical view of sustainability, while adjustment via
inflation or default would not because these would be viewed as alternatives inferior to
adjustment of the primary balance in terms of social welfare.

7
Beyond the problem of defining an operational concept of public debt
sustainability, there are also problems in the design of methods for calculating sustainable
debt levels. These difficulties reflect the gap between the aspects of fiscal policy
emphasized in the different methods and those aspects that seem empirically relevant for
explaining the actual fiscal position of governments. The literature on methods for
assessing public debt sustainability reflects the evolution of ideas on these issues. In the
lines below we review the main features of the different methods. The intent is not to
conduct a comprehensive survey of the literature (as there are already a number of
excellent surveys, see for example Chalk and Hemming (2000) or IMF (2002) and
(2003a)) but to highlight the central differences among the existing methods.
The starting point of most of the existing methods for calculating sustainable
public debt-output ratios is the period budget constraint of the government. This
constraint is merely an accounting identity that relates all the flows of government
receipts and payments to the change in public debt:
Bt +1 = Bt (1 + rt ) − (Tt − Gt )

(1)

where Bt+1 is the stock of public debt issued by the end of period t, Bt is maturing public
debt on which the government pays principal and the real interest rate rt, Tt is total real
government revenue and Gt are current real government outlays (i.e., Tt - Gt is the
primary fiscal balance).
Long-Run Methods
As the example of the long-run approach to debt sustainability given earlier
illustrated, the long-run approach is based on steady-state, perfect-foresight
considerations that transform the government’s accounting identity (1) into an equation

8
that maps the long-run primary fiscal balance as a share of output into a “sustainable”
debt-to-output ratio that remains constant over time (see Buiter (1985), Blanchard (1990)
and Blanchard, Chouraqui, Hagemann and Sartor (1990)). In particular, if we define the
long-run rate of output growth as γ and after some basic algebraic manipulation, the
accounting identity in (1) yields:
b=

t−g
r −γ

(2)

where b is the long-run debt-to-GDP ratio, t and g are the long-run GDP shares of current
revenue and outlays, and r is the steady-state real interest rate. Condition (2) can be read
as an indicator of fiscal policy action (i.e., of the “permanent” primary balance-output
ratio that needs to be achieved by means of revenue or expenditure policies so as to
stabilize a given debt-output ratio), or as an indicator of a “sustainable” debt ratio (i.e.,
the target debt-output ratio implied by a given projection of the long-run primary
balance-output ratio).
Intertemporal Methods
An important shortcoming of the long-run approach is that it fails to recognize
that the “long run” is essentially a theoretical construct. In the short run governments
face a budget constraint that does not reduce to the simplistic (albeit significantly more
tractable) formula of the long-run analysis. There can be temporarily high debt ratios, or
temporarily large primary deficits, that are consistent with government solvency, and
indeed incurring in such temporarily high debt or deficits could be optimal from a taxsmoothing perspective. To force a country into the straight jacket of keeping its public
debt-output ratio no larger than the level that corresponds to the long-run stationary state

9
can therefore be a serious mistake. The realization of these flaws in the long-run
calculations led to the development of intertemporal-budget-constraint methods that
shifted the focus from analyzing directly the debt-output ratio to studying the time-series
properties of the fiscal balance, so as to test whether these properties are consistent with
the conditions required to satisfy the government’s intertemporal budget constraint. This
intertemporal constraint serves as a means to link the short-run dynamics of debt and the
primary balance with the long-run solvency constraint of the government.
In their original form (see Hamilton and Flavin (1986)) the intertemporal methods
aimed to test whether the data can reject the hypothesis that the condition ruling out
Ponzi games on public debt holds. This condition states that at any date t the discounted
value of the stock of public debt t+j periods into the future should vanish as j goes to
j

infinity: Lim ∏ (1 + rt +k ) −1Bt +1+ j = 0 . In other words, in the long run the stock of debt
j →∞

k =0

cannot grow faster than the gross interest rate. If this no-Ponzi-game (NPG) condition
holds, the forward solution of (1) implies that the intertemporal government budget
constraint holds: The present value of the primary fiscal balance is equal to the value of
the existing stock of debt, and hence the exiting public debt or public debt-output ratio is
deemed “sustainable.”
A number of articles tried different variations of this test by testing for stationarity
and co-integration in the time series of the primary balance and public debt, and produced
different results using U.S. data (Chalk and Hemming (2000) review this literature).
These intertemporal-budget-constraint methods also began to introduce elements of
uncertainty into public debt sustainability analysis, but mostly in an indirect manner as
sources of statistical error in hypothesis testing, or by testing the NPG condition in

10
expected value or as an orthogonality condition that considers the fact that at equilibrium
the sequence of real interest rates used to discount the “terminal” debt stock must match
the intertemporal marginal rate of substitution in private consumption.1
The article by Bohn (1998) provided an alternative interpretation of intertemporal
methods that reduces them to testing if the primary balance responds positively to
increases in public debt. In particular, if the primary balance-output ratio and the debtoutput ratio are stationary, the following regression can be used to test for sustainability:
st = ρ bt + α ⋅ Z t + ε t

(3)

where st is the ratio of the primary fiscal balance over GDP, εt is a well-behaved error
term and Zt is a vector of determinants of the primary balance other than the initial stock
of public debt. In Bohn’s case, he included in Zt the cyclical variations in U.S. GDP and
a measure of “abnormal” government expenditures associated with war episodes. He
found strong evidence in favor of ρ > 0. Thus, controlling for war-time spending and the
business cycle, the debt-output ratio is mean-reverting in U.S. data. Moreover, the
positive coefficient ρ, indicating that the primary balance displays a linear response that
is both positive and systematic to increases in debt, is sufficient (albeit not necessary) to
ensure that the intertemporal government budget constraint holds. This is because, as the
more recent methods for evaluating fiscal sustainability under uncertainty emphasize,
ensuring fiscal sustainability requires that above a certain critical maximum level of debt

1



In expected value the NPG condition is Lim Et 
j →∞

j

∏ (1 + r

 k =0

β

the condition becomes Lim Et 
j →∞



t +k


) −1Bt +1+ j  = 0 , in the “equilibrium” tests



u′(Ct +1+ j )
Bt +1+ j  = 0 .
u′(Ct )


t +1+ j

11
b*, the primary balance responds positively (in either linear or non-linear fashion) to
changes in public debt. The intuition is that if this is the case any large increase in debt
due to “ large negative shocks” is eventually reversed through primary surpluses.
Chapter III of IMF (2003b) applied Bohn’s method to a panel of industrial and
developing country data. The results identified a group of developing countries where
the sustainability condition ρ > 0 holds, and others where it does not. Moreover, the
study also shows evidence of non-linearities in the relationship between debt and primary
balances, indicating that countries that were able to sustain larger debt ratios in the data
also displayed a stronger response of the primary balance to debt increases.
Recent Development: Probabilistic Methods and Methods with Financial Frictions
Recent developments in public debt sustainability analysis follow two strands.
The first strand emphasizes the fact that governments, particularly in emerging markets,
face significant sources of uncertainty as they try to assess the patterns of government
revenue and expenditures, and hence the level of debt that they can afford to maintain.
From the perspective of these probabilistic methods, measures of sustainability derived
from the long-run approach or the intertemporal analysis are seen as inaccurate for
governments that hold large stocks of debt and face large shocks to their revenues and
expenditures. The key question here is not whether public debt is sustainable at some
abstract steady state, or whether in a sample of a country’s recent or historical past the
NPG condition holds. The key question is whether the current debt-output ratio is
sustainable given the current domestic and international economic environment and its
future prospects.

12
The second strand aims to incorporate elements of the financial frictions literature
applied to the recent emerging-markets crises. For example, public debt in many
emerging markets displays a characteristic referred to as “liability dollarization” (i.e.,
debt is often denominated in foreign currency or indexed to the price level.). As a result,
abrupt changes in domestic relative prices that are common in the aftermath of a large
devaluation, or a ‘sudden stop’ to net capital inflows, can alter dramatically standard
long-run calculations of sustainable debt ratios and render levels of debt that looked
sustainable in one situation unsustainable in another. Calvo, Izquierdo and Talvi (2003)
evaluate these effects for the Argentine case and find that large changes in the relative
price of nontradables alter significantly the assessments obtained with standard steadystate sustainability analysis. The general version of the Mendoza-Oviedo model also
incorporates these effects (see Mendoza and Oviedo (2004)).
The probabilistic methods for assessing fiscal sustainability propose alternative
strategies for dealing with macroeconomic uncertainty. A method proposed at the IMF
by Barnhill and Kopits (2003) incorporates uncertainty by adapting the value-at-risk
(VaR) principles of the finance industry to debt instruments issued by governments. The
aim of this approach is to model the probability of a negative net worth position for the
government. The method requires estimates of the present values of the main elements of
the balance sheet of the total consolidated public sector (financial assets and liabilities,
expected revenues from sales of commodities or other goods and services, as well as any
contingent assets and liabilities), and an estimate of the variance-covariance matrix of the
variables that are viewed as determinants of those present values in reduced form. This
information is then used to compute measures of dispersion relative to the present values

13
of the different assets and liabilities that determine the value at risk (or exposure to
negative net worth) of the government.
A second probabilistic method recently considered for country surveillance at the
IMF (see IMF (2003c)) modifies the long-run method to incorporate variations to the
determinants of sustainable public debt in the right-hand-side of equation (2), and also
examines short-term debt dynamics that result from different assumptions about the
short-run path of the variables that enter the government budget constraint in
deterministic form. For example, deterministic debt dynamics up to 10 periods into the
future are computed for variations of the growth rate of output of two standard deviations
relative to its mean.
The same IMF publication proposes a stochastic simulation approach that
computes the probability density function of possible debt-output ratios. This stochastic
simulation model, like the VaR approach, is based on a non-structural time-series
analysis of the macroeconomic variables that drive the dynamics of public debt
(particularly output growth, interest rates, and the primary balance). The difference is that
the stochastic simulation model produces simulated probability distributions based on
forward simulations of a vector-autoregression model that combines the determinants of
debt dynamics as endogenous variables with a vector of exogenous variables. The
distributions are then used to make assessments of sustainable debt in terms of the
probability that the simulated debt ratios are greater or equal than a critical value.
Xu and Ghezzi (2002) developed a third probabilistic method to evaluate
sustainable public debt. Their method computes "fair spreads" on public debt that reflect
the default probabilities implied by a continuous-time stochastic model of the dynamics

14
of treasury reserves in which exchange rates, interest rates, and the primary fiscal balance
follow Brownian motion processes (so that they capture drift and volatility observed in
the data). The analysis is similar to that of the first-generation models of balance-ofpayments crises. Default occurs when treasury reserves are depleted, and thus debt is
deemed unsustainable when the properties of the underlying Brownian motions are such
that the expected value of treasury reserves declines to zero (which occurs at an
exponential rate).
3.

The Basic Version of the Mendoza-Oviedo Model

The probabilistic methods summarized in the last section make significant
progress in incorporating macroeconomic uncertainty into debt sustainability analysis but
they are largely based on non-structural econometric methods. In contrast, the Mendoza Oviedo (MO) method aims to provide an explicit dynamic equilibrium model of the
mechanism by which macroeconomic shocks affect government finances. The MO
method also differs from the other probabilistic methods in that it models explicitly the
nature of the government’s forward-looking commitment to remain solvent, instead of
focusing on computing estimates of exposure to negative net worth or depletion of
treasury reserves. As explained below, the MO method determines sustainable debt
ratios that respect a natural debt limit consistent with a credible commitment to repay
similar in principle to the one implicit in the long-run and intertemporal methods.
The structural emphasis of the MO approach comes at the cost of the reduced
flexibility and increased complexity of the numerical solution methods required to solve
non-linear, dynamic stochastic equilibrium models with incomplete asset markets. At the
same time, by proceeding in this manner the MO framework seeks to produce estimates

15
of sustainable public debt that are robust to the Lucas critique. The non-structural or
reduced-form tools used in the other probabilistic methods to model the dynamics of
public debt are vulnerable to the policy instability problems resulting from the Lucas
critique. This is not a serious limitation when these methods are used for an ex-post
evaluation of how well past debt dynamics matched fiscal solvency conditions, but it can
be a shortcoming for a forward-looking analysis that requires a framework for describing
how equilibrium prices and allocations, and hence the ability of the government to raise
revenue and service debt, adjust to alternative tax and expenditure policies or other
changes in the environment (including, for example, a Sudden Stop limiting the access to
international capital markets or a collapse in the real exchange rate triggered by a
devaluation of the currency).
The basic principles of the MO method are as follows. Assume that output
follows a deterministic trend (so that it grows at a constant, exogenous rate γ) and the real
interest rate is constant. Public revenues follow an exogenous stochastic process. The
government is extremely averse to suffering a collapse in its outlays. Hence, it aims to
keep its outlays smooth unless the loss of access to debt markets forces it to adjust them
to minimum tolerable levels. The government can only issue non-state-contingent debt.
The government budget constraint in (1) can then be re-written as:
(1 + γ )bt +1 = bt (1 + r ) − (tt − g t )
where lowercase letters refer to ratios relative to GDP.
Since the government wants to rule out a collapse of its outlays below their
tolerable minimum levels, it would not want to borrow more than the amount of debt it
could service if the primary balance were to remain forever (or “almost surely” in the

(4)

16
language of probability theory) at its lowest possible value, or “fiscal crisis” state. A state
of fiscal crisis is defined as a situation reached after a “sufficiently” long sequence of the
worst realization of public revenues and after public outlays have been adjusted to their
tolerable minimum. This upper bound on debt is labeled the “Natural Debt Limit”
(NDL), which is the term used in the precautionary-savings literature for an analogous
debt limit that private agents impose on themselves when they can only using non-statecontingent assets to try to smooth consumption (see Aiyagari (1994)). The NDL is given
by the growth-adjusted annuity value of the primary balance in the state of fiscal crisis.
The “history of events” leading to a fiscal crisis has non-zero probability
(although it could be a very low probability) as long as that crisis state is an event within
the support of the probability distribution of the primary balance, and as long as there are
non-zero conditional probabilities of moving into this crisis state from other realizations
of the primary balance. Under these conditions, the government knows that there is some
probability that it could suffer a fiscal crisis in the future, and to ensure it can pay for its
minimum level of outlays it must not hold more debt than it could service then.
Since the NDL is a time-invariant debt level that satisfies the government budget
constraint with revenues and outlays set at their minimum, it follows that the NDL
implies that the government remains able to service its debt even in a state of fiscal crisis.
Thus, the NDL that a government imposes on itself in order to self-insure so as to rule out
a collapse of public outlays below its tolerable minimum also allows that government to
offer lenders a credibly commitment to remain able to repay its debt in all states of
nature.

17
To turn the above notions of the NDL and its implied credible commitment to
repay into operational concepts, we need to be specific about the factors that determine
the probabilistic dynamics of the components of the primary balance. On the revenue
side, the probabilistic processes driving tax revenues reflect the uncertainty affecting tax
rates and tax bases. These processes have one component that is the result of domestic
policy variability and the endogenous response of the economy to this variability, and
another component that is largely exogenous to the domestic economy (which typically
results from the nontrivial effects of factors like fluctuations in commodity prices and
commodity exports on government revenues). The one-sector version of the MO model
used in this paper incorporates explicitly the second component.2
On the expenditure side, government expenditures adjust largely in response to
policy decisions, but the manner in which they respond varies widely across countries.
Industrial countries tend to display countercyclical fiscal policies while fiscal policy in
emerging markets is generally procyclical (as the recent literature on procyclical fiscal
policy has shown). In addition, the “adjustment” or minimum level of public outlays to
which the government can commit to adjust in a fiscal crisis is particularly important for
determining the NDL and the sustainable debt ratios in the MO model.
Labeling the fiscal-crisis level (or lowest realization) of the government revenueGDP ratio as tmin and the minimum level of the ratio of outlays to GDP that the
government can commit to deliver as gmin (for gmin < tmin), it follows from the government
budget constraint in (4) that the NDL is the value of b* given by:

2

Note that the exogenous determinants of public revenue dynamics can be important even in economies
that have successfully diversified their exports away from primary commodities. In Mexico, for example,
oil exports are less than 15 percent of total exports but oil-related revenues still represent more than 1/3 of
public sector revenue.

18

bt +1 ≤ b* ≡

t min − g min
r −γ

(5)

This NDL is lower for governments that have (a) higher variability in public revenues
(for example, if fiscal revenue follows a symmetric Markov chain that obeys the rule of
simple persistence, the value of tmin can be written as a multiple of the standard deviation
of public revenues and hence lower values of tmin reduce the debt limit), (b) less
flexibility to adjust public outlays, and (c) lower growth rates or higher real interest rates.
The NDL represents a credible commitment to repay in the sense that it ensures
that the government remains able to repay even in a state of fiscal crisis for a given
known stochastic process driving revenues and a given policy setting the minimum level
of outlays. However, this should not be interpreted as suggesting that the need to respect
the NDL rules out the possibility of sovereign default. Default triggered by “inability to
pay” remains possible if there are large, unexpected shocks that drive revenues below
what was perceived to be the value of tmin or if the government turns out to be unable to
reduce outlays to gmin when a fiscal crisis hits. In addition, default triggered by
“unwillingness to pay” remains possible since the NDL is only an ability to pay criterion
that cannot rule out default for strategic reasons. Later in Section 4 we explore an
extension of this framework that incorporates default risk into the basic MO setup.
Consider a government with exogenous, random fiscal revenues (say, for
example, oil export revenues) and an ad-hoc smoothing policy rule for government
expenditures, such that gt = g (for g≥ gmin) as long as bt+1 ≥ b*, otherwise gt adjusts to
satisfy condition (4). By (4) and (5), if at a particular date the current debt ratio is below
b* and the realization of the revenue-output ratio is tmin, the government finances g by

19
increasing bt+1. In contrast, if at some date the current debt ratio is at b* and the
realization of revenues is tmin, (4) and (5) imply that gt=gmin.
In a simple example with zero initial debt, it is straightforward to show that if the
government keeps drawing the minimum realization of public revenue, it will take the T
periods that satisfy the following condition for the government to hit the NDL:
T

R
g − g min
=
γ 
g − t min
 

(6)

This result indicates that, in the worst-case scenario in which revenues remain "almost
surely" at their minimum, the government can access the debt market to keep the ratio of
public outlays at the level g for a longer period of time the larger is the excess of
"normal" government outlays over minimum government outlays relative to the excess of
normal outlays over the minimum level of revenues. Thus, the government uses debt to
keep its outlays as smooth as possible given its capacity to service debt as determined by
the volatility of its public revenues, reflected in the value of tmin , and its ability to reduce
public outlays in a fiscal crisis, reflected in the value of gmin .
It is critical to note that the key element of the expenditure policy is not the level
of gmin per se but the credibility of the announcement that outlays would be so reduced
during a fiscal crunch. The ability to sustain debt and the credibility of this
announcement depend on each other because a government with a credible ex ante
commitment to major expenditure cuts during a fiscal crisis can borrow more and access
the debt market for longer time, and hence, everything else the same, this government
faces a lower probability to be called to act on its commitment. In a more general case in
which public revenue is not an exogenous probabilistic process but it is in part the result

20
of tax policies and their interaction with endogenous tax bases, the credibility argument
extends to tax policy. Governments that can credibly commit to generate higher and less
volatile tax revenue-output ratios will be able to sustain higher levels of debt, and to the
extent that this helps the economy produce stable tax bases it helps support the credibility
of the government’s ability to raise revenue.
The condition defining the NDL in (5) has a similar form as the formula for
calculating sustainable debt ratios under the long-run method: b =

t−g
. However, the
r −γ

implications for assessing fiscal sustainability under the two methods are sharply
different. In general, the long-run deterministic rule will always identify as sustainable a
debt-output ratio that is unsustainable once uncertainty of the determinants of the fiscal
balance and the NDL are taken into account. This is because the long-run method
ignores the role of the volatility of the elements of the fiscal balance, while in the MO
model one finds that, everything else the same, governments with less variability in tax
revenues can sustain higher debt ratios.
Consider the case of two governments with identical long-run averages of tax
revenue-output ratios at 20 percent. The tax revenue-output ratio of government A has a
standard deviation of 1 percent relative to the mean, while that of Government B has a
standard deviation of 5 percent relative to the mean. Assuming for simplicity that the
distributions of tax revenue-output ratios are Markov processes with tmin set at two
standard deviations below the mean, the probabilistic model would compute the natural
debt limit for A using a value of tmin of 18 percent, while for B it would use 10 percent.
The deterministic long-run method yields the same debt ratio for both governments and
uses the common 20 percent average tax revenue-output ratio to compute it. In contrast,

21
the MO method would find that debt ratio unsustainable for both governments and would
produce a debt limit for B that is lower than that for A.
Another important difference between the two methods is in the way that the MO
method views the debt limit vis-à-vis the way in which the long-run method views the
steady-state debt ratio. In the long-run analysis, the debt ratio is viewed as either a target
ratio to which a government should be forced to move to, or as the anchor for a target
primary balance-GDP ratio that should be achieved by means of a policy correction. In
contrast, in the MO method condition (5) defines only the maximum level of debt.
Unless the NDL binds, this maximum level of debt is not the equilibrium or sustainable
level of debt that should be issued by the government (although it clearly plays a central
role in determining both). Depending on the probabilistic and policy assumptions driving
revenues and expenditures (and, generalizing condition (5), depending also on the
stochastic processes of the real interest rate and output growth), a country can have levels
of debt lower (even much lower) than this critical level, and may take a very long time on
average to enter a state of fiscal crisis or even never arrive at it.
The MO methodology models uncertainty in the form of discrete Markov
processes. Given information on the current stock of public debt, the current tax
revenue-GDP ratio and the assumed behavioral rules for government outlays and
statistical moments of the public revenue process, the model produces conditional oneperiod-ahead and unconditional long-run distributions of the debt-output ratio, as well as
estimates of the average number of periods in which b* is expected to be reached from
any initial bt. Again, depending on the nature of the stochastic processes and policy rules

22
of revenues and outlays, it may take a few quarters to hit the debt ceiling on average or it
may take an infinite number of quarters to do it
4.

Results of the MO Method for Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica & Mexico

This Section applies the MO method described in the last section to the cases of
Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica and Mexico. The Section begins with a brief review of the
recent growth performance and evolution of public debt, public revenues and public
expenditure ratios in these countries. This review serves to identify key parameters
needed to simulate the debt dynamics and solve for natural debt limits.
Review of Growth Performance and Fiscal Dynamics
The growth performance of the four countries examined in this study over the last
two decades was weak. As shown in Table 1, average growth in GDP per capita for the
period 1981-2000 ranged from a minimum of 0.5 percent in Brazil to a maximum of 1.25
percent in Costa Rica. These countries grew at faster rates in the past. Taking averages
starting in 1961, the smallest average per-capita GDP growth rate was 1.8 percent for
Costa Rica and the largest was 2.6 percent for Brazil. Given the apparent structural
breaks in the trend of GDP per capita of these countries since the early 1980s, we conduct
our public debt analysis under a baseline growth scenario that uses 1961-2000 average
growth rates, and compare the results with a scenario that views the growth slowdown of
the last two decades as permanent by using 1981-2000 average growth rates.
Reliable cross-country estimates of public debt stocks and interest rates on public
debt at the general government level are hard to obtain. We use the figures documented
in IMF (2003b) for ratios of public debt to GDP for the period 1990-2002. As shown in
Table 1, the mean debt-GDP ratios for the full sample range from 33.7 percent in

23
Colombia to 49.5 percent in Costa Rica. However, these full-sample averages hide the
fact shown in Figure 1 that debt ratios have been growing rapidly (except in the case of
Costa Rica, where the ratio has been fairly stable but also fairly high). If we split the
sample to create averages for 1990-1995 and 1996-2002, we find that the mean debt
ratios of Brazil, Colombia and Mexico increased by about 10 percentage points between
the first period and the second periods. By the end of the sample period, all four
countries displayed debt ratios of about 50 percent (see Figure 1). The key question to
answer is therefore whether a debt ratio of 50 percent is consistent with fiscal solvency
given the pattern of growth and interest rates and the volatility of fiscal revenues that
these countries face.
Real interest rates on public debt are hard to measure because of differences in
maturity, currency denomination, indexation factors, and residence of creditors for the
various debt instruments that each country issues, and also because of the existence of
time-varying default and exchange-rate risk premia. One useful proxy is the measure of
sovereign risk proposed by Neumeyer and Perri (2003), which is the spread of the
EMBI+ index relative to the U.S. T-Bill rate deflated by an estimate of expected inflation
in the U.S. GDP deflator. The sample period of this measure is relatively short (starting
in 1994) and biased because it includes mainly observations for a turbulent period in
world capital markets. Still, this measure of real interest rates on public debt shows
substantial premia over the world’s risk free rate (the average real interest rates including
the risk premia for a quarterly sample from 1994:1 to 2002:2, are 12.9 percent for Brazil
and 10.3 percent for Mexico). The real interest rate on debt instruments will deviate from
these figures to the extent that (a) debt instruments are domestic rather than external, (b)

24
debt is denominated in domestic currency rather than in foreign currency or in terms of
an indexation factor, and (c) the debt instruments have liquidity or transactions value for
the holders. The lower bound of the interest rate on public debt is set by the real interest
rate on U.S. public debt. The 1981:1-2000:4 average of the U.S. 90 day T-bill rate
deflated by observed U.S. CPI inflation is about 2.8 percent.
Given the above considerations, we consider two interest rate scenarios in our
calculations. The baseline scenario considers a real interest rate of 5 percent, which
incorporates a small long-run default risk premium of about 2.2 percentage points above
the U.S. T-bill rate. The alternative is a high-real-interest-rate scenario in which the real
interest rate is set at 8 percent (i.e., the long-run default risk premium is about 5.3
percentage points above the T-bill rate). In both scenarios we remain relatively
optimistic about growth prospects, using average growth rates for the period 1961-2000.
The measure of public revenues that we need to isolate for conducting the debt
analysis is the total of all tax and non-tax government revenues excluding grants. For
government expenditures we require the total non-interest government outlays (including
all expenditures and transfer payments and excluding all forms of debt service). Once
again, limitations of the existing international databases make it difficult to retrieve
consistent measures of these variables that apply at the level of the entire non-financial
public sector and, in the case of the outlays, that include the annuity values of all
contingent liabilities resulting from obligations like banking- or pension-system bailouts.
We put together estimates of the revenue and outlay ratios for the four countries under
study by combining data from IMF (2003b) and World Development Indicators (see the
footnotes to Table 1 for details). The former shows data for the non-financial public

25
sector but it does not separate interest and non-interest expenditures for some countries.
The latter separates interest and non-interest expenditures but reports data only for the
central government. Thus, the revenue and expenditures data are not exactly comparable
across countries.
The average ratios of total public revenue to GDP during the period 1990-2002
ranged from 12.6 percent in Colombia to 23 percent in Mexico (Table 1). Turning to
examine the volatility of public revenues, Costa Rica displays the lowest coefficient of
variation in the revenue-output ratio, at 5.4 percent of the mean. The coefficient of
variation of revenues is similar in Colombia and Mexico (8.9 and 8 percent respectively).
Brazil shows the highest coefficient of variation of public revenues at 14.1 percent.
Interestingly, the country with the lowest coefficient of variation in public revenues
(Costa Rica) is also the one with the highest average public debt-GDP ratio.
The average of total non-interest outlays as a share of GDP is very similar in
Brazil, Costa Rica and Mexico, at about 19 percent. The average outlays ratio for
Colombia is much lower, at 12.8 percent, but this is one of the measures that applies only
to the central government, so the actual ratio for the non-financial-public sector must be
higher. With regard to the variability of non-interest outlays, Mexico shows the smallest
coefficient of variation (about 4 percent), followed by Costa Rica (10 percent). Brazil
and Colombia show the highest coefficients of variation in the outlays ratio, at about 14
percent for both.
Natural Debt Limits: Baseline Scenario and Two Alternatives
Table 1 reports three sets of calculations of natural debt limits for Brazil,
Colombia, Costa Rica and Mexico. The baseline scenario considers the 1961-2000

26
average growth rates of GDP per capita and a 5 percent real interest rate. The growthslowdown (GS) scenario uses the 1981-2000 average growth rates (with the real interest
rate still at 5 percent). The high-real-interest-rate (HRIR) scenario uses a real interest
rate of 8 percent (with the growth rates set at the 1961-2000 averages).
The baseline scenario differs from the other two because it is designed to produce
a coefficient of fiscal adjustment that yields an NDL equal to the largest debt ratio
observed for each country in the 1990-2002 period. Table 1 reports this coefficient of
“implied fiscal adjustment” in terms of how many standard deviations relative to the
mean of non-interest outlays are needed to yield a debt limit equal to maximum observed
debt (given the data for means and coefficients of variation of revenues and outlays, the
average growth rates, the real interest rate, and assumed floors of public revenue equal to
two standard deviations below the corresponding means). The Table also shows the
implied minimum ratio of outlays to GDP resulting from the coefficient of fiscal
adjustment. The GS and HRIR scenario keep the same fiscal adjustment coefficient and
just alter either the growth rate or the real interest rate.
The public debt-GDP ratios of the four countries under study peaked at similar
levels during the 1990-2002 period (ranging from 50 percent in Colombia to 56 percent
in Brazil). The coefficients of implied fiscal adjustment reported in Table 1 show that, in
order to produce NDLs that can support these high levels of debt, three of the four
countries (Brazil, Colombia and Mexico) need credible commitments to undertake large
cuts in outlays if they were to hit a fiscal crisis. The adjustment measures 2 standard
deviations below the mean of non-interest government outlays in Mexico, 2.3 in
Colombia and 2.6 in Brazil (which are equivalent to cuts relative to the average outlays-

27
GDP ratios of 1.5, 4 and 6.7 percentage points respectively). The fact that these
adjustments are outside the two-standard-deviation threshold of the data for non-interest
outlays of the previous decade suggests that the probability that the governments could
produce these large expenditure cuts if they needed to act on their commitment is low.
The situation in Costa Rica seems more favorable. Costa Rica can support a
credible commitment to repay a debt-output ratio as large as 53 percent of GDP with a
fiscal adjustment of 1.2 standard deviations below the mean of non-interest outlays
(which is equivalent to about 2 percentage points of GDP). Thus, the model is consistent
with the data in predicting that Costa Rica, the country with less volatility in public
revenues, should be the one that has a better chance of sustaining a high debt ratio. This
is the case even though Costa Rica’s growth rate is the same as Colombia’s and is lower
than the growth rates in Mexico and Brazil by 0.4 and 0.7 percentage points respectively.
The potential dangers of using the Blanchard ratios for conducting debt
sustainability analysis are illustrated in the baseline results. The case of Mexico is
particularly striking. The Blanchard ratio, which would compute a sustainable debt ratio
using the difference between the average public revenue and the average government
outlays, yields a debt ratio of about 132 percent, nearly 2.5 times larger than the NDL
produced by the MO model. In the case of Costa Rica, the Blanchard ratio also exceeds
the NDL but by a very small margin. In contrast, in the cases of the two countries where
complying with the NDLs would require the largest expenditure cuts (i.e., where the
consistency of the high debt ratio with fiscal solvency is more questionable), the
Blanchard ratio yields public debt ratios so low that are of little practical relevance. The
Blanchard ratio for Brazil is 3.5 percent and for Colombia the ratio is negative, at –5.3

28
percent (because in the data the average outlays exceed the average revenues by 0.16
percentage points of GDP). In these cases the Blanchard ratio would be switched to its
alternative interpretation, where a target debt ratio would be chosen and the Blanchard
ratio would then be used to set an average primary fiscal balance that the governments
should aim to obtain by adjusting fiscal policy.
Consider next the natural debt limits in the GS and HRIR scenarios. If the growth
slowdown of the last two decades persists, and even assuming that the coefficients of
fiscal adjustment were to remain as high as estimated in the baseline scenario, the current
debt ratios would exceed the natural debt limits of all four countries by large margins.
The situation of Brazil would be particularly compromised, because the current debt ratio
of 56 percent would exceed the maximum debt ratio consistent with a fully credible
commitment to repay in the GS scenario by nearly 26 percentage points of GDP.
The HRIR scenario, in which for example a retrenchment of world capital
markets, increased long-run default risk, or the pressure of large fiscal deficits in
industrial countries push the real interest rate on emerging markets public debt to 8
percent, has even more damaging effects. In this case, even if the growth rates recover to
the 1961-2000 averages and even with the large fiscal adjustment coefficients set in the
baseline scenario, the natural debt limits of all four countries fall to a range between 25.2
percent for Brazil to 27.4 percent for Costa Rica. Notice, however, that the prediction of
the model is not that an increase of the interest rate to 8 percent would trigger immediate
fiscal crises in all four countries. For a fiscal crisis to occur immediately, the increase in
the interest rate would have to be once-and-for-all and permanent. A transitory hike in
the real interest rate could be absorbed in an analogous manner as a transitory downturn

29
in public revenues, and hence a fiscal crisis would only be triggered after a sufficiently
long sequence of adverse shocks.
This last observation highlights again the fact that the NDL is not (in general) the
same as the sustainable or equilibrium level of debt, which is determined by the dynamics
driven by the government budget constraint. We turn now to study these dynamics.
Debt Dynamics
The simulations of debt dynamics consider a grid of public debt-GDP ratios that
spans the interval from 0 to the NDL (the model assumes that if the government budget
constraint yields negative debt at any time, the corresponding fiscal surplus is instead
rebated to the private sector as a lump-sum transfer). The dynamics of sustainable debt
can be traced from any initial public debt ratio in this interval. However, one needs to be
careful in studying the long-run dynamics of debt ratios because this basic version of the
MO model features at least two long-run distributions of public debt, one converging to 0
and the other to the NDL. Which of these two distributions is attained in the long run
depends on initial conditions.
The prediction that the long-run debt ratio is not determined within the model
(i.e., that the long-run debt ratio depends on initial conditions) is not a peculiarity unique
to the MO model. An outcome like this is the key prediction for debt dynamics of the
classic tax-smoothing framework of Barro (1979), and it is also in line with the findings
on Ramsey optimal taxation problems in which smooth taxes are optimal taxes (see
Chapter 12 of Ljungqvist and Sargent (2000)).
The stochastic processes of public revenues used in the simulations are
characterized by time-invariant Markov chains. The Markov chains are defined by three

30
objects: an n-element vector of realizations of the revenues, t, an nxn transition
probability matrix, P, and a probability distribution for the initial value of the realization
of revenues, π0. The typical element of P, Pij , indicates the probability of observing
revenues t=tj in the next period given that revenues are t=ti in the current period.
For each country, the vector of realizations of revenues has 5 elements (n=5). The
lowest value of t is set two standard deviations below average revenues in each of the
four countries under analysis. We use Tauchen’s (1986) univariate quadrature method in
order to construct the rest of the elements of t and the matrix P so as to approximate the
first-order autocorrelation and standard deviation of public revenues observed in the data.
The stochastic simulations require also that we generate a T-period time series of
realizations of revenues, i.e. t1, t2, ... tT, drawn from the Markov vector t. This time series
is constructed using realizations of a uniform random variable u in [0,1] that indicates
how to pick one realization of tax revenue in period t+1 given the realization at time t.
The tax revenue at t+1, tj say, is determined according to:
j

j +1

l =1

l =1

∑ Pi,l < u ≤∑ Pi ,l
or tj = t1 if u<Pi1
The first application of the stochastic simulations is illustrated in Figure 2,
which shows the number of periods that it takes to hit a fiscal crisis (i.e., to hit the NDL)
for the country-specific calibrated parameters and seven initial debt ratios that span the
range between 0.25 and the maximum debt ratio observed in each country in the 19902002 sample. From each initial condition of the debt ratio, there are different stochastic
paths that public debt, revenues and outlays can follow in the future, and each of these
paths features a different number of periods to hit a fiscal crisis. The tall bars in the

31
figure report the average time to a fiscal crisis from 1000 simulations of the public-debt
dynamics induced by the government budget constraint in equation (4). The simulated tax
revenues correspond to the realizations of revenues drawn from the Markov chains
calibrated to the revenue processes of each country (see Table 1 for the corresponding
averages and coefficients of variation). Depending on initial conditions, there are
simulation in which a fiscal crisis never occurs (particularly for low initial debt ratios).
In these cases, the average measure of time to fiscal crisis would go to infinity, and hence
is omitted from the charts.
The short bars in the plots show the minimum possible number of periods before
hitting the fiscal crisis. This extreme adverse scenario corresponds to simulations of debt
dynamics under the assumption that, in every period, the government draws the lowest
realization of the public revenue contained in the vector of realizations of revenues.
The top two graphs in Figure 2 show that in Brazil and Colombia the mean time
to a fiscal crisis is high (15 years or more) for an initial debt ratio equal to 0.25. A fiscal
crisis can occur much sooner on average (in less than 2.5 years) when then initial debt
ratio is around 0.5. The difference between the mean and extreme time to hit a fiscal
crisis is larger in Brazil than in Colombia for all initial debt ratios. Furthermore, the
extreme scenario indicates a shorter time to a fiscal crisis in Brazil than in Colombia
regardless of the initial debt ratio. This is because the lowest realization of revenues are
calibrated to be two standard deviations below the mean, so the higher volatility of
revenues in Brazil implies that the crisis-level of revenues for Brazil is more distant from
the mean than for Colombia.

32
The bottom two graphs in Figure 2 (for the cases of Costa Rica and Mexico) serve
to illustrate how uncertainty affects the dynamics of public debt and the fact that the NDL
is not in general the same as the equilibrium or sustainable debt. The fact that these plots
only show bars for the mean time to a fiscal crisis for high debt ratios (above 50 percent)
indicates that in the sampling of 1000 stochastic simulations starting from debt ratios
below 0.5, there were many cases in which the debt ratio converged to zero instead of
reaching the NDL. Consider for example the initial debt ratio of about 0.35 in the plot
for Costa Rica. The extreme measure of time to a fiscal crisis shows that a fiscal crisis
will occur after 10 years of experiencing realizations of revenues two-standard-deviations
below the mean. However, in the 1000 stochastic simulations used to calculate the mean
time to a fiscal crisis, only about half of the simulations reached the NDL and the rest
converged to a zero public debt position in the long run. Similarly, for an initial debt
ratio of 0.4, the debt ratio never reached the NDL in 127 out of 1000 simulations. Thus,
the Costa Rican and Mexican cases illustrate examples in which the sustainable debt
dynamics deviate sharply from the NDL.
Figure 3 shows a sample of simulated time series of the public debt ratio and
illustrates further how much the NDL and the sustainable debt ratios differ. The figure
shows 50 simulations of debt ratios all starting from a common initial ratio of 0.35, using
the parameter values calibrated to Costa Rica. At each date t, a random draw of public
revenues, along with the date-t debt and the fiscal rules for public outlays, are used to
determine the value of the debt at t+1. Notice that, whereas for some paths the debt ratio
increases rapidly to reach the NDL, for other paths it takes a long time to reach it and for
other paths the debt goes to zero. As explained above, for a large range of initial values

33
of public debt the model predicts that debt ratio will reach the debt limit while for other
initial values the debt ratio goes to zero. This implies that for starting values of the debt
ratio above 0.35, the fraction of paths driving the debt to its maximum level increases and
for starting values below 0.35 that fraction decreases.
Default Risk
Up to this point we followed the methodology proposed by Mendoza and Oviedo
(2004) in which sovereign default was set aside to focus on modeling the optimal debt
policy consistent with fiscal solvency and an ad-hoc rule smoothing public outlays.
Default risk was only taken into account in setting the value of the long-run real interest
rate used to solve for the NDLs and the debt dynamics (5 percent in the benchmark case,
8 percent in the high-interest-rate scenario). However, time-varying default risk premia
are an important feature of public debt in emerging markets. It may make sense for a
government to conduct a forward-looking debt sustainability exercise in which it assumes
that default risk is time invariant as a benchmark scenario, but it is important to study
how the results change when time-varying default risk is introduced.
One important limitation of the analysis of default risk is that existing theoretical
models of default on optimal sovereign debt contracts face serious challenges in
explaining observed debt ratios. The canonical model of Eaton and Gersovitz (1981)
considers a risk-neutral lender and a risk-averse borrower that has the option of
defaulting at the cost of facing permanent exclusion of the debt market. The lender is
willing to take on the risk of default by charging a rate of interest that incorporates a
premium consistent with the probability of repayment (as implied by a standard arbitrage
condition between the expected repayment on defaultable debt and the return on risk-free

34
bonds). There are well-known theoretical problems with this setup, related to the classic
Bulow-Rogoff critique showing that the threat of exclusion may not be credible because
of the option to enter in deposit contracts with lenders, but even if the model were not
affected by these problems, recent quantitative studies show that models in the EatonGersovitz tradition support very small debt ratios of less than 10 percent of GDP (see
Arellano (2004)). This is because the models yield probabilities of default that increase
too rapidly at very low levels of debt.
Given the above difficulties with the theory of endogenous default risk, we follow
a pragmatic approach that takes into account the same risk-neutral lender of the EatonGersovitz model but incorporates an exogenous probability of repayment calibrated to
match observed default risk premia in emerging markets. The arbitrage condition of the
risk-neutral lender implies:
Rw
Rw
R (bt ) =
=
,
λ (bt ) exp(−abt )

a>0

(7)

In this expression, Rw is the gross world risk-free real interest rate and λ(bt) is the
probability of repayment (i.e., 1-λ(bt) is the probability of default). The repayment
probability is modeled as an exponential probability distribution exp(-abt), where the
curvature parameter a determines the speed at which the repayment probability falls as
debt increases.
The exponential formulation of default risk has the advantage that it is consistent
with two key properties of the endogenous default probability of the Eaton-Gersovitz line
of models: (a) the probability of default is increasing and convex on the level of debt and
(b) the probability of default is zero if the stock of debt is zero. The formulation fails to

35
reproduce the property of the Eaton-Gersovitz setup that the probability of default
approaches 1 for a finite “rationing” level of debt at which debtors always find it
preferable to default than to repay (the exponential probability of default approaches 1
asymptotically as debt goes to infinity). However, the formulation still allows for values
of a that yield very large risk premia for high levels of debt comparable to those observed
in the data.
We calibrate the value of a so that the arbitrage condition in (7) holds taking as
given the EMBI+ country risk premium and the public debt ratio observed in Mexico in
1998 (the year of Mexico’s maximum debt ratio in the 1990-2002 sample). Mexico’s
debt ratio in 1998 was bt = 0.549 and the real interest rate that the country faced on this
debt, measured as the U.S. 90-day T-bill rate plus the EMBI+ spread, was R(bt) = 10.48
percent. The risk-free rate (i.e., the real U.S. 90-day T-bill rate) was Rw =3.2 percent.
Plugging these figures into (7) and solving for a yields a = 0.124. Interestingly, the
observed maximum debt and the real interest rate with default premium for Brazil in the
year 2002 are very similar to Mexico’s 1998 figures (Brazil’s debt ratio was 0.56 and the
real interest rate with default risk was 10.8 percent). This suggests that using a common
value of a for the four countries under study is not a bad first approximation.
As we show below, default risk has two important implications for the analysis of
sustainable debt based on the MO model. First, it lowers the levels of NDLs, since the
real interest rates considered in Table 1 are lower than those resulting in the worst state of
nature with default risk. Second, it alters the dynamics of public debt, since the rate of
interest now increases with the level of debt. These two effects result in lower NDLs,
reduced levels of sustainable debt and faster convergence to states of fiscal crisis.

36
Table 2 shows the effects of introducing time-varying default risk in the
calculations of NDLs.3 In all the estimates shown in this Table, the risk free rate is set at
the 1990-2002 average of the real 90-day T-bill rate, which is 2.36 percent, and the
curvature parameter of the probability of repayments is kept at a = 0.124.
The first panel of Table 2 shows how the benchmark estimates of NDLs change
when default risk is introduced. These benchmark estimates take the same growth rates
and minimum levels of public revenues and outlays as in the benchmark scenario of
Table 1. The resulting NDLs are significantly smaller (by 17 to 26 percentage points of
GDP) than those in the benchmark case without default risk. Note that this sharp decline
of the NDLs occurs despite the fact that the risk-free rate at 2.36 percent is about half the
long-run real interest rate used in the benchmark scenario of Table 1. The repayment
probabilities at 96 percent and the default risk premia around 4.35 percent are similar
across countries. The NDLs in this case ensure that governments would be able to repay
even during a fiscal crisis, but they still may choose to default on debt ratios about 0.33
with 4 percent probability.
The second panel of Table 2 shows how NDLs change in the growth slowdown
scenario (which is perhaps more relevant since the data used to calibrate the risk free rate
and the repayment probability function are for the 19901-2002 period). Again, relative
to the growth slowdown scenario of Table 1, we are lowering the risk-free rate from 5 to
2.36 percent and introducing time-varying default risk. To isolate the contribution of the
latter, the third panel of Table 2 shows the NDLs obtained using the growth rates of the

3

Note that with default risk, the constant rate of interest in the denominator of the formula for the NDL is
replaced with the interest rate including default risk defined in equation (7). Since this interest rate depends
on the level of debt, the NDL is now the solution to a non-linear equation.

37
growth slowdown scenario but assuming that there is no default risk so that countries can
borrow at the 2.36 percent risk free rate. Since this rate is about half the one used in
Table 1, we obtain very high NDLs (ranging from 73 to 152 percent of GDP).
Two comparisons are interesting to make using the second and third panels of
Table 2. First, the fact that the NDLs of the growth slowdown scenario in Table 1
(ranging from 30 to 45 percent of GDP) are much smaller than those of the no-defaultrisk case in panel 3 of Table 2, shows that our strategy of setting a long-run real interest
rate of 5 percent as a proxy for default risk in the estimates of Table 1 was not a bad
approximation. Second, the calculations of NDLs of the second and third panel differ
only because the second incorporates the time-varying default risk premium (i.e., both
have the same risk-free rate of 2.36 percent). Since the NDLs without time-varying
default risk are 3 to 5 times larger than those with default risk, this comparison shows
that default risk has major implications for estimates of NDLs.
The last panel of Table 2 re-computes the required adjustments in outlays (i.e. the
values of gmin) needed to support the observed maximum debt ratios of each country in
the 1990-2002 sample as NDLs taking into account time-varying default risk. The
adjustments in outlays are significantly larger than those reported in Table 1. Measured
in standard deviations, the required adjustment in outlays exceeds the two-standard
deviation threshold for all countries and it is larger for Mexico than for the other
countries. Measured in terms of percentage points of GDP, the adjustments rank from
9.4 and 6 percentage points for Brazil and Colombia respectively to about 7 percentage
points for Costa Rica and Mexico. This ranking suggests again that the debt positions of

38
Brazil and Colombia are more difficult to reconcile with fiscal solvency considerations
than those of Costa Rica and Mexico.
Figure 4 illustrates the implications of default risk for the dynamics of public debt
reflected in the measures of time to hit a fiscal crisis. The average time to hit a fiscal
crisis is generally lower once the fact that the default risk premium rises with the level of
debt is considered. Moreover, default risk produces debt dynamics that hit NDLs more
often. This can be seen in the plots for Costa Rica and Mexico. In Costa Rica’s plot, for
example, an initial debt ratio of 40 percent produced at least some stochastic simulations
in the sampling of 1000 runs in which the debt vanished when we use a fixed interest
rate. With default risk, however, all 1000 stochastic simulations eventually hit the NDL
and on average it takes about 9 years for the economy to hit a fiscal crisis.
5.

Conclusions, Caveats & Extensions

This application of the basic version of the MO model to the cases of Brazil,
Colombia, Costa Rica and Mexico shows that, with the exception of Costa Rica, public
debt ratios are already close to the natural debt limits that the governments of these
countries should respect if they wish to preserve smooth access to debt markets, and
protect the credibility of their perceived commitment to be able to repay their debts. This
is the result assuming a relatively optimistic scenario in which the growth slowdown of
the last two decades is reversed to recover the average per-capita growth rates observed
between 1961 and 2000, and the real interest rate remains at a relatively low level of 5
percent. This baseline scenario is also optimistic in that it requires credible commitments
to large cuts in government outlays which recent experience indicates are a lowprobability event (in terms of a coefficient of adjustment defined in units of standard

39
deviations relative to the mean of the ratio of outlays to GDP). Considering less
optimistic scenarios in which growth continues at the low trend of the last two decades or
the real interest rate increases to 8 percent, current debt ratios would exceed NDLs even
with the same tough stance to cut outlays in a state of fiscal crisis assumed in the
benchmark scenario.
The model predicts that the long-run dynamics of the public debt ratio are
undetermined (or more precisely that there is no unique, invariant limiting distribution for
the debt output ratio). This result needs to be considered carefully. On one hand, the
result does not require very strong assumptions: stochastic revenue, relatively inflexible
outlays and some limit to debt market access (whether an NDL or some an ad-hoc debt
limit). Also, the same outcome would result if we take outlays as given and consider
instead arguments for tax smoothing as in Barro (1979). If these are the maintained
assumptions of fiscal solvency analysis, the estimates of time to a fiscal crisis and the
stochastic simulations of debt ratios shown in Figures 2-4, together with the natural debt
limits, summarize all relevant information for assessing whether observed public debt
dynamics are sustainable. In addition, we would need to worry about how this nonstationarity property affects other statistical methods of debt sustainability analysis that
rely on the existence of a well-defined long-run distribution of debt.
On the other hand, we may question the validity of the assumptions that led to the
result of an indeterminate long-run distribution of debt. In Mendoza and Oviedo (2004)
we propose a setup in which government chooses its outlays optimally instead of setting
ad-hoc rules. In particular, we assume that government outlays yield utility to the private
sector, with the added feature of a Stone-Geary-like utility function that sets minimum

40
levels of government expenditures. We preserve the spirit of the “tormented insurer’s”
problem by keeping the assumption that the government aims to maximize its
contribution to private utility given the randomness of fiscal revenue and the fact that it
can only issue non-state-contingent debt. In this setup, the government has a
precautionary-savings motive that yields a unique, invariant limiting distribution of
public debt (resulting from the trade off between the need to self-insure against the risk of
persistent revenue shocks and the desire to smooth government outlays). The role of the
NDL is made clearer because the desire to respect it emerges from the fact that otherwise
the government is exposed to the risk of experiencing states in which its outlays can be
very low, and the government is very averse to these states because of the constantrelative-risk-aversion nature of the utility function of public expenditures.
Most of the analysis was conducted giving a limited role to default risk (by simply
setting a long-run, time-invariant real interest rate with a premium above the risk-free
rate). This was done following the approach of the MO model to provide a forwardlooking tool to design fiscal programs with the explicit intention of preserving the
government’s ability to fulfill its financial obligations. However, default risk is an
important feature of emerging markets of sovereign debt, and hence it is worth adding it
to the analysis of debt sustainability.
We introduced default risk by adopting an exogenous, exponential probability of
repayment that varies with the level of debt. We assumed that lenders are risk neutral
and hence are willing to take default risk by lending at a rate that incorporates the
premium that equates the expected return of risky lending with the risk-free interest rate.
The risk premium function was calibrated to match observed debt ratios and EMBI+

41
spreads on sovereign debt. Introducing this change into the basic version of the M-O
model produces smaller debt limits and speeds up the dynamics that lead to states of
fiscal crisis in which NDLs are reached. NDLs that completely ignore default risk
support dynamic paths of sustainable debt with much higher debt ratios than those
obtained when default risk is introduced. However, since the basic M-O model
approximated the long-run component of default risk by adding a constant premium
above the risk-free interest rate, it yields results for debt dynamics that are a much closer
approximation to those produced by the model with time-varying default risk than those
of a model that ignores default risk completely.
The application of the MO model undertaken in this paper did not consider two
other important elements of the dynamics of public debt in emerging economies: the
endogeneity of the tax bases and fiscal policy choices and the role of financial frictions
like liability dollarization. The endogeneity of the tax bases can be incorporated into the
structure of the MO model. This requires introducing the decisions of the private sector
with regard to the variables that determine the allocations and prices that conform tax
bases (such as labor supply, consumption, the current account and capital accumulation).
Similarly, liability dollarization can be introduced by modifying the model to incorporate
tradable and nontradable goods. The dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model
studied in Mendoza and Oviedo (2004) tries to make progress in these two directions.

42
References

Aiyagari, S. Rao (1994), “Uninsured idiosyncratic risk and aggregate saving,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(3):659-684.
Arellano, Cristina (2004), “Default Risk, the Real Exchange Rate and Income
Fluctuations in Emerging Economies”, mimeo, Duke University.
Barnhill Jr., Theodore M. and George Kopits (2003), “Assessing Fiscal
Sustainability Under Uncertainty,” IMF Working Paper No. WP/03/79.
Barro, Robert J, (1979), “On the Determination of Public Debt,” Journal of
Political Economy.
Blanchard, Olivier J., Jean-Claude Chouraqui, Robert P. Hagemann and Nicola
Sartor (1990), “The Sustainability of Fiscal Policy: New Answers to an Old Question,”
OECD Economic Studies, No. 15, Autumn.
Blanchard, Olivier J., (1990), “Suggestions for a New Set of Fiscal Indicators,”
OECD Working Paper No. 79, April.
Bohn, Henning, (1998), “The Behavior of U.S. Public Debt and Deficits,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, v. 113, August, 949-963.
Buiter, Willem H. (1985), “Guide to Public Sector Debt and Deficits,” Economic
Policy: An European Forum, Vol. 1., November, 13-79.
Calvo, Guillermo A., Alejandro Izquierdo and Ernesto Talvi (2003), “Sudden
Stops, the Real Exchange Rate and Fiscal Sustainability: Argentina’s Lessons,” mimeo,
Research Department, Inter-American Development Bank.
Chalk, Nigel and Richard Hemming (2000), “Assessing Fiscal Sustainability in
Theory and Practice,” IMF Working Paper No. WP/00/81.
Eaton, Jonathan, and Mark Gersovitz (1981), “Debt with Potential Repudiation:
Theoretical and Empirical Analysis,” Review of Economic Studies, v. XLVII, 289-309.
Hamilton, James D. and Marjorie A. Flavin (1986), “On the Limitations of
Government Borrowing: A Framework for Empirical Testing,” American Economic
Review, v. 76, September, 809-819.
International Monetary Fund (2002), “Assessing Sustainability,” SM/02/166.
(2003), “Sustainability-Review of Application and Methodological Refinements,”
mimeo, Policy Development and Review Department.

43
Ljungqvist, Lars and Thomas J. Sargent (2000), Recursive Macroeconomic
Theory, MIT Press.
Mendoza, Enrique G. Assaf Razin and Linda L. Tesar (1994), “Effective Tax
Rates in Macroeconomics: Cross-Country Estimates of Tax Rates on Factor Incomes and
Consumption,” Journal of Monetary Economics, December, v. 34:3, 297-323.
Mendoza, Enrique G. and Pedro Marcelo Oviedo (2004), “Fiscal Solvency and
Macroeconomic Uncertainty in Emerging Markets: The Tale of the Tormented Insurer,”
mimeo, Iowa State University.
Reinhart, Carmen, Kenneth S. Rogoff and Miguel A. Savastano (2003), “Debt
Intolerance,” mimeo, IMF Research Department.

44

Table 1. Fiscal Sector Statistics and Natural Debt Limits
(in percent of GDP)
Brazil 1/

Colombia 2/

Costa Rica 2/

Mexico 3/

Public debt
average
maximum
year of maximum

1990-2002
40.68
56.00
2002

1990-2002
33.71
50.20
2002

1990-2002
49.46
53.08
1996

1990-2002
45.92
54.90
1998

Public revenue
average
coeff. of variation
two-standard dev. Floor

1990-2002
19.28
14.13
13.83

1990-1999
12.64
8.86
10.40

1990-2000
20.28
5.41
18.09

1990-2002
22.96
8.04
19.27

Non-interest outlays
average
coeff. of variation

1991-1998
19.19
13.76

1990-1999
12.80
13.55

1990-2000
18.54
9.98

1990-2002
19.27
3.96

2.55
12.46

2.30
8.81

1.16
16.40

2.02
17.73

1.86
50.49
-5.29

1.83
53.31
54.80

2.20
54.92
131.54

Fiscal sector statistics

Implied fiscal adjustment 4/
Implied minimum non-interest outlays

Benchmark Natural Debt Limits
(1961-2000 growth rates, 5 percent real interest rate)
Growth rate
2.55
Natural debt limit
56.09
Blanchard ratio
3.52

Growth Slowdown Scenario
(1981-2000 growth rates, 5 percent real interest rate, benchmark fiscal adjustment)
Growth rate
0.48
1.05
1.25
Natural debt limit
30.34
40.10
45.10
Blanchard ratio
1.90
-4.20
46.36

0.83
36.96
88.52

High Real Interest Rate Scenario
(1961-2000 growth rates, 8 percent real interest rate, benchmark fiscal adjustment)
Growth rate
2.55
1.86
1.83
Natural debt limit
25.19
25.81
27.39
Blanchard ratio
1.58
-2.70
28.16

2.20
26.53
63.55

Note: The source of public debt data is IMF, World Economic Outlook, October 2003. The sources
of revenue and non-interest outlays are as noted in country footnotes.
1/ Revenue data from IMF, World Economic Outlook, Oct. 2003., non-interest outlays data derived
from data for the Central Government in World Development Indicators.
2/ Revenue and non-interest outlays data for Central Government from World Dev. Indicators.
3/ Revenue and non-interest outlays data from IMF, World Economic Outlook, October, 2003.
4/ Implied fiscal adjustment is the number of standard deviations relative to the mean needed to
obtain a benchmark natural debt limit equal to the largest public debt ratio observed in the data.

45

Table 2. Natural Debt Limits with Default Risk
Brazil

Colombia

Costa Rica

Mexico

33.28
95.96
4.31

33.18
95.97
4.30

34.14
95.86
4.42

33.88
95.89
4.39

NDLs in the growth slowdown scenario with default risk
Natural debt limit
26.12
Probability of repayment
96.82
Default risk premium
3.37

30.38
96.31
3.93

32.12
96.10
4.16

29.12
96.46
3.76

NDLs in the growth slowdown scenario without default risk and risk free rate of 2.36 percent
Natural debt limit
72.95
121.60
152.30

100.80

Required fiscal adjustment to support observed maximum debt ratios as NDLS 2/
Natural debt limit
56.00
50.20
Probability of repayment
93.30
93.97
Default risk premium
7.35
6.57
Implied minimum non-interest outlays
9.82
6.85
relative to average outlays
-9.37
-5.95
in number of st. devs.
3.55
3.43

54.90
93.43
7.20
15.23
-4.04
5.30

Benchmark NDLs with default risk 1/
Natural debt limit
Probability of repayment
Default risk premium

53.08
93.64
6.95
14.12
-4.42
2.39

Notes: Calculations done as described in the text, using a risk free rate of 2.36 percent, which is the 1990-2002
average of the inflation-adjusted 90-day U.S. T-bill rate, and a curvature parameter for the risk function of
a =0.124, which was calibrated to match the EMBI+ spread and the debt ratios observed in Mexico in 1998.
1/ Based on the benchmark values of growth rates and minimum revenue and outlays shown in Table 1
2/ Values of minimum outlays required to support maximum debt ratios shown in Table 1 as NDLs in the setting
with default risk, using growth rates from the benchmark scenario.

46

Figure 1. Total Public Debt as a Share of GDP
60

55

50

45

40

35

30

25

20
1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

Brazil

Colombia

Costa Rica

Mexico

2000

2001

2002

47

48

49

