NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CAPITAL INCOME TAXATION IN THE GLOBALIZED WORLD
Assaf Razin
Efraim Sadka
Working Paper 10630
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10630
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2004

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2004 by Assaf Razin and Efraim Sadka. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Capital Income Taxation in the Globalized World
Assaf Razin and Efraim Sadka
NBER Working Paper No. 10630
July 2004
JEL No. F3, H2
ABSTRACT
The behavior of taxes on capital income in the recent decades points to the notion that international
tax competition that follows globalization of capital markets put strong downward pressures on the
taxation of capital income; a race to the bottom. This behavior has been perhaps most pronounced
in the EU-15 following the single market act of 1992. The 2004 enlargement of the EU with 10 new
entrants put a strong downward pressure on capital income taxation for the EU-15 countries. Tax
havens, and the inadequacy of cooperation among national tax authorities in the OECD in
information exchanges, put binding ceilings on how much foreign-source capital income can be
taxed. What then are the implications for the taxes on domestic-source capital income? The paper
demonstrates that even if some enforcement of taxation on foreign-source capital income is feasible,
a poor enforcement of international taxes would generate political processes that would reduce
significantly the domestic-source capital income taxation.
Assaf Razin
Eitan Berglas School of Economics
Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv 69978
ISRAEL
and NBER
razin@post.tau.ac.il
Efraim Sadka
Eitan Berglas School of Economics
Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv 69978
ISRAEL

Abstract
The behavior of taxes on capital income in the recent decades points to the notion
that international tax competition that follows globalization of capital markets put
strong downward pressures on the taxation of capital income; a race to the bottom.
This behavior has been perhaps most pronounced in the EU-15 following the single
market act of 1992. The 2004 enlargement of the EU with 10 new entrants put a strong
downward pressure on capital income taxation for the EU-15 countries. Tax havens,
and the inadequacy of cooperation among national tax authorities in the OECD in
information exchanges, put binding ceilings on how much foreign-source capital income
can be taxed. What then are the implications for the taxes on domestic-source
capital income? The paper demonstrates that even if some enforcement of taxation
on foreign-source capital income is feasible, a poor enforcement of international taxes
would generate political processes that would reduce significantly the domestic-source
capital income taxation.

1

Introduction

These days globalization across various economies is a universal phenomenon to reckon with.
Guillermo Calvo’s framework of his prolific research was, indeed, the constraints on economic
policy imposed by the integrated, and fluctuating, world capital market. Maurice Obstfeld
and Alan M. Taylor (2003) examine the historical development of globalization (in particular, international capital mobility) by political-economy forces. After World War I, “newly
or better-enfranchised groups such as the working classes" contributed to severely impede
capital mobility. The peace and prosperity that emerged following World War II, and that
1

intensified after the end of the cold war, unleashed political forces for freer capital mobility.
Nevetheless, the aging population (through falling birth rates and increased longevity) raises
the need for tax revenues by the welfare state. This chapter focuses on capital income taxation. Can high domestic capital taxes survive international tax competition brought about
by the recent widespread globalization?
Evidently, the answer is in the negative. As put succinctly by The Economist (31st
May, 1997, pp. 17-23):
“Globalization is a tax problem for three reasons. First, firms have more
freedom over where to locate... . This will make it harder for a country to tax
[a business] much more heavily than its competitors... . Second, globalization
makes it hard to decide where a company should pay tax, regardless of where
it is based... . This gives them [the companies] plenty of scope to reduce tax
bills by shifting operations around or by crafting transfer-pricing... . [Third],
globalization... nibbles away at the edges of taxes on individuals. It is harder to
tax personal income because skilled professional workers are more mobile than
they were two decades ago."
Aging puts downward pressures on the welfare state when the benefits granted by
it are financed by labor taxes (as demonstrated in Razin, Sadka and Swagel (2002)). Aging
may, however, theoretically, boost the size of the welfare state when capital income taxation
are employed to finance the benefits provided by the welfare state (see Razin, Sadka, and
Swagel (2003)). If this is the case, can capital income taxation indeed rescue the welfare
state with an aging population? Not necessarily, if strong international tax competition in
the era of globalization imposes severe constraints on capital income taxation, and thereby
put into question its standing in the public finance of the welfare state.

2

We develop in this Chapter a political economy model to assess how the forces of
globalization aﬀect the taxation of capital income.
The Chapter is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a simple analytical framework for the study of capital taxation in the presence of international capital mobility. In
particular, we analyze in this section the tax structure in the political-economy equilibrium.
In section 3 we apply the model for the analysis of international tax competition. Section 4
concludes.

2

International Capital Mobility: A Stylized PoliticalEconomy Tax Model
We present a stripped-down model of international capital mobility, which enables us to

explore key issues of international taxation, without being sidetracked by irrelevant complications. We consider an economy that lives for two periods, indexed by t = 1, 2. There is one
aggregate, all-purpose good in each period, serving for both consumption and investment.

2.1

Households

There are two types of workers: Skilled workers, who have high productivity, and provide
one eﬃciency unit of labor per unit of labor time, and unskilled workers, who provide q < 1
eﬃciency units of labor per unit of time. Workers have one unit of labor time during each one
of the two periods of their life. They are born without skills and thus with low productivity.
In the first period, each worker chooses whether to get an education and become a skilled
worker, or instead remain unskilled.

3

There is a continuum of individuals, characterized by an innate ability parameter, e,
which is the time needed to acquire a skill. By investing e units of labor time in education,
in the first period, a worker becomes skilled; after which the remaining (1 − e) units of labor
time in the first period provide an equal amount of eﬃciency units of labor in the balance of
the first period. We assume that the individual also provides one eﬃciency unit of labor in
the second period.

We also assume a positive pecuniary cost of acquiring skills, γ, which

is not tax deductible.
Given these assumptions, there exists, again, a cutoﬀ level, e∗ , such that those with
education cost parameters below e∗ will invest in education and become skilled, whereas
everyone else remains unskilled.

The cutoﬀ level is determined by the equality between

the present value of the payoﬀ to education and the cost of education (including foregone
income):
·
(1 − τ L )(1 − q) w1 +

¸
w2
= (1 − τ L )w1 e∗ + γ,
1 + (1 − τ D )r

(1)

where wt is the wage rate per eﬃciency unit of labor in period t = 1, 2; r is the domestic
rate of interest; τ L is the tax rate on labor income (constant over time); and τ D is the tax
rate on capital income of residents from domestic sources (see below). Rearranging terms,
equation (1) yields:
·
e = (1 − q) 1 +
∗

¸
γ
w2 /w1
−
.
1 + (1 − τ D )r
(1 − τ L )w1

(2)

Note that the two taxes, the tax on labor income and the tax on capital income,
have opposite eﬀects on the decision to acquire skill.

The tax on labor income reduces

the foregone (net of tax) income component of the cost of education. It also reduces the
payoﬀ to education by the same proportion.1 Were the pecuniary cost γ equal to zero (or
else tax-deductable), the labor income tax would have no eﬀect on the decision to acquire
4

skill.

However, with a positive pecuniary cost of education, the labor income tax has a

negative eﬀect on acquiring skills: It reduces e∗ and, consequently, also the proportion of
the population who becomes skilled [namely, G(e∗ )]. On the other hand, the tax on capital
income has a positive eﬀect on education, because it reduces the (net-of-tax) discount rate;
thereby raising the present value of the future payoﬀ to education.
We assume for the sake of simplicity that the individual’s leisure time is exogenously
given. Nevertheless, total labor supply is distorted by the taxes, as can be seen from equation
(2). Note that there are G(e∗ ) skilled individuals and 1 − G(e∗ ) unskilled individuals in each
period. The labor supply of each one of the unskilled individuals, in eﬃciency units, is q,
in each period. Therefore, total labor supply in eﬃciency units of the unskilled individuals
is q[1 − G(e∗ )] in each period. However, a skilled individual devotes e units of her time in
the first period to acquire education, and hence works only 1 − e units of time in the first
period. Thus, the individual labor supply in the first period varies over e. The labor supply
R e∗
of skilled individuals is equal to 0 (1 − e)dG. Any skilled individual supplies as labor all of

her unit time in the second period. Thus, total labor supply (Lt ) in eﬃciency units in period

t = 1, 2, is given by:

L1 =

Z

0

e∗

(1 − e)dG + q[1 − G(e∗ )]

(3)

and
L2 = G(e∗ ) + q[1 − G(e∗ )].

(4)

For the sake of simplicity, assume that all individuals have identical preferences over
first and second-period consumption [c1 (e) and c2 (e), respectively], represented by a common,
concave utility function u[c1 (e), c2 (e)]. Each individual has initial income (endowment) in
the first period of I1 units of the consumption-capital good. The total amount of the initial
5

endowment (I1 , because the size of the population is normalized to one) serves as the stock
of capital employed in the first period. (This initial endowment is generated by past savings
or is inherited.) Because taxation of the fixed initial endowment is not distortionary, we
may assume that the government could eﬃciently tax away the entire value of the initial
endowments. Thus, an individual of type e faces the following budget constraints in periods
one and two, respectively:

c1 (e) + sD (e) + sF (e) = E1 (e) + T1 ,

(5)

c2 (e) = T2 + E2 (e) + sD (e)[1 + (1 − τ D )r]

(6)

and

+sF (e)[1 + (1 − τ F − τ ∗N )r∗ ],
where Et (e) is after-tax labor income, net of the cost of education, t = 1, 2, and where Tt is
a uniform lump-sum transfer (demogrant) in period t = 1, 2. That is:

and


 (1 − τ )(1 − e)w − γ for e 5 e∗
L
1
,
E1 (e) =

(1 − τ L )qw1
for e = e∗

 (1 − τ L )w2
E2 (e) =
 (1 − τ )qw
L

2

for e 5 e∗
for e = e∗

.

(7)

(8)

An individual can channel savings to either the domestic or foreign capital market,
because the economy is open to international capital flows. We denote by sD (e) and sF (e)
savings channelled by an e−individual to the domestic and foreign capital market, respectively. We denote by r and r∗ the real rate of return in these markets, respectively.2 The
6

government levies a tax at the rate τ D on capital (interest) income from domestic sources.
Capital (interest) income from foreign sources is subject to a non-resident tax at the rate of
τ ∗N , levied by the foreign government. The domestic government may levy an additional
tax on its domestic residents, on their foreign-source income at an eﬀective rate of τ F . Note
that τ F + τ ∗N is the eﬀective tax rate on foreign-source income of residents.
For the sake of brevity, we consider only the case of a capital-exporting country that
is, its national savings exceed domestic investment, with the diﬀerence (defined as the current
account surplus) invested abroad.3 (The analogous case of a capital-importing country can
be worked out similarly.) By arbitrage possibilities, the net-of-tax rate of interest, earned at
home and abroad, are equalized; that is:
(1 − τ D )r = (1 − τ F − τ ∗N )r∗ .

(9)

Employing (9), one can consolidate the two one-period budget constraints (5) and (6)
into one life-time budget constraint:

c1 (e) + Rc2 (e) = E1 (e) + RE2 (e) + T,

(10)

R = [1 + (1 − τ D )r]−1 ,

(11)

where

is the net-of-tax discount factor (which is also the relative after-tax price of second-price
consumption), and

T ≡ T1 + RT2
is the discounted sum of the two transfers (T1 and T2 ).4

7

(12)

As usual, the consumer maximizes her utility function, subject to her lifetime budget
constraint. A familiar first-order condition for this optimization is that the intertemporal
marginal rate of substitution is equated to the tax-adjusted interest factor:
MRS(e) ≡ u1 [c1 (e), c2 (e)] /u2 [c1 (e), c2 (e)] = 1 + (1 − τ D )r = R−1 ,

(13)

where ui denotes the partial-derivative of u with respect to its ith argument, i = 1, 2.
Equations (13) and (10) yield the consumption-demand functions c̄1 [R, E1 (e) + RE2 (e) + T ]
and c̄2 [R, E1 (c)+RE2 (e)+T ] of an e−individual. The maximized value of the utility function
of an e−individual, v[R, E1 (e) + RE2 (e) + T ], is the familiar indirect utility function.
Denote the aggregate consumption demand, in period t = 1, 2, by:
Z

1

c̄t [R, E1 (e) + RE2 (e) + T ]dG =
Ct [R, (1 − τ L )w1 , (1 − τ L )w2 , T ] ≡
0
Z e∗
c̄t [R, (1 − τ L )(1 − e)w1 + R(1 − τ L )w2 + T − γ]dG +

(14)

0

[1 − G(e∗ )]c̄t [R, (1 − τ L )qw1 + R(1 − τ L )qw2 + T ],

where use is made of equations (7) and (8). Note that e∗ is a function of (1-τ L )w1 and of
Rw2 /w1 [see equation (2)].

2.2

Producers

All firms are identical and possess constant-returns-to-scale technologies, so that with no
further loss of generality we assume that there is only one firm, which behaves competitively.
Its objective, dictated by the firm’s shareholders, is to maximize the discounted sum of the
cash flows accruing to the firm. We assume that the firm finances its investment by issuing
debt. In the first period, it has a cash flow of (1 − τ D )[F (K1 , L1 ) − w1 L1 ] − [K2 − (1 −
8

δ)K1 ] + τ D δK1 , where F (·) is a neo-classical, constant-returns-to-scale, production function.
In the second period, the firm has an operating cash flow of (1 − τ D )[F (K2 , L2 ) − wL L2 ] +
(1 − δ)K2 + τ D δK2 . We denote by δ both the physical and the economic rate of depreciation
(assumed for the sake of simplicity to be equal to each other). This depreciation rate is also
assumed to apply for tax purposes. We essentially assume that the corporate income tax
is fully integrated into the individual income tax. With such integration of the individual
income tax and the corporate tax, there is no diﬀerence between debt and equity finance.
Specifically, we assume that the individual is assessed a tax (at the rate τ D ) on the profits
of the firm, whether or not they are distributed, and that there is no tax at the firm level.
The firm’s discounted sum of its after-tax cash flow is therefore:

π = (1 − τ D )[F (K1 , L1 ) − w1 L1 ] − [K2 − (1 − δ)K1 ] + τ D δK1

(15)

+{(1 − τ D )[F (K2 , L2 ) − w2 L2 ] + τ D δK2 + (1 − δ)K2 }/[1 + (1 − τ D )r].
Note that K1 is the pre-existing stock of capital at the firm, carried over from period zero. Maximizing (15) with respect to K2 , L1 and L2 yields the standard marginal
productivity conditions:

FL (K1 , L1 ) = w1 ,

(16)

FL (K2 , L2 ) = w2 ,

(17)

FK (K2 , L2 ) − δ = r.

(18)

and

Note that although taxes do not aﬀect the investment rule of the firm, nevertheless,
the taxes are distortionary. To see this distortion, consider the intertemporal marginal
9

rate of transformation (MRT ) of second-period consumption (namely, c2 ) for first-period
consumption (namely, c1 ). It is equal to (1 − δ) + FK (K2 , L2 ) : When the economy gives
up one unit of first-period consumption in order to invest it, then it receives in the second
period the depreciated value of this unit (namely, 1−δ), plus the marginal product of capital
(namely, FK ). From equation (18), we can see that:

MRT = 1 + r.
However, from equation (13) we can see that the common intertemporal marginal rate of
substitution of all individuals is equal to:

MRS = 1 + (1 − τ D )r.

Hence, the MRT need not equal the MRS; in fact, the MRT is larger than the MRS when
the tax rate on capital income from domestic sources (τ D ) is positive. This violates one of
the Pareto-eﬃciency conditions.
Note that the firm has pure profits (or surpluses) stemming from the pre-existing
stock of capital, K1 . We denote this surplus by π 1 ,which is equal to:

π 1 = (1 − τ D )[F (K1 , L1 ) − δK1 − w1 L1 ] + K1 .

(19)

The surplus consists of the after-tax profit of the first period, plus the level of the pre-existing
stock of capital. Given the constant-returns-to-scale technology, the firm’s after-tax cash
flow consists entirely of this surplus, that is π = π 1 . This equality follows by substituting the
Euler’s equation, F (K2 , L2 ) = FK (K2 , L2 )K2 + FL (K2 , L2 )L2 , and the marginal productivity
conditions, equations (17) and (18), into equation (15). Naturally, the government fully
taxes away the surplus π1 , before resorting to distortionary taxation (via the various τ 0 s).
10

2.3

Policy Tools: Taxes, Transfers and Debt

The government has a consumption demand of CtG in period t = 1, 2. We assume that the
government can lend or borrow at market rates.

With no loss of generality, we assume

that the government operates only in the foreign capital market, that is, its first-period
budget surplus is invested abroad; for concreteness, suppose that this is positive. Therefore,
the government does not have to balance its budget period by period, but only over the
two-period horizon:

C1G + R∗ C2G + T1 + R∗ T2 =

(20)

τ L w1 L1 + τ L R∗ w2 L2 + τ D R∗ rSD + τ F R∗ r∗ SF
+π1 + τ D [F (K1 , L1 ) − δK1 − w1 L1 ],
where:

SD =

Z

1

sD (e)dG

(21)

0

is the aggregate private savings, channelled into the domestic capital market;

SF =

Z

1

sF (e)dG

(22)

0

is the foreign aggregate private savings, channelled into the foreign capital market; and
R∗ = [1 + (1 − τ ∗N )r∗ ]−1
11

(23)

is the foreign discount rate faced by the domestic economy. Note that the foreign government
levies a tax at the rate τ ∗N on interest income from the home government budget surplus
invested abroad.
The left hand side of equation (20) represents the present value of the government
expenditures on public consumption and transfers, discounted by the factor R∗ , which is the
interest factor at which the domestic economy can lend. The right-hand side of equation
(20) represents the present value of the revenues from the labor income taxes, the interest
income taxes, and the pure surplus of the firm.
Market clearance in the first period requires that:
CA + C1 + C1G + K2 − (1 − δ)K1 + G(e∗ )γ = F (K1 , L1 ),

(24)

where CA is the current account surplus.5 Market clearance in the second period requires
that:
C2 + C2G = F (K2 , L2 ) + (1 − δ)K2 + CA[1 + (1 − τ ∗N )r∗ ].

(25)

Note that the tax at the rate τ ∗N is levied by the foreign country on the interest income
of the residents of the home country, and must therefore be subtracted from the resources
available to the home country.
In order to get one present-value resource constraint, we can substitute the current
account surplus, CA, from equation (24) into equation (25)

C1 + R∗ C2 + C1G + R∗ C2G + K2 − (1 − δ)K1 +
G(e∗ )γ = F (K1 , L1 ) + R∗ F (K2 , L2 ) + R∗ (1 − δ)K2 .

12

(26)

2.4

Median Voter Equilibrium

In this model, e is the only characteristic that distinguishes one individual from another.
Recall that the lower is e, the more able is the individual and more objectionable she is
for tax hikes. We therefore take the median voter to be the decisive voter. Therefore, the
political-economy equilibrium tax rates maximize the (indirect) utility of the median voter.
Policy tools at the government’s disposal are inter alia labor income taxes and capital income
taxes. The derivation of the equilibrium is relegated to the appendix.
The equilibrium tax on capital income is implicitly given by the following condition
1 − δ + FK (K2 , L2 ) = 1 + (1 − τ ∗N )r∗ .

(27)

The political economy equilibrium stock of capital [implicitly determined from equation (27) ascertains the aggregate production eﬃciency theorem (Diamond and Mirrlees
(1971)): The intertemporal marginal rate of transformation [which is 1 − δ + FK (K2 , L2 )]
must be equated to the world intertemporal marginal rate of transformation faced by the
domestic economy [which is equal to 1 + (1 − τ ∗N )r∗ ].
This rule can be seen in Figure 1, where first-period total (private and public) consumption (C1 + C1G ) is plotted on the horizontal axis and second-period total consumption
(C2 + C2G ) on the vertical axis. Suppose that L1 , L2 and e∗ were already set at their
political-economy equilibrium levels. The production possibility frontier is described by the
curve ABD whose slope is equal (in absolute value) to (1 − δ) + FK (K2 , L2 ). The political
equilibrium stock of K2 is HD, which gives rise to the consumption possibility frontier given
by MBN. Any other level of K2, say H 0 D, must generate a lower consumption possibility
frontier - the curve M 0 B 0 N 0 .
Employing the firm’s investment rule [the marginal productivity condition (18)] and
the arbitrage condition [equation (9)], we can conclude from equation (27) that:
13

r = (1 − τ ∗N )r∗ .

(28)

That is, the pre-tax domestic rate of interest (r) must be equated to world rate of interest
faced by the domestic economy, which is the world rate of interest, net of the source taxes.
Equations (9) and (28) yield the political-economy equilibrium tax on foreign-source income:
τ F = τ D (1 − τ ∗N ).

(29)

Thus, in the political-economy equilibrium, the home country imposes the same tax
rate (τ D ) on foreign-source income from capital as on domestic-source income from capital,
except that a deduction is allowed for foreign taxes paid (and levied at source): One dollar
earned abroad is subject to a tax at source at the rate τ ∗N ; the after-foreign-tax income,
which is 1 − τ ∗N , is then taxed by the home country at the rate τ D . The total eﬀective tax
rate paid on foreign-source income is therefore:
τ F + τ ∗N = τ D + τ ∗N − τ ∗N τ D .

3

International Tax Competition and Capital Taxation

A critical issue of taxation, in the era of the globalization of the capital markets, is the
ability, or the inability, of national governments to tax their residents on foreign-source
capital income. An editorial in the New York Times (May 26th, 2001) underscores the
severity of this issue:
“From Antigua in the Caribbean to Nauru in the South Pacific, oﬀshore tax
havens leach billions of dollars every year in tax revenues from countries around
the world... . The Internal Revenue Service estimates that Caribbean tax havens
14

alone drain away at least $70 billion per annum in personal income tax revenue.
The OECD suspects the total worldwide to be in the hundreds of billions of
dollars... the most notorious tax havens do not even extend their minimal tax
rates to their own citizens or domestic enterprises. Their primary aim is to
encourage and profit from individuals and businesses seeking to evade taxes in
their own countries."
It is fairly safe to argue that tax havens, and the inadequacy of cooperation among
national tax authorities in the OECD in information exchanges, put binding ceilings on how
much foreign-source capital income can be taxed. What then are the implications for the
taxes on domestic-source capital income?
Consider the extreme situation where the home country cannot eﬀectively enforce any
tax on foreign-source capital income of its residents. That is, suppose that τ F = 0. Then
we can see from the political-equilibrium tax rule applying to foreign-source capital income,
equation (29), that the tax rate on domestic-source capital income, τ D , would be set to
zero too. Thus, the capital income tax vanishes altogether. And even if some enforcement of
taxation on foreign-source capital income is feasible so that τ F does not vanish altogether,
it still follows from equation (29) that τ D = τ F /(1 − τ ∗N ); so that a low τ F generates a
low τ D . Indeed, a poor enforcement of international taxes would generate political processes
that would reduce significantly the domestic-source capital income taxation.
The unwillingness of foreign tax authorities to cooperate with the home tax authority
in helping to enforce capital taxation on the capital income of residents of the home country
originating abroad usually stems from their desire to lure capital to their countries. This is
what is meant by tax competition. They further compete with the home country by lowering
the source tax (τ ∗N ) they levy on the capital income of the residents of the home country.
We thus capture formally the eﬀect of tax competition by assuming that τ ∗N falls, as foreign
15

governments lure capital to their countries. Then we can see from equation (28) that r, the
net (of depreciation δ) marginal product of domestic capital, must rise. With diminishing
marginal product, this must happen when the stock of domestic capital falls and more capital
flows abroad. Hence, the tax base for the domestic-source capital income shrinks, thereby
turning the enforcement of foreign-source capital income all the more acute.

4

Conclusion

The behavior of taxes on capital income in the recent decades points to the notion that international tax competition that follows globalization of capital markets put strong downward
pressures on the taxation of capital income; a race to the bottom. This behavior has been
perhaps most pronounced in the EU-15 following the single market act of 1992. [See, for
example, Razin and Sadka (forthcoming)]. The 2004 enlargement of the EU with 10 new
entrants put a strong downward pressure on capital income taxation for the EU-15 countries.
Table 1 describes the corporate tax tates in the 25 EU countries in 2004. It reveals a marked
gap between the original EU-15 countries and the 10 accession countries. The latter have
significantly lower rates. Estonia, for instance, has no corporate tax; the rates in Cyprus and
Lithuania are 15%; and 19% in Latvia, Poland and Slovakia. In sharp contrast, the rates in
Belgium, France, Germany, Greece and Italy and the Netherlands range from 33% to 40%.
Eurpe’s new constitution, adopted by the European Summit in Brussels, June 19,
2004 (the text, however, has yet to be ratified in all 25 member states), cannot stop the tax
competition process because the new constitution retains the national veto in tax cooperation, and harmonization. But, there is a flexibility for some countries which want to push
ahead tax harmonization, to do so. Indeed, Germany and France are currently pushing some
of the new entrants to raise their corporate tax rates. Tax competition within the EU is in
sharp contrast to the US federal fiscal system, where the capital income tax (on individuals
16

and corporations) is federal and not state specific. But both the EU and the US are subject
to severe tax competition from the rest of the world.

5

Appendix: Derivation of the Political-Economy Equilibrium

The political-economy equilibrium tax rates maximize the (indirect) utility of the median
voter. Denoting the indirect utility function of the median voter by V, it is given by:

 v[R, (1 − eM )wN + RwN + T − γ] if eM < e∗
1
2
N
N
V (eM , R, w1 , w2 , T ) =

v[R, q(w1N + Rw2N ) + T ] if eM > e∗ ,

where wtN = (1 − τ L )wt is the after-tax wage per eﬃciency unit of labor in period t = 1, 2.
Policy tools at the government’s disposal are inter alia labor income taxes and capital
income taxes. We therefore assume that the government can eﬀectively choose the after-tax
wage rates (w1N and w2N ) and the after-tax discount factor (R). The government can choose
also T, the discounted sum of the lump-sum transfers (T1 and T2 ). Once w1N , w2N , R and T
are chosen, then private consumption demands [C1 (R, w1N , w2N , T ) and C2 (R, w1N , w2N , T )]
are determined. The cutoﬀ level, e∗ , and labor supplies, L1 and L2 , are also determined as
follows:
e∗ (R, w1N , w2N ) = (1 − q)[1 + Rw2N /w1N ] − γ/w1N ,

L1 (R, w1N , w2N ) =

N
N
e∗ (R,w
Z1 ,w2 )

(1 − e)dG + q{1 − G[e∗ (q, w1N , w2N ]},

0

and
17

(20 )

(30 )

£
¤
L2 (R, w1N , w2N ) = G e∗ (R, w1N , w2N ) + q{1 − G[e∗ (R, w1N , w2N )]}.

(40 )

In choosing its policy tools (R, w1N , w2N , and T ) and its public-consumption demands
(C1G and C2G ), the government is constrained by the economy-wide ”budget” constraint (26),
where C1 , C2 , L1 , L2 and e∗ are replaced by the functions C1 (·), C2 (·), L1 (·), L2 (·) and
e∗ (·), given by equations (14) and (20 ) − (40 ), respectively. Note that the capital stock in the
first period (K1 ) is exogenously given. The capital stock in the second period (K2 ) must
satisfy the investment rule of the firm [equation (18)]. Note that because the economy is
fiinancially open, the individuals, by the arbitrage condition [equation (9)], are indiﬀerent
between chanelling their savings domestically or abroad. This means that the government
can choose K2 , and then r and the pre-tax wages (w1 and w2 ) are determined so as to clear
the capital market and labor market in each period through equations (18), (16) and (17),
respectively. This does not mean that the government actually chooses the stock of capital
(K2 ) for the firm, or the pre-tax wage rates (w1 and w2 ), or the domestic interest rate (r).
Rather w1 , w2 and r are determined by market clearance and the firm chooses K2 so as
to maximize its value. What we did is to determine K2 , w1 , w2 and r at levels which are
compatible with firm-value maximization and market clearance in the presence of taxes.
To sum up, the government in a political-economy equilibrium chooses C1G , C2G , R,
w1N , w2N , T and K2 , so as to maximize the utility of the median voter [as given by equation
(29)], subject to the economy-wide “budget” constraint, equation (26). Note that C1 , C2 ,
L1 , L2 and e∗ in the latter constraint are replaced by the functions C1 (·), C2 (·), L1 (·), L2 (·)
and e∗ (·), respectively. We can ignore the government budget constraint (20) by Walras Law.
Note that in this maximization, K2 appears only in the economy-wide “budget” constraint, equation (26). Thus, the first-order condition for the political-economy equilibrium
level of K2 is given by:

18

1 − R∗ FK (K2 , L2 ) − R∗ (1 − δ) = 0.
Note that this choice does not depend on whether the median voter is skilled or unskilled.
Substituting the firm’s investment rule, equation (18), and rearranging terms yield:
1 − δ + FK (K2 , L2 ) = 1 + (1 − τ ∗N )r∗ .

19

NOTES
1.

Evidently, if the tax is progressive, the payoﬀ would be reduced proportionally more

than the foregone-income cost.
2. These rates (r and r∗ ) hold in essence between periods one and two and we therefore
assign no time subscript (one or two) to these rates.
3. Evidently in a non-stochastic set-up like ours, the country is either capital exporter or
capital importer.
4. Note that even though T may seem at first glance to be dependent on τ D (through the
discount factor R), we may nevertheless assume that these are two independent policy tools
because the government can always change either T1 and T2 in order to keep T constant
when it changes τ D .
5. For notational simplicity, we assume that the net external assets are initially equal to
zero, so that there is no initial external debt payment term in the current account.

20

References
Diamond, Peter A., and James A. Mirrlees (1971). “Optimal Taxation and Public Production." American Economic Review (March and June).
Obstfeld, M., and Alan M. Taylor (2003). “Globalization and Capital Markets." In: Michael
D. Bordo, Alan M. Taylor and Jeﬀrey G. Williamson, eds., Globalization in Historical Perspective. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Razin, Assaf and Efraim Sadka, with the cooperation of Chang Woon Nam (forthcoming).
The Decline of the Welfare State: Demography and Globalization, MIT Press.
Razin, Assaf, Efraim Sadka and Phillip Swagel (2002). “The Aging Population and the Size
of the Welfare State.” Journal of Political Economy 110, 4 (August): 900-918.
Razin, Assaf, Efraim Sadka and Phillip Swagel (2004). “Capital Income Taxation under Majority Voting with Aging Population,” Review of World Economics (Weltwirtschftliches
Archiv) 140, 3.

21

Table 1: Statutory Corporate Tax Rates in the Enlarged EU, 2003
Country
Tax Rates (%)
Austria
34
Belgium
34
Cyprus*
15
Czech Republic* 31
Denmark
30
Estonia*
0
Finland
29
France
33.3
Germany
40
Greece
35
Hungary*
18
Ireland
12.5
Italy
34
Latvia*
19
Lithuania*
15
Luxembourg
22
Malta*
35
Netherlands
34.5
Poland*
27
Portugal
30
Slovakia*
25
Slovenia*
25
Spain
35
Sweden
28
UK
30
* New entrants.

22

Figure 1: The Optimal-tax
stock of capital ( K 2 )
Second-period
consumption
(C2 + C2G )

M’M
A
B
B’
H H’D

First-period consumption
N’ N
F ( K1 , L1 ) + (1 − δ ) K1

(C1 + C1G )

