NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ILLICIT DRUG USE AMONG ARRESTEES AND DRUG PRICES
Dhaval Dave
Working Paper 10648
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10648
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2004

Funding for this research was provided by a grant from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation’s Substance
Abuse Research Program to the National Opinion Research Center, University of Chicago. The author would
like to thank Michael Grossman and Jeff DeSimone for valuable comments and suggestions. Financial
support from the John M. Olin Foundation is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Dhaval Dave. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Illicit Drug Use Among Arrestees and Drug Prices
Dhaval Dave
NBER Working Paper No. 10648
August 2004
JEL No. I1
ABSTRACT
Previous studies, by relying on nationally representative surveys, have overlooked the important fact
that use of addictive substances is not uniformly distributed; subgroups of hardcore users account
for most of the drug consumption. This study employs the Drug Use Forecasting system to analyze
the demand for cocaine and heroin by arrestees, employing objective indicators of use based on
urinalysis. The data are repeated city cross-sections, and panel data methodologies are employed to
control for policy endogeneity. Cocaine and heroin prices have a negative effect on the probability
of use even among this group of heavy users. Results indicate that subjective, self-reported measures
of participation are likely to be under-reported, which may impart bias to estimates of the price
elasticity. The own-price cocaine participation elasticity is about n0.17, and the own-price heroin
participation elasticity is about n0.09 for arrestees. This contemporaneous elasticity understates the
full effect, and the long-run price elasticity is about twice the magnitude. Estimated cross-price
elasticities indicate that cocaine and heroin are economic complements. While these findings show
that higher penalties, enforcement, and supply reduction activities can discourage participation by
heavy users, the elasticities are smaller in magnitude relative to the estimates in the prior literature.
Dhaval Dave
University of Pennsylvania, Wharton School
and
National Bureau of Economic Research
365 Fifth Avenue, Suite 5318
New York, NY 10016-4309
ddave@gc.cuny.edu

1

1.

Introduction
The U.S. federal government spends approximately $19 billion a year on drug control

activities (Office of National Drug Control Policy, 2003).1 The portion of this budget allocated
towards demand reduction, including treatment and prevention, has remained relatively stable
over the past 15 years at around 31 %. Much of current drug control policy in the United States,
however, focuses on supply-reduction programs aimed at stopping the flow of drugs and
apprehending and punishing drug offenders. From an economic perspective, such drug
enforcement, by raising the cost of supplying drugs to the U.S. market, acts as a non-monetary
tax and increases the transaction price of drugs.2 By the law of the downward-sloping demand
function, the increase in price must reduce the consumption of illicit drugs. Hence, a critical
question concerns the extent to which drug use responds to prices, especially heavy or
problematic use. Since manipulating prices is one instrument of control that the public sector
can exercise on the market for addictive unhealthy substances, empirical estimates of the relation
between price variations and illicit drug consumption are key to informing and shaping public
policy.
This paper estimates the empirical relationship between the prices of cocaine and heroin
and objective indicators of their use. Cocaine and heroin prices are computed from the System
to Retrieve Drug Evidence (STRIDE), comprised of purchases made by Drug Enforcement
Administration (DEA) agents during undercover operations. The set of outcomes is the
percentage of arrestees testing positive for each substance, derived from the Drug Use
1

State and local spending on drug control amounted to an additional $16 billion in 2000.
Costs for drug suppliers increase because: 1) they are forced to use underground distribution
and transportation channels that can be hidden from authorities, 2) some drug shipments are
captured by the authorities and destroyed, 3) suppliers are forced to use the threat of violence
2

2

Forecasting (DUF) program. Panel data methodologies are used to identify the empirical link
between cocaine and heroin prices and these indicators of use.
While this study is related to the new and growing empirical literature dealing with the
price sensitivity of illegal drug consumption, it improves upon the prior estimates in a number of
ways. The illegal drug use indicators employed in much of the literature are based on selfreports and may be measured inaccurately. This is especially true for heroin use, which is
virtually non-existent in national surveys.3 In contrast, the indicators used in the present study
are objective measures of cocaine and heroin participation, obtained via urinalysis.4 Moreover,
much of the literature, by relying on self-reported national surveys, does not consider
consumption by certain subgroups like the homeless or arrestees, who may behave very
differently from the population at large. The persons sampled in DUF are not representative of
the general population. In particular, the focus is on persons arrested for any offense. These
individuals are much more likely to be hardcore users of drugs than an individual selected at
random. Thus, they also impose the heaviest costs on society and are the target of much illegal
drug policy. Drug use trends based on national surveys may also paint an incomplete picture.
For instance, results from the National Household Surveys of Drug Abuse show that past month
illicit drug use declined steadily from 14.1 % in 1979 to 6.2 % in 1998. In contrast, more
objective indicators of heavy drug consumption show an opposite trend. For instance, drugrelated hospital emergency department episodes increased from 145 (per 100,000 people) in
1978 to 230 in 2001. There were a total of 19,698 deaths from drug-induced causes in 2000, an
or other relatively costly methods to enforce their contracts rather than use the court system,
and 4) because of fines and imprisonment.
3
Less than 0.1 percent of the sample reported current heroin use in the 2002 National Survey
on Drug Use and Health.

3

increase of 177 % from 1981. In 2000, the overall cost of drug abuse to society was estimated at
$161 billion, an increase of almost 60 % from 1992. These trends suggest that while casual drug
use may be declining, use among heavy consumers on the other tail of the distribution may be
rising.
Many studies based on survey data also rely on the respondent’s state of residence as the
geographic unit. Consequently, when estimating the price elasticity of demand, these researchers
have had to employ a state-average price despite the fact that there is considerable inter-city
variation in drug prices even within a given state. This measurement error may lead to biased
estimates. The present study overcomes this limitation by computing and merging drug prices at
the city level. This analysis further exploits the time-series of city cross sections and estimates
various fixed-effects specifications to control for unmeasured factors that may be correlated with
price and consumption. In addition, lagged and lead price series are used in the context of panel
data techniques to inform on the possibility of policy endogeneity. Another deficiency in the
existing literature concerns cross price elasticities of demand. There are very few studies that
analyze the effects of changes in the price of one drug on the consumption of another, and so
estimates of these cross-price effects are limited. The present study estimates whether heroin
and cocaine are substitutes or complements using the aforementioned objective drug use
outcomes.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 reviews prior empirical
studies dealing with the price sensitivity of the consumption of illegal drugs. Section 3 describes
the data assembled for use in this study. Section 4 outlines the analytical models that guide the

4

Arrestees are also asked to report on their own drug use. Comparing these self-reports to the
urinalysis data can inform on the magnitude and importance of any measurement error.

4

empirical specifications. Section 5 discusses the econometric strategy for estimating the models.
Section 6 presents the price elasticities of demand for arrestees. Section 7 discusses these results
and offers some concluding remarks.
2.

Prior Studies
An editorial in Drug and Alcohol Review (1999) stated that while economics has a

critical influence in the development of policies in other areas, “illicit drugs is one of the few
remaining areas yet to be significantly influenced by advances in this discipline.” Yet, there is a
rapidly growing empirical literature by economists dealing with the price sensitivity of
consumption of illegal drugs.5 The inherent difficulty of measuring consumption and price of an
activity that does not enter the official market is apparent. These demand studies primarily draw
on illegal drug prices derived from local purchases made by drug enforcement agents while
undercover. The studies typically combine these prices with self-reported measures of drug use
from such national surveys as the National Household Survey of Drug Abuse and Monitoring the
Future. The outcomes employed in these analyses are usually self-reported past year or past
month participation and frequency of use given positive participation.
The early conventional view that the demand for addictive substances, such as illicit
drugs, did not respond to price was increasingly challenged by subsequent studies. Silverman
and Spruill (1977) implicitly estimate the long-run price elasticity of demand for heroin at –0.25,
based on monthly aggregated data for 41 poor, non-white Detroit communities from November
1970 to July 1973. Van Ours (1995) analyzes data on opium consumption and the number of

5

Economists have also studied various issues concerning the current policy towards illicit drugs
versus a regime where drugs are legalized. See, for example, MacCoun and Reuter (2001),
Miron (2001), Becker, Grossman, and Murphy (2003), Kuziemko and Levitt (2001), and Lee
(1993).

5

opium users in the Dutch East Indies (now Indonesia) for the period 1923 to 1938. He estimates
a short-run price elasticity of demand of –0.70 and a long-run price elasticity of demand of –
1.00. Bretteville-Jensen and Sutton (1996) estimate the price-responsiveness for heroin to be –
1.23, based on a sample of non-dealing heroin users who participated in a needle exchange
program in Oslo, Norway.
Several authors, in more recent studies, have estimated price elasticities using national
survey data. Grossman and Chaloupka (1998) analyze the demand for cocaine by young adults
(ages 17-29) in the Monitoring the Future (MTF) panels using the rational addiction framework.
The data employed in their study consists of panels formed from nationally representative crosssectional surveys of high school seniors conducted between 1976 and 1985, with the last followup conducted in 1989. Grossman and Chaloupka find that annual participation and frequency of
use given positive participation respond negatively to the price of cocaine. The long-run price
elasticity of participation is estimated at –1.00, and the long-run price elasticity of frequency
given participation is estimated at –0.35. They also find that current consumption is positively
affected by past consumption, consistent with the hypothesis that cocaine is an addictive good,
and also positively affected by future consumption, consistent with the rational addiction model.
Chaloupka, Grossman, and Tauras (1999) estimate cocaine price elasticities for past
month and past year outcomes based on the 1982 and 1989 MTF cross-sectional surveys of high
school seniors. Their results indicate a price elasticity of past-year participation of –0.89 and an
elasticity of past-month participation of –0.98. The corresponding frequency elasticities are –
0.40 and –0.45 respectively. However, DiNardo (1993) finds that past-month participation by
high school seniors does not respond to price in a similar MTF sample for the years 1977 – 1987.

6

Based on pooled data from the 1988, 1990, and 1991 National Household Surveys of
Drug Abuse (NHSDA), Saffer and Chaloupka (1999a) estimate models for all ages. They find
that the annual participation price elasticity for cocaine is –0.55 and that for heroin is –0.90.
Monthly participation price elasticities for cocaine and heroin are –0.80 and –0.36 respectively.
Using the same sample, Saffer and Chaloupka (1999b) estimate these price elasticities separately
for demographic subgroups. They find that the cocaine price elasticity is insignificant for blacks
and Asians, -1.83 for Native Americans, and between –0.5 and –0.8 for white males, Hispanics,
women, and youth. For heroin, the price elasticity is estimated at –1.63 for white males, -0.62
for females, -0.36 for youth, and close to zero for all others. DeSimone and Farrely (2001)
analyze data from 1990-1997 NHSDA. They estimate a past-year cocaine participation elasticity
of –0.41 for individuals between the ages of 18 to 39. However, similar models for persons ages
12 to 17 do not yield significantly negative price effects.
While the weight of the evidence from these studies suggests that cocaine and heroin use
do respond negatively to price, there is little consensus about the magnitudes of the own-price
elasticities. Studies that investigate the cross-price responsiveness of various illicit substances
are sparse. Saffer and Chaloupka (1999a, 1999b), based on NHSDA data, estimate demand
functions for cocaine, heroin, marijuana, and alcohol that contain the money price of each
substance except marijuana. Their results show that these substances are economic
complements, such that an increase in the price of one decreases the consumption of all others.
The illegal drug use indicators in the studies just cited may be plagued by inaccuracies if
self-reports are subject to response error, and such surveys also fail to capture many hardcore

7

drug users.6 Caulkins (1996) indirectly estimates cocaine and heroin participation price
elasticities based on data from 1987 to 1991 for 24 cities represented in Drug Use Forecasting
(DUF). He uses as outcomes the percentages of persons arrested and brought to booking
facilities who tested positive for cocaine and heroin based on urine specimens. His price
elasticity estimates are -0.39 for cocaine and -0.28 for heroin, for arrestees. Invoking
assumptions concerning the fraction of drug users testing positive and arrests attributable to drug
use, other causes, and drug spending, Caulkins imputes general participation price elasticities
that are very large in absolute magnitude: -2.5 for cocaine and -1.5 for heroin. His models do not
control for time trends. Furthermore, the city-level drug price is treated as endogenous and
instrumented with the national price. Hence, the results reflect time-series variation between
prices and the drug use outcomes. The models also do not control for any other variables that
may have changed over time.
Crane, Rivolo, and Comfort (1997) employ aggregate time series from DUF in order to
estimate the price elasticity of demand for cocaine ranging from -0.29 to -0.63. This study also
fails to control for time trends. Hyatt and Rhodes (1995) find that cocaine price is negatively
related to the fraction of arrestees testing positive for cocaine, from DUF. While this study adds
city indicators to control for unobserved factors at the city level, it also does not control for time

6

Since drug use is significantly higher among respondents who live in households considered
unstable, the NHSDA’s bias towards sampling stable households is likely to overlook many
heavy drug users. Many studies have documented that respondents in the NHSDA understate
heavy drug use. The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Administration (SAMHSA) reports
that virtually no heroin addicts respond in the NHSDA. A comparison of heavy cocaine users in
the NHSDA with those in other sources shows a marked difference with respect to demographic
characteristics. In the NHSDA, incomes are higher, unemployment is lower, and fewer
respondents report using more than one drug. Estimates of heavy drug use reported in the
NHSDA are also difficult to reconcile with other data sources maintained by SAMHSA. See
Rhodes et al. (2001).

8

trends or any other factors that may have shifted over time. Furthermore, the price of cocaine is
not adjusted for inflation. Since year indicators are not included, this leads to biased estimates.
All of these studies which employ DUF to measure the price responsiveness of cocaine
and heroin estimate models that are misspecified due to lack of adequate controls. They also fail
to check or control for the possibility that policies which affect drug prices may themselves be
endogenous to the drug use outcomes. As a result, it is difficult to ascertain from these studies
whether the negative correlation between the outcomes and price represents a true causal effect
or whether it reflects a spurious correlation due to other unobserved factors. The specifications
in this study include a full set of city and time indicators and interactions between city indicators
and linear trends, along with various socio-economic variables, to control for unmeasured factors
that may be simultaneously correlated with price and consumption. A first-differenced
instrumental variables procedure is also implemented to account for potential endogeneity. None
of the studies reviewed has combined this fixed-effects methodology with objective measures of
drug use.
3.

Data
The empirical work is based on objective outcomes related to cocaine and heroin

consumption derived from the Drug Use Forecasting (DUF) program. The DUF program, which
is maintained by the National Institute of Justice, was established in 1987 to investigate the level
of drug use among booked arrestees in urban areas.7 Adults, 16 years of age and older, who are
arrested and brought to booking facilities in several cities across the U.S. are interviewed on a
voluntary basis, within 48 hours of their arrest, and asked to provide urine specimens. The
interview is usually conducted in about 20 minutes. Over 90 % of those approached agree to be

9

interviewed, while 80 % of them agree to provide urine specimens. There are no marked
differences between arrestees who agree and those who refuse to be interviewed with respect to
ethnicity, age, gender, race, employment, or reason for arrest (Chaiken and Chaiken, 1992).
Urine specimens are collected immediately after the interview and screening for various
substances is conducted off-site. Urinalysis can generally detect the use of drugs within the past
48 to 72 hours.
While DUF does not sample all arrestees brought to booking facilities, Hunt and Rhodes
(2001) suggest that it is reasonable to use the DUF sample to draw inferences about the general
arrestee population. Moreover, Rhodes and McDonald (1991) estimated that in 1989 the DUF
sample accounted for 90 % of cocaine consumption and virtually all of the heroin consumption
in the U.S. While these figures should be interpreted with care, it is apparent that the population
sampled by DUF includes more hardcore drug users. Because users involved in the criminal
justice system account for the majority of drugs consumed, the overall elasticities of the drugs
may be dominated by the price responsiveness of this sub-population (Caulkins, 2001). The data
used in the present study are annual aggregates from 39 large cities for the period 1988 to 2000.8
Until 1997, the DUF program collected information in 24 cities across the United States,
although the number of sites varies from year to year. In 1998 the program was expanded to
more cities, and a redesigned sampling frame based on probability based sampling of the adult

7

See Hunt and Rhodes (2001) for a detailed description of the DUF program.
The DUF cities are New York City, Washington D.C., Portland, San Diego, Indianapolis,
Houston, Ft. Lauderdale, Detroit, New Orleans, Phoenix, Chicago, Los Angeles, Dallas,
Birmingham, Omaha, Philadelphia, Miami, Cleveland, San Antonio, St. Louis, Kansas City, San
Jose, Denver, Atlanta, Albuquerque, Minneapolis, Sacramento, Tucson, Anchorage, Des
Moines, Laredo, Las Vegas, Oklahoma City, Salt Lake City, Seattle, Spokane, Honolulu,
Albany, and Charlotte.
8

10

male population was fully implemented in 2000; it is currently the Arrestee Drug Abuse
Monitoring system.9
Results from urinalysis are used to compute the percentage of arrestees in each city
testing positive for cocaine and the percentage testing positive for heroin.10 Approximately 40 %
of arrestees tested positive for cocaine in the sample, and approximately eight percent tested
positive for heroin. In addition to the urine tests, respondents are also asked to report on their
own drug use. Based on self-reports, variables measuring the percentage of arrestees who
admitted using cocaine or heroin in the past 72 hours are also created. About 21 % of the
arrestees reported using cocaine in the past 72 hours, and five percent reported using heroin.
These figures show the extent of under-reporting in these self-reports. The arrestees are also
asked to report whether they used cocaine and heroin in the past 30 days and the mean number of
days that each drug was used. From these questions, variables measuring the percentage of
arrestees reporting cocaine and heroin participation in the past 30 days and the mean number of
days in each city that cocaine and heroin were consumed by users are created. About 28 %
reported past month cocaine participation, and about six percent reported past month heroin
participation. Conditional on positive participation, cocaine was used on about 23 days and
heroin was used on about 17 days in the past month. Even from these self-reports, it is evident
that the sample in DUF is more representative of the heavy users. For instance, based on the
NHSDA in 1995, the average cocaine user consumed cocaine on 12 days and the average heroin
9

Restricting the data from 1988 to 1997 or deleting observations for the year 2000 does not
affect the results. Models that include the number of arrestees in the DUF sample as a fraction
of total arrests are estimated to account for the change in the sampling frame. Year effects will
capture any other breaks in the data that have occurred over time.
10
Urinalysis tests for all opiates instead of heroin specifically. While heroin is the most
commonly consumed opiate, the class of opiates may also include other drugs such as
morphine.

11

user consumed heroin on six days in the past month. Means for the DUF sample are presented in
Table 1.
Additional covariates are also defined based on the individual arrestee data. These
include the percent of arrestees in each MSA who are male, Black, other race, Hispanic, ages 16
to 24, ages 25 to 54, high school graduate, earned most of their income in the past month through
full-time employment, are married, and whose most serious offense charge was drug-related.
Since the outcomes are measured at the city or MSA level, additional MSA-level variables are
created and included in all models. Personal income per capita is derived from the Bureau of
Economic Analysis website and deflated by the national consumer price index reported by the
Bureau of Labor Statistics. In order to capture local labor market conditions, the unemployment
rate in each MSA is also included in all models. Data on unemployment are obtained from the
Bureau of Labor Statistics, and in some cases also calculated from the March supplements of the
Current Population Survey. Total MSA population is obtained from the U.S. Bureau of Census.
Indicators of local enforcement efforts are also appended to the DUF data set.11
Variables measuring the probability of arrest for drug possession and drug sale are computed
from the FBI’s Uniform Crime Reporting System. Ideally, the probability of arrest is
constructed by dividing the total number of arrests in each category by the total number of drug
users and dealers in the MSA or some proxy for total drug activity. However, as there are no
reliable estimates of the number of drug users and dealers by MSA, the denominator is proxied
by total MSA population and in some cases by the total number of arrests. Variables measuring
the total number of arrests in each MSA due to any drug possession, any drug sale or trafficking,

12

any drug-related violation, sale or trafficking in cocaine or opiates, and sale or trafficking in
marijuana are used to create the corresponding arrest rates.
Data on cocaine and heroin prices are computed from purchases made by undercover
drug enforcement agents. Information on these purchases including cost, weight, and purity is
recorded by the Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) in their System to Retrieve Information from
Drug Evidence (STRIDE). The advantage of STRIDE’s transaction-level data is that they
directly reflect prices on the street. These prices are expected to be relatively accurate because
any unreasonable price offer by a DEA agent may raise suspicion on the dealer’s part and
endanger the agent. However, because the transactions are of varying size and quality, the cost
of each drug must be standardized.
Standardized prices of one pure gram of cocaine and heroin in a given metropolitan area
for a given year are derived in the following manner:
(1)

Log Costijt = π0 + π1 (log Predicted Purityijt + log Weightijt) + π2j ∑ MSAj
+ π3t ∑ Yeart + π4jt ∑ MSAj * Yeart + υijt

The subscripts denote the ith transaction in the jth MSA for year t. Cost refers to the total cost of
the purchase, weight is the total gram weight of the purchase, and purity is the weight of the pure
drug found in the purchase as a fraction of the total purchase weight. MSA and Year refer to
dichotomous indicators of each, and MSA*Year refers to indicators of the interaction between
the two. Predicted Purity is obtained from a first-stage regression of actual purity on all of these
other explanatory variables. The price of one pure gram of the drug in MSA j for year t is then
imputed as:
11

Data in the Uniform Crime Reports are available at the county level. To obtain MSA-level
data, total arrests in each county are summed and aggregated for all counties represented in an

13

(2)

exp ( π0 + π2j + π3t + π4jt ) .

In the above procedure, purity is treated as endogenous because purchases may depend on
expected rather than actual purity (Caulkins, 1994). Identification is achieved by constraining
the coefficient on predicted purity to equal that on weight in the second-stage regression.12 In
this study, price series based on purity treated as exogenous and estimating (1) with the
coefficients unconstrained were experimented with in all models. There are no material changes
in the results or conclusions. STRIDE data are available from 1974 to 2001, and all years are
used to impute the price series for the periods represented in DUF. Excluding outliers, there are
93,784 cocaine transactions and 40,957 heroin transactions.13 In order to maximize the sample
size in subsequent estimation, prices that are missing in any given MSA for any given year are
imputed by the mean of the prices for all other available MSA’s in that particular state.14 Results
are not sensitive to this imputation. All price series are deflated by the national CPI. The mean
real price (in 1982-1984 dollars) of one pure gram of cocaine is $80.47. The mean real heroin
price is $490.18.
One of the advantages of this study is that the drug prices are computed and merged at
the city level. Many prior studies relying on national self-reported survey data used state-

MSA. Using state-level arrest variables does not materially affect results.
12
Equation (1) can be justified by defining the price of one pure gram of drug as:
Price = Cost / (Pure Quantity of Drug) π1 , where pure quantity is purity times total weight. Here
π1 captures any non-linear effects of quantity on price, for example due to quantity discounts. In
log-linear form, this is Log Price = Log Cost - π1 Log Purity - π1 Log Weight. It is assumed that
the standardized price varies between cities and over time. Thus, Log Price = a + b MSA + c
Year + d MSA*Year. Substituting this expression in the log-linear formulation results in an
estimable form, equation (1).
13
Transactions used in the imputation have a purchase cost of at least one dollar (zero cost
represents seizures and are thus excluded) and purity between zero and 100 %.
14
This imputation is more relevant for heroin prices due to more missing data; about eight
percent of the DUF sample are affected by this imputation. For cocaine, a little over one
percent of the DUF sample is affected.

14

average prices despite the fact that drug prices seem to vary widely from city to city. Granted
that there may still be substantial intra-city variation in drug prices at any given time, the
measurement error is likely to be much smaller than with state-level prices.
Kuziemko and Levitt (2001) find that STRIDE cocaine prices from 1986 through 1996
are positively related to state-level indicators of the certainty of punishment, measured by the per
capita number of drug arrests, and the severity of punishment, measured by the fraction of drug
arrests resulting in imprisonment. These findings suggest that illicit drug prices are responsive to
enforcement and apprehension, instruments of current drug control policy. Basov, Jacobson, and
Miron (2001) argue that due to the illicit, secretive nature of the drug trade, both production and
sales are more labor intensive compared to legal markets. Most of these jobs are also likely to be
filled by low-skilled employees, youths, or others with fewer outside opportunities. Their study
shows that cocaine and heroin prices from STRIDE are positively related to the state-specific
relative unskilled wage in a time series of states from 1974 to 1999. These two studies confirm
that DEA drug prices do indeed reflect costs of retailing including expected penalties associated
with this activity and labor costs.
4.

Analytical Framework
The objective of this study is to assess the extent to which outcomes related to cocaine

and heroin consumption respond to cocaine and heroin prices. Since illicit drugs are ultimately
consumer goods, this question can be framed within the context of consumer theory and demand
analysis. The utility function can be reformulated to explicitly take account of the addictive
aspects of illicit drugs.
(3)

Ut = Ut (A1t, A2t, S1t, S2t, Xt)

15

The individual’s current utility depends on current consumption of the addictive goods (A1 and
A2), the non-addictive good (X), and also on the stock of the addictive goods (S1 and S2)
accumulated through past consumption. In addition to positive but diminishing marginal utility
in A and X, the utility function also satisfies certain other restrictions. First, the stocks of
addictive consumption positively affect current marginal utility of the addictive goods. This is
the reinforcement effect by which past consumption of drugs stimulates current consumption.
(4)

UA1S1 = ∂2Ut / ∂A1t S1t > 0

(5)

UA2S2 = ∂2Ut / ∂A2t S2t > 0

Second, the stocks of addictive consumption negatively affect current total utility. This is the
tolerance effect. Higher past addictive consumption lowers current utility, and hence a greater
amount of current addictive consumption is required to obtain a given level of total utility.
Alternatively, this can also reflect harmful addiction since past consumption of drugs can lower
current utility due to detrimental health effects.
(6)

US1 = ∂Ut / ∂S1t < 0

(7)

US2 = ∂Ut / ∂S2t < 0

It is conceivable that there may also be cross-reinforcement effects so that the addictive stock of
one drug may affect the current consumption of the other by affecting its current marginal utility.
(8)

UA1S2 = ∂2Ut / ∂A1t S2t ≥ 0

(9)

UA2S1 = ∂2Ut / ∂A2t S1t ≥ 0

Maximizing the above utility function in every period subject to a basic budget constraint derives
a demand function where current consumption of the addictive good (A1) is affected by its own
price (P1), the price of the other drug (P2), income (I), and other characteristics (Y) such as the

16

individual’s age, gender, race, and education. Current consumption also depends on the
addictive stocks (S1 and S2).15
(10)

At = α1 Pt + δ1 St + β1 It + β2 Yt + εt .

(11)

A1t = α1 P1t + α2 P2t + δ1 S1t + δ2 S2t + β1 It + β2 Yt + εt.

The parameter δ1 is hypothesized to be greater than zero due to the positive reinforcement of past
addictive consumption on current consumption. This intertemporal complementarity between
past and current consumption is the hallmark of economic models of addiction.16 The own-price
effect, α1, is hypothesized to be negative under the law of the downward sloping demand
function. The cross-price effect α2 is positive if the two drugs are economic substitutes, negative
if they are economic complements, and zero if the two drugs are independent. The crossreinforcement effect δ2 may be zero or positive.17
5.

Empirical Framework

In the model presented above, the key parameter of interest is α1, which quantifies the sensitivity
of drug use to changes in its price. In estimating the addictive demand functions (10) and (11),
since the accumulated addictive stock is unobserved, it can be proxied by past consumption
outcomes. That is,
(12)
15

Sit = S (Ait-1)

Equation (10) is based on a utility function with one addictive substance.
This model is referred to as myopic addiction in the literature. Even though addiction is
formulated explicitly through interactions between past and current consumption and has
harmful effects in future periods, the individual is still myopic in that he is maximizing a single
period utility function subject to a period budget constraint. See Becker and Murphy (1988) for a
model of rational addiction wherein the individual maximizes a lifetime utility function comprised
of a summation of discounted period utilities, similar to that specified in (3).
17
In contrast to a cross-reinforcement effect, a cross-dampening effect would mean that (8) and
(9) are negative; that is, an increase in the addictive stock of one drug lowers the current
marginal utility of the other. In this case, δ2 is also negative. Since both cocaine and heroin
16

17

Substituting (12) into (10) and (11) yields:
(13)

At = α1 Pt + δ1 At-1 + β1 It + β2 Yt + εt

(14)

A1t = α1 P1t + α2 P2t + δ1 A1t-1 + δ2 A2t-1 + β1 It + β2 Yt + εt

Estimating equations with lagged dependent variables presents many econometric hurdles
discussed later. Alternately, since demand in any period is a function of the price in that period,
past consumption can be proxied by a series of past prices. With this substitution, the addictive
demand functions can be formulated as:
(15)

At = α1 Pt + λ1 Pt-1 + β1 It + β2 Yt + εt

(16)

A1t = α1 P1t + α2 P2t + λ 1 P1t-1 + λ 2 P2t-1 + β1 It + β2 Yt + εt

Since past consumption stimulates current consumption due to the reinforcement effect, the
coefficients of own-lagged prices are expected to be negative. If there are cross-reinforcement
effects, then the coefficients of cross-lagged prices are also expected to be negative. Statistically
significant lagged price effects thus present indirect evidence of the addictive aspects of heroin
and cocaine.
In this study, the addictive drugs considered are cocaine and heroin, and the set of
outcomes from DUF is the percent of arrestees testing positive for cocaine or heroin use, which
is a measure of the probability of participating in each drug. As such, it is a direct proxy for an
arrestee’s drug use. While the dependent variable is intended to measure a random arrestee’s
probability of participating in cocaine or heroin, DUF does not sample all arrestees. Therefore,
(17)

Prob (Cocaine|Arrested)=Prob (Cocaine|DUF Arrestee)* Prob (DUF Arrestee|Arrested).

In log-linear form, this becomes,

disrupt the flow of the neurotransmitter dopamine in order to produce feelings of pleasure and
reward, a cross-reinforcement effect is theoretically more likely.

18

(18)

Log Prob (Cocaine | DUF Arrestee) =

Log Prob (Cocaine | Arrested) –
Log Prob (DUF Arrestee | Arrested).

The outcomes employed in this study are the percentage of DUF arrestees who tested positive for
cocaine or heroin, that is Prob (Cocaine|DUF Arrestee). Hunt and Rhodes (2001) note that
inferences about the general arrestee population can be drawn from DUF. Nevertheless, some
models include the number of DUF arrestees in each MSA as a fraction of total arrests (from the
Uniform Crime Reports) to proxy for the Prob (DUF Arrestee|Arrested) and to control for
changes in sample design between DUF and ADAM.
The data employed are a time-series of city cross-sections.18 All regressions are
estimated in logistic form, where the dependent variable is measured as the log of the odds ratio.
Since the original outcomes are rates between zero and one, the logistic transformation ensures
that the predicted rate or probability also lies in this range.19 Panel-data techniques are employed
to estimate the following models based on the above formulations:
(19)

Log (Ait/1-Ait) = α1 Pit + λ1 Pit-1 + β1 Iit + β2 Yit + µi + ηt + νit

(20)

Log (A1it/1-A1it) = α1 P1it + α2 P2it + λ 1 P1it-1 + λ 2 P2it-1 + β1 Iit + β2 Yit + µi+ ηt+ νit

The subscripts denote the ith MSA for year t. Y represents the vector of observable determinants
of demand, besides price and income, and is proxied by the unemployment rate, various MSA-

18

Models are estimated with MSA-aggregated rates, based on individual data, for two reasons.
First, cocaine and heroin prices, the key variables of interest, are measured and merged at the
MSA level. Thus, variation in drug use between individuals in a given MSA-year cell conditional
on variation in MSA-level prices and other covariates is noise, and estimating models at the
individual level will not add anything. Dow et al. (2003) also note that aggregation can
ameliorate bias when omitted variables vary more at the individual-level than at the community
level. This is likely the case in the present study where drug use is an individual behavioral
choice affected by unobserved heterogeneity across individuals, and omitted community
variables can be proxied with MSA effects and MSA-specific trends.
19
The elasticity of participation with respect to price is calculated as α1 (1-A)P. The marginal
effect of price on participation is α1 (1-A)A.

19

level socioeconomic characteristics, and drug-related arrest rates. The disturbance is modeled
with two-way error components where µi denotes the unobservable area fixed effects, ηt denotes
the unobservable time effects, and νit is the remainder stochastic error term. In an aggregated
logistic regression, the variance of the error term is inversely proportional to Ait(1-Ait)nit
(Maddala, 1983). Thus, all models are weighted by Ait(1-Ait)nit to correct for the
heteroscedasticity. This formulation is followed in all estimations.
These fixed-effects procedures are inconsistent if city drug prices or the policies that
determine them might depend on the level of substance use, or as is more likely the lagged level
of substance use. This possibility is sometimes referred to as policy endogeneity. There are two
critical issues. The first is that there is an unmeasured fixed effect that is correlated with righthand-side variables. In the context of this research, the fixed effect may be city or state
sentiment (e.g., religiosity) towards drug use that also influences drug prices and enforcement.
The second issue is that price may be predetermined and not strictly exogenous because past
shocks to drug use may be correlated with current prices. Thus, current price is predetermined if
it is uncorrelated with the current disturbance term but correlated with past disturbances.
(21)

E (Pit νis) ≠ 0 for s < t and E (Pit νis) = 0 for s ≥ t

Consider the addictive demand equation (19). For convenience, LOit refers to Log (Ait/1-Ait),
and the year effects and lagged effects are ignored.
(19a) LOit = α1 Pit + β1 Iit + β2 Yit + µi + νit
The area fixed effects can be removed by first differencing.20

20

Fixed-effects estimation is equivalent to first-differencing if there are exactly two periods for
each cross-section. Otherwise, including fixed effects is equivalent to a regression where all
observations are transformed to deviations from the mean, where the mean is calculated for
each cross-section over all periods. For this exposition, the distinction is not important.

20

(19b) LOit - LOit-1 = α1 (Pit - Pit-1) + β1 (Iit - Iit-1) + β2 (Yit - Yit-1) + (νit - νit-1)
If price is predetermined then the orthogonality assumption is violated since Pit is correlated with
νit-1. The fixed-effects or first-differenced specification is no longer consistent.
In order to check for potential policy endogeneity, two informal tests are performed.
First, following Model (1993), specifications with a series of lagged and leading prices are
estimated. If changes in drug outcomes are caused by changes in enforcement or prices as
opposed to changes in prices being causes by these outcomes, then larger outcomes should not
occur until after any decreases in price and vice versa. In specifications with lagged and leading
price series, only the coefficients on contemporaneous and lagged prices should be significant.
The lead prices should be insignificant. If the leading prices are significant, however, then this
could be evidence of policy endogeneity.21
A second informal test estimates specifications with various lagged enforcement
variables to proxy for past shocks to demand that may also be affecting current prices. Consider
the baseline demand equation again, where the disturbance term is divided into two components.
(19c) LOit = α1 Pit + β1 Iit + β2 Yit + µi + νit, where νit = ωit-1 + φit
Thus,
(19d) LOit - LOit-1 = α1 (Pit - Pit-1) + β1 (Iit - Iit-1) + β2 (Yit - Yit-1) + (ωit-1 - ωit -2) +
(φit - φit -1)
Here, φit is a pure stochastic disturbance term that is uncorrelated with all past, current, and
future values of the explanatory variables. However, ωit-1 represents unobserved shocks to past

21

Significant lead prices may also be construed as evidence of rational addiction. However in
the present context, it is unlikely that users are able to forecast drug prices far in advance, as
much as one year. See Gruber and Koszegi (2001).

21

demand that may also affect current prices, making price predetermined and statistically
endogenous. This endogeneity is similar to omitted variables bias in an intertemporal context,
and the composite error νit will also be serially correlated due to this omission. In other words,
there are unmeasured factors ω that simultaneously affect past demand and current prices.
Conditional on ω, price is strictly exogenous with respect to the remainder disturbance term.
Therefore, if variables measuring such shocks can be included in the models, then the
coefficients on price can be analyzed to gauge the extent of such endogeneity. Past enforcement
efforts may proxy for these shocks to some extent. For instance, higher arrest rates related to
drug violations or sales may affect current drug consumption and also influence future drug
prices. If the price effects are robust in specifications that control for these lagged enforcement
variables, then it is likely that price is not predetermined and may be regarded as strictly
exogenous. In addition, including city specific trends in the models may also control for some of
these unobserved intertemporal shocks.
The possibility that price is not strictly exogenous is also treated explicitly in the
estimation of the demand function.
(22)

Log (Ait/1-Ait) = α1 Pit + δ1 Log (Ait-1/1-Ait-1) + β1 Iit + β2 Yit + µi + ηt + νit

Earlier, past addictive consumption was substituted out with past prices in order to bypass the
problems associated with lagged dependent variables. The issues involved are very similar to
those discussed above with predetermined covariates. A first-differenced specification of (22)
gets rid of the unobserved fixed effect but also shows that orthogonality between the explanatory
variables and the disturbance term is violated.
(22a) LOit - LOit-1 = α1 (Pit - Pit-1) + δ1 (LOit-1 - LOit-2) + β1 (Iit - Iit-1) + β2 (Yit - Yit-1) + (νit - νit-1)

22

Note that LOit-1 is correlated with νit-1 (as is Pit if price is predetermined). Arellano and Bond
(1991) show that the orthogonality conditions in a dynamic panel data model can be exploited to
obtain valid instruments for (LOit-1 - LOit-2). Specifically, LOit-2 is a valid instrument, since it is
highly correlated with (LOit-1 - LOit-2) and uncorrelated with (νit - νit-1) as long as the νit are not
serially correlated.22 In fact, following the same logic, all available lags of the dependent
variable are valid instruments for (LOit-1-LOit-2), that is LOit-2, LOit-3, etc. All levels (lagged and
current) of the strictly exogenous variables are also valid instruments.23
The Arellano-Bond estimator also allows for the possibility that one or more of the
explanatory variables may be predetermined and endogenous, for instance price. In the case that
price is predetermined such that E (Pit νis) ≠ 0 for s < t, all relevant lagged levels of the
predetermined variables are used to instrument for the difference, (Pit - Pit-1), following the same
principles above. Lagged levels of the predetermined variables (and not the current levels) also
enter the instrumental matrix for the differenced dependent variable (LOit-1 - LOit-2). If the drug
price is not just predetermined but also purely endogenous such that E (Pit νis) ≠ 0 for s ≤ t, then
the orthogonality conditions allow levels of the drug price lagged two or more periods to serve as

22

If the νit are not serially correlated, there is still first-order autocorrelation between the firstdifferenced errors. Thus, a test of no autocorrelation in νit translates to testing whether there is
second-order or higher degree autocorrelation in the differenced errors. These tests are
presented in the results.
23
Studies have shown that drug prices are positively correlated with the costs of distribution and
retailing, including the relative unskilled wage and the probability of apprehension for selling or
trafficking in various drugs. Holding income and the arrest rate for drug possession constant,
these variables should not affect the full price for users and thus should not affect demand. This
suggests that they may be used as instruments for drug prices to deal with problems of any
measurement error or policy endogeneity. However, in practical application, these instruments
do not pass checks for instrumental validity in basic year-effects models since they are likely to
be correlated with unobserved MSA-specific factors. In models with both year and MSA effects,
these instruments pass the test for overidentification restrictions; however they are very weak
and not strongly correlated with drug prices in the first stage. Since poor instruments
exacerbate the problems, this method is not followed here.

23

instruments. Estimating (22a) via the Arellano-Bond method allows a direct estimation of the
addictive demand function and yields short-run and long-run estimates of the price elasticities. It
also provides a check for the robustness of the estimated elasticities from other specifications
where the lagged dependent variable is proxied by lagged prices. Furthermore, it is also
informative to note whether the price elasticity is sensitive to treating drug prices as strictly
exogenous versus instrumenting them.
6.

Results
Table 2 presents estimation of the baseline demand function for urinalysis based logistic

cocaine and heroin use, which excludes the lagged effects. All specifications include the drug
price, individual and MSA-level socioeconomic covariates, year effects and then progressively
add MSA effects and indicators for MSA-specific linear trends. Specifications 1 through 4
present the models for cocaine use. Cocaine price is negative and statistically significant in all
specifications, and the price elasticity ranges from -0.11 to -0.22. Specification 1, which
includes year indicators, yields an elasticity of an arrestee’s probability of recent (past 48 – 72
hours) cocaine participation with respect to own price of -0.20. Relative to whites, Blacks are
more likely and arrestees of other race are less likely to use cocaine. Hispanics are more likely
to use cocaine relative to non-Hispanics. Individuals ages 16 to 24 and ages 25 to 54 are also
more likely to consume cocaine relative to older individuals. Being married reduces the
probability of using cocaine. The coefficient on income is significantly positive, implying that
health is a normal good. The arrest rate for drug possession has a negative effect on cocaine use.
A higher probability of apprehension raises the full price of cocaine and reduces participation;
the elasticity is estimated at -0.09. The coefficient of the log of the DUF arrest rate is
significantly negative, consistent with equation (18). Specification 2 includes both MSA and

24

year effects; here, only changes in the price of cocaine within a given MSA are relied upon for
identification. Each MSA serves as its own control group, with the price in one year compared
to the prevailing price in the same MSA for another year. The estimated price elasticity is robust
at -0.22. Since there are some MSA-year cells for which the arrest rates are missing, most
subsequent specifications exclude them in order to maximize sample size. Specification 3 shows
that the elasticity is only negligibly affected (-0.19) by this exclusion. Specification 4 adds
indicators of MSA-specific linear trends. This is a stringent test since only deviations around a
linear trend, within each city, are used for identification. The price effect remains significant at
the one percent level, and the elasticity decreases in magnitude to -0.11. The addition of MSAspecific linear trends causes the MSA-level covariates to lose joint significance. The largest gain
in adjusted R-square results from the addition of MSA effects; including MSA-linear trends
raises the adjusted R-square by a relatively small amount. In subsequent analyses, fixed-effects
specifications without city-specific trends are preferred and used to more reliably pin down the
price elasticity.
Specifications 5 to 8 present similar models for urinalysis based logistic heroin use. The
estimated price coefficients are significantly negative in all cases. Specification 5 shows the
effects of the individual and MSA-level covariates. These are generally similar to those
discussed with the cocaine models. Males participate more in heroin, and Blacks and other races
participate less. Arrestees who are otherwise employed full-time in the legal sector are also less
likely to be heroin users. MSA-level income has a small positive effect on heroin participation,
which disappears in subsequent models. Arrestees who have been booked on a drug-related
charge have a higher probability of using heroin. The probability of apprehension, as proxied by
the arrest rate for any drug possession, is significantly negative since it raises the full price of

25

using heroin. The corresponding elasticity is estimated at -0.40. The DUF arrest rate is also
negative and significant. Specification 2, which adds MSA effects, yields a heroin price
participation elasticity estimate of -0.10. Adding MSA-specific linear trends diminishes the
magnitude of the price elasticity to -0.05.
Table 3 presents separate results for drug and non-drug offenders in order to inform on
the extent to which selection of drug offenders into the DUF arrestee sample affects the
participation price elasticity. Compared to individuals whose most serious charge was non-drug
related, drug offenders were more likely to use cocaine and heroin recently and in the past
month. Drug-using offenders also had a higher frequency of use, consuming cocaine and heroin
on slightly more days than non-drug offenders. Thus arrestees booked on a drug charge appear
to be the heaviest among the heavy users. The price elasticities of cocaine and heroin use are
estimated to be slightly lower for the drug offenders relative to the non-drug offenders, implying
that heavier consumers are less price responsive. For cocaine use, the price elasticity ranges
from -0.12 to -0.17 (compared to -0.20 to -0.28 for non-drug offenders), and for heroin use, the
price elasticity ranges from -0.07 to -0.15 (versus -0.14 to -0.19 for non-drug offenders).
Specifications 5 and 6 further restrict the sample of non-drug offenders to those booked only on
misdemeanor charges. The cocaine price elasticity of -0.20 and the heroin price elasticity of 0.08 are similar to those estimated for all non-drug offenders. Furthermore, elasticities based on
samples that exclude individuals booked on drug-related charges are highly similar to those
based on the sample of all arrestees. This is not surprising given that individuals arrested for a
drug-related charge comprise only about 18 % of the total DUF sample and thus do not
contribute much to the overall elasticity measures computed for all arrestees. All subsequent
estimations employ the full sample of arrestees.

26

Table 4 estimates the demand function under the addiction framework, given by equation
(19), where the addictive stock is proxied by one- and two-year lagged prices. The
contemporaneous prices are negative and significant in all specifications, for both cocaine and
heroin, including those with MSA-linear trends. The inclusion of lagged prices does not
substantially reduce the magnitude of the current price elasticity. The short-run cocaine price
elasticity is estimated at -0.18, and the short-run heroin price elasticity is estimated at -0.08. The
elasticity of participation with respect to lagged price, holding current price constant, has a
magnitude almost as large as the current price elasticity. The one-year lagged cocaine price
elasticity is about -0.15, and the two-year lagged cocaine price elasticity is about -0.14. For
heroin, the one-year lagged price elasticity is about -0.15, and the two-year lagged price
elasticity is about -0.05. The coefficients on the contemporaneous and the lagged prices can be
used to calculate the long-run price elasticity of the probability of participating in each drug.
The long-run price elasticity measures the full current and future effects of a change in current
price. For both drugs, it has a magnitude which is more than double the short-run price response,
about -0.45 for cocaine and -0.21 for heroin.
Models 4 and 5 in Table 4 provide a check for policy endogeneity. These models add the
one-year leading price in addition to the current and lagged prices. Significant leading price
effects may indirectly inform on the presence of policy endogeneity or any specification bias.
The current price effect for both cocaine and heroin use is negative and significant in all cases.
The contemporaneous price elasticity for cocaine participation is about -0.18; for heroin, it is 0.09. These magnitudes are highly similar to the estimates reported above and are not sensitive
to the inclusion of the lead prices. The lagged prices are significant as a group in all
specifications, while the lead prices are insignificant. The contemporaneous as well as the long-

27

run price elasticities remain robust to the inclusion of the lead prices, and current cocaine or
heroin use does not seem to be affected by future prices.
Since this is not a definitive test, it would be reassuring if other specification checks also
confirm that policy endogeneity is not likely or does not substantially alter inferences. Table 5
presents specifications that include lagged drug enforcement measures in order to control for any
unobserved shocks to past drug-related outcomes that may affect current prices. One set of
lagged enforcement variables includes one-year lags of the arrest rate for any drug violation and
the arrest rate for selling or trafficking in any drugs. The second set includes one-year lags of the
arrest rate for any drug violation, the arrest rate for selling cocaine and opiates, and the arrest rate
for selling marijuana. The third set includes both one- and two-year lags of the arrest rate for
any drug violation and the arrest rate for selling or trafficking in any drugs. The final set
includes one- and two-year lags of the arrest rate for any drug violation, the arrest rate for selling
cocaine and opiates, and the arrest rate for selling marijuana.
The top panel of Table 6 presents these results for recent cocaine use. Specifications 1-4
include MSA and year effects in addition to the other covariates, and specifications 5-8 also add
MSA-specific linear trends. The lagged enforcement variables as a group are significant in all
models. The cocaine price elasticity is significantly negative in all specifications and is robust to
the inclusion of the lagged arrest rates. It decreases only marginally and ranges from -0.10 to 0.19.
The bottom panel presents the same models for recent heroin use. Heroin price is
negative and significant in all cases, and the lagged enforcement measures are significant in all
but one of the models. The price elasticity remains robust and lies between -0.08 and -0.13.
Overall, these checks show that the drug participation price elasticities are not sensitive to the

28

addition of leading prices or lagged arrest rates, which may be capturing to some extent
unobserved shocks simultaneously affecting past drug uses and price.24
All of the models presented thus far have included only the relevant drug’s own price.
Table 6 estimates the cross-price model derived in equation (20), with and without lagged prices.
Specifications 1-4 present the models for recent cocaine use. Current cocaine price is
significantly negative in all models as is the one-year lagged cocaine price. The
contemporaneous cocaine participation own-price elasticity is estimated at -0.20. Current heroin
price is also negative and significant in the full fixed effects models, with a cross-price elasticity
of -0.03. The one-year lagged cross-price elasticity is estimated at -0.04. This suggests that
cocaine and heroin are not only current economic complements but also intertemporal
complements. This is consistent with a cross-reinforcement effect wherein past heroin
consumption motivates current cocaine consumption by raising the current marginal utility of
cocaine use. Specifications 5-8 present similar models for heroin use. The current own price
elasticity is not affected by the inclusion of the current and lagged cocaine prices, and is
estimated at -0.09. The lagged heroin price effects are also significant, with a corresponding
elasticity of about -0.17. However, the cross price effects are imprecisely estimated in these
models. Symmetry of compensated cross-price effects for cocaine use and heroin use should not
be expected because these are demand functions at the extensive margin, measuring the decision
to participate in the consumption of a given drug.25
24

The elasticities are more affected in non-fixed effects models (not shown), suggesting that the
full fixed effects and the city-specific trends are capturing much of the variation in such factors
and other unobserved non-contemporaneous shocks.
25
In the case of an interior solution, symmetric cross-price effects result from Young’s theorem
applied to a small neighborhood around a given interior point where both X and Y are
consumed. In the case of an exterior solution, the comparison of cross-price effects involves
the comparison of neighborhoods around two points, one where X is consumed but Y is not and

29

One of the advantages of DUF is that the indicators of drug use based on urine specimens
are objective and more accurate than self-reported indicators, which may be plagued by
measurement errors due to misreporting. Such inaccuracies in self-reported data may have
biased prior estimates of the price elasticity of demand. The extent of this measurement error
can be gauged in DUF because arrestees were also asked to report on their own cocaine and
heroin use in the past 72 hours.26 Looking at the simple means, there seems to be vast underreporting in the self-reported data. About 41 % of the arrestees tested positive for cocaine use
whereas only 21 % admitted to using cocaine recently. Over eight percent of the arrestees tested
positive for heroin whereas only five percent admitted to its use in the last three days. While
most agree that survey data are plagued with misreporting, it is unknown to what degree and
whether the misreporting is systematic. It is likely that hardcore drug users are more likely to
under-report, and that recent use is more likely to be under-reported than past month or past year
use. At least for the sample of arrestees, it can be assessed whether the elasticities and marginal
effects are sensitive to such measurement error. The participation-price elasticity can differ
because of differences in mean participation as well differences in the marginal response.
Under-reporting, by reducing the measured mean participation, results in larger magnitudes of
the elasticity, ceteris paribus. However, it is also likely that the marginal response may be
different between those who accurately report drug use and those who do not. Since the sign of
this difference is not known a priori, this effect may either raise or lower the elasticity.

vice versa. In the absence of requisite restrictions on the utility parameters, symmetric crossprice effects for the participation decision are not a necessary property of such demand
functions.
26
These questions were only asked from 1989 to 1999.

30

Table 7 presents models for both the urinalysis-based indicators of drug use and the selfreported measures. The top panel estimates the same logistic specification used thus far, and
reports both the elasticity and the marginal effect for cocaine and heroin use. Comparing the
specifications for the objective and self-reported indicators of cocaine use, the marginal effect of
price is somewhat larger for the urinalysis based indicators. However, the large under-reporting
raises the absolute elasticity. For heroin participation, the marginal price response is not much
different between the two sets of outcomes. The under-reporting again causes the absolute
magnitude of the self-reported elasticities to be larger. The bottom panel estimates a double-log
demand function so that the estimated price coefficient also represents the elasticity. The price
elasticities with respect to self-reported cocaine participation and heroin participation are again
higher. Overall these results suggest that self-reported data are plagued by under-reporting,
which in the case of heavy users is likely to be substantial. Such under-reporting tends to impart
an upward absolute bias, yielding cocaine price elasticities that are as much as two times the
magnitude and heroin price elasticities that are as much as three times the magnitude relative to
those based on objective indicators.
Defining the percentage of arrestees in each MSA who under-report as the difference
between the objective and the subjective participation measures, models show that the rate of
under-reporting is significantly negatively related to the own drug’s price conditional on other
observed covariates. This means that the rate of under-reporting is higher in those cities with
lower drug prices and presumably higher consumption. This negative correlation between
under-reporting and drug prices implies that the measurement error is systematic. It is also
consistent with the direction of the bias in the elasticities estimated with the self-reported data
and the hypothesis that more heavy drug users are less price responsive.

31

Models of addiction suggest that current use is a direct and positive function of past use
due to the reinforcement effect. Earlier, the addictive stock was proxied by a series of past prices
due to problems associated with including a lagged dependent variable as a regressor. The
significance of lagged price effects is evidence of this addiction framework. Table 8 directly
estimates the demand function under addiction expressed in equation (22) by the Arellano-Bond
(A-B) procedure, which as explained in section 5 is a first-differenced instrumental variables
estimator.27
The top panel of Table 8 presents the results for logistic cocaine use. Specifications 1-3
exclude year effects, and specifications 4-6 include them. The one-year lagged cocaine use is
positive and significant at the one percent level in all models. This is consistent with the
addiction paradigm. Cocaine price is negative and significant in all specifications. Specification
1 and 4 treat the cocaine price as strictly exogenous. Specifications 2 and 5 treat it as a
predetermined variable and account for an endogenous policy response. Specifications 3 and 6
treat the price as a pure endogenous variable and account for the simultaneity of supply and
demand.28 Specifications 1-3, which exclude year effects, are only presented for comparison.

27

Baltagi et al. (2000) estimate demand specifications for cigarettes using various dynamic
panel-data estimators. Also see Baltagi and Levin (1986). Anderson and Hsiao (1981, 1982)
discuss these estimation techniques. Baltagi (1995) provides a good overview of these
estimators.
28
It is generally assumed that the U.S. supply of cocaine and heroin is infinitely elastic, that is
suppliers are able to satisfy any market demand at the current price. This assumption is
invoked in virtually all empirical studies of the demand for drugs. Cocaine and heroin are
basically agricultural products that are inexpensive to produce and require minimal processing.
Rhodes et al. (2001) note that cocaine, for instance, is fairly easy to transport and only about
300 metric tons satisfy entire U.S. market demand. The largest costs involved in producing,
transporting, and distributing cocaine are the costs of operating in the illegal sector. Miron
(2001) suggests that the black market price of cocaine is as much as 5 times higher and that of
heroin as much as 19 times higher than prices that would prevail in a legalized regime. The
amount of coca harvested exceeds the amount shipped by a substantial amount. This implies
that suppliers can draw on this excess capacity to satisfy any expansions in market demand

32

For these models, the test of overidentifying restrictions for instrumental validity can be rejected
at the 10 % significance level. The instrumental matrix passes the validity check more readily in
the models with year effects. From these specifications, the short-run or contemporaneous
cocaine price elasticity is estimated to be between –0.09 and –0.12. A model with a lagged
dependent variable can be derived from a distributed lagged model where current consumption
depends on all past values of price and the effect of successively distant lags diminish
geometrically. In this case, the long-run price elasticity can be calculated as the current price
elasticity times (1/1-δ1) where δ1 is the coefficient of lagged drug use. It measures the total
impact of a change in price on participation after all the lagged effects have been felt. The longrun cocaine price elasticity is estimated between –0.16 and –0.22. Note that this long-run
elasticity is much smaller than that implied from the reduced-form myopic addiction models that
include a series of lagged prices. The reason is that these models do not show any evidence that
lagged prices have a substantially smaller effect than current prices, at least for the one and twoyear lags. That is, the price coefficients are not restricted to follow a geometrically decaying
pattern.
Treating the cocaine price as predetermined or endogenous and instrumenting for it does
not substantially alter the results. It should also be noted that there is no evidence of
autocorrelation in any of the models; no autocorrelation in non-differenced errors is equivalent to
no autocorrelation beyond the first order in first-differenced errors. This is a necessary condition
for the validity of past levels as instruments for current differences in the A-B procedure. If
without increasing their per unit cost. Basov, Jacobson, and Miron (2001) similarly note that the
U.S. is also a relatively small market for opiates. All of these considerations point to the
domestic supply curves for cocaine and heroin being highly elastic. However, simultaneity and

33

policy endogeneity is interpreted as an intertemporal omitted variables bias, then it will lead to
impure serial correlation in the disturbance term. The lack of serial correlation suggests that
policy endogeneity is not likely. This is consistent with the inferences drawn from the prior
checks for such specification bias.
The bottom panel of Table 8 presents similar estimation for logistic heroin use. Lagged
heroin use is significantly positive in all specifications. The short-run heroin price elasticity is
estimated to be between –0.06 and –0.11, and the long-run price elasticity is between –0.09 and –
0.17. Overall, these results confirm the strong addictive aspects of cocaine and heroin.
Magnitudes of the current price elasticity for heroin are very similar to those estimated in the
earlier models with and without lagged prices. Furthermore, the errors are non-autocorrelated,
and explicitly treating price as a predetermined or endogenous variable does not substantially
alter the elasticities.
7.

Conclusions
The objective of this study was to estimate the empirical relationship between the prices

of cocaine and heroin and objective indicators of their use. By employing data on cocaine and
heroin use based on urine specimens this study bypasses any measurement errors prevalent in
survey data due to misreporting. The persons sampled in DUF constitute an important subgroup
of hardcore drug users, which is often not captured by national surveys. Since these persons are
more likely to be serious users, impose the heaviest costs on society, and are the targets of much
illegal drug policy, studying their addictive consumption behavior is very important from a
public policy stance.

the more relevant consideration of policy endogeneity are directly addressed with the ArellanoBond methodology.

34

The key conclusion that emerges from this study is that cocaine and heroin prices have a
significantly negative effect on the probability of use for arrestees. The elasticity estimates that
emerge are robust in virtually all of the specifications tested. Results from DUF indicate that the
own-price cocaine participation elasticity ranges from -0.11 to -0.23, and the own-price heroin
participation elasticity is between -0.07 and -0.12. These elasticities are significantly smaller
than those estimated in prior studies. This is not surprising since the arrestee population is more
likely to be addicted to drugs than the population at large and thus may be less responsive to
price. Indicators based on urinalysis are also more likely to pick up participation in heavy
consumption, which may be less responsive to price. Furthermore, the data from DUF show that
self-reports of drug use are biased downwards, and this may impart an upward absolute bias to
the estimated elasticities. These elasticities are also smaller in magnitude than those obtained
from other studies of DUF. However, all of these other studies are plagued with specification
errors, inadequate controls, and bias due to unmeasured factors. The present study uses the time
series of repeated city cross-sections to estimate full fixed-effects specifications that control for
unmeasured factors, policy endogeneity, and simultaneity. It also adds to the limited literature
on cross-price elasticities; the results suggest that cocaine and heroin are likely economic
complements.29 The results also show the presence of significantly negative own and cross-price
effects but insignificant lead-price effects.
The contemporaneous elasticity understates the full effect, since the long-run price
elasticity is about twice the magnitude. In a fixed population of arrestees, the elasticity estimates
from this study imply that a 10 % increase in the current price of cocaine in the U.S. will prevent
about 63,187 arrestees from currently using cocaine and deter an additional 103,627 arrestees in

35

future periods. A corresponding increase in heroin price will prevent about 7,093 arrestees from
consuming heroin in the current period and deter an additional 14,840 arrestees subsequently.30
Approximately 13.8 % of cocaine and heroin users consume both drugs. Taking multiple users
into account, a 10 % increase in cocaine and heroin price will thus deter approximately 165,842
arrestees from using drugs. Total societal costs from drug abuse were estimated at $160.7 billion
for 2000 (ONDCP, 2001). In the Drug Abuse Warning Network, about 46 % of all hospital
emergency department drug-related episodes involved cocaine or heroin in 2000.31 Applying
this proxy share for health-related costs, total costs from cocaine and heroin abuse amount to
approximately $73.9 billion. For that same year, there were a total of 13.8 million federal, state,
and local arrests in the U.S. About 30.5 % of the DUF sample tested positive for either cocaine
or heroin, or both. Ignoring multiple arrests in a year, this implies that there were approximately
4.2 million cocaine or heroin using arrestees in 2000. Assuming that these drug abusing
arrestees are fully responsible for all of the costs from drug abuse, the social cost of one such
drug user is $17,539.32 Thus a 10 % increase in both cocaine and heroin prices will reduce social
costs by $2.9 billion. Simple time-series estimates and prior studies suggest that a 10 % increase
in drug prices requires an increase in total drug control spending of at least $2 - $3 billion or

29

This is consistent with the studies by Saffer and Chaloupka (1996a, 1996b) and Dave (2004).
These estimates are based on Table 4 and the total number of arrests (13,814,843) and
arrestee drug prevalence in 2000. If the cross-price effects are negative, then more arrestees
will be deterred from using cocaine and/or heroin. It is also assumed that increases in drug
prices do not affect arrests. If enforcement efforts that raise the price of drugs also raise the
total number of arrests, then less arrestees will be deterred from drug participation.
31
This is likely an overestimate because episodes may involve multiple drugs. For instance,
only 28 % of cocaine episodes involved solely cocaine. See Dave (2004).
32
Rhodes and McDonald estimated that the sample represented in DUF accounts for as much
as 90% of total cocaine consumption and virtually all of the heroin consumption in the U.S.
30

36

between $12,060 to $18,090 per deterred user.33 Thus, it is not readily apparent that further
enforcement and interdiction driven increases in drug prices are necessarily cost-efficient. The
share of law enforcement has steadily risen from 36 % to 53 % over the past 15 years. In
contrast, resources allocated towards shifting demand, such as treatment and prevention, have
remained stable at only about one-third of the total budget over this period. Requisite caveats
notwithstanding, the low magnitudes of the participation price elasticity suggest that a more
demand-driven drug control policy may well be worth considering in future allocation of the
drug control budget.34

33

Total drug control spending in the U.S. amounted to $35 billion in 2000. Miron (2001)
estimates that the black market price of cocaine is about 4 times larger and that of heroin is
about 14 times larger than the price in a legal market. A crude extrapolation implies that an
increase in the drug control budget of $2 - $3 billion will raise the price of both drugs by about
10 %. Time series regressions of cocaine and heroin prices on total drug control spending, after
accounting for linear and quadratic trends, suggest a similar increase in spending of $2 billion.
34
This analysis does not consider the price response at the intensive margin. However, prior
studies have shown that the consumption elasticity for users is a very small share of the total
price response. See Grossman et al. (2002). Models estimated on the DUF sample, based on
self-reported past month participation and frequency, confirm this result. Saffer, Chaloupka,
and Dave (2001) also suggest that a reallocation of resources from criminal justice to drug
treatment may be more cost-effective.

37

References
T.W. Anderson, and C. Hsiao, “Estimation of Dynamic Models with Error Components,”
Journal of the American Statistical Association 76, (1981): 598-606.
T.W. Anderson, and C. Hsiao, “Formulation and Estimation of Dynamic Models Using Panel
Data,” Journal of Econometrics 18, (1982): 47-82.
B.H. Baltagi, Econometric Analysis of Panel Data (New York: John A. Wiley & Sons, 1995).
B.H. Baltagi, J.M. Griffin, and W. Xiong, “To Pool or not to Pool: Homogeneous Versus
Heterogeneous Estimators Applied to Cigarette Demand,” The Review of Economics and
Statistics 82, (2000): 117-126.
B.H. Baltagi, and D. Levin, “Estimating Dynamic Demand for Cigarettes Using Panel Data: The
Effects of Bootlegging, Taxation, and Advertising Reconsidered,” The Review of Economics and
Statistics 68, 1(1986): 148-155.
S. Basov, M. Jacobson, and J.A. Miron, “Prohibition and the Market for Illegal Drugs: An
Overview of Recent History,” Working Paper (Boston: Boston University, 2001).
G.S. Becker and K.M. Murphy, “A Theory of Rational Addiction,” Journal of Political Economy
96, (1988): 675-700.
G.S. Becker, M. Grossman, and K.M. Murphy, “The Economic Theory of Illegal Goods: The
Case of Drugs,” Working Paper, (2003).
J. Bound, D.A Jaeger, and R.M. Baker, “Problems With Instrumental Variables Estimation
When the Correlation Between the Instruments and the Endogenous Explanatory Variables Is
Weak,” Journal of the American Statistical Association 90, (1995): 443-450.
A. Bretteville-Jensen and M. Sutton, “The Income Generating Behavior of Injecting Drug Users
in Oslo,” Addiction 91, (1996): 63-79.
Bureau of Census website: www.census.gov.
Bureau of Economic Analysis website: www.bea.gov.
Bureau of Labor Statistics website: www.bls.gov.
Bureau of Justice Statistics, U.S. Department of Justice, Sourcebook of Criminal Justice
Statistics 2000 (Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 2001).
J.P. Caulkins, “Estimating Elasticities of Demand for Cocaine and Heroin with DUF Data,”
Working Paper( Pittsburgh: Heinz School of Public Policy, Carnegie Mellon University, 1996).

38

J.P. Caulkins, “Developing Price Series for Cocaine,” Working Paper (RAND: 1994).
J.P. Chaiken and N.Chaiken, Analysis of the Drug Use Forecasting Sample of Adult Arrestees.
Draft Report to the National Institute of Justice. Washington, D.C.: Abt Associates.
F.J. Chaloupka, M. Grossman, and J.A. Tauras, “The Demand for Cocaine and Marijuana by
Youth,” in The Economic Analysis of Substance Use and Abuse: An Integration of Econometric
and Behavioral Economic Research, ed. F.J. Chaloupka, M. Grossman, W.K. Bickel, and H.
Saffer (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999): 133-155.
A. Clark, “The Economics of Drug Legalization,” Working Paper (Orleans, France: University
of Orleans, 1998).
B.D. Crane, A.R. Rivolo, and G.C. Comfort, An Empirical Examination of Counterdrug
Interdiction Program Effectiveness (Alexandria, Virginia: Institute for Defense Analysis,
1997).
D. Dave, “The Effects of Cocaine and Heroin Price on Drug-Related Emergency
Department Visits,” NBER Working Paper, (2004).
J. DeSimone, “Is Marijuana a Gateway Drug?” Eastern Economics Journal 24, (1998): 149-164.
J. DeSimone, “The Effect of Cocaine and Heroin Prices and Arrests on Cocaine and HeroinRelated Deaths,” Working Paper, (2001).
J. DeSimone, “The Response of Drug Injection and Needle Sharing to Local Cocaine and Heroin
Prices, AIDS Prevalence, and Needle Exchange Programs,” Working Paper, (2002).
J. DeSimone and M.J. Farrelly, “Price and Enforcement Effects on Cocaine and Marijuana
Demand,” Working Paper (Greenville, North Carolina: East Carolina University, 2001).
J. DiNardo and T. Lemieux. “Alcohol, Marijuana, and American Youth: The Unintended Effects
of Government Regulation,” Journal of Health Economics 20, (2001): 991-1010.
W.H. Dow, K.A. Gonzalez, and L. Rosero-Bixgy, “Aggregation and Insurance-Mortality
Estimation,” NBER Working Paper 9827, (2003).
M. Grossman and F.J. Chaloupka, “The Demand for Cocaine by Young Adults: A Rational
Addiction Approach,” Journal of Health Economics 17, (1998): 427-474.
M. Grossman, F.J. Chaloupka, and I. Sirtalan , “An Empirical Analysis of Alcohol Addiction:
Results from the Monitoring the Future Panels,” Economic Inquiry 36, (1998): 39-48.
M. Grossman, F.J. Chaloupka, and K. Shim, “Illegal Drug Use and Public Policy,” Health

39

Affairs 21, (2002): 134-144.
J. Gruber and B. Köszegi, “Is Addiction ‘Rational’? Theory and Evidence,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics 116, (2001): 1261-1303.
H. Harwood, D. Fountain, and G. Livermore, The Economic Costs of Alcohol and Drug Abuse in
the United States, 1992 (Rockville, MD: National Institutes of Health, 1998).
J.A. Hausman, “Specification Tests in Econometrics,” Econometrica 46, (1978): 1251-1271.
J.L. Horowitz, “Should the DEA’s STRIDE Data be Used for Economic Analyses of Markets for
Illegal Drugs,” Journal of the American Statistical Association 96, (2001): 1254-1271.
D. Hunt and W. Rhodes, Methodology Guide for ADAM (Washington D.C.:National Institute of
Justice, 2001).
R.R. Hyatt, Jr. and W. Rhodes, “The Price and Purity of Cocaine: The Relationship to
Emergency Room Visits and Death, and to Drug Use among Arrestees,” Statistics in Medicine
14, (1995): 655-668.
I. Kuziemko and S. Levitt, “An Empirical Analysis of Imprisoning Drug Offenders,” Working
Paper (Chicago: University of Chicago, 2001).
L.W. Lee, “Would Harassing Drug Users Work?” Journal of Political Economy 101, (1993):
939-959.
R. MacCoun and P. Reuter, Drug War Heresies: Learning from Other Vices, Times, and Places
(Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 2001).
G.S. Maddala, Limited-Dependent and Qualitative Variables in Econometrics (New York:
Cambridge University Press, 1983).
C.F. Manski, J.V. Pepper, and C.V. Petrie, eds., Informing America’s Policy on Illegal Drugs:
What We Don’t Know Keeps Hurting Us, Committee on Data and Research for Policy on Illegal
Drugs, National Research Council (Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 2001).
J.A. Miron, “The Effect of Drug Prohibition on Drug Prices,” Working Paper (Boston: Boston
University and Bastiat Institute, 2001).
K.E. Model, “The Effect of Marijuana Decriminalization on Hospital Emergency Room Drug
Episodes: 1975-1978,” Journal of the American Statistical Association 88, (1993): 737-747.
K.M. Murphy and F. Welch, “The Structure of Wages,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107,
(1992): 285-326.

40

Office of National Drug Control Policy, The Economic Costs of Drug Abuse in the United States:
1992-1998 (Washington, DC: Office of National Drug Control Policy, 2001).
Office of National Drug Control Policy, The National Drug Control Strategy: 2001 Annual
Report (Washington, DC: Office of National Drug Control Policy, 2001).
Office of National Drug Control Policy, What America’s Users Spend on Illegal Drugs, 19881998 (Washington, DC: Office of National Drug Control Policy, 2000).
R.L. Pacula, M. Grossman, F.J. Chaloupka, P.M. O’Malley, L.D. Johnston, and M.C. Farrelly,
“Marijuana and Youth,” in Risky Behavior among Youths: An Economic Analysis, ed. J. Gruber
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000): 271-326.
W. Rhodes, R. Hyatt, and P. Scheiman, “The Price of Cocaine, Heroin, and Marijuana, 19811993,” The Journal of Drug Issues 24, (1994): 383-402.
W. Rhodes, P. Johnston, S. Han, Q. McMullen, and L. Hozik, “Illicit Drugs: Price Elasticity of
Demand and Supply,” ABT Associates, (2001).
H. Saffer, F.J. Chaloupka, and D. Dave, “State Drug Control Spending and Illicit Drug
Participation,” Contemporary Economic Policy 19, (2001), 150-161.
H. Saffer and F.J. Chaloupka, “The Demand for Illicit Drugs,” Economic Inquiry 37, (1999a):
401-411.
H. Saffer and F.J. Chaloupka, “Demographic Differentials in the Demand for Alcohol and Illicit
Drugs,” in The Economic Analysis of Substance Use and Abuse, eds. F.J. Chaloupka, M.
Grossman, W.K. Bickel, and H. Saffer (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999): 187-212.
L.P. Silverman and N.L. Spruill, “Urban Crime and Price of Heroin,” Urban Economics 4,
(1977): 80-103.
C.F. Thies and C.A. Register, “Decriminalization of Marijuana and the Demand for Alcohol,
Marijuana and Cocaine,” Social Science Journal 30, no. 4 (1993): 385-399.
J.C. van Ours, “The Price Elasticity of Hard Drugs: The Case of Opium in the Dutch East Indies,
1923-1938,” Journal of Political Economy 103, (1995):261-279.

41

Table 1
Drug Use Forecasting System
Sample Means
Variable
Recent Cocaine Use
Urinalysis
Logistic Recent Cocaine
Use Urinalysis
Recent Heroin Use
Urinalysis
Logistic Recent Heroin
Use Urinalysis
Recent Cocaine Use
Self-Report
Logistic Recent Cocaine
Use Self-Report
Recent Heroin Use SelfReport
Logistic Recent Heroin
Use Self-Report
Past Month Cocaine Use

Definition
Percent of arrestees in each MSA whose urine tested positive for cocaine use in
the past 48 – 72 hours
Log of the odds of recent cocaine use urinalysis

Logistic Past Month
Cocaine Use
Past Month Heroin Use

Log of the odds of past month cocaine use

Logistic Past Month
Heroin Use
Frequency Past Month
Cocaine Use
Log Frequency Past
Month Cocaine Use
Frequency Past Month
Heroin Use
Log Frequency Past
Month Heroin Use
Cocaine Price

Log of the odds of past month heroin use

Percent of arrestees in each MSA whose urine tested positive for opiate use in
the past 48 – 72 hours
Log of the odds of recent heroin use urinalysis
Percent of arrestees in each MSA who reported using cocaine in the past 72
hours
Log of the odds of recent cocaine use self-report
Percent of arrestees in each MSA who reported using heroin in the past 72 hours
Log of the odds of recent heroin use self-report
Percent of arrestees in each MSA who reported using cocaine in the past 30 days

Percent of arrestees in each MSA who reported using heroin in the past 30 days

Mean number of days in each MSA that cocaine was used in the past 30 days,
conditional on users
Log of frequency past month cocaine use
Mean number of days in each MSA that heroin was used in the past 30 days,
conditional on users
Log of frequency past month heroin use

Male

Price of one pure gram of cocaine, divided by the annual national consumer
price index
Price of one pure gram of heroin, divided by the annual national consumer price
index
Percent of arrestees in each MSA who are male

Black

Percent of arrestees in each MSA who are black

Other Race

Percent of arrestees in each MSA who are of a race other than white or black

Hispanic

Percent of arrestees in each MSA who are Hispanic

Age 16-24

Percent of arrestees in each MSA who are between the ages of 16 through 24

Age 25-54

Percent of arrestees in each MSA who are between the ages of 25 through 54

High School Graduate

Percent of arrestees in each MSA who are high school graduates or above

Heroin Price

Mean
0.3976
(0.1374)
-0.4587
(0.6312)
0.0827
(0.0585)
-2.6622
(0.8136)
0.2130
(0.0800)
-1.3833
(0.5286)
0.0505
(0.0476)
-3.4140
(1.1522)
0.2803
(0.0902)
-0.9920
(0.4763)
0.0641
(0.0548)
-3.0819
(1.0485)
23.2946
(4.5912)
3.1281
(0.2040)
17.0798
(4.3605)
2.7862
(0.3798)
80.47
(27.81)
490.18
(373.78)
0.7586
(0.1174)
0.5152
(0.2592)
0.0248
(0.0529)
0.1628
(0.1792)
0.3338
(0.0571)
0.6495
(0.0567)
0.5946

42

(0.0685)
0.3901
(0.0998)
Married
0.1597
(0.0522)
Drug Charge
Percent of arrestees in each MSA whose most serious offense charge was drug
0.1734
related
(0.0757)
MSA Income
Per capita personal income in each MSA, divided by the annual national
16.8784
consumer price index
(2.6015)
MSA Unemployment
Unemployment rate in each MSA
0.0544
(0.0208)
DUF Arrest Rate
Total number of arrestees in DUF divided by total number of arrests in each
0.0113
MSA
(0.0090)
Log DUF Arrest Rate
Natural logarithm of DUF Arrest Rate
-4.7746
(0.8132)
Drug Possession Arrest
Percent of arrests in each MSA resulting from any drug sale or trafficking
0.0777
Rate
(0.0367)
Drug Violation Arrest
Total number of arrests in each MSA due to any drug violation divided by MSA
0.0056
Rate
population
(0.0025)
Drug Sale Arrest Rate
Total number of arrests in each MSA due to any drug sale or trafficking divided
0.0014
by MSA population
(0.0012)
Cocaine Sale Arrest Rate Total number of arrests in each MSA due to cocaine sale or trafficking divided
0.0008
by MSA population
(0.0010)
Marijuana Sale Arrest
Total number of arrests in each MSA due to marijuana sale or trafficking
0.0003
Rate
divided by MSA population
(0.0002)
Population
Total MSA population
2978176
(2369104)
Observations
332
Notes: Standard deviations are in parentheses. Number of observations listed represents the maximum
number. For some variables, the actual sample size is slightly less due to missing information.
Full-Time Employment

Percent of arrestees in each MSA whose main source of income in the past 30
days was from full-time employment
Percent of arrestees in each MSA who are married

43

Table 2
Logistic Cocaine & Heroin Use
Baseline Models
Dependent Variable
Specification
Own Price
(Cocaine / Heroin)
Male
Black
Other Race
Hispanic
Age 16-24
Age 25-54
High School Graduate
Full-Time
Employment
Married
MSA Income
MSA Unemployment
Drug Charge
Drug Possession Arrest
Rate
DUF Arrest Rate

Logistic Recent Cocaine Use

Logistic Recent Heroin Use

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

-0.00425***
(-4.27)
ε = -0.204
0.34056
(1.35)
1.38365***
(8.46)
-1.53597**
(-2.17)
1.17571***
(5.11)
6.63717*
(1.82)
9.86560***
(2.67)
-0.47737
(-1.01)
-0.47854
(-1.42)
-2.25552***
(-2.88)
-0.02060*
(-1.95)
-0.45419
(-0.41)
0.37793
(1.20)

-0.00452***
(-5.68)
ε = -0.217

-0.00399***
(-5.01)
ε = -0.192

-0.00231***
(-3.36)
ε = -0.111

-0.00022***
(-2.66)
ε = -0.098

-0.00025***
(-2.81)
ε = -0.112

-0.00011*
(-1.61)
ε = -0.049

Yes***

Yes***

Yes***

-0.00030**
(-2.11)
ε = -0.134
1.18552***
(2.95)
-1.48631***
(-5.85)
-2.92378***
(-2.92)
0.28981
(0.82)
6.81469
(1.15)
3.89146
(0.65)
0.88981
(1.08)
-4.26460***
(-7.50)
-0.82250
(-0.65)
0.03856**
(2.38)
1.66783
(0.34)
0.88997*
(1.90)

Yes***

Yes***

Yes***

-1.96280**
Yes
No
Yes
-5.67362***
Yes
No
Yes
(-2.23)
(-4.11)
-0.07976**
Yes
No
Yes
-0.19246***
Yes***
No
Yes**
(-2.10)
(-3.35)
Year Effects
Yes***
Yes***
Yes***
Yes***
Yes**
Yes***
Yes***
Yes***
MSA Effects
No
Yes***
Yes***
Yes***
No
Yes***
Yes***
Yes***
MSA-Linear Trend
No
No
No
Yes***
No
No
No
Yes***
R-Squared
0.698
0.889
0.868
0.940
0.536
0.887
0.868
0.932
Observations
300
300
322
300
281
281
301
281
Notes: All estimates are from weighted regressions. Dependent variable is log(A/1-A) where A is the percentage of arrestees in each MSA testing positive for cocaine or heroin use. T-ratios
are in parentheses. *** significant at 1 percent ** significant at 5 percent * significant at 10 percent. Elasticities are reported where the own-price coefficient is significant at 10 percent or
less in a one-tailed test.

44

Table 3
Logistic Cocaine & Heroin Use
Restricted Samples
Dependent Variable
Sample

Logistic Recent Cocaine Use
Non-Drug Offenders

Drug Offenders

Non-Drug Misdemeanor
Offenders
5
6

Specification

1

2

3

4

Cocaine Price

-0.00330***
(-2.50)
ε = -0.122
Yes***

-0.00452***
(-3.97)
ε = -0.167
Yes***

-0.00548***
(-5.93)
ε = -0.276
Yes***

-0.00404***
(-4.90)
ε = -0.204
Yes***

-0.00606***
(-6.22)
ε = -0.302
Yes***

-0.00406***
(-4.01)
ε = -0.202
Yes***

Yes***
No
0.512
321

Yes***
Yes***
0.795
321

Yes***
No
0.695
322

Yes***
Yes***
0.862
322

Yes***
No
0.741
320

Yes***
Yes***
0.853
321

Individual / MSA
Covariates
Year Effects
MSA Effects
R-Squared
Observations
Recent Cocaine Use
- Urinalysis
Recent Cocaine Use
- Self Report
Past Month Cocaine
Use - Self Report
Frequency Past
Month Cocaine Use
- Self Report

Dependent Variable
Sample

0.538

0.368

0.375

0.314

0.191

0.204

0.394

0.255

0.263

24.1

23.1

23.0

Drug Offenders

Logistic Recent Heroin Use
Non-Drug Offenders

Non-Drug Misdemeanor
Offenders
5
6

Specification

1

2

3

4

Heroin Price

-0.00034**
(-1.66)
ε = -0.147
Yes***

-0.00017*
(-1.34)
ε = -0.073
Yes***

-0.00043***
(-2.94)
ε = -0.194
Yes***

-0.00030***
(-3.25)
ε = -0.135
Yes***

-0.00053***
(-3.77)
ε = -0.237
Yes***

-0.00018***
(-2.05)
ε = -0.081
Yes***

Yes***
No
0.271
295

Yes***
Yes***
0.805
295

Yes***
No
0.492
301

Yes***
Yes***
0.847
301

Yes***
No
0.578
288

Yes***
Yes***
0.848
288

Individual / MSA
Covariates
Year Effects
MSA Effects
R-Squared
Observations
Recent Heroin Use Urinalysis
Recent Heroin Use Self-Report
Past Month Heroin
Use - Self Report
Frequency Past
Month Heroin Use Self-Report

0.113

0.075

0.078

0.074

0.045

0.044

0.090

0.058

0.057

18.0

16.9

16.6

Notes: All estimates are from weighted regressions. Dependent variable is log(A/1-A) where A is the percentage of arrestees in each
MSA testing positive for cocaine or heroin use. T-ratios are in parentheses. *** significant at 1 percent ** significant at 5 percent *
significant at 10 percent. Elasticities are reported where the own-price coefficient is significant at 10 percent or less in a one-tailed test.
Individual/MSA covariates include: male, black, other race, Hispanic, age 16-24, age 25-54, high school graduate, full-time
employment, married, MSA income, and MSA unemployment.

45

Table 4
Logistic Cocaine & Heroin Use
Lagged & Leading Prices
Dependent Variable
Specification
Cocaine Price
1 Year Lagged
Cocaine Price
2 Year Lagged
Cocaine Price
1 Year Leading
Cocaine Price
Long Run Elasticity
Individual / MSA
Covariates
Year Effects
MSA Effects
MSA-Linear Trend
R-Squared
Dependent Variable
Specification
Heroin Price
1 Year Lagged
Heroin Price
2 Year Lagged
Heroin Price
1 Year Leading
Heroin Price
Long Run Elasticity
Individual / MSA
Covariates
Year Effects
MSA Effects
MSA-Linear Trend
R-Squared

Logistic Recent Cocaine Use
3
4

1

2

-0.00454***
(-3.95)
ε = -0.220
-0.00232**
(-2.03)
ε = -0.116
-0.00001
(-0.01)

-0.00190***
(-2.85)
ε = -0.092
-0.00092*
(-1.37)
ε = -0.046
-0.00016
(-0.25)

-0.00371***
(-4.35)
ε = -0.180
-0.00322***
(-3.69)
ε = -0.162

No

-0.00362***
(-4.47)
ε = -0.175
-0.00301***
(-3.85)
ε = -0.151
-0.00255***
(-3.51)
ε = -0.136
No

No

Yes

-0.00359***
(-4.23)
ε = -0.174
-0.00287***
(-3.29)
ε = -0.144
-0.00207***
(-2.59)
ε = -0.111
Yes

-0.333
Yes***

-0.445
Yes***

-0.137
Yes***

-0.336
Yes***

-0.414
Yes***

Yes***
No
No
0.679

Yes***
Yes***
No
0.879

Yes***
Yes***
Yes***
0.929

Yes***
Yes***
No
0.878

Yes***
Yes***
No
0.880

1

2

-0.00027*
(-1.58)
ε = -0.121
-0.00031**
(-2.06)
ε = -0.164
-0.00015
(-1.14)

-0.00017**
(-1.89)
ε = -0.076
-0.00030***
(-3.92)
ε = -0.159
-0.00007
(-0.94)

No

No

Logistic Recent Heroin Use
3

5

4

5

-0.00020**
(-2.24)
ε = -0.090
-0.00028***
(-3.47)
ε = -0.149
No

-0.00016**
(-1.83)
ε = -0.072
-0.00024***
(-3.02)
ε = -0.127
-0.00009
(-1.22)

No

-0.00012**
(-1.75)
ε = -0.054
-0.00029***
(-4.67)
ε = -0.154
-0.00008*
(-1.39)
ε = -0.046
No

Yes

Yes

-0.261
Yes***

-0.211
Yes***

-0.220
Yes***

-0.216
Yes***

-0.180
Yes***

Yes**
No
No
0.460

Yes***
Yes***
No
0.879

Yes***
Yes***
Yes***
0.942

Yes***
Yes***
No
0.887

Yes***
Yes***
No
0.892

Notes: All estimates are from weighted regressions. Dependent variable is log(A/1-A) where A is the percentage of arrestees in each
MSA testing positive for cocaine or heroin use. T-ratios are in parentheses. *** significant at 1 percent ** significant at 5 percent *
significant at 10 percent. Elasticities are reported where the own-price coefficient is significant at 10 percent or less in a one-tailed test.
Individual/MSA covariates include: male, black, other race, Hispanic, age 16-24, age 25-54, high school graduate, full-time
employment, married, MSA income, and MSA unemployment.

46

Table 5
Logistic Cocaine and Heroin Use
With Lagged Enforcement Measures
Specification

1

2

3

Dependent Variable
Cocaine Price
Individual / MSA
Covariates
Lagged Enforcement
Year Effects
MSA Effects
MSA-Linear Trend
R-Squared

5

6

7

8

Logistic Recent Cocaine Use
-0.00393***
(-4.56)
ε = -0.191
Yes***

-0.00381***
(-4.51)
ε = -0.185
Yes***

-0.00340***
(-3.68)
ε = -0.165
Yes***

-0.00340***
(-3.81)
ε = -0.165
Yes***

-0.00244***
(-2.97)
ε = -0.118
Yes***

-0.00236***
(-2.91)
ε = -0.114
Yes***

-0.00228***
(-2.55)
ε = -0.111
Yes***

-0.00208**
(-2.33)
ε = -0.101
Yes***

Group 1***
Yes***
Yes***
No
0.889

Group 2***
Yes***
Yes***
No
0.892

Group3***
Yes***
Yes***
No
0.897

Group 4***
Yes***
Yes***
No
0.901

Group 1***
Yes**
Yes***
Yes***
0.936

Group 2***
Yes**
Yes***
Yes***
0.939

Group3***
Yes**
Yes***
Yes***
0.937

Group 4***
Yes**
Yes***
Yes***
0.940

-0.00020**
(-2.08)
ε = -0.090
Yes*

-0.00018**
(-1.67)
ε = -0.081
Yes

-0.00017*
(-1.51)
ε = -0.076
Yes

Dependent Variable
Heroin Price

4

Logistic Recent Heroin Use
-0.00029***
(-2.92)
ε = -0.130
Yes***

-0.00025***
(-2.49)
ε = -0.112
Yes***

-0.00029***
(-2.76)
ε = -0.130
Yes***

-0.00026***
(-2.44)
ε = -0.117
Yes***

-0.00021**
(-2.26)
ε = -0.094
Yes**

Individual / MSA
Covariates
Lagged Enforcement
Group 1***
Group 2***
Group3***
Group 4***
Group 1**
Group 2*
Group3**
Group 4
Year Effects
Yes***
Yes***
Yes***
Yes***
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
MSA Effects
Yes***
Yes***
Yes***
Yes***
Yes***
Yes***
Yes***
Yes***
MSA-Linear Trend
No
No
No
No
Yes***
Yes***
Yes***
Yes***
R-Squared
0.899
0.900
0.901
0.903
0.935
0.935
0.934
0.932
Notes: All estimates are from weighted regressions. Dependent variable is log(A/1-A) where A is the percentage of arrestees in each MSA testing positive for
cocaine or heroin use. T-ratios are in parentheses. *** significant at 1 percent ** significant at 5 percent * significant at 10 percent. Group 1 enforcement
variables are: lagged one year drug violation arrest rate and drug sale arrest rate. Group 2 enforcement variables are: lagged one year drug violation arrest rate and
cocaine/heroin sale arrest rate. Group 3 enforcement variables are: lagged one year drug violation arrest rate and marijuana sale arrest rate. Group 4 enforcement
variables are: one and two year lagged drug violation arrest rate and cocaine/heroin sale arrest rate. Elasticities are reported where the own-price coefficient is
significant at 10 percent or less in a one-tailed test. Individual/MSA covariates include: male, black, other race, Hispanic, age 16-24, age 25-54, high school
graduate, full-time employment, married, MSA income, and MSA unemployment.

47

Table 6
Logistic Cocaine and Heroin Use
Cross Prices
Dependent Variable
Specification
Cocaine Price

1

Logistic Recent Cocaine Use
2
3

-0.00635***
(-5.52)
ε = -0.305
0.00001
(0.17)

-0.00540***
(-4.23)
ε = -0.259
0.00003
(0.41)

1 Year Lagged
Cocaine Price

_

1 Year Lagged
Heroin Price

_

-0.00264**
(-2.10)
ε = -0.131
0.00002
(0.27)

Heroin Price

Individual / MSA
Covariates
Year Effects
MSA Effects
R-Squared

-0.00479***
(-5.19)
ε = -0.230
-0.00012**
(-2.24)
ε = -0.035
_

5
-0.00202
(-0.99)

-0.00129
(-0.57)

0.00137
(1.12)

0.00164
(1.37)

-0.00037***
(-2.27)
ε = -0.165
_

-0.00026*
(-1.50)
ε = -0.116
-0.00065
(-0.28)

-0.00026***
(-2.95)
ε = -0.116
_

-0.00021***
(-2.35)
ε = -0.094
0.00057
(0.47)

_

_

Yes***

-0.00032**
(-2.26)
ε = -0.164
Yes***

Yes***

-0.00033***
(-4.35)
ε = -0.169
Yes

Yes*
No
0.452

Yes*
No
0.459

Yes***
Yes***
0.868

Yes***
Yes***
0.878

Yes***

Yes***

Yes***

-0.00413***
(-4.61)
ε = -0.198
-0.00009*
(-1.75)
ε = -0.026
-0.00337***
(-3.89)
ε = -0.167
-0.00013***
(-2.84)
ε = -0.044
Yes

Yes***
No
0.671

Yes***
No
0.680

Yes***
Yes***
0.870

Yes***
Yes***
0.881

_

Logistic Recent Heroin Use
6
7

4

8

Notes: All estimates are from weighted regressions. Dependent variable is log(A/1-A) where A is the percentage of arrestees in each MSA testing positive for
cocaine or heroin use. T-ratios are in parentheses. *** significant at 1 percent ** significant at 5 percent * significant at 10 percent. Group 1 enforcement
variables are: lagged one year drug violation arrest rate and drug sale arrest rate. Group 2 enforcement variables are: lagged one year drug violation arrest rate and
cocaine/heroin sale arrest rate. Group 3 enforcement variables are: lagged one year drug violation arrest rate and marijuana sale arrest rate. Group 4 enforcement
variables are: one and two year lagged drug violation arrest rate and cocaine/heroin sale arrest rate. Elasticities are reported where the own-price coefficient is
significant at 10 percent or less in a one-tailed test. Individual/MSA covariates include: male, black, other race, Hispanic, age 16-24, age 25-54, high school
graduate, full-time employment, married, MSA income, and MSA unemployment.

48

Table 7
Cocaine and Heroin Use
Urinalysis vs. Self-Report
Dependent
Variable
Specification
Cocaine Price

Individual / MSA
Covariates
Year Effects
MSA Effects
R-Squared

Dependent
Variable
Specification
Log Cocaine
Price
Individual / MSA
Covariates
Year Effects
MSA Effects
R-Squared

Urinalysis
1

Logistic Recent Cocaine Use
Self-Report
Urinalysis
2
3

Self-Report
4

Urinalysis
5

Logistic Recent Heroin Use
Self-Report
Urinalysis
6
7

Self-Report
8

-0.00529***
(-5.22)
ME = -0.0013
ε = -0.248
Yes***

-0.00564***
(-5.15)
ME = -0.0009
ε = -0.353
Yes***

-0.00365***
(-4.22)
ME = -0.0009
ε = -0.171
Yes***

-0.00378***
(-3.96)
ME = -0.0006
ε = -0.236
Yes***

-0.00044***
(-2.62)
ME = -.00003
ε = -0.196
Yes***

-0.00061***
(-2.65)
ME = -.00003
ε = -0.282
Yes***

-0.00019**
(-2.09)
ME = -.00001
ε = -0.085
Yes***

-0.00042**
(-2.21)
ME = -.00002
ε = -0.194
Yes***

Yes***
No
0.656

Yes
No
0.550

Yes***
Yes***
0.869

Yes***
Yes***
0.810

Yes
No
0.463

Yes***
No
0.515

Yes***
Yes***
0.879

Yes**
Yes***
0.766

Log Recent Cocaine Use
Self-Report
Urinalysis
2
3

Self-Report
4

Urinalysis
5

Log Recent Heroin Use
Self-Report
Urinalysis
6
7

Self-Report
8

-0.26795***
(-4.90)
Yes***

-0.51824***
(-4.64)
Yes***

-0.13492***
(-2.86)
Yes***

-0.26424**
(-2.28)
Yes***

-0.12202*
(-1.45)
Yes***

-0.34596***
(-2.68)
Yes***

-0.02882
(-0.59)
Yes***

-0.30700***
(-2.78)
Yes***

Yes***
No
0.641

Yes
No
0.529

Yes***
Yes***
0.857

Yes***
Yes***
0.728

Yes
No
0.444

Yes*
No
0.521

Yes**
Yes***
0.876

Yes**
Yes***
0.772

Urinalysis
1

Notes: All estimates are from weighted regressions. Dependent variable is log(A/1-A) where A is the percentage of arrestees in each MSA testing positive for
cocaine use or heroin use (urinalysis) or the percentage of arrestees in each MSA reporting positive cocaine or heroin use in the past 72 hours (self-report). Tratios are in parentheses. *** significant at 1 percent ** significant at 5 percent * significant at 10 percent. Group 1 enforcement variables are: lagged one-year
drug violation arrest rate and drug sale arrest rate. Group 2 enforcement variables are: lagged one-year drug violation arrest rate, cocaine/heroin sale arrest rate,
and marijuana sale arrest rate. Group 3 enforcement variables are: lagged one- and two-year drug violation arrest rate and drug sale arrest rate. Group 4
enforcement variables are: lagged one- and two-year drug violation arrest rate, cocaine/heroin sale arrest rate, and marijuana sale arrest rate. Elasticities are
reported where the own-price coefficient is significant at 10 percent or less in a one-tailed test. Individual/MSA covariates include: male, black, other race,
Hispanic, age 16-24, age 25-54, high school graduate, full-time employment, married, MSA income, and MSA unemployment.

49

Table 8
Logistic Cocaine and Heroin Use
Arellano – Bond Estimation
Dependent Variable
Specification
Lagged 1 Year
Logistic Cocaine Use
Cocaine Price

Year Effects
Cocaine Price Treatment
Sargan Overidentification
Test
AR(1) Test
AR(2) Test
Dependent Variable
Specification
Lagged 1 Year
Logistic Cocaine Use
Cocaine Price

Year Effects
Cocaine Price Treatment
Sargan Overidentification
Test
AR(1) Test
AR(2) Test

Logistic Recent Cocaine Use
3
4

1

2

0.35406***
(4.09)
-0.00413***
(-3.41)
SR ε = -0.198
LR ε = -0.306
No
Exogenous
0.060

0.35316***
(7.25)
-0.00433***
(-5.65)
SR ε = -0.207
LR ε = -0.320
No
Predetermined
0.090

0.34696***
(7.01)
-0.00477***
(-5.69)
SR ε = -0.228
LR ε = -0.349
No
Endogenous
0.057

0.000
0.186

0.000
0.187

0.000
0.165

1

2

0.21623**
(2.39)
-0.00015*
(-1.60)
SR ε = -0.065
LR ε = -0.083
No
Exogenous
0.000

0.35717***
(5.19)
-0.00023***
(-2.63)
SR ε = -0.100
LR ε = -0.156
No
Predetermined
0.152

0.31955***
(4.52)
-0.00026***
(-2.78)
SR ε = -0.113
LR ε = -0.166
No
Endogenous
0.105

0.000
0.141

0.000
0.141

0.000
0.124

5

6

0.4550***
(7.37)
-0.00186**
(-1.97)
SR ε = -0.089
LR ε = -0.163
Yes
Exogenous
0.266

0.44388***
(8.62)
-0.00244***
(-2.66)
SR ε = -0.117
LR ε = -0.210
Yes
Predetermined
0.172

0.44623***
(8.41)
-0.00252***
(-2.32)
SR ε = -0.121
LR ε = -0.219
Yes
Endogenous
0.121

0.000
0.436

0.000
0.334

0.000
0.324

5

6

0.30121***
(3.39)
-0.00014*
(-1.35)
SR ε = -0.061
LR ε = -0.087
Yes
Exogenous
0.000

0.40393***
(5.69)
-0.00022**
(-2.29)
SR ε = -0.096
LR ε = -0.161
Yes
Predetermined
0.209

0.36940***
(4.97)
-0.00025***
(-2.33)
SR ε = -0.109
LR ε = -0.173
Yes
Endogenous
0.135

0.000
0.220

0.000
0.187

0.000
0.170

Logistic Recent Heroin Use
3
4

Notes: Dependent variable is log(A/1-A) where A is the percentage of arrestees in each MSA testing positive for cocaine or heroin use. Z-values are in
parentheses. *** significant at 1 percent ** significant at 5 percent * significant at 10 percent. Elasticities are reported where the own-price coefficient is
significant at 10 percent or less in a one-tailed test. Individual/MSA covariates include: male, black, other race, Hispanic, age 16-24, age 25-54, high school
graduate, full-time employment, married, MSA income, and MSA unemployment.

