                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              CAN INFLATION TARGETING WORK
                             IN EMERGING MARKET COUNTRIES?

                                          Frederic S. Mishkin

                                         Working Paper 10646
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10646


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2004




For presentation in a conference in honor of Guillermo Calvo, held on April 15 and 16, 2004 at the
International Monetary Fund in Washington, DC. The views expressed in this paper are exclusively those of
the author and not those of Columbia University or the National Bureau of Economic Research.The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2004 by Frederic S. Mishkin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Can Inflation Targeting Work in Emerging Market Countries?
Frederic S. Mishkin
NBER Working Paper No. 10646
July 2004
JEL No. E5, F3
                                       ABSTRACT

This paper explores issues in emerging market countries to make inflation targeting work for them.

It starts by outlining why emerging market economies are so different from advanced economies and

then discuss why developing strong fiscal, financial and monetary institutions is so critical to the

success of inflation targeting in emerging market countries. Then it discusses two emerging market

countries which illustrate what it takes to make inflation targeting work well, Chile and Brazil. It

then addresses a particularly complicated issue for central banks in emerging market countries who

engage in inflation targeting: how they deal with exchange rate fluctuations. The next topic focuses

on the IMF's role in promoting the success of inflation targeting in emerging market countries. The

conclusion from this analysis is that inflation targeting is more complicated in emerging market

countries and is thus not a panacea. However, inflation targeting done right can be a powerful tool

to help promote macroeconomic stability in these countries.

Frederic S. Mishkin
Graduate School of Business
Uris Hall 619
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
fsm3@columbia.edu
       An important theme in Guillermo Calvo’s work has been that emerging market

economies are very different from advanced economies, and this has important implications

that need to be factored in when designing macroeconomic policies. For example, Guillermo

(e.g., see Calvo, 1999a, Calvo, 2001 and Calvo and Mendoza, 2000) has been quite skeptical of

inflation targeting as a monetary policy strategy for emerging market countries.1 He worried that

allowing too much discretion to policymakers in the weak institutional environment of emerging

market countries might lead to poor macroeconomic outcomes. I am known to be an advocate of

inflation targeting, but I think that Guillermo’s concerns about inflation targeting’s efficacy in

emerging market countries need to be taken seriously.

       Before starting it is important to make clear what an inflation targeting regime is all

about. It comprises five elements: 1) the public announcement of medium-term numerical

targets for inflation; 2) an institutional commitment to price stability as the primary goal of

monetary policy, to which other goals are subordinated; 3) an information inclusive strategy in

which many variables, and not just monetary aggregates or the exchange rate, are used for

deciding the setting of policy instruments; 4) increased transparency of the monetary policy

strategy through communication with the public and the markets about the plans, objectives,

and decisions of the monetary authorities; and 5) increased accountability of the central bank

for attaining its inflation objectives. The list should clarify one crucial point about inflation

targeting: it entails much more than a public announcement of numerical targets for inflation

for the year ahead. This is important in the context of emerging market countries because



       1
           Although I suspect that Guillermo may be more favorable now, but you will have to ask
him.

                                                 -1-
many of them routinely reported numerical inflation targets or objectives as part of the

government's economic plan for the coming year, and yet their monetary policy strategy

should not be characterized as inflation targeting, which requires the other four elements for it

to be sustainable over the medium term.

        In this paper, I explore what additional issues need to be addressed in emerging market

countries to make inflation targeting work for them. I start by outlining why emerging market

economies are so different from advanced economies and then discuss why developing strong

fiscal, financial and monetary institutions is so critical to the success of inflation targeting in

emerging market countries. Then I discuss two emerging market countries which illustrate what

it takes to make inflation targeting work well, Chile and Brazil. I then address a particularly

complicated issue for central banks in emerging market countries who engage in inflation

targeting: how they deal with exchange rate fluctuations. The next topic focuses on the IMF’s

role in promoting the success of inflation targeting in emerging market countries. The

conclusion from this analysis is that inflation targeting is more complicated in emerging market

countries and is thus not a panacea. However, inflation targeting done right can be a powerful

tool to help promote macroeconomic stability in these countries.




WHY EMERGING MARKET ECONOMIES DIFFER FROM ADVANCED
ECONOMIES


        In our paper on the choice of exchange rate regimes in emerging market economies

(Calvo and Mishkin, 2003), Guillermo and I have outlined five fundamental institutional


                                                  -2-
differences for emerging market countries that must be taken into account to derive sound theory

and policy advice. These are:



        • Weak fiscal institutions.

        • Weak financial institutions including government prudential regulation and

          supervision.

        • Low credibility of monetary institutions.

        • Currency substitution and liability dollarization.

        • Vulnerability to sudden stops (of capital inflows).



        Advanced countries are not immune to problems with their fiscal, financial and monetary

institutions, the first three items in the list above, but there is a major difference in the degree of

the problem in emerging market countries. Weak fiscal, financial and monetary institutions

make emerging market countries very vulnerable to high inflation and currency crises, so that the

real value of money cannot be taken for granted. As a result, emerging market countries face the

threat that domestic residents may switch to a foreign currency leading to currency substitution

(Calvo and Végh, 1996). Currency substitution is likely to be due not only to past inflationary

experience but also to the sheer fact that a currency likes the U.S. dollar is a key unit of account

for international transactions. This phenomenon has induced the monetary authority to allow

banks to offer foreign exchange deposits. In this fashion, a sudden switch away from domestic

and into foreign money need not result in a bank run, since in the presence of foreign exchange

deposits, such a portfolio shift could be implemented by simply changing the denomination of


                                                  -3-
bank deposits. Otherwise, deposits would be drawn down to purchase foreign exchange,

resulting in a bank run.

       Foreign exchange deposits induce banks—partly for regulatory reasons that prevent

banks from taking exchange rate risk—to offer loans denominated in foreign currency, usually

dollars, hence leading to what is called liability dollarization. As pointed out in Mishkin (1996)

and Calvo (2001) liability dollarization is what leads to an entirely different impact of currency

crises on the economy in emerging market versus advanced countries. In emerging market

countries, a sharp real currency depreciation raises the value of liabilities in local currency, thus

causing the net worth of corporations and individuals to fall, especially those whose earnings

come from the nontradables sector. This serious negative shock to corporations and individuals’

balance sheets, then increases asymmetric information problems in credit markets, leading to a

sharp decline in lending and an economic contraction. Thus, liability dollarization (where the

currency mismatch takes place in corporates’ and households’ balance sheets) may become a

major problem for economies that are relatively closed and highly indebted (this has typically

been the case in several emerging market countries after the capital-inflow episode in the first

half of the 1990s; see Calvo, Izquierdo and Talvi, 2002). Under those circumstances, the

monetary authority is likely to display “fear of floating” (see Calvo and Reinhart, 2002) i.e., a

reluctance to allow free fluctuations in the nominal exchange rate,2 placing an additional

constraint on emerging market countries’ monetary policy. It should be noted, however, that not




       2
        The main concern is fluctuations in the real exchange rate but, as is well known (see
Mussa, 1986), the real exchange rate shows high correlation with the nominal exchange rate.

                                                 -4-
all emerging market countries suffer from liability dollarization in a serious way (e.g., Chile, and

South Africa, see Eichengreen, Hausmann and Panizza, 2002).

        A dominant phenomenon in emerging market countries is a sudden stop, a large negative

change in capital inflows, which, as a general rule, appear to contain a large unanticipated

component (see Calvo and Reinhart, 2000). This phenomenon is mostly confined to emerging

market countries. It likely hits only emerging market countries because of their weak fiscal and

financial institutions, and it is only recently that it is being subject to systematic empirical

analysis. Preliminary evidence suggests that there is a high degree of bunching of sudden stops

across emerging market countries. This is especially evident after the Russian 1998 crisis, and

the recent Enron et al Wall Street scandals. This leads to the conjecture that, to a large extent,

sudden stops have been a result of factors somewhat external to emerging market countries as a

group. It might have been triggered by crisis in one emerging market country, as the Russian

crisis illustrates, but contagion across emerging market countries was likely due to difficulties

experienced outside these countries, especially in world financial centers (for evidence about

that, see Kaminsky, Reinhart and Vegh, 2003). To illustrate, a possible contagion mechanism is

a liquidity crunch in a financial center triggered by margin calls following unexpected capital

losses, which leads the financial center to dump emerging market securities or, at least, not to

participate in biddings for new debt instruments issued by emerging market countries. Calvo

(1999b) conjectures that this mechanism could explain the large negative impact that the Russian

crisis had over all emerging markets.

        The effect of sudden stops on individual countries is by no means uniform. In Latin

America, for example, Argentina suffered a very serious dislocation, while neighboring Chile


                                                  -5-
escaped relatively unscathed (although Chile has seen its growth rate fall by more than 50

percent). In Asia, Korea has had a strong recovery, while Indonesia is still reeling from the

shock. Tentative analysis suggests that these different outcomes have much to do with initial

conditions. Chile had low debt relative to Argentina and did not suffer from liability

dollarization, while at the time of crisis most debt instruments in Argentina were denominated in

U.S. dollars. On the other hand, even though both Korea and Indonesia suffered from foreign

exchange debt, the former was able to socialize much of the financial problem (as a result

Korea’s debt climbed from about 12 to about 33 percent of GDP in 1996-8). Hence, once again,

debt and currency mismatch appear to have played a crucial role in determining the depth of

crisis.

          In the following sections, we will see how the above institutional features make inflation

targeting a more complicated exercise in emerging market economies than in advanced

economies.



DEVELOPING STRONG FISCAL AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS



          Fiscal stability is a fundamental necessary condition for inflation control and hence

inflation targeting. A key lesson from the “unpleasant monetarist arithmetic” discussed in

Sargent and Wallace (1981) and the recent literature on fiscal theories of the price level

(Woodford, 1994 and 1995) is that irresponsible fiscal policy puts pressure on the monetary

authorities to monetize the debt, thereby producing rapid money growth and high inflation. If

fiscal imbalances are large enough, monetary policy eventually becomes subservient to fiscal


                                                  -6-
considerations (so-called fiscal dominance) and an inflation target would have to be abandoned

or seriously modified.

       Similarly, a safe and sound financial system is also a necessary condition for the success

of an inflation targeting regime. A weak banking system is particularly dangerous. Once a

banking system is in a weakened state, a central bank cannot raise interest rates to sustain the

inflation target because this will likely lead to a collapse of the financial system. Not only can

this cause a breakdown of the inflation targeting regime directly, but it can also lead to a

currency collapse and a financial crisis that also erode the control of inflation. When markets

recognize the weakness of the banking system, there will be a reversal of capital flows out of the

country (a sudden stop) that will result in a sharp depreciation of the exchange rate which leads

to upward pressures on the inflation rate. Moreover, as a result of the currency devaluation,

which most likely accompanies the monetary expansion, the debt burden of domestic firms

which are denominated in foreign currency rises, while the assets which are denominated in

domestic currency do so at a much slower pace, thus leading to decline in net worth. As

described in Mishkin (1996), this deterioration in balance sheets then increases adverse selection

and moral hazard problems in credit markets, leading to a sharp decline in investment and

economic activity, and ultimately a complete collapse of the banking system. The subsequent

bailout of the banking system leads to a huge increase in government liabilities which will have

to be monetized in the future (Burnside, Eichenbaum and Rebelo, 2001), thus undermining the

inflation targeting regime. Unfortunately, the scenario outlined here has happened all too often

in recent years as evidenced by the twin crises (currency and financial) in Chile in 1982, Mexico

in 1994-95, East Asia in 1997, Ecuador in 1999, Turkey in 2000-2001.


                                                 -7-
        Fiscal imbalances can also lead to banking and financial crises that will blow out any

monetary regime to control inflation. As outlined in Mishkin and Savastano (2001), large

budget deficits may force the government to confiscate assets, particularly those in the banking

system and this has indeed happened often in Latin America. The suspicion that this might occur,

would then cause depositors and other creditors to pull their money out of the banking system,

and the resulting banking crisis would then also cause a contraction of lending and the economy.

This happened several times in Argentina’s checkered history, with the most recent variant of

this mechanism occurring in 2001. The Argentine banking system was generally in quite good

shape until 2000, even though the economy had been in a recession for several years. The

strength of the Argentine banking system was the result of a sophisticated prudential regulatory

and supervisory regime put into place after the tequila crisis that made Argentina's prudential

supervision one of the best in the emerging market world (e.g., see Calomiris and Powell (2000).

Large budget deficits forced the Argentine government to look for a new source of funds, the

banking system which was primarily foreign-owned. After Domingo Cavallo became Minister

of the Economy in April 2001 and the central bank president, Pedro Pou, was forced to resign,

prudential supervisory standards were weakened and banks were both encouraged and coerced

into purchasing Argentine government bonds. With the decline in the value of these bonds as

the likelihood of default on this debt increased, bank's net worth plummeted. The likely

insolvency of the banks, then led to a classic run on the banks and a full-scale banking crisis by

the end of 2001. The result was a collapse of currency, a devastating depression and an initial

surge in inflation.




                                                -8-
       The particular problems for inflation control arising from fiscal and financial sector

imbalances are of course not unique to emerging market countries and are a concern in advanced

economies. However, these problems are of a different order of magnitude for emerging market

countries and so must be addressed at the outset if an inflation targeting regime is to be able to

keep inflation under control. Fiscal reforms which increase transparency of the government

budget and budget rules which help keep budget deficits from spinning out of control are needed

to prevent the fiscal imbalances that can lead to a collapse of an inflation targeting regime.3

       Avoiding financial instability requires several types of institutional reforms. First,

prudential regulation of the banking and financial system must be strengthened in order to

prevent these types of financial crises.4 Second, the safety net provided by the domestic

government and the international financial institutions set up by Bretton Woods might need to be

limited in order to reduce the moral hazard incentives for banks to take on too much risk.5 Third,

currency mismatches need to be limited in order to prevent currency devaluations from

destroying balance sheets. Although prudential regulations to ensure that financial institutions

match up any foreign-denominated liabilities with foreign-denominated assets may help reduce

currency risk, they do not go nearly far enough. Even when the banks have equal foreign-



       3
           For a discussion of fiscal reforms, see Perry, et. al (2000) and Tanzi (2000).
       4
       See Mishkin (2003) for a description of what financial policies help prevent financial crises in
emerging market countries.

       5
        For example, recent research, summarized in Demirguc-Kunt and Kane (2002), suggests that
the spread of deposit insurance in emerging market countries has made banking crises more likely.
Other –rather mixed– evidence about the incidence of moral hazard at the international level is provided
by Dell’Ariccia et al. (2000) and Jeanne and Zettelmeyer (2001).


                                                   -9-
denominated (dollar) assets and liabilities, if banks dollar assets are loans to companies in dollars

who themselves are unhedged, then banks' are effectively unhedged against currency

devaluations because the dollar loans become nonperforming when the devaluation occurs.6

Thus limiting currency mismatches may require government policies to limit liability

dollarization or at least reduce the incentives for it to occur.7 Fourth, policies to increase the

openness of an economy may also help limit the severity of financial crises in emerging market

countries. The reason why openness may affect financial fragility is that businesses in the

tradable sector have balance sheets which are less exposed to negative consequences from a

devaluation of the currency when their debts are denominated in foreign currency. Because the

goods they produce are traded internationally, they are more likely to be priced in foreign

currency. Then a devaluation which raises the value of their debt in terms of domestic currency

is also likely to raise the value of their assets as well, thus insulating their balance sheets from

the devaluation. Moreover, as argued in Calvo, Izquierdo and Talvi (2002), the more open is the

economy, the smaller will be the required real currency depreciation following a sudden stop.

Therefore, although firms in the nontradable sector are exposed to balance sheet shocks if they

are liability dollarized, the size of the shock is smaller, the more open is the economy.

       One view is that the fiscal and financial reforms discussed above must be in place before

inflation targeting can even be attempted (Masson, Savastano and Sharma, 1997). However,



       6
        See Mishkin (1996) for how this occurred in Mexico and Garber (1999) for a discussion of how
the prudential regulations for Mexican banks to have a matched book did not protect them from
currency risk.

       7
         Recent papers by Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2002) and Jeanne (2002) suggest that
de-dollarization may require a major overhaul of the domestic financial sector.

                                                 -10-
although fiscal and financial stability are necessary conditions for inflation control, I think the

view that these reforms are prerequisites for attempting an inflation targeting regime in emerging

market countries is too strong. Because inflation targeting commits the government to keeping

inflation low, it can be argued (Brash, 2000, and Bernanke, Laubach, Mishkin and Posen, 1999)

that inflation targeting can help promote fiscal and financial reforms because the it now becomes

clearer that the government must support these reforms if the inflation targeting regime is to be

successful. Also a commitment to inflation control by the government makes it harder for the

government to advocate loose fiscal policy because it is clearly inconsistent with the inflation

target. However, institution of an inflation targeting regime by no means insures fiscal and

financial reforms. If an inflation targeting regime is to be sustainable, a commitment to and

work on these reforms is required when an inflation targeting regime is implemented.




DEVELOPING STRONG MONETARY INSTITUTIONS



       Two underlying monetary institutions are necessary for the ability of the monetary

authorities to keep inflation under control. The first is a public and institutional commitment to

price stability as the overriding long-run goal of monetary policy. The institutional commitment

can be written into law as it is in central bank legislation in many countries, most prominent

among which are the EMU countries, and this is clearly helpful in giving a mandate to the

central bank to control inflation. Inflation targeting takes this institutional commitment even

further by defining what is price stability more specifically by providing a numerical inflation


                                                 -11-
target as the objective for monetary policy. However, it is important to recognize that laws may

matter less than the general public and politicians’ commitment to support price stability. Here

past history matters. Many emerging market countries have had a history of poor support for the

price stability goal and since laws are easily overturned in these countries, it is not clear that

laws will be sufficient.

        The second institutional arrangement necessary for the success of inflation targeting is a

public and institutional commitment to instrument independence of the central bank.8 Instrument

independence means that the central bank is prohibited from funding government deficits, has to

be allowed to set the monetary policy instruments without interference from the government and

the members of the monetary policy board must be insulated from the political process by giving

them long-term appointments and protection from arbitrary dismissal. There is a large literature

on central bank independence and the forms that it takes (see Cukierman, 1992 and Forder 2000

for a recent survey), but again what is written down in the law may be less important than the

political culture and history of the country. The contrast between Argentina and Canada is

instructive here. Legally, the central bank of Canada does not look all that independent because

the government has the ultimate responsibility for the conduct of monetary policy. In the event

of a disagreement between the Bank of Canada and the government, the minister of finance can

issue a directive that the bank must follow. However because the directive must be specific and




        8
         There is an important distinction between goal and instrument independence (Debelle and
Fischer, 1994 and Fischer, 1994). Instrument independence is the ability of the central bank to set
monetary policy instruments without government interference, while goal independence means that the
monetary authorities set the goals for monetary policy. The standard view in the literature is that central
banks should have instrument but not goal independence.


                                                   -12-
in writing, and because the Bank of Canada is a trusted public institution, a government override

of the bank is likely to be highly unpopular and this will rarely occur. Thus in practice the Bank

of Canada is highly independent. In contrast, the central bank of Argentina was highly

independent from a legal perspective. However, this did not stop the Argentine government

from forcing the resignation of the highly respected president of the central bank Pedro Pou in

April of 2001 and his replacement with a president who would do the government's bidding.

Indeed, it is unimaginable in countries like Canada, the United States or in Europe, that the

public would tolerate the removal of the head of the central bank in such a manner, and indeed I

do not know of any case of this happening in recent history.9 Thus a strong legal commitment to

central bank independence without genuine public and political support for this independence,

may not be enough to ensure monetary policies that will focus on inflation control in many

emerging market countries.

       An important advantage of inflation targeting is that it allows the monetary authorities

some discretion and flexibility to use monetary policy to cope with shocks to the domestic

economy. Indeed, as argued by Fraga, Goldfajn and Minella (2003), this flexibility is even more

important in emerging market countries because they are subject to larger shocks. Inflation

targeting regimes typically have built in flexibility to allow them to achieve their inflation target

over longer horizons and are better characterized as “flexible inflation targeting” as is described

in Svensson (1997) and Bernanke, Laubach, Mishkin and Posen (1999). This advantage of



       9
         However, except for the Great Depression, advanced countries have not been hit by
equally large shocks as in Argentina. Thus, the stability of the central bank in advanced
countries may be partly explained by the size of the shocks and, in particular, the general
absence of sudden stops.

                                                -13-
inflation targeting is also its weakness. Critics of inflation targeting, of whom Guillermo has

been a prominent one (e.g., Calvo, 1999a, Calvo, 2001 and Calvo and Mendoza, 2000), have

argued that inflation targeting may allow too much discretion to monetary policy and so may not

provide a sufficient nominal anchor. However, as pointed out in Bernanke and Mishkin (1997)

inflation targeting should be seen as a regime of "constrained discretion". Transparent

discussions of the conduct of monetary policy can make it more difficult for the central bank to

follow overly expansionary monetary policy, while accountability means that the central bank

pays a high price if it engages in discretionary policy that leads to high inflation. However,

Guillermo is quite quite correct that inflation targeting is no panacea. In order for inflation

targeting to work to constrain discretion, it has to be supported by the public and the political

process. Inflation targeting can help focus the public debate so that it supports a monetary policy

focus on long-run goals such as price stability as has occurred in many inflation targeting

countries (Bernanke, Laubach, Mishkin and Posen, 1999). However, these benefits require even

more transparency and excellent communication skills on the part of the central bank in the more

politically complicated environment in emerging market countries. Even excellent

communication may not be enough if the political environment is incapable of supporting an

independent central bank that focuses on inflation control.




TWO CASE STUDIES OF INFLATION TARGETING IN EMERGING MARKET
COUNTRIES: THE CHILEAN AND BRAZILIAN EXAMPLES




                                                -14-
       Despite the challenges to getting inflation targeting to work successfully, inflation

targeting has been successfully in promoting macroeconomic stability in a number of emerging

market countries. Here we will look at two case studies, Chile and Brazil, that illustrate that

institutional development along the lines discussed above has been critical to the success of

inflation targeting in the emerging market context.

       Chile is the poster child for inflation targeting regimes in emerging market countries

because it has had great success in lowering inflation to levels found in advanced countries,

while at the same time experiencing very rapid economic growth.10 From 1991, when the

inflation targeting regime started, to the present, Chile has been able to lower inflation rates from

above 20% to around 2% currently. Over the same period, output growth has been very high,

averaging 6% per year from 1991 to 2002. However, it is important to emphasize that the

success of Chile's inflation targeting regime has been based on development of the requisite

institutions we have discussed here. Over the 1991-2002 period Chile's budget surplus averaged

a little under 1% of GDP. In addition, due largely to the measures taken in the aftermath of the

severe banking crisis in the early 1980s (costing over 40% of GDP), Chile developed banking

regulation and supervisory practices that are among the best in the emerging market world

(Caprio, 1998) and are viewed as comparable to those found in advanced countries. As a result,

even during the tequila crisis of 1995, the Russian meltdown of 1998 and the current difficulties

in Latin America, the soundness of Chile's financial system has never come into question. The

controls on short-term capital inflows have also been cited as another important factor behind the


       10
        For those of you who don’t know this expression, a poster child is a beautiful, but
disadvantaged, child that is put on a poster (or advertisement) for a charity in order to stimulate
donations.

                                                -15-
relative stability of the Chilean economy in the 1990s. However, these controls are very

controversial and it is not at all clear that they have made a significant contribution to Chile's

success (de Gregorio, Edwards and Valdes, 2000 and Edwards, 1999).

        Chile also has worked on developing strong monetary institutions. In 1989 Chile passed

new central bank legislation (which took effect in 1990 just before the start of the inflation

targeting regime) that gave independence to the central bank and mandated price stability as its

primary objective. Indeed, as pointed out in Landerretche et al. (1999) Chile only gradually

hardened up its inflation targeting regime over time, with the announced inflation objective initially

being interpreted more as official inflation projects rather than formal or "hard" targets. Only after

the central bank already had some success with disinflation by 1994 did the inflation projections

become hard targets with the central bank accountable for meeting them. Furthermore, until August

1999, Chile had an exchange-rate band around a crawling peg and in 1998 it actually fixed its

exchange rate for a time (although this was a mistake that will be discussed in the next section and

was reversed later).11 Thus Chile has exhibited some "fear of floating" along the lines described by

Calvo and Reinhart (2002). Indeed, Chile's inflation targeting regime should be seen as very

evolutionary, with Chile going to a full-fledged inflation targeting regime only in May 2000 (see

Mishkin and Savastano, 2002).

        Brazil implemented inflation targeting shortly after the real collapsed in January 1999.

After much confusion, in early February the new central bank president, Arminio Fraga, announced

that Brazil would soon be adopting an inflation targeting strategy, while at the same time putting his




11
 See Mishkin and Savastano (2002).


                                                 -16-
money where his mouth was by increasing the interbank policy interest rate by 600 basis points to

45%. On June 21, the President of Brazil issued a decree instituting an inflation targeting

framework. This framework included all the features of a full-fledged inflation targeting regime,

including: 1) the announcement of multi-year inflation targets (with explicit numerical targets for the

12-month rate of inflation in the years 1999, 2000 and 2001, and a commitment to announce the

targets for 2002 two years in advance; 2) assigning the National Monetary Council the responsibility

for setting the inflation targets and tolerance ranges based on a proposal by the Minister of Finance;

3) giving to the central bank of Brazil full responsibility to implement the policies needed to attain

the inflation targets; 4) establishing procedures to increase the central bank’s accountability

(specifically, if the target range is breached, the central bank president would have to issue an open

letter to the Minister of Finance explaining the causes of the deviation, the measures that will be

taken to eliminate it, and the time it will take to get inflation back inside the tolerance range) and 5)

taking actions to improve the transparency of monetary policy (concretely, the central bank was

requested to issue a quarterly Inflation Report modeled after that produced by the Bank of England).

        Brazil’s adoption of inflation targeting was not preceded by prior development of all the

fiscal, financial and monetary reforms that were discussed earlier. First, the 1999 collapse of the

real can be attributed to the inability of the Brazilian government to put its fiscal house in order: the

currency crisis was prompted by a moratorium on debt payments at the beginning of January by the

governor of a Brazilian state, Minas Gerais. Brazil then did take steps to improve its fiscal balances

under its program with the IMF, but there were still doubts about the durability of Brazil’s fiscal

reforms (e.g., see Mishkin and Savastano, 2002.) On the other hand, Brazil did have a strong

banking system because it had undergone a major restructuring following the banking crisis of


                                                  -17-
1994-96 (see Caprio and Klingebiel, 1999.) The independence of Brazil’s central bank and the

commitment to price stability, however, were not clear cut. Both were based on a presidential

decree and confidence in a superb central bank president, but not on a more formal commitment

based on legislation.

       To the surprise of many, the inflation targeting strategy seemed to work. The initial inflation

targets were set at 8% for 1999, 6% for 2000 and 4% for 2001, with a tolerance range of ±2%.

There was a remarkably small pass-through from the large depreciation of the real (which fell by

45% on impact and thereafter stabilized at 30% below its pre-devaluation level) for several months,

the output contraction was contained (in fact, annual GDP grew by almost 1 percent in 1999), Brazil

was not cut-off from external financing--though there was some “arm twisting” involved-- and there

were no major bank runs. By March 1999, asset prices had started to recover, the real appreciated

and the central bank found room to lower interest rates--which it did, quite aggressively (from a high

of 45% to below 20% in a seven-months period). Inflation and the exchange rate remained subdued

through October, when the monthly inflation rate rose to 1.2%, the largest monthly increase since

June 1996, and the exchange rate crossed, briefly, the then “critical” mark of R$2.00 per U.S.

dollar. In the event, inflation in 1999 reached 8.9%, above the 8% target for the year but well within

the 2 percent tolerance range; during 2000 inflation continued falling, and closed the year right at the

6% mid-point target set by the central bank in mid-1999. However, in 2001, the inflation rate

exceeded the 4% inflation target by more than the 2% tolerance range, ending up at 7.7%.

       The weakness of some aspects of the institutional framework for fiscal and monetary policy

did come back to haunt the inflation targeting regime in Brazil. In the runup to the presidential

election in October 2002, the market had concerns that the front-runner, Lula, would weaken fiscal


                                                 -18-
and monetary institutions. Lula had made statements that seemed to indicate that once in office he

would encourage fiscal policy to be highly expansionary and would not take steps to prevent a

possible default on Brazil’s foreign debt. He also indicated that he would not reappoint the highly

respected president of the central bank, Arminio Fraga, and Lula’s commitment to the independence

of the central bank, price stability and the inflation targeting regime was far from clear. Not

surprisingly, the lack of market confidence in Lula, who was then elected President led to a sharp

depreciation of the Brazilian real and a sharp upward spike to inflation to 12.5%, which

substantially overshot the inflation target of 3.5% for 2002. The impact of the Brazilian election on

the inflation targeting regime illustrate that weak fiscal and monetary institutions are likely to create

severe problems for an inflation targeting regime.

        However, the response of the Brazilian government and central bank to the overshoots of the

inflation targets illustrates that inflation targeting can help keep inflation under control in the face of

big shocks like the real depreciation in 2002. As noted above, under the presidential decree that

gave birth to inflation targeting, the Banco Central do Brasil was required to submit an open letter

to the Ministry of Finance explaining the causes of the breach of the inflation target and what steps

would be taken to get the inflation rate back down again. Given the large overshoot of the inflation

targets, central bank credibility was on the line and the Banco Central do Brasil performed

brilliantly. It explained how it would modify its inflation targets and what inflation path it would

shoot for in the future with a very high degree of transparency (see Fraga, Goldfajn and Minella,

2003). First it explained why the exchange rate had overshot, and made explicit estimates of the

size of the shocks and their persistence. It estimated the regulated-price shock to be 1.7% and

estimated the inertia from past shocks to be 4.2% of which 2/3 was to be accepted, resulting in a


                                                   -19-
further adjustment of 2.8%. Then the central bank added these two numbers to the previously

announced target of 4% to get an adjusted inflation target for 2003 of 8.5% (=4% + 1.7% + 2.8%).

The adjusted target was then announced in the open letter sent to the Minister of Finance in January

2003, which explained that getting to the non-adjusted target of 4% too quickly would entail far too

high a loss of output. Specifically, the letter indicated that an attempt to achieve an inflation rate of

6.5% in 2003 would be expected to entail a decline of 1.6% of GDP, while trying to achieve the

non-adjusted target of 4% would be expected to lead to an even larger decline of GDP of 7.3%.

        The procedure followed by the Banco Central do Brasil was a textbook case for central bank

response to shocks in emerging market countries. First the procedure had tremendous transparency,

both in articulating why the initial inflation target was missed, but also how the central bank was

responding to the shock and plans to return to its longer-run inflation goal. This degree of

transparency helped minimize the loss of credibility from the target miss and the need to adjust the

short-term inflation target. Second, the central bank recognized that not adjusting the inflation target

was just not credible because the market and the public clearly recognized that inflation would

overshoot the initial target. Thus adjusting the target was absolutely necessary to retain credibility

for the central bank, because to do otherwise would have just signaled to the markets that the central

bank was unwilling to be transparent. Third, by discussing alternative paths for the inflation rate

and why the particular path using the adjusted target was chosen, the central bank was able to

demonstrate that it was not what Mervyn King (1996) has referred to as an “inflation nutter” who

only cares about controlling inflation and not about output fluctuations. By its procedure of

outlining that lower inflation paths would lead to large output losses, the Banco Central do Brasil

demonstrated that it was not out of touch with the concerns of the public because it indeed does care


                                                  -20-
about output losses, just as the public and the politicians do. This procedure is then likely to

promote public and political support for central bank independence.

         The outcome from this episode has been very favorable. After the initial spike, Brazil’s

inflation rate and interest rates have been coming down rapidly. From its level of 12.5% in 2002,

the inflation rate fell to 9.3% by the end of 2003, which is within the central bank tolerance range for

the adjusted inflation target of 8.5%. Market expectations of inflation have also dropped

dramatically and now suggest that the market expects the central bank to meet its inflation targets in

2004. The interbank policy interest rate has also fallen from 26.5% in June 2003 to 16.3% in

February 2004. Also after the initial decline in GDP, the Brazilian economy has begun growing

again.

         The Brazilian central bank has not been able to do this on its own. Given the discussion in

this paper, an important component of a successful response to an inflation shock of this magnitude

is growing confidence in government fiscal policy. President Lula has surprised many of his

detractors by supporting measures to maintain fiscal discipline. He supported and got legislation

passed in August 2003 to reform the public pension system to make it fiscally sustainable. His

government has also pursued conservative spending policies that have resulted in a primary budget

surplus in 2003 of 4.3% of GDP which is above the target of 4.25% requested by the IMF. Of

course there are still concerns about how Brazil will proceed in the future. A new central bank law

that would strengthen the independence of the Banco Central do Brasil and would provide a firmer

institutional basis for inflation targeting has not yet been passed. Also given the pressures on the

Lula government from the left, continuing fiscal responsibility is not completely assurred.




                                                 -21-
        The examples of Chile and Brazil illustrate that inflation targeting is indeed feasible in

emerging market economies, despite their more complicated political and economic environment.

Inflation targeting has been able to provide a strong nominal anchor that can keep inflation

expectations in check. However, this requires not only a focus on good communication and

transparency by the central bank, but also supportive policies to develop strong fiscal, financial and

monetary institutions. The Brazilian case suggests that these policies do not have to be fully in place

when inflation targeting is adopted for it to produce good macroeconomic outcomes, but it is

important to have a strong commitment to develop these institutions and continuing vigilance that

fiscal, financial and monetary institutions will continue to be strengthened.



DEALING WITH EXCHANGE RATE FLUCTUATIONS



        The special features of emerging market economies outlined in the first section of the paper

suggests that emerging market countries are likely to have greater concerns about exchange rate

fluctuations than advanced countries do. Because of their past history and lower credibility in their

ability to keep inflation under control, emerging market countries are more likely to find that

depreciations lead to a rise in inflation as a result of the pass through from higher import prices and

greater demand for exports.

        In addition, liability dollarization means that depreciations are particularly dangerous

because they can trigger a financial crisis along the lines suggested in Mishkin (1996, 1999). These

countries have much of their debt denominated in foreign currency and when the currency

depreciates, this increases the debt burden of domestic firms. Since assets are typically denominated


                                                 -22-
in domestic currency and so do not increase in value, there is a resulting decline in net worth. This

deterioration in balance sheets then increases adverse selection and moral hazard problems, which

leads to financial instability and a sharp decline in investment and economic activity. This

mechanism explains why the currency crises in Chile in 1982, Mexico in 1994-95, East Asia in

1997, Ecuador in 1999, Turkey in 2000-2001 and Argentina in 2001-2002 pushed these countries

into full-fledged financial crises, which had devastating effects on their economies.

         Given the potential devastating impact of currency depreciation on the financial system and

the possibility that it will lead to a burst of inflation means provides a reason for central banks in

emerging market countries not to pursue benign neglect of exchange rates even when they are

inflation targeting. In order to prevent sharp depreciations of their currencies, which can destroy

balance sheets and trigger a financial crisis, central banks in these countries may have to smooth

exchange rate fluctuations. However, there is a danger that monetary policy, even under an

inflation-targeting regime, may put too much focus on limiting exchange rate movements. The

possibility of “fear of floating” (Calvo and Reinhart, 2002) when emerging market countries engage

in inflation targeting is a real one.

        The first problem with too strong a focus on limiting exchange rate movements is that it runs

the risk of transforming the exchange rate into a nominal anchor that takes precedence over the

inflation target. This has been a problem recently in Hungary, a transition country which has an

exchange rate target as part of its inflation targeting regime (Jonas and Mishkin, 2003). For

example, when the Hungarians adopted inflation targeting in July 2001, they retained an exchange

rate band ±15 percent. Pursuing two nominal objectives could result in a situation where one

objective will need to be given preference over the second objective, but without a clear guidance


                                                  -23-
how such conflict would be resolved. This is likely to make monetary policy less transparent and

hinder the achievement of the inflation target. Indeed, this is what has happened in Hungary In

January 2003, the forint appreciated to the upper end of the band, and speculation about the

revaluation of the parity resulted in a sharp acceleration of capital inflows that forced the National

Bank of Hungary to respond by cutting interest rates by 2 percentage points and intervening heavily

in the foreign exchange market. The National Bank of Hungary is reported to have bought more

than 5 billion euros, increasing international reserves by 50 percent and base money by 70 percent.12

Even though the National Bank of Hungary began subsequently to sterilize this huge injection of

liquidity, market participants then assumed that maintaining the exchange rate band would have a

priority over the inflation target and expected inflation in 2003 to exceed the National Bank of

Hungary’s inflation target.by 5 percentage points..13 The outcome was that in 2003 Hungary did

indeed overshoot its target, but by a somewhat smaller 2.2 percentage points.14

        The second problem from too strong a focus on limiting exchange rate fluctuations is that

the impact of changes in exchange rates on inflation and output can differ substantially depending

on the nature of the shock that causes the exchange rate movement. Different monetary policy

responses therefore depend on the nature of the shock. If the domestic currency depreciates because

of a pure portfolio shock, inflation is likely to rise and the appropriate response to keep inflation

under control is for the monetary authorities to tighten monetary policy and raise interest rates. In

        12
             See J.P. Morgan (2003).
        13
          Analysts have interpreted this as an evidence that the NBH is determined to maintain
the currency band even at the cost of temporary higher inflation. See IMF (2002).
        14
         Israel also had a fairly tight exchange rate band during the early years of its inflation
targeting regime and this caused it to experience similar difficulties. See Bernanke, Laubach,
Mishkin and Posen (1999) and Leiderman (2000).

                                                  -24-
emerging market countries which have substantial liability dollarization, tightening monetary policy

to prevent a sharp depreciation may be even more necessary to avoid financial instability (for the

reasons mentioned above). On the other hand, if the exchange rate depreciation occurs because of

real shocks, the impact is less likely to be inflationary and a different monetary policy response is

warranted, but even here it depends on the nature of the shock. A negative terms-of-trade shock,

which lowers demand for exports, reduces aggregate demand and is thus likely to be deflationary. In

this situation, the correct interest rate response is to lower interest rates to counteract the drop in

aggregate demand, and not to raise interest rates.

         The mistakes that the Chilean central bank made in 1998 illustrates how serious the second

problem can be. Chile's inflation targeting regime also included a focus on limiting exchange rate

fluctuations by having an exchange rate band with a crawling peg which was (loosely) tied to lagged

domestic inflation. Instead of easing monetary policy in the face of the negative terms-of-trade

shock, the central bank raised interest rates sharply and even narrowed its exchange rate band. In

hindsight, these decisions were a mistake: the inflation target was undershot and the economy

entered a recession for the first time in the 1990s.15 With this outcome, the central bank came under

strong criticism for the first time since it had adopted its inflation targeting regime in 1990,

weakening support for the independence of the central bank and its inflation targeting regime.

During 1999, the central bank did reverse course, easing monetary policy by lowering interest rates


    15
      Given its location in Latin America, Chile’s central bank did have to worry about a loss
    of credibility from exchange rate deprecation. Also because Chile encountered a sudden
    stop of capital inflows at the time, the ability of the Chilean central bank to pursue
    countercyclical policy was limited. However, although lowering interest rates in 1998
    may not have been as attractive an option as it was in a country like Australia, which
    responded to the terms-of-trade shock by easing monetary policy, the sharp rise in the
    policy interest rate in 1998 was clearly a policy mistake.

                                                   -25-
and allowing the peso to decline, and in May 2000 it revised its inflation targeting regime to reduce

its focus on exchange rates.

         The conclusion from the discussion here is that there is a rationale for central banks in

emerging market countries to smooth exchange rates, but they can go to far. To cope with potential

problems of financial instability, but preserve the focus on inflation control, central banks could

increase the transparency of any intervention in the foreign exchange market by making it clear to

the public that the purpose of the intervention is to smooth “excessive” exchange-rate fluctuations

and not to prevent the exchange rate from reaching its market-determined level over longer

horizons. However, continuing exchange market interventions, particularly unsterilized ones, are

likely to be counterproductive because they are not transparent. Instead, exchange rate smoothing

via changes in the interest rate instrument will be more transparent and indicate that the nominal

anchor continues to be the inflation target and not the exchange rate. Central banks could also

explain to the public the rationale for exchange rate intervention in a manner analogous to that for

interest-rate smoothing, i.e., as a policy aimed not at resisting market-determined movements in an

asset price, but at mitigating potentially destabilizing effects of abrupt and sustained changes in that

price.

         It is also important for central banks to recognize that the pass-through from exchange rate

changes to inflation is likely to be regime dependent. After a sustained period of low inflation

engineered by an inflation targeting regime, the affect of the exchange rate on the expectations-

formation process and price setting practices of households and firms in the economy is likely to




                                                  -26-
fall.16 Thus, inflation targeting is likely to help limit the pass-through from exchange rates to

inflation and the view that a currently high pass-through is a barrier to successful inflation targeting

is unwarranted.




HOW CAN THE IMF HELP?



        A theme in both this and my recent paper with Guillermo (Calvo and Mishkin, 2003) is that

developing strong fiscal, financial and monetary institutions is the key to successful macroeconomic

policy. One way the IMF can help emerging market countries who choose to inflation target is to

provide them with better incentives to develop these institutions. Instead of trying to impose a large

number of conditions on countries as when the IMF lending program is put into effect, the IMF can

provide the right incentives by being more willing to extend programs ex ante to countries who are

making a serious attempt at reform, while saying no to governments who are unwilling to do so.

        In addition, the IMF conditions for evaluating monetary policy under its programs can be

modified to reflect the special features of inflation targeting regimes. In the past, a key element of

IMF conditionality was ceilings on the growth rate of net domestic assets. Unfortunately, net

domestic assets conditionality which is derived under the IMF’s “financial programming”

framework is based on an outdated theory, the monetary approach to the balance of payments (see

Mussa and Savastano, 1999), which requires that the growth rate of monetary aggregates is closely



        16
         See Muinhos (2001), Frenkel (2002) and Minella, de Freitas, Goldfajn and Muinhos
(2002, 2003).

                                                  -27-
linked to inflation. However, the linkage between monetary aggregates and inflation is almost

always found to be very weak when inflation rates are reasonably low as is the case for emerging

market countries that have adopted inflation targeting. As a result targets for net domestic asset

targets are likely to lead to inappropriate setting of monetary policy instruments and are likely to

decrease monetary policy transparency.

        In an inflation targeting regime, it seems natural to replace net domestic asset conditionality

with assessment of the country’s inflation performance. Indeed, this is what the IMF moved to in

evaluating monetary policy under its program for Brazil when inflation targeting was adopted in

1999. The IMF program has conducted quarterly reviews on how well Brazil has done in meeting

its inflation targets, but there is still a problem that the IMF evaluation is essentially backward

looking (Blejer, Leone, Rabanal, and Schwartz, 2001)

        Inflation targeting is inherently forward-looking so the issue arises as to how IMF

conditionality might be modified to be more forward looking. One approach would be for the IMF

to monitor monetary policy institutions. Specifically, the IMF conditions could focus on the degree

of central bank independence, whether the central bank mandate focuses on price stability as the

long-run overriding goal of monetary policy, and whether transparency and accountability of the

central bank is high. As part of this monitoring, the IMF could conduct a careful assessment of

central bank procedures as to the legitimacy of its forecasting process and whether the central bank

provides adequate explanations for misses of its inflation targets. In a sense this shift in approach is

similar to the shift in approach that has occurred in bank supervision in recent years. In the past

bank supervision was also quite backward looking in that it focused on the current state of banks’

balance sheets. However, this backward-looking approach is no longer adequate in today’s world,


                                                  -28-
in which financial innovation has produced new markets and instruments that make it easy for banks

and their employees to make huge bets easily and quickly. In this new financial environment, a

bank that is quite healthy at a particular point in time can be driven into insolvency extremely

rapidly from trading losses, as forcefully demonstrated by the failure of Barings in 1995. Thus bank

examinations have now become far more forward looking and now place much greater emphasis on

evaluating the soundness of a bank’s management processes with regard to controlling risk.

Similarly, the IMF could shift its conditionality to focus on the management processes in central

banks to keep inflation under control.



CONCLUDING REMARKS



        It has been my honor have Guillermo Calvo as a close friend for over twenty years, ever

since he helped recruit me to come to Columbia Univeristy. Guillermo has always cared deeply

about applying economic analysis to promote better outcomes in emerging market countries and his

work has been an inspiration to me. This paper expands on many themes in Guillermo’s research.

The bottom line from the analysis here is that inflation targeting can be an effective tool for

emerging market countries to manage their monetary policy. However, to ensure that inflation

targeting produces superior macroeconomic outcomes, emerging market countries would benefit by

focusing even more attention on institutional development, while international financial institutions

like the IMF can help by providing these countries with better incentives to engage in this

development. The hope is that this will lead to better economic performance in these countries over

the coming years.


                                                 -29-
                                        REFERENCES

Bernanke, B., T. Laubach, F. Mishkin, and A. Posen, 1999, Inflation Targeting: Lessons from the
International Experience, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press

Bernanke, Ben S. and Frederic S. Mishkin (1997). “Inflation Targeting: A New Framework for
Monetary Policy?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 11(2): 97-116.

Blejer, Mario I., Alfredo M. Leone, Pau Rabanal, and Gerd Schwartz (2001), "Inflation
Targeting in the Context of IMF-Supported Adjustment Programs", IMF Working Paper no. 01/31,
March.

Brash, Donald T. 2000. "Inflation Targeting in New Zealand, 1988-2000," Speech to the Trans-
Tasman Business Cycle, Melbourne, February 9.

Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum and Sergio Rebelo (2001). “Prospective Deficits and the Asian
Currency Crisis,” Journal of Political Economy 109(6): 1155-1197.

Caballero, Ricardo J. and Arvind Krishnamurthy (2002). “Excessive Dollar Debt: Financial
Development and Underinsurance,” mimeographed, MIT.

Calomiris and Andrew Powel (2000) “Can Emerging Market Bank Regulators Establish Credible
Discipline? The Case of Argentina, 1992-1999” NBER Working Paper 7715

Calvo, Guillermo A. (1999a) “Capital Markets and the Exchange Rate,” mimeo, University of
Maryland, October

Calvo, Guillermo A. (1999b). “Contagion in Emerging Markets: when Wall Street is the carrier,”
mimeographed, University of Maryland.

Calvo, Guillermo A. (2001). “Capital Markets and the Exchange Rate: with Special Reference to the
Dollarization Debate in Latin America,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 33(2): 312-334.

Calvo, Guillermo A., Alejandro Izquierdo and Ernesto Talvi (2002). “Sudden Stops, the Real
Exchange Rate and Fiscal Sustainability: Argentina’s Lessons,” IADB Working Paper No. 469.

Calvo, G. and E. Mendoza, 2000, “Capital-Market Crises and Economic Collapse in
EmergingMarkets: An Informational-Frictions Approach,” mimeo, Duke University and University
of Maryland, January

Calvo, Guillermo and Frederic S. Mishkin, "The Mirage of Exchange Rate Regimes for
Emerging Market Countries," Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 17, No. 4 (Fall 2003).




                                               -30-
Calvo, Guillermo A. and Carmen M. Reinhart (2000). “When Capital Flows Come to a Sudden
Stop: Consequences and Policy,” in Peter B. Kenen and Alexander K. Swoboda, eds., Reforming the
International Monetary and Financial System (Washington, DC: IMF).

Calvo, Guillermo A. and Carmen M. Reinhart (2002). “Fear of Floating” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 117(2): 379-408.

Calvo, Guillermo A. and Carlos A. Végh (1996). “From Currency Substitution to Dollarization and
Beyond: Analytical and Policy Issues,” in Guillermo A. Calvo, Money, Exchange Rates, and Output
(Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press): 153-175.

Caprio, Gerald, Jr. (1998). “Banking on Crises: Expensive Lessons from Recent Financial
Crises,” World Bank Working Paper No. 1979,

Caprio, G. and D. Klingebiel, 1999. “Episodes of Systemic and Borderline Financial Crises,”
World Bank, mimeo, October

Cukierman, Alex, 1992. Central Bank Strategy, Credibility and Independence: Theory and
Evidence (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press).

Debelle, Guy and Stanley Fischer (1994). “How Independent Should a Central Bank Be?” in
Jeffrey C. Fuhrer, ed., Goals, Guidelines, and Constraints Facing Monetary Policymakers,
Conference Series 38 (Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston): 195-221.

De Gregorio, Jose, Sebastian Edwards and Rodrigo O. Valdes (2000). “Controls on Capital
Inflows: Do They Work?” NBER Working Paper No. w7645.

Dell'Ariccia, Giovanni, Isabel Gödde and Jeromin Zettelmeyer (2000). “Moral Hazard and
International Crisis Lending: A Test,” mimeographed, International Monetary Fund.

Demirguc-Kunt, Asli and Edward J. Kane (2002). “Deposit Insurance around the Globe: Where
Does it Work?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 16(2): 175-195.

Edwards, S., 1999, “How Effective are Controls on Capital Inflows? An Evaluation of
Chile’s Experience,” mimeo, UCLA, June

Eichengreen, Barry, Ricardo Hausmann and Ugo Panizza (2002). “Original Sin: The Pain, the
Mystery, and the Road to Redemption,” presented at the conference Currency and Maturity
Matchmaking: Redeeming Debt from Original Sin, IADB, Washington, DC, November 21-22.

Fischer, Stanley (1994). “Modern Central Banking,” in Forrest Capie, Charles A. E. Goodhart,
Stanley Fischer, and Norbert Schnadt, eds., The Future of Central Banking: The Tercentenary
Symposium of the Bank of England (Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press): 262-308.


                                              -31-
Fraga, Arminio, Goldfajn Ilan and Minella André Minella, 2003, “Inflation Targeting in Emerging
Market Economies” NBER Macro Annual, forthcoming.

Frenkel, Jacob (2002) “The Transition to Inflation Targeting” in in Banco de Mexico, Stabilization
and Monetary Policy: The International Experience (Bank of Mexico: Mexico City).

Forder, James (2000) “Central Bank Independence and Credibility: Is There a Shred of Evidence?:
Review” International Finance, vol. 3, no. 1, April: 167-85.

Garber, Peter (1999). “Hard-Wiring to the Dollar: From Currency Board to Currency Zone,” in
Global Markets Research (London: Deutsche Bank).

International Monetary Fund (2002), Global Market Monitor, December 17.

Jeanne, Olivier (2002). “Why Do Emerging Economies Borrow in Foreign Currency?” presented at
the conference Currency and Maturity Matchmaking: Redeeming Debt from Original Sin, IADB,
Washington, DC, November 21-22.

Jeanne, Olivier and Jeromin Zettelmeyer (2001). “International Bailouts, Moral Hazard, and
Conditionality,” Economic Policy 33: 409-432.

Jonas, Jiri and Frederic S. Mishkin (2003) "Inflation Targeting in Transition Countries:
Experience and Prospects," NBER Working Paper No. 9667 (May), forthcoming in Michael
Woodford, ed., Inflation Targeting (University of Chicago Press: Chicago)

Kaminsky, Graciela L, Reinhart, Carmen M, and Carlos A. Vegh (2003). “The Unholy Trinity of
Financial Contagion,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, forthcoming.

King, Mervyn, 1996. "How Should Central Banks Reduce Inflation?- Conceptual Issues," in
Achieving Price Stability, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Kansas City, MO: 53-91.

Landerretche, Oscar, Felipe Morandé and Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel (1999). “Inflation Targets and
Stabilization in Chile,” Central Bank of Chile Working Paper No. 55.

Leidermann, Leonardo (2000), “Inflation Targeting Under a Crawling Band: Lessons from Israel,”
in Mario Blejer et al. (eds), “Inflation Targeting in Practice: Strategic and Operational Issues and
Application to Emerging Market Economies.” International Monetary Fund, Washington, D.C.

Masson, P., M. Savastano, and S. Sharma, 1997, “The Scope for Inflation
Targeting in Developing Countries,” IMF Working Paper 97/130, October

Minella André, Paulo Springer de Freitas, Ilan Goldfajn, and Marcelo Kfoury Muinhos (2002)
“Inflation Targeting in Brazil: Lessons and Challenges” Banco Central do Brazil Working Paper 53,
Nov. 2002


                                                -32-
Minella André, Paulo Springer de Freitas, Ilan Goldfajn, and Marcelo Kfoury Muinhos (2003)
“Inflation Targeting in Brazil: Constructing Credibility under Exchange Rate Volatility” Banco
Central do Brazil Working Paper 77, Dec. 2003

Mishkin, Frederic S. (1996). “Understanding Financial Crises: A Developing Country Perspective,”
Annual World Bank Conference on Development Economics: 29-62.

Mishkin, Frederic S. (1999). “Lessons from the Asian Crisis,” Journal of International Money and
Finance 18(4): 709-723.

Mishkin, Frederic S. (2003) "Financial Policies and the Prevention of Financial Crises in
Emerging Market Countries," in Martin Feldstein, ed., Economic and Financial Crises in
Emerging Market Countries (University of Chicago Press: Chicago): 93-130.

Mishkin, Frederic S. and Miguel Savastano (2001). “Monetary Policy Strategies for Latin America,”
Journal of Development Economics 66(2): 415-444.

Mishkin, Frederic S. And Miguel Savastano, 2002. "Monetary Policy Strategies for Emerging
Market Countries: Lessons from Latin America," Comparative Economic Studies Vol. XLIV,
No. 2 (Summer 2002): 45-83.

Morgan, J.P. (2003), Emerging Europe, Middle East & Africa Weekly, January 31.

Muinhos, Marcelo Kfoury (2001) “Inflation Targeting in an Open Financially Integrated Emerging
Economy: the case of Brazil” Banco Central do Brazil Working Paper 26, August 2001

Mussa, Michael (1986). “Nominal Exchange Rate Regimes and the Behavior of Real Exchange
Rates: Evidence and Implications,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public
Policy 25: 117-213.

Mussa, Michael and Miguel Savastano (1999) "The IMF Approach to Economic Stabilization,"
NBERMacro Annual 1999: 79-121.

Perry, Guilermo, John Whalley and Gary McMahon (2000) “Fiscal Reform and Structural Change
in Developing Countries” v.2 St. Martin’s Press, New York 2000

Sargent, Thomas and Neil Wallace (1981). “Some Unpleasant Monetarist Arithmetic,” Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 1-17.

Svensson, Lars O. (1997). “Inflation Forecast Targeting: Implementing and Monitoring Inflation
Targets,” European Economic Review 41: 1111-1146.




                                                -33-
Tanzi, Vito (2000) Rationalizing the Government Budget or Why Fiscal Policy Is so Difficult” in
in Anne Krueger, ed. Economic Policy Reform: The Second Stage (University of Chicago
Press: Chicago, 2000).

Woodford, Michael (1994). “Monetary Policy and Price Level Determinacy in a Cash-in-
Advance Economy,” Economic Theory 4: 345-380.

Woodford, Michael (1995). “Price Level Determinacy without Control of a Monetary
Aggregate,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 43: 1-46.




                                             -34-
