NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTERNATIONAL INNOVATION AND DIFFUSION
OF AIR POLLUTION CONTROL TECHNOLOGIES:
THE EFFECTS OF NOX AND SO2 REGULATION
IN THE U.S., JAPAN, AND GERMANY
David Popp
Working Paper 10643
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10643
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2004

The author thanks Neelaskhi Medhi, Miki Ouchi, Jacob Brower and Yonghong Wu for excellent research
assistance, and Eric Welch for help obtaining environmental regulation data from Japan. Financial support
provided by DOE grant DE-FG02-ER63467. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by David Popp. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Control Technologies: The Effects of
NOX and SO2 Regulation in the U.S., Japan, and Germany
David Popp
NBER Working Paper No. 10643
July 2004
JEL No. O31, O33, Q53, Q55
ABSTRACT
Using patent data from the United States, Japan, and Germany, this paper examines both the
innovation and diffusion of air pollution control equipment. Whereas the United States was an early
adopter of stringent sulfur dioxide (SO2) standards, both Japan and Germany introduced stringent
nitrogen dioxide (NOX) standards much earlier than the US. Nonetheless, in both cases, tightened
standards in the U.S. led to more domestic patenting, but not more foreign patenting. Overall, the
data suggest that inventors respond to environmental regulatory pressure in their own country, but
not to foreign environmental regulations. Moreover, any technology transfer that occurs appears to
be indirect. Domestic innovation occurs even for technologies that have already experienced
significant innovative activity abroad. Moreover, utilities in countries that adopt regulations later
nonetheless purchase pollution abatement equipment from domestic firms. However, patent citation
data from the U.S. show that earlier foreign patents are an important building block for NOX
pollution control innovations in the U.S., suggesting that American inventors build on technological
advances made in countries that adopted stringent regulation earlier.
David Popp
Department of Public Administration
Syracuse University
The Maxwell School
400 Eggers
Syracuse, NY 13244-1090
and NBER
dcpopp@maxwell.syr.edu

Technological change has the potential to play a key role in limiting the effects of longterm environmental problems such as climate change. As such, environmental economists have
increasingly paid attention to the links between environmental policy and technology. These
links traditionally come in one of two ways. First, environmental policy may induce new
innovations by increasing the potential value of producing environmentally-friendly technology.
Second, environmental policy may encourage the diffusion of existing environmentally-friendly
technologies. However, few studies of technological change, either in the environmental or
broader economics literature, link both aspects of technological change. This paper is the first
part of a broader research study designed to fill that gap by looking at international technology
transfer of pollution control technologies.
This paper uses patent data to investigate flows of air pollution control technology
between the United States, Japan, and Germany. In particular, I examine flows of technologies
designed to reduce nitrogen oxide (NOX) and sulfur dioxide (SO2) emissions by electric utilities.
Most previous empirical studies of innovation and adoption of environmental technologies have
focused on a single country, and the majority focus on US data. In general, this is appropriate, as
the US traditionally has been among the first countries to enact strong environmental regulation
and has also been among the first to develop relevant pollution control technologies. However,
this is not true in the case of NOX. Other nations, particularly Japan and Germany, adopted
stringent NOX regulations earlier than the US. As a result, these nations also developed NOX
pollution control equipment faster than the US. A study of the innovation and diffusion of NOX
technologies in the US thus offers an opportunity to study the international diffusion of
environmental technologies.
regulations.

In comparison, the US was an early adopter of strong SO2

Thus, trends in SO2 patents will serve as a useful control, to check whether

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

2

differences in international patenting of pollution control technologies are truly due to
differences in international environmental regulation.
In this paper, I use patent data from each of these three countries to track innovation of
NOX and SO2 technologies. I use these data to answer two related questions. First, what role
does environmental policy play in inducing environmentally-friendly innovation? Do domestic
environmental regulations spur innovation by foreign inventors, as well as domestic inventors?
Second, using patent citations, I examine the role of international knowledge spillovers, asking
what contribution patents from foreign inventors make to innovation by domestic inventors in
the US. The results suggest that international transfer of these technologies occurs indirectly –
via influencing domestic inventors – rather than directly. This finding suggests that for countries
adopting environmental regulations similar to those already in place elsewhere, domestic R&D
will be needed before technology transfer can occur.

I. Motivating Theory/Literature Review
The goal of this paper is to understand how environmental policies both at home and
abroad affect the stock of knowledge available within a country.1 As such, it draws from two
separate sets of literature. Questions about the direct linkages between environmental policy and
innovation within a country have been studied using an induced innovation framework.
Similarly, questions about flows of knowledge across countries are addressed by papers looking
at knowledge spillovers. Figure 1 illustrates the linkages explored in this paper. Circles illustrate
variables exogenous to this study, while boxes represent endogenous variables. Solid lines
1

The concept of a knowledge stock represents the current state of technology available for use by firms. Like a
physical capital stock, it is typically modeled as a function of previous knowledge and current R&D investment.
See, for example, Griliches (1995). In recent years, several climate policy models have made use of knowledge
stocks to model links between environmental policy and technological change. Examples include Goulder and
Schneider (1999), Buonanno et al. (2003), and Popp (2004).

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

3

represent links well-established in the literature. Broken lines represent links that are less
established, and thus the focus of this study.
Within each country, we expect domestic environmental policy to lead to increases in
domestic R&D focused on environmental technologies. Such predictions come from models of
induced innovation (Hicks, 1932; Ahmad, 1966; Kamien and Schwartz, 1968; and Binswanger
1974, 1978a, 1978b), which predict that increased input prices encourage innovation to
economize on usage of the more expensive input. In this framework, by increasing the costs of
using environmental resources, environmental policies induce R&D designed to protect the
environment. Recently, as measures of innovative activity such as patents have become more
readily available, empirical economists have begun to estimate the effects that prices and
environmental policies have on environmentally-friendly innovation.

Examples include

Brunnermeier and Cohen (2003), Popp (2002), Newell, Jaffe, and Stavins (1999), and Jaffe and
Palmer (1997).
Because of the wealth of data available, each of these studies focuses on innovation in the
United States. US environmental standards are typically among the world’s most stringent,
making it an appropriate study of the need for innovation to comply with environmental
regulations. However, because of their focus on US data, as well as a focus on a broad range of
environmental technologies, these papers do not provide insight to the incentives for innovation
in countries that are latecomers to environmental regulation. Since US coal-fired power plants
faced relatively weak standards for NOX emissions until the 1990s, this paper offers a look at
innovation on a technology when a country is a latecomer to environmental regulation.
While the above papers establish links between domestic policy and domestic R&D (as
well as the links between foreign environmental policy and foreign environmental R&D in

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

4

Figure 1), little work has looked at the linkages across countries. That is, what effect, if any,
does environmental policy in one country have on environmental R&D in a second country?
The one paper to date that does provide some evidence for this question is Lanjouw and Mody
(1996), who use patent data from the US, Japan, Germany, and 14 low-and middle-income
countries to examine international trends in patenting for a wide range of environmental
technologies. As expected, they find that environmentally-friendly innovation increases as
pollution abatement cost expenditures in the country increase. For the developing countries, the
majority of these patents come from foreign countries. For the US, Japan, and Germany, the
majority of these patents are typically domestic patents. However, this is not always the case. In
their data, the majority of vehicle air emissions patents granted in the US in their sample are
from foreign nations, even though the US was the first country to adopt strict emissions
standards. This suggests that regulations in one country can spur innovation by firms in other
nations. By focusing on individual air pollutants, this project offers a more detailed look at
international patterns of environmental invention than the work of Lanjouw and Mody. In
addition, rather than using the indirect proxy of pollution abatement expenditures as a measure of
regulatory stringency, I make use of specific variations in regulations to more carefully identify
the effects of changes in specific regulations in each country.
The above research addresses how environmental policy affects innovation in each
country. Also important is how the knowledge represented by these innovations flow into a
country. This is represented by the knowledge stock in Figure 1. There are two potential
avenues by which foreign knowledge can have an influence in the domestic economy. First,
foreign inventions may enter the knowledge stock and be adopted directly by domestic firms.
The direct line between foreign R&D and the available knowledge in Figure 1 illustrates this

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

5

possibility. If the inventor is not completely compensated for the value of the invention, a
“spillover” has occurred, as the domestic firm receives a net benefit, but a direct knowledge
transfer does not occur, since the ability of the domestic firm to create its own inventions has not
increased (Griliches 1979). Rather, this is a pecuniary externality. Second, foreign knowledge
entering the knowledge stock may affect the productivity of domestic R&D. The “blueprints”
represented by foreign patents may serve to inspire additional innovation by domestic inventors.
These represent true knowledge spillovers, as the knowledge represented by the foreign patent
creates a positive externality – knowledge which is borrowed by the domestic inventor (Griliches
1979). Such spillovers are shown by the line between foreign and domestic R&D in Figure 1. In
addition, the connection between the knowledge stock and domestic R&D flows both ways, as
technological advances may serve as building blocks for future R&D.
Note that these two avenues have different implications for the timing of innovation and
adoption of new pollution control technologies in countries that are late adopters of
environmental regulations (follower countries). In the case of direct adoption, the technology
will already exist, having been invented in countries that were early adopters of environmental
regulations (leader countries). As such, follower countries should experience rapid adoption of
new technologies.2 However, direct adoption might not be possible. Domestic R&D may be
needed to make modifications of foreign inventions to make them compatible with local markets.
For example, both Cohen and Levinthal (1989) and Griffith, Redding, and Van Reenen (2003)
find positive links between R&D and the ability of firms to absorb knowledge spillovers.
Foreign knowledge can still be beneficial in this case, as it provides knowledge on which

2

The beneficiaries of the adoption, however, may be the innovators from leader countries, who experience increased
sales due to regulations in the follower country. Such a finding would support the early mover advantage
hypothesized by Porter as one reason why environmental regulations may increase international competitiveness
(Porter and van der Linde 1995).

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

6

domestic inventors can build. This paper uses the timing of patent applications and regulations
across countries to identify these effects. If direct adoption is the primary means of technology
transfer, most environmental patents in each country should come from the technology leader,
and there should not be a corresponding burst of patenting activity in countries that adopt
regulations later. In comparison, if additional R&D is needed to adapt innovations, we would
expect additional domestic patenting activity as each nation strengthens its own environmental
regulations.
In addition, I use patent citations to measure knowledge flows across nations, to ask how
important knowledge spillovers from the leader country are to these domestic inventions. When a
patent is granted, it contains citations to earlier patents that are related to the current invention.
In recent years, several economists have used patent citations as a measure of knowledge flows.3
Examples include Jaffe, Fogarty, and Banks (1998), Jaffe and Trajtenberg (1996), Caballero and
Jaffe (1993), Jaffe, Henderson, and Trajtenberg (1993), and Johnson and Popp (2003). Most
related to this work, Jaffe and Trajtenberg (1999) use data from citations granted in the US to
estimate the likelihood of citations across “pairs” of countries.

Looking at broad sets of

technologies (e.g. all chemical technologies), they find that patents are most likely to cite other
patents assigned to inventors from the same country.

Looking at more distinctly defined

environmental technologies, in this paper, I show that this relationship changes for technologies
first developed abroad.

3

Jaffe and Trajtenberg (2002) review this literature.

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

7

II. Regulation of NOX and SO24
Both NOX and SO2 have received significant attention from regulators for over 30 years.
NOX emissions are produced by the combustion of fossil fuels, when nitrogen contained in the
fuel combines with oxygen during the combustion process. NOX emissions can be reduced either
by making modifications to the combustion process or by using post-combustion control
techniques.

Major environmental concerns resulting from NOX emissions are ground-level

ozone and acid rain. SO2 emissions come from burning coal or oil as a fuel. The primary
concern form SO2 emissions is acid rain. SO2 emissions can be reduced by switching to cleanerburning coal or using flue gas desulfurization (FGD) units (commonly known as “scrubbers”) to
remove emissions. This section reviews the regulation of NOX and SO2 in the US, Japan and
Germany. Figure 2 summarizes NOX regulations in the three countries. SO2 regulations have
not varied over time as much, and are simply described in the text below. Regulations are
expressed in both the local units used in each country and in mg/m3, which is the most
commonly used unit across countries.

A. United States
In the United States, NOX and SO2 are two of six criteria pollutants regulated by the
Clean Air Acts. The first national standards for NOX and SO2 were set by the 1970 Clean Air
Act (CAA). US SO2 emissions limits have historically been among the most stringent in the
world. The 1970 CAA established a limit of 1.2 pounds of SO2 per million Btu (lbs/mmBtu) of
heat input for power plants (equivalent to 1480 mg/m3). The 1977 CAA kept this limit, but
added technology-forcing language that essentially required the use of scrubbers to achieve at
4

Except where otherwise noted, information in this section comes from a series of publications on emission
standards published by the International Energy Agency Clean Coal Centre: Vernon (1988), Soud (1991),
McConville (1997), and Sloss (2003).

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

8

least 90% SO2 removal. The 1990 CAA established SO2 emission permit trading, in which
plants are required to hold permits for each ton of SO2 emitted. The number of permits were
restricted, with the goal of reducing emissions to 10 million tons less than 1980 levels by 2000.
As is well documented, the permit trading program has successfully achieved this goal at costs
significantly lower than would have been possible without trading (see, for example, Ellerman et
al. 1997).
In comparison, NOX emissions were primarily seen as a local issue until the 1990 Clean
Air Act. NOX emissions results in two major environmental problems – the formation of
ground-level ozone and acid rain. As such, US NOX regulations have focused on areas where
these two problems are primary concerns – California (ozone) and the eastern United States (acid
rain). For NOX, the 1970 CAA established a limit of 0.7 lbs/mmBtu of NOX for power plants
(equivalent to 860 mg/m3). The 1977 CAA tightened the standard slightly, lowering the limit to
0.5-0.6 lbs/mmBtu (equivalent to 615-740 mg/m3).5 In addition, removal of at least 65% of NOX
emissions was required.
It was not until the 1990s that NOX regulations were strengthened, and even then the
focus was on regions of primary concern. First, the state of California established limits as low
as 0.015 lb/mmBtu (18.45 mg/m3) for the Los Angeles Basin beginning in 1991 (Alfonso et al.
2000). At the national level, the 1990 CAA established the Ozone Transport Commission
(OTC), designed to address the regional problem of acid rain in the eastern US. The resulting
plan, implemented in phases, called for reductions in affected eastern states to 0.2 lb/mmBtu
(equivalent to 246 mg/m3) beginning in May 1999, and reductions to 0.15 lb/mmBtu (equivalent
to 220 mg/m3) by May of 2003, and allowed trading of NOX emission permits across plants in

5

Different limits applied depending on the type of coal burnt. The higher 0.6 limit applied to bituminous coal,
which is most commonly used at US coal-fired electric plants.

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

9

the region.6 The 1998 NOX SIP Call expanded NOX reductions to 22 eastern states, and required
that emissions reductions be in place by 2004. At the national level, the 1990 CAA tightened
emission standards to as low as 0.4-0.46 lb/mmBtu (490-565 mg/m3) by 2000.7 Unlike previous
legislation, these reductions applied to both new and existing plants.

B. Japan
Japan’s air pollution regulations follow a similar trend to those of the US, with the
exception that NOX emissions were regulated more quickly. National air pollution regulation in
Japan began with the 1968 Air Pollution Control Law. This law set initial emissions standards
for NOX and SO2. These standards were tightened by amendments in 1970 and 1974, which
introduced formulas for additional emission reductions in “polluted regions”. Within these
regions, both total emissions in the region and plant-level emissions are regulated.
For SO2, emissions standards vary by plant, according to a formula that considers both
the region’s environmental quality and the “effective stack height” of the plant.8

Stricter

standards apply for new plants in the most polluted regions. Standards for a sample plant with an
effective stack height of 260 meters range from 245-1250 parts per million (ppm) (equivalent to
700-3600 mg/m3). For new plants in the most polluted regions, such as Tokyo the standard can
be as low as 60 ppm (170 mg/m3). Compared to the US, Japanese regulations are stricter for
sources in polluted areas, but weaker elsewhere.

6

Affected states are Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont, Massachusetts, Connecticut, Rhode Island, New York, New
Jersey, Pennsylvania, Maryland, Delaware, and the District of Columbia.
7
This regulation was phased in, with slightly higher standards between 1996 and 1999. Also, note that the
requirements vary by plant. The standards presented apply to tangentially-fired boilers and dry bottom wall-fired
boilers respectively. These are the most common boiler types in the US. Other boilers are allowed more NOX
emissions.
8
“Effective stack height” is the sum of both the actual stack height and the average plume rise height.

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

10

In contrast, Japanese NOX regulations have been stricter than the US since the 1974
amendments to the Air Pollution Control Law. At that time, allowable NOX emissions from
coal-fired power plants fell from 902 mg/m3 to 616 mg/m3, making Japan’s NOX standard nearly
30% stricter than the limits in place in the US at the time. Despite stricter regulations, NOX
continued to be a problem in Japan. As a result, the NOX standard was tightened further in 1987,
with a new limit of just 410 mg/m3. Moreover, unlike in the US, where older plants are
grandfathered from new emission standards, these standards apply to both new and existing
plants.

C. Germany
In contrast to the US and Japan, Germany9 implemented strict air pollution standards
later. The Federal Immission Control Law of 1974 sets general principles for air pollution
control, but specific limits were not set until the mid 1980’s. For large (> 50 MWt) plants, the
Ordinance on Large Combustion plants established emissions standards on June 1, 1983.
Smaller plants (1-50 MWt) are covered by the Technical Instruction for Air Pollution Control,
which was last amended in 1986. As a latecomer to air pollution regulation, Germany could
potentially take advantage of advances made elsewhere. As such, the standards set in the 1980s
were significantly stricter than those in the US or Japan. NOX emissions from the largest coalfired power plants (including existing plants) were limited to just 200 mg/m3. Similarly, SO2
emissions were limited to just 400 mg/m3. Both new and existing plants were expected to
comply with these regulations by 1990. The federal government provided assistance through
both research and tax benefits for plant expenditures on NOX control. These tax credits placed
particular emphasis on the development of German-manufactured catalysts. For SO2, existing
9

Prior to unification, this section describes laws passed in West Germany.

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

11

plants were given until April 1, 1993 to meet these standards, and were only required to restrict
emissions to 2000 mg/m3 in the interim. Upon unification, the states of the former East Germany
adopted West German environmental standards. New plants would have to comply immediately,
while existing plants from the former East Germany were given until 1996 to come into
compliance with these regulations.

III. Patent Data
This paper uses patent data from the US, Japan, and Germany to study trends of
innovation and technology transfer in response to NOX and SO2 regulations. These data come
from various sources, including the EPO’s esp@cent database, the Japanese Patent Office’s
website, the Delphion on-line patent database, the NBER patent citation database, and a set of
CD-ROM’s from MicroPatent. Below I describe how the international patent system works,
discuss how such data should be interpreted, and briefly describe construction of the dataset used
in this paper. A description of patent citation data is presented in section V. Appendix A
provides a more detailed discussion of the construction of the data for this paper.

A. Using Patent Data
Patents are granted by national patent offices in individual countries. Patent protection is
only valid in the country that grants the patent. An inventor must file for protection in each
nation in which protection is desired. Nearly all patent applications are first filed in the home
country of the inventor. The date of the initial application is referred to as the priority date. If
the patent is granted, protection begins from the priority date. Inventors who desire patent
protection in other nations must file applications in those nations, either directly or by using a

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

12

Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT) that designates the countries in which protection is desired,
within one year of the priority date. If the inventor does file abroad within one year, the inventor
will have priority over any patent applications received in those countries since the priority date
that describe similar inventions.
These additional filings of the same patent application in different countries are known as
patent families. Because of the additional costs of filing abroad, along with the one-year waiting
period that gives inventors additional time to gauge the value of their invention, only the most
valuable inventions are filed in several countries. Moreover, filing a patent application in a
given country is a signal that the inventor expects the invention to be profitable in that country.
Because of this, researchers such as Lanjouw and Schankerman (1999) have used data on patent
families as proxies for the quality of individual patents. Lanjouw and Mody (1996) use such
data to show that environmental technologies patented by developed country firms are more
general than similar inventions from developing countries, as the developed country inventions
have larger patent families.
Using patent data offers several advantages. First, patent data from all three countries is
readily available. Second, patent data is available in highly disaggregated forms. Whereas R&D
data is typically available only for specific industries or general applications,10 patent
classifications can be used to distinguish, for example, between pollution control devices
designed to reduce NOX emissions from devices designed to control SO2 emissions. Third, the
number of countries in which an inventor seeks protection for an invention provides a measure of
diffusion of the innovation. Fourth, economists have found that patents, sorted by their date of
application, provide a good indicator of R&D activity (see, for example, Griliches 1990).

10

For example, in the US, R&D data is available from 1972-1994 for air pollution control, but it is not broken down
by pollutant.

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

13

Nonetheless, when working with patent data, it is important to be aware of its limitations.
The existing literature on the benefits and drawbacks of using patent data is quite large.11 For
this research, it is particularly important to note that although the decision to file a patent
obviously follows from the decision to perform R&D, not all successful research results are
patented. In return for receiving the monopoly rights inferred by a patent, the inventor is
required to publicly disclose the invention.

Rather than make this disclosure, inventors may

prefer to keep an invention secret. Surveys of inventors indicate that the rate at which new
innovations are patented varies across industry (Levin et al. 1987). Fortunately, when studying
the development of a single technology, this is less of a concern than when using patent data to
measure innovation trends across several dissimilar industries.12 Finally, it is also important to
note that the quality of individual patents varies widely. Some inventions are extremely valuable,
whereas others are of almost no commercial value. This is partly a result of the random nature of
the inventive process. Accordingly, the results of this paper are best interpreted as the effect of
an “average” patent, rather than any specific invention.

B. Data Description
When patents are granted, they are given technology classifications and subclassifications
by various patent offices. These classifications can be used to identify patents pertaining to each
11

Griliches (1990) provides a useful survey.
One concern that remains is that the propensity to patent may vary over time. For example, the number of patents
filed in recent years in the United States has risen dramatically. Some observers argue that at least part of this
increase can be attributed to recent court decisions that have increased the value of patent protection. One possible
control for this is to use the percentage of all successful domestic patent applications per year in each technology
field as the measure of innovative activity. Using the percentage of applications in each field, rather than a raw count
of applications, accounts for growth in the economy and exogenous changes in patenting behavior. Policy changes
that affect all patent classifications would lead to a change in both the total number of patent applications and the
number of pollution control patent applications in a given year. Results using this method were obtained, and no
major changes in the trends described in section IV were found when these controls were made. As the application
data were not available across all years, and because presenting data in percentages does not allow one to compare
the magnitude of patenting activity across countries, the raw data are presented in section IV.
12

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

14

of the technologies described in section IV. Traditional classification systems, such as the
International Patent Classification (IPC) system or the US patent classification system, do not
provide enough detail to distinguish among technologies at the level of detail needed for this
paper. Thus, two alternative classification systems were used. For US and German patents,
relevant patents were identified using the European Classification System (ECLA). The ECLA is
based upon the IPC, but provides additional detail necessary to distinguish between the types of
pollution controlled by various technologies.

ECLA classifications are assigned to patent

examiners at the European Patent Office (EPO). The EPO provides a searchable on-line
database, esp@cenet, that includes ECLA classifications for all German patents and all US
patents granted since 1920.13 However, the EPO database does not include complete updates of
the ECLA for Japanese patents. Thus, Japanese patents were obtained from the Intellectual
Property Digital Library on the Japan Patent Office (JPO) web site.14 The JPO does not use the
ECLA. However, it uses its own system, the F-term, which, like the ECLA, provides greater
detail than the IPC.
Using these two systems, we identified classifications relevant to the technologies
described in section IV. This process is described in greater detail in appendix A. Appendix B
lists the classifications used for each technology type. In choosing relevant classifications,
particular care was taken to avoid classifications that were too broad – that is, where some
patents in the class pertained to pollution control, but most did not. Using the on-line databases,
we downloaded a list of patent numbers for documents published in the US, Germany, Japan,

13

The database can be found at http://ep.espacenet.com/search97cgi/s97is.dll?Action=FormGen&Template=ep/en/
home.hts
14
This database can be found at http://www.ipdl.jpo.go.jp/homepg_e.ipdl.

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

15

and the EPO.15,16 Once the relevant patents had been obtained, descriptive information on these
patents was downloaded from the Delphion on-line database. These data are available for
patents published in the US, Germany, or the EPO, but not for patents from Japan. Descriptive
data downloaded include the application, priority, and issue date for each patent, the home
country of the inventor, and data on patent families. Data on the year of application for Japanese
patents was obtained from the JPO website. However, it is not possible to identify the home
country of the inventor or the priority year for the Japanese patents in the dataset.
To organize the data, patents were sorted by priority year (or the application year for
Japanese patents). As noted earlier, this date tends to correspond with the actual inventive
activity. Moreover, as the average length of time it takes to process a patent application varies
across countries, using priority dates, rather than the date of grant, provides a common date for
comparisons across countries.

Data from Japan and German includes both successful and

unsuccessful patent applications, as all patent applications are published in each country 18
months after the initial filing. However, the US data includes only patent applications that were
subsequently granted. Until 2001, patents were only published in the US upon grant, so that no
public record exists of unsuccessful US patent applications. Finally, one caveat is necessary for
interpreting Japanese data.

Until 1988, Japanese patent law required a separate patent

application for each unique claim on a patent. For example, the inventor of a bicycle would

15

Before German unification, this only includes patents granted in West Germany. However, prior to unification,
there are very few patents granted in West Germany to East German inventors. Moreover, there are no spikes in
domestic patent counts after unification, suggesting that unification has little effect on the data.
16
Beginning in 1978, an inventor desiring protection in Europe could file a single patent application through the
EPO. The applicant designates as many of the 18 EPO member-states for protection as desired. The application is
examined by the EPO. If granted, the patent is transferred to the individual national patent offices designated for
protection. Typically, a patent applicant first files for protection in their home country, and then applies to offices
abroad, such as the EPO. The esp@cenet database returns patent numbers for patents with German priority that
were also filed through the EPO, but does not return the German patent numbers for patents with foreign priority
that were filed through EPO and designated Germany for protection. Thus, foreign patent counts in Germany are
augmented by including EPO patents from non-German inventors that designate Germany for protection.

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

16

require separate patents describing its various parts (Ordover 1991). In other countries, a single
patent can use several claims to describe an invention. Thus, an invention that would result in
one patent in other nations would result in many individual patents in Japan. Even today,
Japanese patents tend to have fewer claims than US patents (Cohen et al. 2002). As such, while
the data are useful to observe trends across time within countries, the level of patenting activity
across countries are not directly comparable using patent data alone.

IV. Pollution Control Innovations Across Countries
Using the patent data described above, this section examines innovations in pollution
control technologies designed to reduce emission of NOX or SO2 from coal-fired power plants. I
describe the technologies used to control these emissions, and look at patenting trends across the
three countries. Of particular interest are the links between environmental policies in one nation
and patenting activity in a second. Do environmental policies spur patenting activity from
foreign researchers? Moreover, do foreign environmental regulations lead to patenting activity
within a second country?

A. NOX Post Combustion
NOX emissions can be controlled via modifications to the combustion process or by
treatment of flue gas after combustion. The primary post-combustion techniques are selective
catalytic reduction (SCR) and selective non-catalytic reduction (SNCR). In both processes, an
ammonia-based regent is injected into the flue gas stream. A chemical reaction between the
NOX gases and the regent produce nitrogen and water. SCR uses a catalyst to produce this
reaction, allowing it to work at lower temperatures than SNCR technology. SCR has a higher

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

17

capital cost than SNCR, but can reduce emissions by as much as 80-90%, compared to just 3040% reduction from SNCR technologies. (CoalPower4 2001, Afonso et al., 2000) As such, SCR
is the technology of choice for plants facing tight NOX emissions restrictions, such as in
Germany and Japan. Table 1 shows the number of plants using post-combustion techniques
versus those using combustion modification, taken from the CoalPower4 database.

This

database, available from the International Energy Agency’s Clean Coal Centre, includes coalfired plants in operation as of 2000. 51 of 87 (59%) of Japanese coal-fired power plant units use
post-combustion techniques to control NOX emissions, often in combination with combustion
modification techniques. Similarly, 118 of 228 (52%) plants in Germany use post-combustion
methods. In contrast, just 44 post-combustion treatment techniques were in use in 1150 US units
(3.8%), although another 72 were planned or under construction in response to strengthened NOX
regulations in the late 1990s.
The complexity of retrofitting SCR on an existing plant depends on both the level of
reduction required and the quality of the coal burned. Higher flue gas sulfur and ash loadings
make retrofitting more difficult in Germany than Japan. German boilers are more similar to US
boilers than those in Japan, suggesting that lessons learned in Germany will be of particular use
as US plants begin to adopt SCR technologies. (Frey 1995) This also suggests that innovations
in one country need not apply to plants elsewhere.
Trends in patenting of post-combustion NOX control techniques across the US, Japan,
and Germany show the importance of local influences. Figure 3 displays these patents for the
United States. Beginning in 1973, when stricter Japanese NOX limits took effect, until 1988,
when the 1990 CAA was being debated in Congress, as many or more successful NOX postcombustion patent applications filed in the US came from foreign sources as domestic sources in

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

18

all but three years (1978, 1980, and 1981). These trends are driven in large part by stricter
regulations in Japan and Germany. Note that NOX post-combustion patents from Japan increase
after passage of stricter NOX regulations in 1973, and German patents peak after passage of NOX
regulations in 1984. Japanese patents also reach a second, lower peak after Japanese standards
were tightened in 1987. In fact, at the peak level of patenting for each country, the number of
patents from each country is greater than the number from US applicants in the same year!
Furthermore, neither German nor Japanese patenting activity respond to the 1990 CAA. In
contrast, domestic (US applicant) and total foreign patents do respond to the 1990 CAA.
Domestic patents increase by a factor of 11 from a post-CAA low of 6 in 1982 to a peak of 68 in
1990.17
Figure 4 displays the same data for Germany.
regulation and innovation are even more apparent.

Here, the links between domestic

Domestic NOX post-combustion patent

applications increase by a factor of 5.5 between 1983 and 1985, from 27 to 149. In contrast, total
foreign applications merely double from 12 in 1983 to 24 in 1985. Recall that the regulations
passed in Germany in 1984 were significantly more stringent than NOX regulations elsewhere.
Thus, new innovations were needed to achieve these goals. A look at international patenting
activity of German inventors supports the notion that important innovations were taking place in
response to these innovations. For German NOX post-combustion patents, an average of 30%
were also filed in Japan between 1970 and 2000, and 24% were also filed in the United States.
However, inventors of patents granted in the mid-1980s were more likely to file in Japan. In
1982, just 30.8% such patents also sought protection in Japan. This figure rises to 37.0% in

17

Note that the growth in US post-combustion patents also begins in the mid-1980s. This is likely in response to
new standards passed for industrial sources of NOX, rather than the German regulations. If these patents were in
response to German regulations, we would expect to see a similar increase of US patent applications in Germany.
As we will see in Figure 4, this is not the case.

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

19

1983, 45.1% in 1984, and 46.3% in 1985. It drops back to 26.7% in 1986, and doesn’t reach
30% again until 1992, suggesting that the prospects for truly important discoveries began to fall.
This may explain the quick drop in patenting activity that occurs in the late-1980s.18

As

evidence of the importance of regulation in the target country, note that there was no such
increase in filings to the US, where there was little market for SCR technology due to laxer
regulations. For example, only 17.4% of these German patents also filed for protection in the
U.S. in 1985.
Finally, Figure 5 displays patent data for Japan. As noted earlier, breakdowns by the
applicant’s home country are not available for the Japanese patents. Once again, the importance
of domestic regulations are important, as NOX post-combustion patents peak after NOX standards
were tightened in 1973 and 1987. Note also that there is no evidence of Japanese inventors
responding to regulatory changes in Germany during the mid-1980s. However, the increase in
patenting activity in 1995 and 1996 may be a reaction to new regulations pending in the United
States, as Japanese patents filed in the US at the same time experience a similar jump.

B. NOX Combustion Modification Techniques
In contrast to post-combustion techniques, combustion modification techniques are less
costly, as they do not require add-on equipment. Rather, they involve changing the combustion
process to reduce the amount of NOX formed by combustion. Typically, such modifications
work by adjusting the mix of air and fuel used in combustion, which reduces the peak flame
temperature and results in lower NOX formation. Commonly used techniques include low-NOX
burners (LNB) and overfire air (OFA), in which combustion air is separated into primary and

18

Popp (2002) uses patent citations to support a similar story for US energy innovation in response to higher energy
prices during the 1970s and 1980s.

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology
secondary flows.

20

These techniques reduce emissions by 30-40% from uncontrolled levels

(CoalPower4 2001, Afonso et al. 2000). Other techniques used include flue gas recirculation
(FGR), in which some of the flue gas is recirculated and mixed with combustion air. On its own,
this technique reduces emissions by approximately 20%. Thus, it is often used in combination
with other techniques. Finally, fuel staging techniques, such as reburning, use a secondary fuel
directed at a section of the furnace. The secondary fuel breaks down and reacts with NOX
produced by the primary combustion process.

A third, final combustion stage then burns

remaining carbon monoxide and hydrocarbons produced by this second stage. Reburning can
reduce emissions by as much as 70%, particularly when paired with other techniques, such as
SCNR (CoalPower4 2001, Afonso et al. 2000).
Compared to post-combustion techniques, combustion modification techniques are used
in all three countries. One difference, as shown in Table 1, is the majority of plants using
combustion modification in Germany or Japan also make use of post-combustion techniques. In
contrast, only 22 of the 437 plants using combustion modification in the US also use postcombustion techniques. Patenting trends reflect these usage patterns. Figure 6 shows these
trends for the US. While all three countries have some combustion modification patents, the US
holds a greater share of such patents. Unlike the post-combustion techniques, there are more
domestic than foreign patents within the US in nearly every year. Japanese and German patents
filed in the US remain low even after the passage of regulations in each country. For example,
German combustion modification patents peak at just 5 in 1985. Japanese patents peak at 8 in
1995, and peak at just 6 after passage of Japanese NOX regulations in the 1970s. This compares
to post-combustion peaks of 29 patents for Germany and 31 for Japan. In comparison, US
combustion modification patents peak at 36 in 1991. Moreover, there is little US patenting until

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

21

the late 1980s, when negotiations for the 1990 CAA began, providing further evidence that
stringency of regulation is important for inducing innovation.
In Japan and Germany, even domestic combustion modification patents show little
response to policy. There is an increase in combustion modification patents in Japan after
passage of NOX regulations in 1973, but the increase is not as strong as exists for either postcombustion techniques or SO2 control technologies. Similarly, as shown in Figure 7, combustion
modification patents in Germany do rise in the 1980s, but the response is more gradual than for
post-combustion techniques.

Moreover, the level of patenting activity remains relatively

constant through the 1990s. These patents are no more likely to file for protection in the US than
patents from other years, so this is less likely to be a response to NOX regulations in the US than
a response to the deadline for plants from the former East Germany to comply with emissions
regulations.

C. Sulfur Dioxide
Sulfur dioxide from coal-fired power plants can be reduced by switching to cleaner coal
or using flue gas desulfurization (FGD) units, commonly known as “scrubbers”. The most
common scrubber technology is the wet scrubber. In a wet scrubber, a sorbent, usually lime or
limestone, is injected into a vessel to interact with the flue gas. The chemical reaction creates a
sludge, which must be disposed of. A second chemical reaction can convert the sludge into
gypsum, which can be sold. Removal efficiencies as high as 99% are possible (CoalPower4
2001).
As with NOX, the timing of SO2 patenting activity follows regulatory trends in each
country. Figure 8 shows that SO2 patents in the US respond to passage of the CAAs, reaching

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

22

peaks in 1979 (after passage of the 1977 CAA requiring scrubbers) and 1994 (immediately
before the beginning of the SO2 permit program in 1995). A similar spike occurs in the mid1970s in Japan. As Popp (2003) notes, the nature of innovation changed during this time, as the
scrubber mandate focused innovation on lowering the costs of compliance, rather than improving
efficiency. In comparison, permit trading increased the rewards for installing more efficient
scrubbers, so innovation after the 1990 CAA had a greater effect on the removal efficiency of
scrubbers. Unlike NOX, we see little increase in patents from either Japan or Germany applicants
in the US, even though there are spikes in patenting activity in each country corresponding with
the implementation of SO2 standards. There is a small jump in German SO2 patents in 1982, but
the increase is not as noticeable as with NOX technologies. It may be that, since the US was also
regulating SO2 emissions, and thus innovating at the same time as Japan and Germany, these
foreign innovations were not perceived as unique enough to also enter the US market. Finally,
note that although Japanese and German SO2 patents do not increase much, there is an increase
in total foreign patents during the late 1980s. These patents come from other EPO nations, and
correspond with passage of the Directive on Controlling of Emissions from Large Combustion
Plants by the European Community in 1988, which established minimum SO2 standards for
European countries (McConville 1997).
This jump in European patents also affects Germany, as shown in Figure 9. Other than
this spike in European patenting efforts, German SO2 patenting trends follow those of NOX, in
that German inventors are active after the implementation of standards in 1984, but inventors
from Japan and the US do not respond. Moreover, there is not much patenting activity from
Japan and the US in the 1970s, despite higher activity levels in each country. Also, unlike NOX
post-combustion techniques, German inventors tended not to seek protection in Japan and the

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

23

US, even during the spike of patenting in the mid-1980s. At peak patenting levels in 1983, just
12% of German applicants for SO2 patents also filed in Japan, and just 17% in the US. This
compares to over 37% who filed for protection of NOX post-combustion techniques in Japan. In
this case, as a latecomer to SO2 regulation, German innovations simply do not appear as
important as those from Japan or the US.

V. Do Knowledge Spillovers Occur?
A cursory look at the patent data suggests any spillovers that do occur across countries in
these technologies are indirect.

In each country, firms respond to stricter environmental

standards by increasing innovation. This remains true even for countries that are latecomers to
regulations, such as the US for NOX and Germany for SO2. This suggests that these latecomers
are not simply taking advantage of innovations done elsewhere. As further evidence of this, note
that the suppliers of both NOX post-combustion pollution control techniques in the US and SO2
scrubbers in Germany (both cases of late adoption of regulation) are primarily domestic
companies, as shown in Table 2. This does not necessarily mean, however, that these follower
countries reap no benefits from earlier foreign innovations, as such innovations may influence
the R&D done in each of the follower nations.

Such transfers represent true knowledge

spillovers, as the knowledge represented by the cited patent creates a positive externality –
knowledge which is borrowed and improved upon by the domestic inventor (Griliches 1979).
This section uses patent citation data for pollution control patents granted in the US to
test for such knowledge spillovers. When a patent is granted, it contains citations to earlier
patents that are related to the current invention. The citations are placed in the patent after
consultations among the applicant, his or her patent attorney, and the patent examiner. It is the

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

24

applicant’s responsibility to list any related previous patents of which he or she is aware. In
addition, the examiner, who specializes in just a few patent classifications, will add other patents
to the citations, as well as subtracting any irrelevant patents cited by the inventor. Patent citations
narrow the reach of the new patent by placing the patents cited outside the realm of the current
patent, so it is important that all relevant patents be included in the citations.19 For the same
reason, inventors have an incentive to make sure that no unnecessary patents are cited. As a
result, the previous patents cited by a new patent should be a good indicator of previous
knowledge that was utilized by the inventor.20
The analysis requires data on every citation made by the patents in the pollution control
database.

These come from two sources.

The NBER patent database (Hall, Jaffe, and

Tratjenberg 2001) contains all patents made by US patents granted from 1976-1999. It also
includes descriptive data on patents granted since 1963.

Data from CD’s available from

MicroPatent were used to update the citation records from 2000-2003. These two sources were
used to create pairs of citing and cited patents for all of the pollution control patents. Descriptive
data such as the year of grant and application, the inventor’s home country, and the technology
class of each cited patent were also included. In addition to patents for NOX post-combustion
control, combustion modification, and SO2 control, I also include a broader group of general air
pollution control patents.

The patent classifications of this broader group are included in

Appendix B.

19

“Outside the realm” means that the patent holder cannot file an infringement suit against someone whose
invention infringes on qualities of the patented invention that were also included in patents cited by the patent
holder.
20
The key assumption here is that a citation made to a previous patent indicates a flow of knowledge from the cited
patent to the citing patent, so that patents cited more frequently are considered more valuable to future inventors.
Jaffe, Fogarty, and Banks (1998) investigate the validity of this assumption, using evidence from citations made to
NASA patents. They conclude that, although there is noise in the citation process, aggregate citation patterns
represent knowledge spillovers, although the spillover may be indirect.

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

25

In making a formal analysis of patent citations, a simple count of subsequent citations is
not enough, for the raw number of citations to any patent depends on the total number of patents
that follow. Instead, it is necessary to look at the probability of citation. To prepare the data, I
sort potentially cited patents for each pollution control technology by the year in which the
patent was granted. I denote this year CTD, for “year cited.” Since a patent application is not
made public in the U.S. unless the patent is granted, the year of grant is the year in which the
patented innovation entered the public domain. Citing patents, denoted CTG, are sorted by year
of application. Sorting by the year of application corresponds with the knowledge available to
the inventor at the time the innovation was made, and allows the results to correspond to the
counts of patent applications described in the preceding section.
One issue is considering which patents comprise the pool of potentially cited patents for
each technology group. In general, patent citations within a field come from a narrow range of
patents. For example, one would expect pollution control patents to cite inventions made in
chemistry or combustion, but not in sewing, agriculture, or medicine. Thus, considering the
entire universe of patents granted in a given year overstates the pool of potentially cited patents.
This is important, since the size of the pool of potentially cited patents should vary over time as
outside forces change incentives for innovation in a given field. I narrow the pool of cited
patents by considering patents from only the most cited US patent classifications for each
technology group. Data on the US patent classification of each cited patent comes from the
NBER patent database. Table 3 shows the classifications considered as potentially cited patents
for each technology, along with the percentage of citations made by patents in the group that cite
patents in that classification. In general, these groups include over two-thirds of all citations

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

26

made, although the figure is slightly lower for the more general air pollution control group. Only
cited patents included in these US classifications are included in the subsequent analysis.21
In principle, regression analysis could be used on each individual patent in the data set.
However, since most patents are never cited, the dependent variable is zero for most individual
patents. Instead, I use the model first develop by Adam Jaffe and his co-authors and sort the data
into groups of patents that could potentially cite each other (Caballero and Jaffe 1993, Jaffe and
Trajtenberg 1996, 1999). For each combination of citing and cited years, separate groups are
constructed for each technology, i; each citing country, l; and each cited country L. In each case,
the countries considered are the US, Japan, Germany, and all other countries. Thus, one possible
group includes citations made by US NOX post-combustion patents applied for in 1996 to US
NOX post-combustion patents granted in 1994. Another such cohort would include citations
made by US NOX post-combustion patents applied for in 1996 to Japanese NOX post-combustion
patents granted in 1994.

Denoting citations in each group as ci,l,L,CTD,CTG, the number of

potentially cited patents applied for in year CTD as ni,L,CTD, and the number of potentially citing
patents granted in year CTG as ni,l,CTG, the probability of citation, p, for patents within each
group is:
(1)

pi,l,L,CTD,CTG =

ci ,l , L ,CTD ,CTG
(ni , L ,CTD )(ni ,l ,CTG )

,

To estimate the likelihood of citation for various groups of patents, it is necessary to
control for factors that affect the likelihood of citation. Following the work of Jaffe and his coauthors, I estimate the probability of citation using an exponential distribution to model flows of
knowledge. In this model, the probability of citation is written as:

21

Results using all patents as potentially cited patents are similar, and are available from the author by request.

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

27

(2) p(i,l,L,CTG,CTD) = αiαCTDαCTGαi,l,L[1+φL*dumNOXP]exp[-β1(CTG-CTD)][1-exp(-β2(CTGCTD))] + ε.

β1 represents the rate of decay of knowledge as it becomes obsolete, and β2 stands for the rate at
which newly produced knowledge, as represented by a newly-patented innovation, diffuses
through society. Parameters capturing attributes of the citing or cited patents that may influence
the probability of citation, represented by the α parameters, include:22
•

the likelihood of citation to patents from various years (αCTD),23

•

the frequency with which patents applied for in the citing year cite earlier patents
(αCTG),24,25

•

the likelihood of citations within each technology group (αi), and

•

the frequency of citations within each citing-cited country pair (αl,L).

For this paper, it is this last set of variables that is of primary interest. Flows of citations
across countries provide evidence of disembodied technology transfer – that is, the direct transfer
of ideas. Jaffe and Trajtenberg (1999) use this framework to look at citation patterns across a
broad range of technologies, as their paper includes citations made by all US patents. They find
that patents are most likely to cite other patents assigned to inventors from the same country.

22

Although the model requires us to estimate attributes associated with the cited year, the citing year, and the lag
between them, it is possible to identify attributes related to all three because the age of patents enters the model nonlinearly.
23
This parameter can be seen as capturing variations in the usefulness of knowledge across time. Using a similar
specification, Popp (2002) finds that this parameter declines over time for energy patents, suggesting diminishing
returns to research over time.
24
Changes in citing behavior over time must be accounted for because of institutional changes at the patent office
that make patents more likely to cite earlier patents than was previously true, even if all other factors are equal. In
particular, two changes have played an important role. First, computerization of patent office records has made it
easier for both patent examiners and inventors to locate other patents similar to the current invention. Second,
increasing legal pressure has made it more important for examiners to be sure that all relevant patents are cited.
25
Although in principle citing and cited parameters could be estimated for every year, the model does not converge
when that is attempted. Thus, citing parameters are grouped into four-year intervals, and cited parameters into fiveyear intervals.

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

28

They also find US patents more likely to cite patents assigned to Japanese inventors than to
German inventors, although US inventors are 38% less likely to cite Japanese inventions as other
American inventions.
In section IV, we saw that Japanese inventors were the first to invest substantial resources
in NOX post-combustion pollution control techniques. The bracketed term 1+φL*dumNOXP tests
whether there are differences in the flows of knowledge to the United States for these
technologies. dumNOXP is a dummy variable equal to one for NOX post-combustion techniques.

φL captures the additional likelihood of US inventors citing a patent from country L for this
technology. Positive estimates mean that citations are more likely to country L for NOX postcombustion techniques. This is interpreted as a greater flow of knowledge into the US from
country L for this technology.
I estimate equation (2) using non-linear least squares. Because the data are grouped, I
weight each observation by

(n

i , L ,CTD

)(N

i ,l ,CTG

)

to avoid problems with heteroskedasticity

(Greene 1993). For purposes of identification, one parameter of each type is normalized to 1.26
Table 4 presents the results of this estimation. Results of the parameters for citing and
cited years, as well as the rates of decay and diffusion, are similar to those found in the papers by
Jaffe and others.

Of interest here are the patterns of citations across countries.

Overall,

inventors are more likely to cite other patents from their own country. For US inventors of
pollution control technologies, they are about 40 percent less likely to cite patents from any other
country, with Germany receiving the next most citations. Japanese inventors are equally likely
to cite American and Germany patents. German inventors, however, are twice as likely to cite

26

These are SO2 citing patents, citing year 1974-1977, cited year 1963-1968, and US citing US. For the NOX postcombustion term, US citing US is normalized to 0.

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

29

Japanese inventors as American inventors. Inventors from other nations make slightly more use
of knowledge from the US and Germany than from Japan.
Of particular interest is whether the pattern of knowledge flowing into the US changes for
NOX post-combustion patents. Here, we see that Japanese patents do provide a more important
source of knowledge for this technology. Japanese patents are 61 percent more likely to be cited
by American inventors for this technology. The overall likelihood of citation, relative to patents
from US inventors, is found by multiplying this result by the overall coefficient for US/Japanese
citing/cited pairs. This equals 0.95, revealing that Japanese NOX post-combustion patents are
just five percent less likely to be cited by US inventors than similar patents from other US
inventors. German patents experience no significant differences for this technology, and patents
from other countries are less likely to be cited for this technology.
To explore this further, Table 5 shows the result of analogous dummy variables for three
alternative specifications. Column (1) shows the results just discussed. Column (2) presents a
model with separate dummy variables for NOX post-combustion patents granted before or after
1990, the year in which the last Clean Air Act was passed. To see if the results for NOX postcombustion patents are truly unique, column (3) also includes a dummy variable for SO2 patents.
Finally, column (4) includes both technologies and the pre-or-post 1990 dummies.
Turning first to column (2), we see the particular importance of the early Japanese
patents. Japanese NOX post-combustion patents are more than twice as likely to be cited by
American inventors as other Japanese patents. In fact, interacting this term with αUS,Jap, we see
that these early Japanese patents are 91 percent more likely to be cited than American NOX postcombustion patents! In columns (3) and (4), we see that the basic patterns for NOX postcombustion patents hold when the SO2 dummies are also included in the model. The SO2

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

30

dummies are only significant for Japan and other nations. However, the effects are much
smaller, with citation probability increases of just 15 percent. In each case, US patents remain
the top source of knowledge flows for SO2.

VI. Conclusion

This paper uses patent data from the US, Japan, and Germany to study international
technology transfer of pollution control technologies. I find that inventors respond to domestic
regulatory pressures, but not foreign regulatory pressures. There is little increase in foreign
patents in either the US or Germany in response to increased emissions standards for NOX or
SO2. There are, however, increases in patents from foreigners when regulations in the respective
home countries increase. Thus, foreign regulatory pressures do increase the knowledge stock of
a country.
However, at least for the technologies studied here, the resulting technology transfer is
indirect. There is no evidence of domestic firms directly adopting these foreign technologies.
First, even for countries that enact regulations late, such as the US for NOX or Germany for SO2,
domestic innovative activity still increases after new regulations are passed. Second, domestic
utilities do not purchase equipment from foreign suppliers, who have greater experience with
these technologies, but rather from domestic firms. Nonetheless, using patent citation data from
the US, I show that earlier foreign patents do play an important role as building blocks for
domestic inventors.
These findings have important implications for the relationship between environmental
policy and technological change. It suggests that diffusion of environmental technologies across
borders will be slowed by the need for domestic R&D to adapt these technologies to local

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

31

markets. Moreover, for large-scale models of environmental policy and induced technological
change, it suggests that domestic and foreign R&D are imperfect substitutes. Thus, it is not
enough to model knowledge stocks as a combination of domestic and foreign innovative activity.
Functional forms that require some level of domestic innovation before adoption of foreign
technologies should be used.
Finally, it is useful to consider the generalizability of these results. It is particularly
striking that even a technological leader like the US does not take direct advantage of foreign
technologies. Still, further research on technology transfer between developed and developing
countries is needed.

We would expect there to be greater differences in technological

sophistication between developing and developed countries than between the US, Japan, and
Germany. This has two conflicting implications for applying these results to transfer from
developed to developing countries. First, greater differences in currently-used technologies
suggest that adopting the technology to local circumstances will be even more important for
developing countries. However, less technological sophistication in developing countries may
hamper the ability to make such modifications, and make developing countries more willing to
accept “imperfect fits” of technology, rather than do adaptive R&D. For example, Lanjouw and
Mody (1996) find developing countries are more likely to patent water pollution control devices
than air pollution control, and explain this difference by noting that water treatment plants must
operate under many different types of local conditions. They also find variation in patenting
levels across countries. Some countries, such as Brazil, experience significant increases in
environmental patenting in their study. Other, such as South Korea, patent less, choosing instead
to import pollution control technology from abroad. More detailed analysis of such differences
would be of great use to both policymakers and economists alike.

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

32

REFERENCES

Ahmad, Syed (1966), “On the Theory of Induced Innovation,” Economic Journal, 76(302), 34457.
Afonso, Rui, Marika Tatsutani, T.J. Roskelley, and Praveen Amar (2000), “The Regulation of
NOX Emissions from Coal-Fired Boilers: A Case Study,” in Environmental Regulation
and Technology Innovation: Controlling Mercury Emissions from Coal-Fired Boilers,
Northeast States for Coordinated Air Use Management, Boston, MA.
Binswanger, Hans P. (1978a), “The Microeconomics of Induced Technical Change,” in Hans P.
Binswanger and Vernon W. Ruttan, eds., Induced Innovation: Technology, Institutions,
and Development, Baltimore, MD: John Hopkins University Press, 91-127
Binswanger, Hans P. (1978b), “Issues in Modeling Induced Technical Change,” in Hans P.
Binswanger and Vernon W. Ruttan, eds., Induced Innovation: Technology, Institutions,
and Development, Baltimore, MD: John Hopkins University Press, 128-63.
Binswanger, Hans P. (1974), “A Microeconomic Approach to Innovation,” Economic Journal,
84(336), 940-58.
Brunnermeier, Smita B. and Mark A. Cohen (2003), “Determinants of environmental innovation
in US manufacturing industries,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management,
45(2), 278-293.
Buonanno, Paolo, Carlo Carraro, and Marzio Galeotti (2003), “Endogenous Induced Technical
Change and the Costs of Kyoto,” Resource and Energy Economics, 25(1), 11-34.
Caballero, Ricardo J. and Adam B. Jaffe (1993), “How High are the Giants’ Shoulders: An
Empirical Assessment of Knowledge Spillovers and Creative Destruction in a Model of
Economic Growth,” in Olivier J. Blanchard and Stanley Fischer, eds., NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 1993, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 15-74.
CoalPower4 (2001), CD-ROM database available from the International Energy Agency Clean
Coal Centre.
Cohen, Wesley M., Akira Goto, Akiya Nagata, Richard R. Nelson, and John P. Walsh (2002),
“R&D spillovers, patents, and the incentives to innovate in Japan and the United States,”
Research Policy, 31(8-9), 1349-1367.
Cohen, Wesley M. and Daniel A. Levinthal (1989), “Innovation and Learning: The Two Faces of
R&D,” The Economic Journal, 99, 569-596.
Ellerman, A. Denny, Richard Schmalensee, Paul L. Joskow, Juan Pablo Montero, and Elizabeth
M. Bailey (1997), Emissions Trading Under the U.S. Acid Rain Program: Evaluatin of
Compliance Costs and Allowance Market Performance, Cambridge, MA: MIT Center for
Energy and Environmental Policy Research.
Frey, H. Christopher (1995), “Engineering-Economic Evaluation of SCR NOX Control Systems
for Coal-Fired Power Plants,” Proceedings of the American Power Conference, 57(2),
1583-1588.

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

33

Goulder, Lawrence H. and Stephen H. Schneider (1999), “Induced Technological Change and
the Attractivenes of CO2 Emissions Abatement,” Resource and Energy Economics, 21,
211-253.
Greene, William H. (1993), Econometric Analysis, New York: Macmillan Publishing Co.
Grilichez, Zvi (1995), “R&D and Productivity: Econometric Results and Measurement Issues,”
in Paul Stoneman ed., Handbook of the Economics of Innovation and Technological
Change, Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers, 52-89.
Griliches, Zvi (1990), “Patent Statistics As Economic Indicators: A Survey,” Journal of
Economic Literature, 28(4), 1661-707.
Griffith, Rachel, Stephen Redding, and John Van Reenen (2003), “R&D and Absorptive
Capacity: Theory and Empirical Evidence,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 105(1),
99-118.
Hall, Bronwyn, Adam B. Jaffe, and Manuel Tratjenberg (2001), “The NBER Patent Citation
Data File: Lessons, Insights and Methodological Tools,” NBER Working Paper 8498.
Hicks, John R. (1932), The Theory of Wages, London: Macmillan.
Jaffe, Adam B., Michael S. Fogarty, and Bruce A. Banks (1998), “Evidence from Patents and
Patent Citations on the Impact of NASA and Other Federal Labs on Commercial
Innovation,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 46, 183-205.
Jaffe, Adam B., Rebecca Henderson, and Manuel Trajtenberg (1993), “Geographic Localization
of Knowledge Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 108(3), 577-98.
Jaffe, Adam B. and Karen Palmer (1997), “Environmental Regulation and Innovation: A Panel
Data Study,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 79(4), 610-19.
Jaffe, Adam B. and Manuel Trajtenberg (1999), “International Knowledge Flows: Evidence from
Patent Citations,” Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 8, 105-36.
Jaffe, Adam B. and Manuel Trajtenberg (1996), “Flows of Knowledge From Universities and
Federal Labs: Modeling the Flow of Patent Citations Over Time and Across Institutional
and Geographic Boundaries,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 93,
12671-77.
Johnson, Daniel K.N. and David Popp (2003), “Forced Out of the Closet: The Impact of the
American Inventors Protection Act on the Timing of Patent Disclosure,” RAND Journal
of Economics, 34(1), 96-112.
Kamien, Morton I. and Schwartz, Nancy L. (1968), “Optimal Induced Technical Change,”
Econometrica, 36(1), 1-17.
Keller, Wolfgang (2001), “International Technology Diffusion,” NBER Working Paper #8573.
Kemp, René (1997), Environmental Policy and Technological Change: A Comparison of the
Technological Impact of Policy Instruments, Edward Elgar Publishing, Cheltenham, UK.
Lanjouw, Jean O. and Ashoka Mody (1996), “Innovation and the International Diffusion of
Environmentally Responsive Technology,” Research Policy, 25, 549-71.

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

34

Lanjouw, Jean O. and Mark Schankerman (1999), “The Quality of Ideas: Measuring Innovation
with Multiple Indicators,” NBER Working Paper #7345.
Levin, Richard C., Alvin K. Klevorick, Richard R. Nelson, and Sidney G. Winter (1987),
“Appropriating the Returns from Industrial Research and Development,” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, 3, 783-820.
McConville, Alessandra (1997), Emission standards handbook, London: IEA Coal Research.
Newell, Richard G., Adam B. Jaffe, and Robert N. Stavins (1999), “The Induced Innovation
Hypothesis and Energy-Saving Technological Change,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
114, 941-975.
Popp, David (2004), “ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of
Global Warming,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 48(1), 742768.
Popp, David (2003), “Pollution Control Innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990,” Journal of
Policy Analysis and Management, 22(4), 641-660.
Popp, David (2002), “Induced Innovation and Energy Prices,” American Economic Review,
92(1), 160-180.
Porter, Michael E. and Claas van der Linde (1995), “Toward a New Conception of the
Environment-Competitiveness Relationship,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 9(4),
97-118.
Sloss, Lesley L. (2003), Trends in emission standards, London: IEA Coal Research.
Soud, Hermine N. (1991), Emission standards handbook: air pollutant standards for coal-fired
power plants, London: IEA Coal Research.
Vernon, Jan L. (1988), Emission standards for coal-fired plants: air pollutant control policies,
London: IEA Coal Research.

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

35

Figure 1 – Theoretical Framework

Domestic
Environmental
Policy

Domestic
R&D

Available
Knowledge

Foreign
Environmental
Policy

Foreign
R&D

Figure 1 presents a schematic of the theoretical framework for this proposal. In
the diagram, boxes represent endogenous variables chosen by firms and circles
represent exogenous variables. Solid lines represent linkages well-established in
the literature. Broken lines are links that are less established, and are thus the
focus of this study.

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

36

Figure 2 – Summary of NOX regulations

1000
900
800
700

mg/m3

600
500
400
300
200
100
0
1971

1974

1977

1980

1983

1986

1989

1992

1995

1998

2001

year
United States

Japan

Germany

The figure shows changes in allowed levels of NOX emissions for power plants in the
United States, Japan, and Germany. Note that there are no regulations in Germany until
June of 1983. Until 1996, US law only applies to new plants, whereas both new and
existing plants must comply with these regulations in Japan and Germany. Also note that
lower standards were in place in southern California and the eastern United States during
the 1990s.

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

37

Figure 3 – NOX Post-Combustion Patents in the United States

80

70

60

number

50

40

30

20

10

0
1967

1970

1973

1976

1979

1982

1985

1988

1991

1994

1997

2000

priority year
US

Foreign

Japan

Germany

The figure shows patents granted in the United States for post-combustion treatment of NOX
emissions. Patents are sorted by the home country of the assignee and by priority year. Note
that patents from each country respond to regulations in that country, but there is little evidence
of foreign patents responding to US regulatory pressures. Also, because of stronger regulations
abroad, foreign inventors have as many, and often more patents, than US inventors.

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

38

Figure 4 -- NOX Post-Combustion Patents in Germany

160

140

120

number

100

80

60

40

20

0
1970

1973

1976

1979

1982

1985

1988

1991

1994

1997

2000

priority year
Germany

Foreign

US

Japan

The figure shows patents granted in Germany for post-combustion treatment of NOX emissions.
Patents are sorted by the home country of the assignee and by priority year. Note that German
inventors respond dramatically to the passage of strict NOX emission standards in 1983, but
foreign inventors do not.

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

39

Figure 5 – Pollution Control Patents in Japan

700

600

number

500

400

300

200

100

0
1970

1973

1976

1979

1982

1985

1988

1991

1994

1997

2000

2003

application year
SO2

NOX combustion modification

NOX post-combustion

The figure shows patents granted in Japan for each pollution control technology. Unlike patents
for Germany and the US, a breakdown of patents by inventor country is not available. Patents
are sorted by their application year. Peak patenting activities correspond with the 1974
amendments to the Air Pollution Control Law and tighter NOX standards passed in 1987.

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

40

Figure 6 – NOX Combustion Modification Patents in the United States

40
35
30

number

25
20
15
10
5
0
1967

1970

1973

1976

1979

1982

1985

1988

1991

1994

1997

2000

priority year
US

Foreign

Japan

Germany

The figure shows patents granted in the United States for combustion modification techniques to
control NOX emissions. Patents are sorted by the home country of the assignee and by priority
year. Unlike post-combustion control techniques, US inventors are the main source of patents
for combustion modification.

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

41

Figure 7 – NOX Combustion Modification Patents in Germany

30

25

number

20

15

10

5

0
1970

1973

1976

1979

1982

1985

1988

1991

1994

1997

2000

priority year
Germany

Foreign

US

Japan

The figure shows patents granted in Germany for combustion modification techniques to control
NOX emissions. Patents are sorted by the home country of the assignee and by priority year.
German inventors respond to the passage of strict NOX emission standards in 1983, but not as
dramatically as for post-combustion control techniques.

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

42

Figure 8 – SO2 Control Patents in the United States
80

70

60

number

50

40

30

20

10

0
1967

1970

1973

1976

1979

1982

1985

1988

1991

1994

1997

2000

priority year
US

Foreign

Japan

Germany

The figure shows patents granted in the United States for SO2 control techniques. Patents are
sorted by the home country of the assignee and by priority year. Compared to NOX control
technologies, US inventive activity is larger and more consistent, reflecting the stringent nature
of SO2 regulations throughout the period.

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

43

Figure 9 – SO2 Control Patents in Germany

90
80
70

number

60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1970

1973

1976

1979

1982

1985

1988

1991

1994

1997

2000

priority year
Germany

Foreign

US

Japan

The figure shows patents granted in Germany for SO2 pollution control. Patents are sorted by
the home country of the assignee and by priority year. Once again, we see that German
inventors respond to the passage of strict emission standards in 1983, but foreign inventors do
not.

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

44

Table 1 – Summary of NOX Control Techniques Used at Coal-Fired Power Plants

Total number of plants
Combustion modification only
Use post-combustion
of these:
Post-combustion only
Both

US
1150
415
44

%
36.1%
3.8%

22
22

1.9%
1.9%

Germany
%
228
68
29.8%
118
51.8%
27
91

11.8%
39.9%

Japan
87
22
51

%
25.3%
58.6%

6
45

6.9%
51.7%

The table shows the total number of coal-fired power plants reported in the CoalPower4
database as of 2000, as well as the number of plants using each type of NOX control
technique. For those plants using post-combustion techniques, the last rows indicate
whether they use post-control techniques alone or in tandem with combustion
modification.

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

45

Table 2 – Top Equipment Suppliers for Selected Technologies

A. NOX post-combustion equipment for US plants

Babcock and Wilcox
Black & Veatch/Steag
Foster Wheeler Energy Corporation
Sargent & Lundy
ABB Combustion Engineering
Hamon Research-Cottrell, Inc.

Number
supplied
17
10
8
7
7
6

Percent of
total supplied
20.5%
12.0%
9.6%
8.4%
8.4%
7.2%

Number
supplied
34
34
29
19
16
13

Percent of
total supplied
18.6%
18.6%
15.8%
10.4%
8.7%
7.1%

B. SO2 equipment for German plants

Lentjes Bischoff GmbH
Noell-KRC Energie und Umwelttechnik GmbH
Deutsche Babcock Anlagen GmbH
L. und C. Steinmueller GmbH
Thyssen Still Otto Anlagentechnik GmbH
Saarberg Hoelter Lurgi GmbH

The table shows the top equipment suppliers for selected pollution control technologies in the US
and Germany. In both cases, domestic suppliers dominate, even though early development of
each technology occurred overseas.

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

46

Table 3 – Patent Classes Used for Potentially Cited Patents

Classification
NOX Post-Combustion
423: Chemistry of inorganic compounds
502: Catalyst, solid sorbent, or support therefor: product or process of making
422: Chemical apparatus and process disinfecting, deodorizing, preserving, or sterilizing
NOX Combustion Modification
431: Combustion
110: Furnaces
60: Power Plants
SO2 Control
423: Chemistry of inorganic compounds
110: Furnaces
122: Liquid heaters and vaporizers
422: Chemical apparatus and process disinfecting, deodorizing, preserving, or sterilizing
95: Gas Separation: Processes
Other Pollution Control
423: Chemistry of inorganic compounds
422: Chemical apparatus and process disinfecting, deodorizing, preserving, or sterilizing
210: Liquid purification or separation
95: Gas Separation: Processes
502: Catalyst, solid sorbent, or support therefor: product or process of making
96: Gas Separation: Apparatus

% of all
citations
47.8
13.2
6.1
43.9
16.6
13.4
31.9
12.0
11.2
6.7
5.8
18.7
9.2
8.7
7.1
7.1
5.5

The table shows the US patent classifications used to create the pool of potentially cited patents
for the regressions in section V. These classes represent between 56 and 73 percent of all cited
patents.

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology
Table 4 – Citation Regression Results
Standard
Parameter
Estimate
Error
Technology Dummies
NOX pre combustion
1.762
0.027
NOX post combustion
0.906
0.017
Sulfur dioxide
1.000
NA
Other pollution control
0.458
0.011
Citing Year
1974-1977
1.000
NA
1978-1981
0.920
0.038
1982-1985
1.079
0.052
1986-1989
1.306
0.074
1990-1993
1.519
0.100
1994-1997
1.418
0.108
1998-2001
1.417
0.123
Cited Year
1963-1970
1.000
NA
1971-1975
2.077
0.145
1976-1980
2.347
0.181
1981-1985
1.965
0.171
1986-1990
2.071
0.201
1991-1995
2.062
0.222
1996-2001
2.066
0.251
Citing/Cited Country Pairs
US citing US
1.000
NA
US citing Japan
0.589
0.017
US citing Germany
0.638
0.021
US citing Other nations
0.568
0.016
Japan citing US
0.387
0.016
Japan citing Japan
1.070
0.035
Japan citing Germany
0.397
0.037
Japan citing Other nations
0.337
0.031
Germany citing US
0.319
0.018
Germany citing Japan
0.611
0.033
Germany citing Germany
0.923
0.046
Germany citing Other Nations
0.356
0.036
Other nations citing US
0.480
0.014
Other nations citing Japan
0.339
0.025
Other nations citing Germany
0.495
0.031
Other nations citing Other nations
0.735
0.025
Citing pattern differences for NOX post-combustion patents
US citing US
0.000
NA
US citing Japan
0.610
0.059
US citing Germany
0.057
0.055
US citing Other nations
-0.401
0.043
Decay
0.243
0.004
Diffusion
0.00011
0.00001
* -- H0 is β = 0

N=42976

T-ratio (H0
β=1)
28.12
-5.45
NA
-48.83
NA
-2.12
1.52
4.13
5.19
3.89
3.40
NA
7.46
7.44
5.65
5.32
4.78
4.24
NA
-24.05
-17.64
-27.51
-39.53
2.02
-16.35
-21.53
-38.07
-11.82
-1.69
-17.99
-38.55
-26.56
-16.38
-10.72
NA
10.36*
1.03*
-9.43*
63.74*
14.07*

Adjusted R-square: 0.2348

47

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

48

Table 5 – Alternative Citation Regression Specifications
(1)
(2)
(3)
Citing pattern differences for NOX post-combustion patents
US citing US
0
0
NA
NA
US citing Japan
0.610
0.716
(10.36)
(9.64)
US citing Germany
0.057
0.094
(1.03)
(1.41)
US citing Other nations
-0.401
-0.342
(-9.43)
(-6.87)
Citing pattern differences for pre-1990 NOX post-combustion patents
US citing US
0
NA
US citing Japan
2.244
(17.92)
US citing Germany
-0.121
(-1.48)
US citing Other nations
-0.358
(-4.55)
Citing pattern differences for post-1990 NOX post-combustion patents
US citing US
0
NA
US citing Japan
-0.669
(-42.91)
US citing Germany
0.294
(2.30)
US citing Other nations
-0.093
(-0.72)
T-statistics in parenthesis

Table continued on next page

(4)

0
NA
2.517
(15.86)
-0.057
(-0.62)
-0.274
(-3.03)
0
NA
0.679
(7.46)
0.161
(2.16)
0.286
(4.18)

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

49

Table 5 – Alternative Citation Regression Specifications (continued)
Citing pattern differences for SO2 patents
US citing US

0
NA
0.151
(2.73)
0.066
(1.13)
0.188
(3.56)

US citing Japan
US citing Germany
US citing Other nations
Citing pattern differences for pre-1990 SO2 patents
US citing US

0
NA
0.119
(1.97)
0.166
(2.24)
-0.369
(-6.79)

US citing Japan
US citing Germany
US citing Other nations
Citing pattern differences for post-1990 SO2 patents
US citing US
US citing Japan
US citing Germany
US citing Other nations
R-square
MSE

0.2348
10.1776

0.2458
10.0298

0.2351
10.1726

0
NA
-0.129
(-2.36)
0.006
(0.10)
0.115
(2.04)
0.2478
10.002

T-statistics in parenthesis

The table presents results of differing citation patterns for alternative specifications of the
citation regression. Column (1) repeats the results presented in table 4 for the NOX postcombustion citation pattern dummy. Column (2) presents results of a regression distinguishing
between cited NOX post-combustion patents granted before and after 1990. Columns (3) and (4)
repeat this analysis, including dummy variables for both NOX post-combustion techniques and
SO2 techniques. Note that the patterns found for NOX post-combustion techniques are not found
for SO2 technologies, nor does the inclusion of SO2 technologies change the pattern of results for
NOX post-combustion techniques.

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

A1

Data Appendix A – Creation of the Patent Data Set

When patents are granted, they are given technology classifications and subclassifications
by various patent offices. These classifications can be used to identify all patents for each of the
technologies described in section IV.

For US and German patents, relevant patents were

identified using the European Classification System (ECLA). ECLA classifications are assigned
to patent examiners at the European Patent Office (EPO). The EPO provides a searchable on-line
database, esp@cenet, that includes ECLA classifications for all German patents and all US
patents granted since 1920.27 This classification scheme is based upon the often-used
International Patent Classification system (IPC), but includes classifications at a greater level of
detail. This additional detail allows for separate identification of technologies based on the
pollutants they control. For example, IPC classification B01D 53/86 includes catalytic processes
for pollution control. ECLA class B01D 53/86F2 specifies catalytic processes for reduction of
NOX, and B01D 53/86B4 specifies catalytic processes for reduction of SO2. Moreover, as new
classifications are added, the EPO updates the ECLA of older patents in its database. This is
important, as classifications distinguishing pollution control techniques for specific pollutants
were not added until recently. Using the EPO’s on-line database, a list of all patent numbers in
relevant technology classes was downloaded for the US, Germany, and the EPO.28
However, the EPO database does not include complete updates of the ECLA for Japanese
patents. Thus, Japanese patents were obtained from the Intellectual Property Digital Library on
27

The database can be found at http://ep.espacenet.com/search97cgi/s97is.dll?Action=FormGen&Template=ep/en/
home.hts
28
Beginning in 1978, an inventor desiring protection in Europe could file a single patent application through the
EPO. The applicant designates as many of the 18 EPO member-states for protection as desired. The application is
examined by the EPO. If granted, the patent is transferred to the individual national patent offices designated for
protection. Typically, a patent applicant first files for protection in their home country, and then applies to offices
abroad, such as the EPO. The esp@cenet database returns patent numbers for patents with German priority that
were also filed through the EPO, but does not return the German patent numbers for patents with foreign priority
that were filed through EPO and designated Germany for protection. Thus, foreign patent counts in Germany are
augmented by including EPO patents from non-German inventors that designate Germany for protection.

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

A2

the Japan Patent Office (JPO) web site.29 The JPO does not use the ECLA. However, it uses its
own system, the F-term, which, like the ECLA, provides greater detail than the IPC. F-terms
consist of a 5-digit theme code, a 2-digit viewpoint symbol, and a 2-digit number. For example,
consider technologies classified as 4D002 AA12. The 5-digit theme code 4D002 pertains to
“processing of waste gases.” The two letter viewpoint symbol AA pertains to “compounds to be
processed.” Finally, the 2-digit number specifies that NOX is the component processed.
The first step in assembling the patent data used in this paper was to identify relevant
ECLA classifications.
sources.

Information on appropriate technologies was obtained from several

Much of this information is summarized through documents available from the

International Energy Agency’s (IEA) Clean Coal Research Centre, and is available on-line at
htpp://www.iea-coal.org.uk.

Keyword searches were used to identify potentially relevant

patents. Individual documents were viewed to determine which were, in fact, patents pertaining
to pollution control. A tally of the ECLA classifications of these patents was made, enabling us
to identify classifications that occurred frequently in the data. Then, searches of these ECLAs
were done both separately and in combination with relevant keywords to identify classifications
for which the majority of patents did pertain to pollution control. This last step was particularly
important for combustion modification patents, as many patents in potential combustion
classifications pertain to other aspects of combustion (e.g. for improving horsepower). Once the
relevant ECLA classes were found, they were matched to corresponding F-term classes in the
Japanese system, using both a reading of the various definitions and searches of the Intellectual
Property Digital Library of the JPO using the IPC class most closely corresponding to the ECLA
codes.

29

This database can be found at http://www.ipdl.jpo.go.jp/homepg_e.ipdl.

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

A3

After establishing the patent classifications to use in this research, the next research step
was to obtain a list of all patents from the US, Japan, Germany, and the EPO in these
classifications. Patent numbers from all but Japan were obtained from esp@cenet, and the
Japanese data came from the Intellectual Property Digital Library of the JPO. Because of
differences in patent laws in each country, slightly different data are available from each site.
US data is only available for granted patents, as patent applications were not published by the US
Patent Office until 2001. In contrast, both successful and unsuccessful patent applications are
available for Germany and the EPO. Finally, the Japanese database contains information on all
patent applications since 1971. Using application data, rather than granted patents, is more
reliable for Japan, as the patent examination process in Japan often takes six or more years,
compared to 2-3 years in the United States.
Both of these sources provide lists of patents, but do not allow the user to download large
quantities of descriptive data about the patents. Thus, we augmented the patent numbers with
descriptive information downloaded from the Delphion on-line database.30

This database,

available only by subscription, allows the user to download multiple patent records in machinereadable formats. Descriptive data available include the priority, application and issue dates for
each patent, the home country of the inventor, and data on patent families. Unfortunately,
updated ECLA classifications are not available from Delphion. Thus, we downloaded patents
from Delphion that fell in related IPC classifications, and merged these data with the lists of
patent numbers to restrict the analysis to those falling in the relevant ECLA classes.
Also, the Delphion database does not include detailed descriptive data for Japanese patents.
Fortunately, the application year of each patent is available from the JPO website. However, the
priority date of these patents is unavailable.
30

Available at http://www.delphion.com.

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

B1

Appendix B – Patent Classifications Used for Each Control Technology

European Classifications for Pollution Control Patents
Nitrogen Dioxide pollution control
Combustion Modification
F23C 6/04B
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING; LIGHTING; HEATING;
WEAPONS; BLASTING ENGINES OR PUMPS/COMBUSTION
APPARATUS; COMBUSTION PROCESSES/COMBUSTION
APPARATUS USING FLUENT FUEL/Combustion apparatus
characterised by the combination of two or more combustion
chambers/in series connection/[N: with staged combustion in a single
enclosure]
F23C 6/04B1
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING; LIGHTING; HEATING;
WEAPONS; BLASTING ENGINES OR PUMPS/COMBUSTION
APPARATUS; COMBUSTION PROCESSES/COMBUSTION
APPARATUS USING FLUENT FUEL/Combustion apparatus
characterised by the combination of two or more combustion
chambers/in series connection/[N: with staged combustion in a single
enclosure]/ [N: with fuel supply in stages]
F23C 9
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING; LIGHTING; HEATING;
WEAPONS; BLASTING ENGINES OR PUMPS/COMBUSTION
APPARATUS; COMBUSTION PROCESSES/COMBUSTION
APPARATUS USING FLUENT FUEL/Combustion apparatus with
arrangements for recycling or recirculating combustion products or
flue gases

Post-Combustion
B01D 53/56
PERFORMING OPERATIONS; TRANSPORTING/ PHYSICAL OR
CHEMICAL PROCESSES OR APPARATUS IN GENERAL/
SEPARATION/ Separation of gases or vapours; Recovering vapours
of volatile solvents from gases; Chemical or biological purification of
waste gases, e.g. engine exhaust gases, smoke, fumes, flue gases,
aerosols/Chemical or biological purification of waste gases/Removing
components of defined structure/Nitrogen compounds/Nitrogen oxides
B01D 53/56D
PERFORMING OPERATIONS; TRANSPORTING/ PHYSICAL OR
CHEMICAL PROCESSES OR APPARATUS IN GENERAL/
SEPARATION/ Separation of gases or vapours; Recovering vapours
of volatile solvents from gases; Chemical or biological purification of
waste gases, e.g. engine exhaust gases, smoke, fumes, flue gases,
aerosols/Chemical or biological purification of waste gases/Removing
components of defined structure/Nitrogen compounds/Nitrogen
oxides/[N: by treating the gases with solids]

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology
B01D 53/60

B2

PERFORMING OPERATIONS; TRANSPORTING/ PHYSICAL OR
CHEMICAL PROCESSES OR APPARATUS IN GENERAL/
SEPARATION/ Separation of gases or vapours; Recovering vapours
of volatile solvents from gases; Chemical or biological purification of
waste gases, e.g. engine exhaust gases, smoke, fumes, flue gases,
aerosols/Chemical or biological purification of waste gases/Removing
components of defined structure/Simultaneously removing sulfur
oxides and nitrogen oxides
B01D 53/86F2
PERFORMING OPERATIONS; TRANSPORTING/ PHYSICAL OR
CHEMICAL PROCESSES OR APPARATUS IN GENERAL/
SEPARATION/ Separation of gases or vapours; Recovering vapours
of volatile solvents from gases; Chemical or biological purification of
waste gases, e.g. engine exhaust gases, smoke, fumes, flue gases,
aerosols/Chemical or biological purification of waste gases/General
processes for purification of waste gases; Apparatus or devices
specially adapted therefore/Catalytic processes/ N: Removing nitrogen
compounds]/[N: Nitrogen oxides]/
B01D 53/86F2C PERFORMING OPERATIONS; TRANSPORTING/ PHYSICAL OR
CHEMICAL PROCESSES OR APPARATUS IN GENERAL/
SEPARATION/ Separation of gases or vapours; Recovering vapours
of volatile solvents from gases; Chemical or biological purification of
waste gases, e.g. engine exhaust gases, smoke, fumes, flue gases,
aerosols/Chemical or biological purification of waste gases/General
processes for purification of waste gases; Apparatus or devices
specially adapted therefore/Catalytic processes/ N: Removing nitrogen
compounds]/[N: Nitrogen oxides]/[N: Processes characterised by a
specific catalyst]
B01D 53/86F2D PERFORMING OPERATIONS; TRANSPORTING/ PHYSICAL OR
CHEMICAL PROCESSES OR APPARATUS IN GENERAL/
SEPARATION/ Separation of gases or vapours; Recovering vapours
of volatile solvents from gases; Chemical or biological purification of
waste gases, e.g. engine exhaust gases, smoke, fumes, flue gases,
aerosols/Chemical or biological purification of waste gases/General
processes for purification of waste gases; Apparatus or devices
specially adapted therefore/Catalytic processes/ N: Removing nitrogen
compounds]/[N: Nitrogen oxides [N: Processes characterised by a
specific device]
B01D 53/86G
PERFORMING OPERATIONS; TRANSPORTING/ PHYSICAL OR
CHEMICAL PROCESSES OR APPARATUS IN GENERAL/
SEPARATION/ Separation of gases or vapours; Recovering vapours
of volatile solvents from gases; Chemical or biological purification of
waste gases, e.g. engine exhaust gases, smoke, fumes, flue gases,
aerosols/Chemical or biological purification of waste gases/General
processes for purification of waste gases; Apparatus or devices
specially adapted therefore/Catalytic processes/ [N: Simultaneously
removing sulfur oxides and nitrogen oxides]

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology
B01J 29/06D2E

B3

PERFORMING OPERATIONS; TRANSPORTING/ PHYSICAL OR
CHEMICAL PROCESSES OR APPARATUS IN GENERAL/
CHEMICAL OR PHYSICAL PROCESSES, e.g. CATALYSIS,
COLLOID CHEMISTRY; THEIR RELEVANT APPARATUS/
Catalysts comprising molecular sieves/ having base-exchange
properties, e.g. crystalline zeolites/ Crystalline aluminosilicate
zeolites; Isomorphous compounds thereof/ [N: containing metallic
elements added to the zeolite]/ [N: containing iron group metals, noble
metals or copper]/ [N: Iron group metals or copper]

Sulfur Dioxide pollution control
B01D 53/14H8 PERFORMING OPERATIONS; TRANSPORTING/ PHYSICAL OR
CHEMICAL PROCESSES OR APPARATUS IN GENERAL/
SEPARATION/ Separation of gases or vapours; Recovering vapours
of volatile solvents from gases; Chemical or biological purification of
waste gases, e.g. engine exhaust gases, smoke, fumes, flue gases,
aerosols/ by absorption/ [N: Gases containing acid components]/ [N:
containing only sulfur dioxide or sulfur trioxide]
B01D 53/50
PERFORMING OPERATIONS; TRANSPORTING/ PHYSICAL OR
CHEMICAL PROCESSES OR APPARATUS IN GENERAL/
SEPARATION/ Separation of gases or vapours; Recovering vapours
of volatile solvents from gases; Chemical or biological purification of
waste gases, e.g. engine exhaust gases, smoke, fumes, flue gases,
aerosols/Chemical or biological purification of waste gases/Removing
components of defined structure/Sulfur compounds/Sulfur oxides
Includes 50B, 50B2, 50B4, 50B6, 50C, 50D
B01D 53/86B4 PERFORMING OPERATIONS; TRANSPORTING/ PHYSICAL OR
CHEMICAL PROCESSES OR APPARATUS IN GENERAL/
SEPARATION/ Separation of gases or vapours; Recovering vapours
of volatile solvents from gases; Chemical or biological purification of
waste gases, e.g. engine exhaust gases, smoke, fumes, flue gases,
aerosols/Chemical or biological purification of waste gases/General
processes for purification of waste gases; Apparatus or devices
specially adapted therefore/Catalytic processes/ [N: Removing sulfur
compounds]/ [N: Sulfur oxides]
F23C 10
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING; LIGHTING; HEATING;
WEAPONS; BLASTING ENGINES OR PUMPS/COMBUSTION
APPARATUS; COMBUSTION PROCESSES/COMBUSTION
APPARATUS USING FLUENT FUEL/ Fluidised bed combustion
apparatus

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

B4

General Pollution Control
B01D 53/34
PERFORMING OPERATIONS; TRANSPORTING/ PHYSICAL OR
CHEMICAL PROCESSES OR APPARATUS IN GENERAL/
SEPARATION/ Separation of gases or vapours; Recovering vapours
of volatile solvents from gases; Chemical or biological purification of
waste gases, e.g. engine exhaust gases, smoke, fumes, flue gases,
aerosols/Chemical or biological purification of waste gases
B01D 53/74
PERFORMING OPERATIONS; TRANSPORTING/ PHYSICAL OR
CHEMICAL PROCESSES OR APPARATUS IN GENERAL/
SEPARATION/ Separation of gases or vapours; Recovering vapours
of volatile solvents from gases; Chemical or biological purification of
waste gases, e.g. engine exhaust gases, smoke, fumes, flue gases,
aerosols/Chemical or biological purification of waste gases/General
processes for purification of waste gases; Apparatus or devices
specially adapted therefore
B01D 53/86
PERFORMING OPERATIONS; TRANSPORTING/ PHYSICAL OR
CHEMICAL PROCESSES OR APPARATUS IN GENERAL/
SEPARATION/ Separation of gases or vapours; Recovering vapours
of volatile solvents from gases; Chemical or biological purification of
waste gases, e.g. engine exhaust gases, smoke, fumes, flue gases,
aerosols/Chemical or biological purification of waste gases/General
processes for purification of waste gases; Apparatus or devices
specially adapted therefore/Catalytic processes

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

B5

Japanese F-terms for Pollution Control Technologies
Nitrogen Dioxide pollution control
Combustion Modification
3K091 AA01
Combustion of fluid fuel/Purpose of improvement/Control of nitrous
oxides (NOx)
3K065 TA01
Other non-classified combustion/Purpose and effects of
improvements/Control of nitrous oxides (NOX)
3K065 QA01
Other non-classified combustion/Pollution prevention (i.e., purposes
and means)/Low nitrous oxides (NOX)
3K065 QA02
Other non-classified combustion/Pollution prevention (i.e., purposes
and means)/ Low nitrous oxides (NOX)/Low nitrous oxides (NOX) by
divided flames
3K065 QA03
Other non-classified combustion/Pollution prevention (i.e., purposes
and means)/ Low nitrous oxides (NOX)/Low nitrous oxides (NOX) by
thick and thin fuel combustion
3K065 QA04
Other non-classified combustion/Pollution prevention (i.e., purposes
and means)/ Low nitrous oxides (NOX)/Low nitrous oxides (NOX) by
multi-stage combustion
3K064 AA01
Fluidized-bed combustion and resonant combustion/Purpose and effect
of improvements/Control or suppression of nitrous oxides (NOX)
F23C 11/02,301 Other combustion apparatus using fluent fuel/with fluidised bed/
suppressing generation of SOX

Post-Combustion
4D002 AA12
Processing of waste gases/Components to be processed/Nitrogen
oxides (NOx)
4G069 CA13
Catalysts/Reactions used that are associated with Environmental
Protection/Target substances/Nitrous oxides (NOX)

International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Technology

B6

Sulfur Dioxide pollution control
4D002 AA02
Processing of waste gases/Components to be processed/Sulfur oxide
(SOX)
3K091 AA02
Combustion of fluid fuel/Purpose of improvement/Control of sulfur
oxides (SOx)
3K091 FB09
Combustion of fluid fuel/Air supply and fuel supply for
afterburning/Forms of combustion chambers/Supply of desulfurization
agents
3K065 TA02
Other non-classified combustion/Purpose and effects of
improvements/Control of sulfur oxides (SOX)
3K065 QA06
Other non-classified combustion/Pollution prevention (i.e., purposes
and means)/Low sulfur oxides (SOX)
3K065 QA07
Other non-classified combustion/Pollution prevention (i.e., purposes
and means)/ Low sulfur oxides (SOX)/Low sulfur oxides (SOX) by
desulfurization agents
3K064 AA02
Fluidized-bed combustion and resonant combustion/Purpose and effect
of improvements/Control or suppression of sulfur oxides (SOX)
3K065 AA11
Other non-classified combustion/Furnace shapes/Fluidized bed
furnaces
F23C 11/02*
Combustion apparatus; combustion processes/Combustion apparatus
using fluent fuel/Other combustion apparatus using fluent fuel/with
fluidised bed
F23C 11/02,303* Combustion apparatus; combustion processes/Combustion apparatus
using fluent fuel Other combustion apparatus using fluent fuel/with
fluidised bed/ suppressing generation of SOX (only desulfurisation in
the furnace. F23C11/00, 307 takes precedence)
F23C11/00, 307* Combustion apparatus; combustion processes/Combustion apparatus
using fluent fuel Other combustion apparatus using fluent
fuel/suppressing generation of SOx (desulfurisation in the furnace)

* – These IPC classes are included to capture general fluidized bed combustion patents.
Fluidized bed combustion has its own five digit theme code (3K064). These cannot
be downloaded separately from the Japanese patent database, as the remainder of
the F-term is needed for downloading. However, the corresponding IPC classes can
be downloaded, and are included in the data used in the paper.

