NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DO THE RICH FLEE FROM HIGH STATE TAXES?
EVIDENCE FROM FEDERAL ESTATE TAX RETURNS
Jon Bakija
Joel Slemrod
Working Paper 10645
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10645
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2004

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2004 by Jon Bakija and Joel Slemrod. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Do the Rich Flee from High State Taxes? Evidence from Federal Estate Tax Returns
Jon Bakija and Joel Slemrod
NBER Working Paper No. 10645
July 2004
JEL No. H23, H71, H73, H77, R23, J14
ABSTRACT
This paper examines how changes in state tax policy affect the number of federal estate tax returns
filed in each state, utilizing data on federal estate tax return filings by state and wealth class for 18
years between 1965 and 1998. Controlling for state- and wealth-class specific fixed effects, we find
that high state inheritance and estate taxes and sales taxes have statistically significant, but modest,
negative impacts on the number of federal estate tax returns filed in a state. High personal income
tax and property tax burdens are also found to have negative effects, but these results are somewhat
sensitive to alternative specifications. This evidence is consistent with the notion that wealthy
elderly people change their real (or reported) state of residence to avoid high state taxes, although
it could partly reflect other modes of tax avoidance as well. We discuss the implications for the
debate over whether individual states should “decouple” their estate taxes from federal law, which
would retain the state tax even as the federal credit for such taxes is eliminated. Our results suggest
that migration and other observationally equivalent avoidance activities in response to such a tax
would cause revenue losses and deadweight losses, but that these would not be large relative to the
revenue raised by the tax.
Jon Bakija
Department of Economics
Williams College
Williamstown, MA 01267
jbakija@williams.edu
Joel Slemrod
University of Michigan Business School
701 Tappan Street, Room A2120
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
and NBER
jslemrod@umich.edu

Introduction
This paper presents evidence on the degree to which wealthy elderly people migrate or
otherwise undertake actions to avoid state taxes, based on an examination of the
relationship between changes in state tax policies and changes in the number of federal
estate tax returns filed in each state over time. In setting optimal state tax policy,
particularly with regards to the degree of progressivity, the extent to which people flee
states that attempt to impose relatively high tax burdens on them is a critical
consideration. A long-standing argument in the public finance literature holds that state
governments should refrain from redistributive tax and transfer policies, and that these
should instead be the responsibility of the central government (Musgrave, 1959, and
Oates, 1972). Out-migration by high-income people and in-migration by low-income
people may partly or fully undermine a state’s effort to achieve redistribution, and the
deadweight losses arising from distorted location decisions might be avoided if the same
redistribution were instead effected by the central government. Yet we observe that states
do indeed implement policies such as progressive income taxes and wealth-transfer taxes,
as well as redistributive spending policies. Possible explanations might include a limited
willingness of individuals to migrate across states in response to taxes, which prevents
the impact of progressive state policies from being completely undone, coupled with
heterogeneity across states in tastes for redistribution, and the possibility that
redistribution is a local public good.2 When states do operate redistributive policies, the
optimal degree of redistribution from the state’s perspective is a declining function of the
degree of mobility in response to taxes (Mirrlees, 1982).3 An extensive empirical
literature has developed to examine whether the migration decisions of the poor are
affected by the generosity of state anti-poverty policies, usually finding little evidence of
an effect.4 But to date, we have little or no information on whether progressive state tax
policies are affecting the location decisions of the rich.5
Recently, the question of whether rich elderly people in particular flee from states
that tax them relatively heavily has become an especially salient question for state
governments. States must now decide how to respond to the elimination of a credit in the
federal estate tax for state estate and inheritance (henceforth “EI”) tax payments. In the

1

recent past, all states imposed a tax at death to “soak up” the maximum available federal
credit. A soak-up tax imposed no incremental burden on a state’s residents, but rather
merely effected a transfer of revenue from federal to state governments. The Economic
Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2001 (EGTRRA) scheduled a gradual
elimination of the credit for state EI taxes between 2002 and 2004, after which it will be
replaced by a deduction.6 When the federal credit is eliminated, states that maintain their
estate taxes at the former soak-up level will be imposing larger incremental burdens than
states that do not. By 2006, the difference in tax burdens on estates larger than $675,000
between a state that maintains the tax in its 2001 form, versus a state that eliminates the
tax, will be on average roughly 4.5 percent of the bequest.7 As of January 2004, eighteen
states that formerly levied soak-up estate taxes had “decoupled” from federal law, so that
they would persist at pre-EGTRRA levels even as the federal credit is eliminated. 8
Numerous other states were debating whether to take legislative action to decouple their
estate taxes, while states with taxes that were already decoupled were debating whether to
eliminate them. The potential impact of such taxes on migration behavior is at the crux of
the debate over this issue.
Substantial historical variation in state tax policy offers an opportunity to learn
about how tax burdens on the rich affect their location decisions. EI taxes provide a
particularly good experiment. Historically, most states imposed their own idiosyncratic
EI taxes and also operated a soak-up tax in parallel, so that tax liability at death would
equal the larger of the two taxes. When the state’s idiosyncratic EI tax exceeded the soakup tax liability, the excess was an incremental burden relative to other states. But,
beginning in the 1970s, more and more states began to eliminate these taxes, switching to
sole reliance on the soak-up tax. The timing of repeal varied greatly across states; for
example, 28 states repealed their idiosyncratic EI taxes between 1976 and 2000, and the
timing of those changes was spread fairly evenly throughout the period (Conway and
Rork, 2004a). Other states consistently imposed no incremental EI tax over this period, or
maintained a tax throughout the period. Differences across states in effective income,
sales, and property tax burdens exhibited less stark, but still substantial, variation over
time. For example, the elimination of deductibility of sales taxes in the Tax Reform Act
of 1986 made states with high sales taxes become relatively less attractive compared to

2

other states, and various state income tax reforms had modest effects on the degree of
progressivity. Historical tax law changes thus arguably provide treatment and control
groups for testing how differing time patterns of tax burdens across states match up with
time patterns in the number of estate tax return filers claiming residence in each state.
Some recent research has examined the determinants of migration behavior for
the elderly in general. None, though, has focused on the wealthy elderly, who are now
almost exclusively the ones impacted by state EI taxes, and whose behavior might have
special implications for the optimal progressivity of a state tax system. Conway and
Houtenville (2001) review the previous literature, and then examine migration flows
between each pair of states in the U.S. between 1985 and 1990, using aggregate statelevel data from the 1990 U.S. Census. They find some evidence that the elderly in general
are less likely to migrate into states with higher EI taxes, although they also find the
perverse result that the elderly are less likely to migrate out of states with higher EI taxes.
Results for other types of taxes are rather mixed and sensitive to the specification chosen.
Duncombe, Robbins, and Wolf (2003) estimate a discrete choice model of county-tocounty migration decisions of the elderly between 1985 and 1990, again using 1990
Census data. They find that various taxes, including inheritance taxes, reduce the
probability of locating in a jurisdiction, although estate tax rates are found to have a
positive effect on the probability of locating in a state. Using the Health and Retirement
Survey, Farnham and Sevak (2004) examine whether members of “empty nest”
houesholds, who would presumably prefer to move to jurisdictions with lower property
taxes and education spending, actually reduce their property tax burdens when they
move. They find that when such people move across state boundaries they achieve some
modest property tax reduction, but not when they move within-state. Conway and Rork
(2004b) recently undertook the first study to utilize a panel data approach to study
aggregate migration flows, controlling for time-invariant unobservable characteristics of
states with state-specific fixed-effects. Based on 1970 through 2000 decennial census
data, they examine how aggregate in-migration and out-migration flows of states change
over time in response to changes in state taxes, and again find mixed results.
A common feature of all of these previous studies (with the exception of Farnham
and Sevak, which only examined property taxes) is that the measures of state tax burdens

3

have been rough approximations. Some studies use measures based on aggregate tax
collections, in spite of the fact that these measures are endogenously related to migration
behavior.9 In other cases, studies apply “representative” tax parameters that are assumed
to apply equally to all taxpayers in a state, despite the fact that the burdens of EI and
income taxes are extremely heterogeneous across individuals. We would expect that,
ceteris paribus, states imposing taxes that are relatively progressive compared to other
states would tend to repel those who are relatively heavily taxed and attract those who are
relatively lightly taxed. In that case, it may not be very informative to examine how
migration responds to a tax rate that is calculated, for example, at a single
“representative” level of wealth or income for the state as a whole.10 Because EI taxes in
particular are so heavily concentrated on the wealthy, their effects may be lost in studies
relying on aggregate data or using representative tax rates that are assumed to apply to
all.
Our study addresses the question of how the reported locations of wealthy elderly
people respond to state tax policy by utilizing panel data on the number of federal estate
tax returns filed in each of five wealth classes in each state for 18 years between 1965
and 1998. A distinct advantage of using federal estate tax return data is that this is the
only kind of data available providing information on any significant number of wealthy
people and their locations.11 A disadvantage is that, in contrast to the data typically used
in the migration literature, we do not actually observe whether an individual moves, only
his or her reported state of residence at the date of death. There are some factors, such as
tax-induced changes in wealth accumulation behavior, or undertaking avoidance
activities that enable one to “pretend” to move, that are difficult to distinguish from
migration in our data. As such, our approach is similar to the extensive literature on the
elasticity of taxable income, where we have compelling evidence that some sort of tax
avoidance behavior with important policy implications is occurring, but we cannot be
absolutely certain of its exact form.12
We model the choice of (reported) state of residence in both linear regression and
conditional logit frameworks, and we take advantage of the state panel characteristic of
our data to control for state- and wealth-class specific fixed-effects and state-specific time
trends, in addition to controlling for a broad array of time-varying state characteristics.

4

We thus take a “difference-in-differences” type approach, where the identification for the
tax effects comes entirely from differences across states in the time pattern of tax rates
within each wealth class. A major contribution of our work is the development and use of
detailed federal and state inheritance, estate, and income tax calculators that allow us to
construct accurate estimates of the tax burdens likely to apply to the individuals in our
study in different states and at different wealth levels.
We find that, controlling for state and wealth class fixed effects, a one percentage
point increase in the wealth-class-specific effective state EI average tax rate is associated
with 1.4 percent to 2.7 percent decline in the number of federal estate tax returns filed in
the state, depending on the specification. Estates over $5 million are found to be
particularly sensitive to the EI tax, declining by nearly 4 percent in response to a onepercentage point rate increase. Sales tax, income tax, and property tax rates are also
found to have similar and sometimes larger negative impacts on the number of federal
estate tax returns filed in a state, although the results for the latter two taxes are sensitive
to alternative specifications. Controlling for unobserved heterogeneity in state
characteristics has an important effect on the estimates, in the direction of increasing the
estimated magnitude of the negative impact of taxes. At the end of the paper, we consider
what our estimates imply about the debate over state EI taxes, and what they contribute to
our understanding of the welfare costs of state taxation. Our results support the idea that
state governments face a trade-off and should take tax-induced migration and related
avoidance activities into account when setting tax policy. But our results also imply that
in the case of a decoupled estate tax, revenue losses and deadweight losses from these
particular forms of behavioral response are unlikely to be large relative to revenues
collected
Estate Tax Return Data
We begin with a description of the federal estate tax return data that forms the basis of
our study, as an understanding of the data helps explain the choices we have made in our
econometric approach. The federal estate tax is a tax on the total value of bequests made
at death, less deductions for bequests to a spouse, bequests to charity, and a few other

5

miscellaneous items. It applies exclusively to estates that exceed an exemption level ($1.5
million in 2004) that is effectively created by a “unified credit.” A return is required on
behalf of any decedent whose “gross estate” (assets before subtracting debts or
deductions) exceeds the exemption level. Above the exempt level, substantial marginal
tax rates are imposed, ranging from 45 to 48 percent in 2004. The exemption level has
fluctuated significantly in value over time. In nominal terms, the exempt level was
$60,000 from 1954 to 1976, after which it increased in steps to $600,000 by 1987, where
it stayed until 1997 before beginning to increase again.13
Our empirical analysis is based on tabulations of federal estate tax return data
provided to us by the Statistics of Income division of the Internal Revenue Service (IRS).
The underlying data set is a sample of returns stratified based on size of gross estate, age
at death, and either year of death (1985 and after) or filing year (before 1985).14 The
average sampling rate for the observations we use was about 25 percent of the national
population of estate tax returns, although this varies widely from year to year. To
preserve confidentiality, the data were provided to us in the form of aggregated cells,
broken up into year, state, and wealth class combinations. We use 18 years of data -1965, 1969, 1976, 1982, and 1985 through 1998. The data for 1985-1998 are arranged by
year of death. Data before 1985 represent estate tax returns that were filed in the
following year; most of these returns pertain to deaths that occurred in the year indicated.
The missing years are omitted either because the IRS did not draw a sample of returns
filed in the following year, or because a key piece of information such as state of
residence was not collected. All 50 states are included in all years, and the District of
Columbia is included starting in 1976. The wealth classes are defined based on net worth,
which equals the total gross estate minus debts.15 The wealth categories (measured in
constant 1996 dollars, calculated using the CPI-U) are $400,000 - $750,000, $750,000 $1.25 million, $1.25 million - $2 million, $2 million - $5 million, and over $5 million. To
maintain comparability of populations within similar cells across years, we omit any
wealth category in any particular year where the federal filing threshold was above the
minimum bound of the category.16 For each year-wealth-state cell, we have information
on the number of sampled returns in that cell, as well as an estimate of the number of
population estate tax returns represented by those sampled observations (the population

6

estimate is the weighted sum of sampled returns, where each weight is the inverse of the
known sampling probability for that observation). If the number of returns in the cell was
between 1 and 3, it was reported to us as 2, so that we would not be able to identify the
characteristics of any particular individual. The number of state-wealth-year cells
included in the analysis is 3,713, the number of underlying sampled returns is 236,829,
and the estimated population of returns represented is 955,987. Thus, the average number
of sampled returns in a cell is 64, and the average number of population returns
represented by a cell is 257. In 43 of the cells, or 1.1 percent, there were no sampled
returns, and in 286 cells, or 7.7 percent, there were between 1 and 3 sampled returns.
Theory and Empirical Approach
Our empirical approach to estimating how state characteristics and policy variables
influence the location of federal estate tax return filers derives directly from a simple
model in which elderly individuals make decisions about where to live based on
comparison of the utilities they would obtain at each location. To be precise, consider an
individual i who has a Cobb-Douglas utility function over consumption (C), and the
inheritance received by heirs (I).17 The utility (U) and budget constraints associated with
choosing to live in state j can be represented as:
(1)

Uij = Cijα1Iij α2exp(δ’Zij + εij)
Cij = Wij – Bij - TLij
Iij = Bij - TEij

In this formulation Wij is wealth, Bij is the bequest gross of taxes, TEij is the estate and
inheritance tax liability imposed on bequests, TLij is the tax liability associated with
location j while alive, Zij is a vector of state-specific amenities and characteristics that we
will consider in detail later, and εij is a random error reflecting heterogeneity in tastes.
Substituting in for C and I, taking logs of both sides, and taking a first-order Taylor-series
approximation of ln(C) and ln(I) around C = (W-B*) and I = B*, respectively (where *
indicates the optimal value), in order to separate out the effects of taxes, yields:

7

(2)

ln(U*ij) = α1ln(Wij – B*ij) + α2ln(B*ij) - α1τLij - α2τEij + δ’Zi1 + εij

where τLij = TijL / (Wi – B*ij) is the average tax rate while alive (expressed as a share of
expenditures while alive gross of taxes, since that is the point around which we are taking
the approximation), and τEij = TijE / B*ij is the average estate and inheritance tax rate
(expressed as a share of the pre-tax bequest),
When deciding whether to live in a specific state j=1 or an alternative state j=2,
state 1 is selected if utility in state 1 exceeds utility in state 2, that is if:
(3)

α1 [ln(Wi – B*i1)-ln(Wi – B*i2)] + α2 [ln(B*i1) - ln(B*i2)]
- α1 [τLi1 - τLi2] - α2 [τEi1 - τEi2] + δ’[Zi1-Zi2] + (εi1 - εi2) > 0
If εij is drawn from a logistic distribution, then the effects of the explanatory

variables on the probability of choosing state j can be estimated with a logit model. If we
generalize to a choice among a large number of states (50 plus the District of Columbia in
our study), then the probability Pi1 that individual i is observed in location j=1 is given
by:
(4)

Pi1 = exp(β’Xi1)/Σj[exp(β’Xij)],

where β’Xij is the non-error part of the right-hand-side of equation (2) above. Estimation
proceeds by finding the vector of parameters β that maximizes the probability that the
individuals in the sample choose their observed locations. This is the “conditional logit”
model developed by McFadden (1974).18 It is sometimes called a “fixed effects” logit,
because it has the useful feature that any individual characteristics or aggregate
influences that are constant across locations are effectively differenced out of equation
(4) -- they cancel out because they affect all of the exp(.) terms equally. So, for example,
any aggregate influences that would normally be controlled for through year fixed effects
in a linear regression are automatically controlled for in conditional logit, as they are
constant across j and thus difference out. For our conditional logit estimates, we treat
8

each of the 236,829 sampled returns in our data as an independent observation making a
choice from among all of the available jurisdictions, based on representative tax rates that
someone in his or her particular wealth class would face in each state in that year, and the
characteristics of each of the states.19 Our data do not provide us with individual-level
characteristics, but to the extent that unobserved individual characteristics are the same
regardless of which state is chosen, they are irrelevant in the conditional logit.20 The
information we do have varies only across wealth classes (which we will denote through
the subscript k), states (j), and years of death (t), so the ij subscripts in equation (4) are
replaced with jkt subscripts in our empirical analysis.
We also use a simpler approach derived from the same theoretical model that
allows us to estimate a linear regression. If we treat the choice about whether to live in a
particular state j as a choice between that state and a single alternative option with
characteristics that are a composite of the rest of the nation as a whole, and again assume
logistically distributed errors, then the probability Pjkt that an individual in wealth class k
and year t will choose state j is:
(5)

Pjkt = exp[β’(Xjkt-X~j,kt)]/{1+exp[β’(Xjkt-X~j,kt)]},

where X~j,kt is a vector of representative values of the characteristics in X for the rest of
the nation as a whole (excluding state j) for that wealth class and year.21 This can be
rearranged into a linear equation:
(6)

ln[Pjkt/(1-Pjkt)] = β’(Xjkt-X~j,kt)

Pjkt represents the proportion of nationwide returns in wealth class k and year t that are
filed in state j (i.e., the observed probability of choosing j). This is a common approach
for dealing with aggregated data like ours that provides information on the proportion of
people in a cell who make a particular choice. The dependent variable is known as the
log-odds ratio, and the interpretation of the coefficients is the same as in the conditional
logit – in both cases each coefficient represents the marginal effect of an explanatory
variable on the log-odds ratio. In this approach, the unit of analysis is the state-wealth-

9

year cell, so there are 3,713 separate observations in the regression. As Greene (2000, pp.
834-837) notes, this kind of regression exhibits heteroskedasticity of a known form, and
we deal with this appropriately through weighted least squares.22 As with the conditional
logit, individual characteristics that are constant across states, as well as any aggregate
influences that have a similar proportional effect on the number of estate tax returns filed
in all states, difference out of equation (7), and so we are effectively controlling for them.
One matter of interpretation in both approaches is that if the optimal bequest B*ij
is assumed to be constant across states, then the first two terms in equation (3) above
(which form the basis of the linear model) are zero, and the first two terms in equation (2)
cancel out of the conditional logit likelihood function, so we are left with tax rates and
the state characteristics contained in Z as the only explanatory variables. However,
B*ij may vary systematically across states, because the income and substitution effects of
state tax policies may lead to different optimal choices regarding things like wealth
accumulation and avoidance behavior across the different states. In that case, if our goal
were to measure α1 and α2, then B*ij would have to enter our estimation equations to the
extent that it differs across states. It is, though, clearly impossible to observe what an
individual’s optimal B* would be in each of the 51 possible jurisdictions, so the first two
terms in equation (2) (for the conditional logit) and (3) (for the linear regression) will be
omitted variables. The implication is that the coefficients on the tax rate variables do not
directly measure the α1 and α2 parameters of the utility function (which only reflect the
direct effect of taxes on utility arising because they reduce after-tax consumption and
inheritances). Rather, the tax coefficients will now reflect the net effect of taxes on utility
after taking into account the fact that individuals can offset some of the negative impact
of state taxes by re-optimizing their choices regarding consumption and bequests.
Tax and Government Spending Variables
In this section, we explain some essential features of state EI taxation, describe the
construction of our fiscal variables, and provide information on how the time-series
variation in the tax variables differs across states, to illustrate the sources of identification
for our estimates. 23 Although the theory above was developed in terms of a total average

10

tax rate in life and at death, in the empirical analysis we include a separate tax rate for
each major type of tax (EI, income, sales, and property) because each one may have a
different effect on location decisions.
As noted above, the federal estate tax has long provided a limited credit to the
taxpayer for EI taxes paid to state governments, and this credit has a critical impact on
the degree of variation in relative tax burdens across states. The credit was initially
introduced in 1924, and the maximum allowable credit has always been an increasing
function of the size of the taxable estate; the schedule that applied from 1954 through
2001 is shown in Table 1. Because the federal credit for state taxes was non-refundable,
the maximum allowable credit was actually the minimum of the amount determined
through Table 1, and federal estate tax liability calculated before application of the credit
for state taxes.24 If a state were to cut its EI tax below the maximum federal credit, the
reduction in state tax would be exactly offset by an increase in federal tax, making
residents of the state no better off while transferring revenue from state to federal coffers.
As a result, all states eventually implemented an estate tax provision that “soaked up” any
otherwise unused federal credit.25 Historically, most states also operated their own
idiosyncratic estate and/or inheritance tax systems in addition to the soak-up provision. In
those cases, the decedent’s tax payment to the state would be the larger of the liability
under the state’s unique EI tax and the liability under the soak-up tax. Some states, on
the other hand, did not operate their own special EI taxes, and instead relied solely on a
soak-up tax exactly equal to the maximum allowable federal credit; these states imposed
no positive incremental EI tax burden. Over the last four decades, more and more states
gradually repealed their own idiosyncratic EI taxes, and switched to relying exclusively
on the soak-up tax.
To represent the incremental state EI average tax rate in each state, year, and
wealth class, we construct a variable EIATR, which is defined as the combined federalstate inheritance and estate tax liability as a share of net worth, less what it would be in a
state relying exclusively on the soak-up tax. It is based on the federal and state tax rules
in effect for deaths on July 1 of the relevant year. In constructing this variable we have to
address the fact that in some cases the tax burden can vary depending on how the estate
was divided up among various types of heirs. For example, state inheritance taxes often

11

subjected close relatives to lower tax rates and higher exemptions than more distant
relatives. We calculate a representative tax burden based on the assumption that the estate
is left equally divided between two adult children. The tax rate for each wealth category
is computed by assuming net worth and the taxable estate are equal to the midpoint of
each wealth category (converted to the nominal dollars of the relevant year). For the top
wealth category, we use $10 million 1996 dollars, converted to current dollars. EIATR is
computed using a detailed federal-state inheritance and estate tax calculator that we
developed ourselves. It is based largely on information collected from the Annotated
Statutes and Session Laws of the various states, and a complete collection of historical
federal estate tax returns and instructions. The calculator accurately reflects such
important features of the tax code as the federal credit for state EI taxes and any
deductibility of federal taxes at the state level. Further detailed information on the
capabilities and sources of information for this calculator are available separately in
Bakija (2004a).
Table 2 illustrates the patterns of variation in the value of EIATR across states
and over time between 1965 and 2000, for a decedent with a net worth and taxable estate
equal to $1 million in constant 1996 dollars. It is clear from Table 2 that early in our
sample period many states imposed an incremental burden on such estates, and that by
the end of the sample period most states did not – this is largely the result of switching to
exclusive reliance on soak-up taxes.26 Usefully for our purposes, though, there was
considerable variation in the timing of the switches, and even variety in the direction of
changes in tax rates. For example, many states’ incremental EI tax rates on a given
constant-dollar estate actually went up during much of this period, largely due to "bracket
creep," as inflationary increases in wealth interacted with nominal bracket structures that
went unchanged for many years. Two notable examples of increases are in
Massachusetts (which substantially increased burdens when it switched from an
inheritance tax to a higher-rate estate tax in 1976), and California (which reflects both
bracket creep and rate increases). Both states subsequently eliminated their incremental
taxes.
Table 3 illustrates that the time pattern of incremental state EI taxes also differed
across wealth levels. In many states, the incremental state average tax rate was actually

12

higher for the “moderately rich” than it was at the upper reaches of the wealth
distribution, because the federal credit rate schedule eventually overtook the state tax
rates, so at some point any further state tax liability would be fully offset by federal
credit. As a result, in many states the very rich can serve as a control group (because they
already faced little or no incremental burden) and the moderately rich as a treatment
group (because they did face an incremental burden but it was eliminated). At the same
time, there was still a sizeable minority of states that at one time imposed substantial
incremental burdens even in our highest wealth class.27
In sum, the incentives created by state EI taxes changed differently in different
states, did not change smoothly along a linear trend, and changed differently across
different wealth levels within states. This makes it possible to distinguish the effects of
these taxes from time-invariant state characteristics and unobserved trending variables. It
is also clear from Tables 2 and 3 that the incremental state EI tax rates tended to be fairly
small. Note, though, that when applied to large estates even a small tax rate differential
implies a large dollar differential in EI tax liability. The potential tax savings in absolute
terms could plausibly outweigh the cost (psychic and otherwise) of moving, especially
since moving costs probably increase less than proportionately with wealth.
Our measure of the effective state average income tax rate, INCATR, is defined
as the combined federal and state income tax liability as a share of income, less what it
would be in a state without an income tax. We compute this figure using a tax calculator
program that we have developed, which is described in detail with references in Bakija
(2004b). It is similar to NBER’s Internet Taxsim (Feenberg and Coutts, 1993), but it
covers a much wider range of years (1900-2002) for both federal and state taxes, and
incorporates some additional features such as treatment of long-term capital gains and
detail on types of deductions. The tax rates for each wealth class and year are calculated
based on representative values of income and deductions expected to apply to people in
each wealth category based on our tabulations of IRS individual income tax data. We
first compute the percentile of the national wealth distribution of decedents that
corresponds to the thresholds for each of our wealth categories in 1982. We then go to the
1980 IRS public-use cross-sectional micro data set of individual income tax returns, and
select the group of individual taxpayers who are in the same fractile of the national

13

income distribution among people aged 65 or over as our estate tax returns are in the
national wealth distribution of decedents. The estate tax return filers then are assumed to
have had values for each income component and deduction that are the same as the
average values in that fractile of the elderly income distribution in 1980.28 The amounts
of income and deductions are grown forwards and backwards from 1980 by the rate of
change in the CPI-U, and the relevant year’s federal and state tax rules are applied to
these values.
Our measure of state retail sales tax burden, SALESTX, is based on the statutory
general retail sales tax rate in the state for the relevant year.29 To account for the effects
of deductibility from the federal income tax, we multiply the retail sales tax rate by (1MTRfs), where MTRfs is the reduction in federal income tax liability caused by a $1,000
increase in state sales tax liability, divided by 1,000. We use the same approach for
calculating the marginal federal income tax rate for each wealth class and year as
described above for INCATR. MTRfs is always zero after 1986, because the Tax Reform
Act of 1986 eliminated the sales tax deduction from the federal tax.
The property tax burden variable, PROPTX, is based on state and local property
tax revenues as a share of state personal income in the relevant year.30 Federal tax
deductibility is accounted for by multiplying this figure by (1-MTRfp), where MTRfp is
the reduction in federal income tax liability caused by a $1,000 increase in state and local
property taxes, again using the same approach as for INCATR.31
Appendix Tables A.1 through A.3 illustrate how the values of INCATR,
SALESTX, and PROPTX for the $750,000 - $1.25 million wealth class change over time
for each state. There is a reasonable degree of heterogeneity and non-linearity in the timepattern of rates across the different states for each tax, which is essential for
distinguishing their effects from time-invariant or trending state characteristics. One
useful source of variation captured by our variables is that high-tax states became
relatively less attractive compared to low-tax states after 1986, because of the declining
impact of federal deductibility. In addition to the elimination of sales tax deductions after
1986, deductions for the other taxes became less valuable due to reduced federal marginal
rates, and eventually because of federal limitations on itemized deductions and the
increasing prevalence of the alternative minimum tax.

14

Other things equal, we would expect all of the above tax rates to have a negative
effect on the number of federal estate tax returns filed in a state, as the rich would prefer
not to live in a state that taxes them heavily. It is possible that some of the negative effect
of taxes on the attractiveness of a state to wealthy people is offset by the government
services those taxes provide. To control for the positive amenity value of government
spending, we include a variable GOVEXRAT, which is direct general state and local
government expenditure in the state in the relevant year, expressed as a share of state
personal income.32 This variable includes both spending financed from sources within
the state and spending financed through grants provided by the federal government. We
do not attempt to control for what share of government spending goes to things that are
especially likely to benefit wealthy elderly people. To the extent that states adopting tax
changes that particularly burden the wealthy elderly also provide them with offsetting
benefits, our estimated tax coefficients would reflect both the negative effect of taxes per
se and the possibly positive effects of the expenditure changes that tend to accompany
these taxes. Our tax coefficients may thus be regarded as testing whether state taxation of
the rich follows the benefit principle.
Issues in Interpreting the Tax Effects
A data set based on federal estate tax returns has many advantages, particularly the
unique opportunity it provides us to learn something about the behavior of the rich.
However, there are also some complications arising from the limited nature of the
information we have available, which we will consider here.
First, we must consider how state of residence is determined in the federal estate
tax return data, and for the purposes of state EI taxation.33 In the federal estate tax return
data used in our study, state of residence is whatever was reported on the federal tax
form. Both the federal form and state tax laws define state of residence based on the
location where the taxpayer is primarily "domiciled." The legal concept of “domicile”
refers to the place that an individual intends to maintain as his or her primary residence,
to which he or she would always return after absences of limited duration. Domicile is
sometimes not crystal clear; for example, a decedent may have owned homes in more

15

than one state. In the case of residences in two different states, the burden of proof would
be on the taxpayer to establish that the newer residence was the primary domicile
(Schoenblum, 1982, Vol. 1, p. 124). States consider a long list of both quantitative and
qualitative indicators in order to determine the location of primary domicile. Relevant
criteria include physical location in the state for more than six months of the year, how
many years the taxpayer had lived in the state, strength of ties to the local community,
and where the taxpayer was registered to vote and maintained bank accounts, among
many other factors. Disputes sometimes arise over which state can claim the decedent as
a resident for state tax purposes. Most states subscribe to an interstate agreement that
provides for third-party arbitration in such situations.
It was also the case that different portions of an individual decedent’s property
could be taxed by different states. When the decedent owned property in multiple states,
a state inheritance or estate tax almost always applied as follows. If the decedent were
primarily domiciled in the state, the tax base in that state would include all tangible
property (e.g., real estate) located within the state, plus all intangible property (e.g.,
financial assets) regardless of its “location.” Tangible property located in other states
would be included in the tax base of those other states. In such a case, a state typically
required the taxpayer to calculate that state’s tax burden as if all of the estate were located
in that state, and then to pay a prorated share of the tax depending on the share of the total
estate that was actually taxable in that particular state; usually, each state’s share of the
federal credit was similarly apportioned. As a result, the true effective estate and
inheritance tax rate for such a taxpayer could be some weighted average of the rates for
two or more states. In the data we will be using for this study, we only know which state
the taxpayer claims as the primary domicile, so we will not be able to take this particular
complication into account. We assume that the entire estate reported on the federal estate
tax form was subject to tax by the state listed on that form. 34
Because our data on state of residence are based on the reported state of primary
domicile, at least some of the responsiveness of the reported location of federal estate tax
returns to tax rates could reflect people who in some sense “pretend” to move, for
example by buying a second home in another, low-tax state, and then claiming that this is
the primary domicile when in fact it may not be. Whether the response represents true

16

migration or not, the implications of our estimates from the perspective of an individual
state tax authority regarding the revenue effects of such a tax will be the same – in either
case, the state loses revenue when it is not claimed as the primary domicile for tax
purposes. Both types of response also involve deadweight loss. Even pretending to move
represents a welfare cost, arising for example from buying a second home that one might
not otherwise want, exposing oneself to the risk of a penalty, etc. If it did not, everyone
would do so and we would observe no reported domiciles in states that levy incremental
EI taxes, which we will see below is empirically not close to true. We will consider the
revenue and welfare implications of our estimates in greater detail at the end of the paper.
Another issue in interpreting the estimated effects of all of our tax variables arises
because the number of federal estate tax returns that we observe in each state, year, and
wealth class in our data is influenced not only by individual decisions to move across
states, but also by factors that influence the size of the bequests left by people who live in
a particular state. This is true because a change in the pre-tax bequest size can push
people who are at the margin above or below the minimum bequest size threshold
necessary to appear in our data. Such a threshold is unavoidable, because estate tax
returns are only filed by people with gross assets above the federal estate tax exemption
level. Any aggregate influences on estate size that are uniform across states will not
affect our results, because our estimation procedures effectively control for them. But
state taxes themselves may cause similar people in different states to leave different size
bequests, because (except for sales taxes) they effectively tax the returns to various forms
of saving, and because they reduce disposable lifetime resources available for either
consumption or bequests.35 It is also possible that some of any estimated response to EI
taxes could reflect other forms of avoidance behavior, as living in a state with a higher EI
tax rate would increase the incentive to do more aggressive tax planning, to substitute
some inter vivos gifts for bequests, etc.36
One piece of evidence that can help put some of the considerations just mentioned
into perspective comes from Kopczuk and Slemrod (2001). That paper estimates the
effect of federal estate tax rates on the amount of net worth reported on federal estate tax
returns, relying on time-series variation in federal estate tax rates between 1916 and 1996
for identification. The estimate from the preferred specification in that paper implies that

17

a one percentage point increase in the EI tax rate would reduce the reported net worth of
federal estate tax return filers by about 0.3 percent.37 As we will see below, this is
dramatically smaller than our estimate of the percentage reduction in the number of estate
tax returns filed in a state in response to a one percentage point increase in the EI tax rate.
The implication is that if the Kopczuk and Slemrod result is in the right ballpark, then the
estimated effects of EI taxes presented below largely reflect changes in state of residence
rather than changes in the size of bequests.
Control Variables
We want the remaining variables in our model to control for several types of influences
on the number of estate tax returns filed in each state that could be correlated with the
state’s tax policies. First, we want to control for the various characteristics of a state that
make it relatively attractive or unattractive, especially to elderly people. Second, we want
to control for the fact that high-income people may tend to congregate in certain states
during their working years because those states offer the best earning opportunities, for
example due to urban agglomerations that involve productivity-enhancing spillovers
among workers or businesses. Many of those people may tend to stay in that state after
retirement because of the fixed costs of moving. For instance, many high-income people
live in New York, New Jersey, and Connecticut because of their proximity to the
earnings opportunities in New York’s financial district, so we would expect to find
relatively large numbers of estate tax returns filed in those states even if the states impose
large tax burdens on wealthy elderly people. Ideally, we would like to control for an
indicator of whether someone lived in a particular state during his or her working years –
the coefficient on this variable would reflect the fixed costs of moving. Estate tax return
data does not provide information on the state one resided in during one’s working years,
so we will instead rely on other methods of controlling for which states are likely to have
large numbers of high-income working-age people, which we will describe below.
There are numerous reasons why the tax policies chosen by a state might be
systematically correlated with the concentration of high-income people or elderly people
in the state. For example, states that for reasons of historical accident happen to have

18

urban agglomerations that contribute to the productivity of high-skill workers may have
some monopoly leverage over those workers that enables them to sustain more
progressive tax systems than other states, without driving the high-skill workers out.38
The median voter in a jurisdiction may prefer a more progressive state tax system when
the jurisdiction has greater income inequality, because there is more to be gained from
redistribution (Persson and Tabellini 1999). Each of these would bias our estimates
against finding that heavy taxes on wealthy elderly people have a negative effect on the
number of such people choosing to reside in a state. Alternatively, high-income people or
elderly people may have greater political power in the states where they are heavily
concentrated, leading to tax systems that are more favorable to them, which would bias
our estimates towards finding a negative effect of taxes on residential choice. Thus we
also want to control for difficult-to-observe characteristics of states that might lead the
design of the tax system to be systematically associated with the number of wealthy
elderly people in the state.
As noted above, factors that differentially affect the value of bequests across
states will influence how many people rise above the minimum bequest-size threshold to
appear in our data. Therefore, we want to control to the extent possible for economic
forces that cause similar people in different states to end up with property of different
values at death. This could include, for example, state-specific variation in prices and
asset values.
The most important thing that we do to address these issues is to include dummy
variables for each state-wealth class combination. So doing will effectively control for
any time-invariant characteristics of the state that make it particularly attractive to elderly
people in each wealth class. It will also control for any persistent political economy
characteristics of the state that influence its tax policy, any persistent features of the state
such as the presence of a large urban agglomeration that might enable it to sustain more
progressive taxes than other states or lead to high concentrations of high-income younger
people in the state, and any persistent differences in price levels. After controlling for
these, all of the identification for the tax effects will come from differences across states
in the time pattern of tax rates within each wealth class. We also try estimating the model
without these dummies, to reveal the empirical importance of these issues, and in this

19

specification we will include some time-invariant state characteristics that would
typically be included in a migration regression.
To control for difficult-to-observe state-specific influences that may change over
time, we also try including state-specific linear time trends. This could account, for
example, for the possibility that some unobserved factor is causing different states to
gradually become more or less attractive to rich elderly people over time. In this case, the
identification for our tax effects will come from non-linear time patterns of tax rates that
differ across states, arising for example from large discrete changes caused by state tax
reforms, or federal tax reforms that have different impacts across states. Controlling for
state time trends makes our estimates more robust against potential reverse causality from
political economy considerations. For instance, if a state’s share of the nation’s rich
elderly population is trending upwards for some non-tax-related reason, their growing
political power may make it more likely that the state’s EI tax is eliminated. This would
bias us towards finding a larger negative impact of EIATR, as the fact that a larger share
of national estate tax returns are observed in this state after the EI tax is eliminated than
before is driven by some pre-existing trend rather than by the change in tax rates.
Alternatively, it could be that when a state’s share of the national population of wealthy
elderly people is trending downwards for some reason unrelated to taxes, the government
becomes concerned that the EI tax is to blame, and as a result the tax is eliminated or
reduced. This would bias our estimates against finding a strong negative effect of EI
taxes. To the extent that these third factors proceed according to a linear trend, this
approach will control for them. Controlling for state-specific trends does have a cost,
though, because if there is any classical measurement error in our explanatory variables,
controlling for time trends will reduce the signal-to-noise ratio in those variables, which
we would expect to exacerbate a bias towards zero in the estimated coefficients. As
additional checks on potential reverse causality arising from political economy stories,
we perform a Granger causality test to see whether the number of federal estate tax
returns filed in a state helps predict future changes in state tax rates, and we try an
instrumental variables approach using lagged tax rates, which are less likely to be
endogenous, as instruments.

20

We control for three demographic variables. The first is ln(POP), where POP is
the state’s population in the relevant year.39 The population variable helps control for the
number of people who are likely to face moving costs that keep them in the state at
retirement. It also controls for unobserved factors that make the state attractive to people
in general, and for the fact that larger states are more likely to have social networks that
attract relatives and friends from other states.
The next demographic variable is ln(T5YSHR). This is the log of the share of the
state’s population of single individuals and couples aged 25-59 in the relevant year who
fall into the top 5 percent of the national income distribution for that age group. The
calculation omits couples where either spouse is aged 60 or above. This variable is meant
to represent the prevalence of affluent people in the state who are potential estate tax
filers but have not yet retired, in order to proxy for the expected likelihood that an
individual in our sample faces moving costs that might keep him or her in the state after
retirement. It is also meant to control for the level of unobserved amenities that would
attract high-income people in general to the state.40
Third, we control for a death rate variable, ln(DTHRAT), which is the log of state
deaths for those aged 45 or above divided by state population.41 We subtract the
population-weighted number of estate tax return deaths in the state from the numerator in
order to avoid endogeneity. This variable is meant to control for factors that make the
state particularly attractive to elderly people in general – states with a lot of elderly
people will have a high death rate.
The motivation for this particular set of demographic variables and their
functional form is that they provide a reasonable counterfactual against which to test
whether taxes that particularly burden the rich make them relatively more likely than
others to move away from the states in which they resided earlier in life. If high-income
people who live in a particular state while young are not more likely than others to
emigrate from that state when old, then we might expect DTHRAT×T5YSHR×POP to be
a good predictor of the number of estate tax returns filed in the state. By entering each of
these variables into our estimation equations in log form, we nest a special case where the
share of national estate tax returns in a wealth class that are filed in a particular state (Pjkt)
is exactly equal to that state’s share of the national value of DTHRAT×T5YSHR×POP.

21

This occurs when the coefficient on the log of each of these variables is precisely one,
and all the other coefficients are zero.42
Two time-varying dis-amenities that we control for are the crime rate and the
unemployment rate. CRIME is the number of crimes per 100 population in the state.
UNEMP is the annual state unemployment rate. Either variable may also help control for
changes in economic conditions in a state that may affect real estate values there, thus
pushing people above or below the minimum wealth threshold.43
NCMPRE82 is a dummy for “not a community property state,” interacted with a
dummy for whether the year is before 1982. This is another factor that could push people
above or below the minimum wealth threshold. Prior to 1982, property owned jointly
between spouses was generally included in the gross estate of a decedent in proportion to
his or her contribution to the purchase of the property. Similar property in the eight
“community property states” was counted by the federal estate tax as belonging 50
percent to each spouse, because constitutional considerations required the federal
government to respect state laws regarding property. Thus, the meaning of net worth
reported on estate tax returns may differ systematically between the two types of states
before 1982. Since on average the husband is the first to die, and is also the one most
likely to contribute more than 50 percent of the purchase price of assets, this probably
caused the measure of wealth reported on estate tax returns on average to be
systematically larger in non-community-property states than in community-property
states. 44 Starting in 1982, the federal estate tax treatment of jointly-owned property in all
states was changed to become more like community property.
STKSHR is the share of wealth held in the form of stocks in each state-wealth cell
in the 1976 estate tax return data. We interact this term with the log of the Standard and
Poor’s 500 stock price index (SP500), to account for the fact that stock market variations
are an important determinant of wealth for estate tax filers. People in different states may
have different propensities to own stock, and thus stock market fluctuations might have
different impacts across states on the number of people rising above our minimum wealth
threshold.45
HOUSEPR is a state-specific housing price index. This helps control for the cost
of living in a particular state – a high cost of living makes the state a relatively

22

unattractive place to live. At the same time, it helps control for changes in property
values that could influence the size of bequests in the state – surging property values
would tend to mean more estate tax returns. Rising housing prices would also be a signal
that the state is becoming a relatively more desirable place to live. Thus, the expected
sign on this variable is ambiguous. We construct this variable by starting with the Office
of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight (OFHEO) state-specific index of the price
required to buy a constant-quality house. It is available annually from 1975 through the
present, and is based on a large sample of repeat home-sales. No state-specific price
indices are available before 1975, so we extend the series backwards to 1965 using the
rate of growth in the median price for new single-family homes for each census region. 46
The OFHEO index only reflects changes in housing prices over time, but not crosssectional differences in prices at any given point in time. This is not a problem when we
control for the state-wealth dummies, which will absorb any persistent differences across
states. But since we also want to try the estimation without the state-wealth dummies, we
introduce cross-sectional variation into the index by taking the median house price in
each state from the 2000 census (from Bennefield, 2003), and then converting it to the
current dollars of each prior year using the state housing price index.
PCPI is state per capita income, in constant 1996 dollars.47 This is another
potential control for which states are likely to have large numbers of high-income
younger people who subsequently stay in the state after retirement to avoid moving costs.
It may also serve to some extent as a proxy for variations in state amenities, cost of
living, or asset prices that are not otherwise captured elsewhere. Of course, there may be
some reverse causality problems with this variable, as a change in the number of elderly
rich people in the state would directly influence per capita personal income. As a result,
controlling for it may absorb some of the effects of the various taxes, so we only include
this (in log form) in a sensitivity analysis, to see if a more complete control for which
states have high average incomes makes a difference to our results.
Finally, only when we run our specification without state-wealth dummies, we
include three time-invariant climate variables, which should reflect amenities that seem to
be particularly important to the elderly. SUN is the average share of days that are sunny
or partly cloudy for major cities in the state. HEATING and COOLING are the number

23

of heating degree days and cooling degree days annually in the state (divided by 1000),
on average, since the beginning of the record for these variables at the relevant weather
stations.48 A heating degree day measures the difference between the average of high and
low temperatures for the day and 65 degrees Fahrenheit when that average is below 65; a
cooling degree day does the same for days when the average temperature is above 65.
Therefore, states with low values for both variables would be very temperate, while states
with high values for HEATING are very cold, and states with high values for COOLING
are very hot. All three climate variables are long-term averages over time for each state,
and thus do not vary over time.49
Descriptive statistics on all of the variables used in our analysis are provided in
Table 4.
Conditional Logit Results
Table 5 shows the basic results from our conditional logit specification. To interpret the
results, note that multiplying the estimated coefficient by (1-Pjkt) yields the percentage
change in the number of estate tax returns filed in a particular wealth class and state, in
response to a one unit increase in the explanatory variable for that wealth class and state,
holding all other explanatory variables across all states constant. Pjkt is the proportion of
national returns in a wealth class that are filed in state j, which is approximately 0.02 on
average. So for the typical state, the percentage change in estate tax returns filed in the
state per unit change in the explanatory variable is approximately 0.98 times the
coefficient.. For this reason, when discussing the results in the text, we report the
coefficent times 0.98.
Estimates of the effect of estate and inheritance taxes are shown in the top row.
When neither state-wealth dummy variables nor state time trends are included in the
specification (column 1), a one percentage point increase in the average state EI tax rate
is estimated to reduce the number of federal estate tax return filers in the state by 0.6
percent. Controlling for unobserved heterogeneity with state-wealth dummies (column 2)
increases the magnitude of the estimated reduction threefold, to 1.8 percent. The fact that
the estimate becomes substantially larger after controlling for time-invariant unobserved

24

characteristics of states would be consistent, for example, with a situation where states
that have characteristics that make them persistently attractive to the rich, such good
earning opportunities for high-skill workers, are also more likely to operate EI taxes. This
would bias the estimates in a positive direction unless we control for the state-wealth
dummies. The estimated negative effect of a one percentage point increase in EIATR
remains robust to the addition of state-specific time trends (column 3), at 1.4 percent. The
difference from zero in all three cases is highly statistically significant. The economic
significance of these estimates is addresed at the end of the paper.
Income tax rates are estimated to have a negative impact across all three
specifications as well. The percentage reduction in estate tax returns caused by a one
percentage point increase in INCATR is estimated at 2.3 in column (1), increases to 2.7
when we control for state-wealth dummies in column (2), and drops to 1.4 when we add
state-specific time trends in column (3); all are significantly different from zero. The
estimated effects of sales taxes follow a similar pattern to EI taxes. A one percentage
point increase in the state sales tax rate is estimated to reduce the number of estate tax
filers by a statistically insignificant 0.4 percent in column (1), but this effect increases to
3.3 percent when we control for state-wealth dummies in column (2), and remains large
at 2.7 percent after controlling for state-specific time trends; both of the latter two results
are highly statistically significant. We might expect that states with high sales taxes
would be particularly unattractive to the elderly, because their consumption is high
relative to their incomes at that point in the life cycle, and the latter two results seem
consistent with this expectation. The fact that, at least after controlling for unobserved
heterogeneity, sales taxes are estimated to have a significant negative effect on the
number of estate tax returns claiming residence in the state, suggests that not all of the
estimated response to taxes represents “pretend” moves. A change in reported residence
that does not really reflect a change in where one spends time would have no effect on
one’s sales tax burden. Rather, that would largely depend on where someone actually
lives and spends money.
In the case of property taxes, the estimated effects are highly sensitive to the
degree to which we control for unobserved heterogeneity across states. In column (1), a
one percentage point increase in the property tax rate is associated with a very large 14.1

25

percent increase in the number of estate tax returns filed in the state. The estimated effect
turns negative but insignificant once we control for state-wealth dummies in column (2),
and then becomes a large and statistically significant negative 3.3 percent when we
control for state-specific time trends in column (3).50 We will consider possible
explanations for the pattern of property tax coefficients later, in the context of sensitivity
analyses that shed some light on the issue.
The estimated impacts of the other variables are for the most part what we would
expect. In column (1), a one percentage point increase in government spending is
estimated to increase the number of estate tax return filers in the state by a small but
statistically significant 0.3 percent. Adding state-wealth dummies does not change the
coefficient much but increases the standard error enough to render it statistically
insignificant, and adding time trends pushes the coefficient close to zero. All this
suggests that rich elderly people do not place a high value on living in a state with
extensive government-provided services, at least not when all such services are
aggregated. In columns (1) and (2), the estimated coefficient on the log of population is
very close to one, suggesting that if we held the other influences constant across states, a
state’s share of national estate tax returns would be approximately the same as its share of
the national population.51 After controlling for state-specific time trends in column (3), a
one percent increase in population is estimated to increase the number of estate tax
returns by 1.4 percent, suggesting that in years when a state’s population is growing
particularly rapidly, the number of estate tax returns grows more than proportionately.52
The current value of T5YSHR is found to be positively associated with the number of
estate tax returns filed, although the relationship is far from one-for-one; a one percent
increase in T5YSHR is estimated to increase the number of estate tax returns by around
0.3 percent in all three specifications. As for DTHRAT, in specification (1) it has a
coefficient very near one, indicating that if other influences were held constant across
states, a state’s share of national estate tax returns would be proportional to its share of
national deaths. When we control for state-wealth dummies, the effect of the state death
rate drops to near zero, suggesting that the association between non-estate tax return
deaths and estate tax returns reflects time-invariant characteristics of states that make
them attractive to the elderly in general. Controlling for state-specific time trends as well

26

causes the association between non-estate tax return deaths and estate tax returns to turn
negative, a result for which we do not have a good explanation. We tried re-estimating
the time-trend specification without DTHRAT, and found it made no significant
difference to the estimated tax coefficients.
In all specifications, the state unemployment rate has a large and statistically
significant negative effect, as we would expect. NCMPRE82 has a positive effect, which
is also what we would expect – this is picking up the fact that prior to 1982, in noncommunity property states, a systematically larger share of a couple’s wealth would be
counted as part of the gross estate of the first spouse to die. The state crime rate is found,
counter-intuitively, to be significantly positively associated with the number of federal
estate tax return filers in a state. While this result may be puzzling, it is also consistent
with nearly all previous research on elderly migration, which usually finds that elderly
people are significantly more likely to migrate to states with higher crime rates (Conway
and Houtenville 2001). STKSHR*LN(SP500) has an insignificant effect in the first two
specifications, but is significant and has the expected positive sign when we control for
state time trends. Higher housing prices in a state are found to have a positive and
significant impact on the number of estate tax return filers in a state in all three
specifications. This suggests either that the positive effect of rising property values
pushing people above the minimum wealth threshold to appear in our data, or the fact that
rising property values serve as a signal that a state is becoming a relatively attractive
place to live, outweigh the negative influence arising from the effect of cost of living on a
state’s attractiveness. Finally, in the specification where no state-wealth dummies or state
time trends are included, the estimated coefficients on the time-invariant climate
variables are sensible. A sunny climate is found to positively influence the number of
federal estate tax return filers in a state, and more heating degree days (i.e., a colder
climate) has a negative influence; conditional on these other characteristics, cooling
degree days (indicating a hot, rather than temperate, climate) have no significant impact.
One might be concerned that some of our control variables could be introducing
bias into our estimated tax coefficients. For instance, it could be that high taxes are
causing younger high-income people, or elderly people in general, to flee the state as
well. To the extent that our tax measures are correlated with the taxes imposed on those

27

other groups, then our T5YSHR or DTHRAT variables could be absorbing some of the
effects of taxes on the number of rich elderly people living in the state as well. In Table 6,
we test the sensitivity of the coefficients on the policy-relevant variables to the omission
or addition of a variety of variables. Each column shows the results of re-estimating
specification (2) from Table 5, each time omitting or adding a single variable. The first
thing to note is that the coefficients on EIATR and SALESTX hardly change at all in any
of the specifications, so these results seem to be quite robust to the precise set of
explanatory variables included. The coefficient on INCATR is also fairly stable. The one
major exception is that it becomes notably smaller when we control for the log of per
capita personal income, although this could simply mean that when high income tax rates
drive rich people out of the state, this reduces the state’s per capita income directly, so
that controlling for per capita income absorbs the tax effect.
Another interesting finding here is that omitting T5YSHR from the specification
causes the coefficient on the property tax rate to become a large positive value. Putting
T5YSHR back in and then adding the log of per capita personal income to the
specification causes the coefficient on the property tax rate to become a large negative
value, similar to the effect of controlling for state-specific time trends. This suggests that
in Table 5, the counter-intuitive large positive property tax coefficient in column (1), and
the small size of the property tax coefficient in column (2), may be driven by the fact that
high-income states tend to have high property tax burdens due to some omitted third
factor, and that high-income states also tend to have large numbers of estate tax returns.
Indeed, a review of Table A.3 reveals that the states with the highest property tax rates
tend to be high-income Northeastern states, and the states with the lowest property tax
rates tend to be low-income southern states. The simple correlation between PROPTX
and per capita personal income in 1995 is positive 0.38.53
Linear Regression Results
In this section, we present results from a simplified version of our model that can be
estimated as a linear regression. As discussed earlier, the dependent variable is the logodds ratio, ln[Pjkt/(1-Pjkt)], where Pjkt is the proportion of national estate tax returns in

28

wealth class k and year t that are filed in state j. The explanatory variables are the same as
for the conditional logit, except that for each one we subtract off a “representative” value
of the variable for the rest of the nation, for the appropriate year and wealth class where
applicable. For POP, T5YSHR, and DTHRAT, we subtract off the actual values
calculated for the rest of the nation as a whole (e.g., the total population of the other 50
jurisdictions in the case of POP). For all other variables we subtract off the simple
unweighted mean of the variable for the other 50 jurisdictions.54 The interpretation of
coefficients in this model is exactly the same as for the conditional logit. A disadvantage
of the linear approach is that it does not capture the heterogeneity of characteristics across
the alternatives not chosen by the individual. For instance, people might be more likely to
flee a particular state in response to a tax increase if half of the other states had a tax rate
of 4 percent and half had no tax, than if all other states had a tax rate of 2 percent,
because in the former case there is an available alternative that offers greater tax savings.
The linear approach treats the two situations as identical, whereas the conditional logit
appropriately differentiates between them. One reason we perform this exercise is to
address any bias to the standard errors caused by the fact that most of our explanatory
variables are the same for everyone in a particular state, and because our policy variables
are serially correlated across time within a state. In those cases, Moulton (1990) and
Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan (2004) demonstrate (in a linear regression framework)
that that standard errors will be biased downwards when errors are correlated across
observations and across time within a state. The standard procedures for fixing this
problem have been developed for linear regressions. To address this issue, in our linear
regressions, we compute standard errors that are robust to any arbitrary form of
correlation in errors across wealth classes and time within a state (i.e., we allow the errors
to be clustered by state),55 and that are robust to any residual heteroskedasticity (using the
Huber-White method). The linear framework also enables us to use an instrumental
variables approach to address potential endogeneity.
Column (1) of Table 7 depicts estimates from the linear version of the standard
model controlling for state-wealth dummies (i.e., the equivalent to the specification in
Table 5, Column 2). Compared to the conditional logit, standard errors are now
considerably larger across the board, which we find is driven largely by the clustering.56

29

Nevertheless, both the EI tax and sales tax coefficients remain statistically significant in
their differences from zero. In both cases, the point estimate of the effect is quite close to
what we found in the similar version of the conditional logit. Again compared to the
conditional logit, the income tax effect becomes a bit smaller (-1.6), and the property tax
effect becomes much larger (-3.9), but in both cases, the standard errors increase so much
that we can no longer be confident in these particular results. This is not surprising, given
that the differences in the time paths of these variables across states are much less
dramatic than for the EI tax and sales tax. Results for the other variables are generally
quite similar to what we find in the conditional logit.
In column (2) of Table 7, we show the results of estimating the same model, but
using five year lags of each tax rate as instruments for their current values. One rationale
for this approach is that in the event that there is reverse causality arising from some kind
of political economy story, tax rates from 5 years before would likely be less affected by
the problem. For instance, a surge in the number of estate tax return filers relative to other
states leads might lead to political support for elimination of any incremental EI tax in
this state.57 In that case, the coefficient on the current EIATR would be biased towards
more negative, and we would expect that using a lagged tax rate as an instrument should
make the coefficient less negative. A second rationale is that this may help address the
possibility of slow adjustment to changes in tax rates. For example, although the EI tax
rate applying in the year someone dies is in fact the rate at which the individual actually
pays the tax, the variable that influences migration decisions might be the individual’s
forecast of what that rate would be at the date of death, based on the information that had
been available the last time he or she made a decision about moving. Such decisions may
occur infrequently due to the fixed costs of moving. As a result, the estimates based on
current tax rates may understate the long-run effect of a change in tax rates. This too
suggests using a lagged tax rate as an instrument for the current tax rate. In this case, we
would expect the instrumental variables approach to make the estimated tax effects more
negative. The estimates shown in column (2) suggest that the second consideration may
be more important, as all of the tax effects become considerably more negative. A one
percentage point increase in EIATR is now estimated to reduce the number of estate tax
return filers in a state by about 2.6 percent. Not surprisingly, the standard errors also

30

become quite a bit larger, so only the coefficient on EIATR is now statistically significant
in its difference from zero. Nonetheless, these results suggest that if there is any bias to
our estimates arising from either political economy considerations or slow adjustment to
changes in tax rates, it is likely to be a bias towards zero.
In column (3), we return to using current tax rates, without instruments, but add
state-specific time trends, which as noted before is another way of making our estimates
more robust to political economy issues. Adding the time trends makes all of the tax
coefficients, except for the income tax, more negative in this case. Once again, however,
only EIATR and SALESTX are statistically significant. The estimated percentage impact
on returns is now -2.1 for EIATR, and -4.0 for SALESTX.
As an additional check for the possibility of reverse causality, in Table 8 we
present the results of a Granger causality test. The dependent variable in this regression
is the current value of EIATR, and the explanatory variables are a lagged value of
EIATR, a lagged value of the log-odds ratio of estate tax returns (i.e., the dependent
variable from our other regressions), and the current values all of the other covariates
from column (1) of Table 7 (including state-wealth dummies). Lag length is five years, or
as close to five years as possible in cases where there are gaps in our estate tax return
data. The estimated coefficient on the lagged log-odds ratio of estate tax returns is
negative 0.00001, and is not close to statistically significant. What this means is that,
conditional on the other covariates in our model, the number of estate tax return filers in a
state does not help predict changes in EI tax rates in any of the next five years that persist
through year 5. As Table 2 demonstrated, most of the major changes in EI tax rates
during our sample period were quite persistent. We performed similar tests for each of
the other tax rates, and they produced similar results. This should add to our confidence
that the 5-year lagged tax rates are valid instruments, so that the estimates based on those
instruments are uncontaminated by reverse-causality problems. This is, of course, not
foolproof. For instance, it still could be that an increase in the number of estate tax return
deaths in the current year in some sense causes a change in tax rates five or more years in
the past, as the extra current decedents could have been living in the state and perhaps
politically active five or more years before. Still, taken together, our findings that the tax
effects persist even after controlling for a very rich set of covariates (including state-

31

wealth class dummies, state-specific time trends, the number of high-income younger
people in the state, and the number of non-rich elderly people in the state as indicated by
non-estate tax return death rate), that using lagged tax rates as instruments increases the
magnitude of the effects, and that estate tax filings do not help predict future changes in
tax rates, greatly limit the scope for political-economy-related reverse-causality stories.
Our final set of estimates, shown in Table 9, check to see if there is heterogeneity
across wealth classes in responsiveness to taxes. We do this by splitting the sample into
returns with net worth greater than $5 million in 1996 dollars, and all other returns. This
is done using the linear regression framework, controlling for state-wealth dummies.
When we split the sample in this way, the results for the below-$5 million group are
largely the same as we found in previous specifications. The top wealth group, on the
other hand, is found to be much more responsive to EI taxes and income taxes, and less
responsive to sales taxes and property taxes. A one percentage point increase in the EI tax
rate is estimated to reduce the number returns over $5 million by 3.9 percent, and a
similar increase in the income tax rate is estimated to reduce those returns by 4.2 percent.
These results are quite plausible, suggesting that the relative importance of EI tax and
income tax burdens is larger for the wealthiest individuals.
Implications for Revenue and Welfare
Taken together, our estimates provide robust evidence of some sort of behavioral
response to state taxes by the rich. As noted above, estimates from prior literature on the
effects of EI taxes on the size of reported bequests suggest that the magnitude of that
effect is considerably smaller than the effect we find here. If those estimates from the
prior literature are accurate, then the effects of EI taxes that we find here would largely
reflect changes in real (or reported) state of residence.
In this section, we provide an example to help illustrate the economic significance
of these results -- whether the policy implications of our estimated coefficients are “big”
or “small.” To do this, we consider what our estimates imply about the revenue and
welfare effects of decoupling a state’s estate tax from federal law. As we noted above, a

32

state that does this will impose a significant incremental tax burden relative to other
states, and for this reason it is a subject of active debate in state legislatures.
Figure 1 illustrates how a conventional welfare analysis would apply to taxinduced changes in real or reported state of residence. The horizontal axis represents the
number of people reporting that their residence is in a particular state j. The height of line
segment mn* represents the net benefit to a particular individual of reporting residence in
state j. This net benefit equals the benefit (measured in dollars) of reporting that one lives
in state j, minus the benefit provided by the next best alternative, in the absence of tax
differentials. If the next best alternative is to actually move to another state, then the net
benefit equals the welfare cost of moving to a less-preferred state. If the next best
alternative is to change one’s reported residence without actually moving, then the net
benefit equals the welfare cost of “pretending” to move, which reflects the real resource
costs of avoidance activities necessary to convince the tax authorities that one has
actually moved, as well as factors such as the disutility arising from risking a penalty.
When state j imposes a tax that is higher than in other states, the difference in tax
liabilities across states inserts a wedge under the net benefit schedule, as illustrated in the
diagram. For people between n’ and n*, the cost of moving or pretending to move is less
than the tax savings from doing so, and those people change their real or reported state of
residence. After this behavioral response, the revenue raised by state j is equal to
rectangle A, and the deadweight loss is triangle B. If the net benefit schedule is
approximately a straight line, then the deadweight loss caused by the behavioral response
to the tax is approximately equal to half of the revenue forgone due to the behavioral
response.58
Table 10 depicts our estimates of the effective tax rates that will be imposed in
2006 by a state that decouples its estate tax from federal law and freezes it based on the
credit schedule, exemption ($675,000), and rates applying in the federal estate tax in
2001.59 We calculate the effective state average estate tax rate as a percentage of net
worth, relative to a state that eliminates its estate tax, at the mean taxable estate in each of
six gross estate size classes, based on tabulations of returns filed in 2001 posted on the
IRS web site.60 The decoupled state tax is estimated to impose a burden equal to 4.5
percent of net worth, on average, on estates above $675,000 in 2001 dollars. Despite the

33

fact that the decoupled state estate tax has a highly graduated rate schedule with a top
statutory rate of 16 percent, the distribution of average tax rates is fairly uniform across
the gross estate size classes. This occurs because the benefits of deductibility from the
federal estate tax begin to kick in at a taxable estate of $2 million (the federal exemption
applicable in 2006), and because other deductions represent a larger share of net worth in
the higher gross estate classes.
Table 11 shows our rough estimates of the expected revenue effects of behavioral
responses to a decoupled state estate tax like the one just described, based on a range of
estimates of the coefficient on EIATR. We show results based on four sets of estimates of
the coefficient on EIATR: the -1.38 estimated in the conditional logit with state-specific
time trends (Table 5, Column 3); the -2.67 from the instrumental variables estimate
(Table 7, Column 2); an “intermediate” coefficient of -2; and the -3.95 (for estates above
$5 million) and -1.84 (for estates below $5 million) from the split sample estimates
(Table 9). We calculate the percentage of estate tax return filers in each wealth class that
change their state of residence as β(0.98)EIATR, where β is the coefficient on EIATR,
0.98 is the value of (1-P) for a typical state, and EIATR is the wealth class-specific tax
rate shown in Table 10. We then calculate the percentage decline in the state’s aggregate
estate tax revenues, assuming that returns in each gross estate size class shown in Table
10 have the mean taxable estate for the class, and that the beginning distribution of
returns across classes in the state is the same as it was in the data on returns filed
nationwide in 2001.
When we carry out these calculations, we find that the estimated percentage of
revenue lost due to behavioral responses ranges from 6.2 percent to 13.5 percent (this is
the ratio of area B+C to area A+B+C). The implied approximate deadweight loss ranges
from 3.3 percent to 7.8 percent of revenues actually raised (this is the ratio of area B to
area A).61 Thus, although we are confident that the behavioral response to such a tax
change would be non-zero, our best guess is that the welfare cost and revenue loss from
any tax-induced migration would be small relative to the revenue that would be collected.
If a decoupled state estate tax causes people to move out of the state, the state
might also lose revenues from other taxes. To get a rough idea of the potential importance
of this consideration, we estimated the average state income tax, property tax, and sales

34

tax burdens of elderly households that are in the same fractile of the national elderly
income distribution as estate tax return filers are in the national wealth distribution of
decedents, based on itemized deductions for each type of tax reported on individual
income tax returns.62 Our tabulations suggest that for this group, the average annual
liability for these three taxes combined is about 14.6 percent of the estimated $155,500
average liability at death per taxable return from a decoupled state estate tax like the one
described above (in 2006, converted to 2001 dollars). The degree to which people fleeing
EI taxes reduces other revenues depends crucially on how long before death people leave
the state, a question that our data does not allow us to answer. Suppose that people on
average move five years before death, and the state loses the full amount of revenues
from all four of the taxes (the latter being a worst-case scenario, as some of the lost
revenue should be recouped, for example because the former resident’s property is
unlikely to be simply abandoned). In that case, the total revenue loss to the state would be
(1 + 0.146×5) = 1.73 times as large as the revenue loss from the estate tax alone. Thus,
the total revenue loss would range from 10.7 percent to 23.2 percent of the static revenue
gain from decoupling. Performing the same calculation but assuming that people on
average move ten years before death suggests that the revenue loss would be
approximately 2.45 times as large as in Table 11, ranging from 15.2 percent to 33.1
percent of static revenue gain from decoupling. Note that the deadweight loss in these
calculations would be substantially less than one-half of the revenue loss, as the relevant
tax wedge would be the difference between the total tax liability associated with
reporting residence in this particular state, and total tax liability associated with the next
best alternative (the difference being substantially less than the total tax liability). In other
words, much of the revenue loss simply represents a transfer between the governments of
different states in this example. These illustrative calculations, while admittedly rough,
do suggest that although behavioral responses can be expected to reduce the net revenue
raised by decoupling, it is unlikely that states would put themselves anywhere near the
wrong side of the Laffer curve by doing so.

35

Conclusion
This paper finds that the number of federal estate tax return filers reported as residing in
each state is negatively influenced by the level of taxes imposed on high-income and
high-wealth people in that state. The most compelling results are for estate and
inheritance taxes and sales taxes, but income taxes and property taxes have statistically
significant negative effects of similar magnitudes in some reasonable specifications. Our
evidence is consistent with the idea that some rich individuals flee states that tax them
relatively heavily, although it may reflect other modes of tax avoidance as well. The
estimated amounts of deadweight loss and revenue loss from the flight are not large
relative to revenue collected by the taxes, however.
One implication of our finding of a response to EI taxes is that bequests are not
entirely accidental – the optimal degree of taxation of bequests is known to depend
heavily on the extent to which bequests are accidental or intentional.63 An implication of
the responsiveness to taxes in general is that the optimal degree of state tax progressivity
is less than it would be without such responses, although this by no means definitively
answers the question of whether the current degree of progressivity is too high or too low.
In one sense, any deadweight loss arising from migration, whether real or simply
reported, that is induced by progressive state taxation is a pure waste. This is because the
same distributional and revenue goals could have been achieved through the central
government while avoiding that particular source of welfare cost. On the other hand, our
estimates imply that a progressive increase in state taxes on wealthy elderly people, such
as that involved in decoupling the state estate tax from federal law, is still likely to raise a
substantial share of the revenue that it would have raised in the absence of the kinds of
behavioral response reflected in our estimates, even after taking into account the impact
on revenues from other taxes. Thus, in this context, a state that is not satisfied with the
distributional properties of federal taxation appears to face a standard trade-off between
raising revenue in a progressive fashion and the efficiency costs of that approach, one
aspect of which we have illustrated here.

36

Table 1 – Maximum federal credit for state
inheritance and estate taxes, 1954-2001
Adjusted taxable
estate ($)

Amount of credit ($)

Rate on
excess (%)

40,000

0

0.8

90,000

400

1.6

140,000

1,200

2.4

240,000

3,600

3.2

440,000

10,000

4.0

640,000

18,000

4.8

840,000

27,600

5.6

1,040,000

38,800

6.4

1,540,000

70,800

7.2

2,040,000

106,800

8.0

2,540,000

146,800

8.8

3,040,000

190,800

9.6

3,540,000

238,800

10.4

4,040,000

290,800

11.2

5,040,000

402,800

12.0

6,040,000

522,800

12.8

7,040,000

650,800

13.6

8,040,000

786,800

14.4

9,040,000

930,800

15.2

1,082,800

16.0

10,040,000

“Adjusted taxable estate” is the taxable estate (gross
estate less debts, expenses, and deductions for items
such as charity and gifts to a spouse), less $60,000.

37

Table 2 -- Effective average state inheritance and estate tax rate (percent) on a $1 million (in
constant 1996 dollars) bequest divided equally between two adult children (EIATR)
State 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 State 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000
AK
1.1
MS
0.5
0.4
0.4
AL
MT
2.9
2.8
2.8
2.8
AR
NC
2.5
2.5
2.4
1.8
1.7
AZ
ND
4.1
4.0
2.0
CA
2.6
4.3
4.6
5.1
NE
0.1
CO
2.4
2.8
3.4
0.0
NH
CT
2.8
2.6
2.3
2.2
2.6
2.6
2.8
NJ
0.8
0.8
0.8
1.9
1.8
DC
0.5
0.3
0.9
0.8
1.0
NM
0.2
DE
1.6
1.6
2.1
2.2
2.1
1.9
1.8
NV
FL
NY
2.3
2.2
2.0
1.9
1.9
2.0
2.0
GA
OH
1.5
2.5
2.5
2.6
2.7
2.6
2.5
2.4
HI
2.0
1.8
1.7
1.3
OK
3.8
3.8
2.9
3.0
0.9
1.1
1.2
IA
1.3
1.9
1.9
1.7
2.1
2.5
2.2
OR
2.8
2.7
2.9
8.3
0.7
ID
2.7
2.6
2.7
2.0
PA
1.4
5.0
4.5
3.9
3.4
3.1
2.7
2.5
IL
1.0
0.9
0.7
0.2
RI
4.1
4.3
4.4
4.4
2.9
IN
1.6
1.4
1.0
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
SC
2.9
3.0
3.1
3.0
3.9
1.8
KS
0.7
0.5
0.3
0.0
0.1
0.1
SD
1.7
2.9
3.0
3.7
3.5
3.3
3.1
3.2
KY
2.6
2.5
2.4
2.4
3.0
3.3
0.9
TN
2.4
3.4
3.9
3.2
0.2
0.0
0.2
LA
2.0
1.8
1.3
0.8
0.3
TX
0.7
0.6
0.5
MA
2.5
3.2
3.1
6.6
6.7
7.1
6.5
UT
6.0
6.1
5.9
MD
0.2
VA
0.5
0.3
ME
1.1
0.9
0.6
2.5
0.1
VT
2.1
1.9
4.8
MI
2.3
2.2
1.9
1.6
1.9
2.0
WA
1.8
2.3
2.9
3.6
MN
2.8
2.7
2.6
1.0
0.2
WI
4.0
3.9
3.9
4.0
4.4
0.2
MO
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.5
WV
2.5
2.2
1.8
1.7
WY
0.9
0.5
U.S. mean
1.7
1.8
1.8
1.6
1.0
0.7
0.5
0.2
Std. dev.
1.3
1.5
1.6
1.9
1.5
1.4
1.2
0.6
Notes: blank indicates zero. Table depicts combined federal-state inhertance and estate tax liablity as a percentage of
net worth, minus what it would be in a state that only operates a "soak-up" tax.

38

Table 3 -- Effective average state inheritance and estate tax rates on a bequest divided
equally between two adult children, at different estate values
Estate value
(constant 1996 $)
$575,000
$1,000,000
$1,625,000
$3,500,000
$10,000,000

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

1.7
1.7
1.6
1.4
0.9

1.9
1.8
1.7
1.6
1.0

1.8
1.8
1.7
1.5
0.8

1.6
1.6
1.5
1.2
0.6

1.7
1.0
0.9
0.7
0.3

1.4
0.7
0.6
0.4
0.2

1.1
0.5
0.5
0.3
0.2

0.4
0.2
0.1
0.0
0.0

Values shown are un-weighted means of state effective average tax rates on a bequest of the
indicated value, as a percentage of net worth.

39

Table 4 – Variable definitions and descriptive statistics
Variable

Description

OBS

Number of sampled estate tax returns in cell

RETURNS
EIATR
INCATR
SALESTX
PROPTX
GOVEXRAT
POP
T5YSHR
DTHRAT

Mean

Estimated population of federal estate tax returns in
cell (OBS times sampling weight)
Effective state average estate and inheritance tax
rate at midpoint of wealth category
Effective state average income tax rate at similar
point of elderly income distribution
Statutory state retail sales tax rate, adjusted for any
savings from federal income tax deductibility
State and local property tax revenues as a share of
state personal income, adjusted for any savings from
federal income tax deductibility
State and local government expenditures as a share
of state personal income
State population, thousands
Share of individuals / couples aged 25-59 in the state
who fall into the top 5% of the national income
distribution for that age group
State deaths, aged 45 and above (excluding fed.
estate tax return deaths) divided by state population

Min

Max

Std.
Dev

64

0

1,374

114

257

0

5,760

503

0.007

0

0.077

0.014

0.021

0

0.057

0.014

0.034

0

0.080

0.021

0.020

0.003

0.054

0.008

0.181

0.107

0.502

0.043

4,764

271

32,683

5,231

0.043

0.018

0.153

0.017

0.007

0.002

0.011

0.001

UNEMP

State unemployment rate

0.059

0.022

0.155

0.021

NCMPRE82

Dummy variable for “not a community property state”
interacted with dummy for years before 1982

0.171

0

1

0.377

CRIME

State crime rate (crimes per 100 population)

4.602

0.502

12.174

1.826

STKSHR

Share of assets held in stocks in 1976 for each statewealth combination

0.373

0.044

0.789

0.156

SP500

S & P 500 stock price index

373

88

1,085

269

73

11

320

41

20.906

3.197

35.939

4.753

HOUSEPR
PCPI

State-specific housing price index (expressed in
thousands of dollars)
State per capita personal income (in thousands of
1996 dollars)

SUN

Fraction of days that are clear or partly cloudy

0.494

0.300

0.690

0.076

HEATING

Heating degree days / 1000

5.066

0

8.968

2.175

COOLING

Cooling degree days / 1000

1.226

0

4.474

0.955

Years included: 1965, 1969, 1976, 1982, 1985-1998
Number of state-wealth-year cells: 3,713
Number of underlying sampled returns: 236,829
Estimated population of returns represented: 955,987
Mean values presented above are un-weighted means across all 3,713 cells.

40

Table 5 -- Conditional logit estimates of how state characteristics affect the
reported locations of federal estate tax return filers

No state-wealth
dumies or state
time trends
(1)
EIATR
INCATR
SALESTX
PROPTX
GOVEXRAT
LN(POP)
LN(T5YSHR)
LN(DTHRAT)
UNEMP
NCMPRE82
CRIME
STKSHR*LN(SP500)
LN(HOUSEPR)
SUN
HEATING
COOLING
State / wealth dummies?
State-specific time trends?

-0.639
(0.173)**
-2.378
(0.239)**
-0.368
(0.236)
14.379
(0.513)**
0.371
(0.123)**
1.010
(0.003)**
0.322
(0.015)**
1.194
(0.020)**
-3.585
(0.197)**
0.247
(0.011)**
0.062
(0.003)**
-0.091
(0.005)**
0.660
(0.015)**
0.443
(0.038)**
-0.036
(0.002)**
-0.004
(0.005)
No
No

Including
dummies for
each state wealth class
combination
(2)

Including statewealth dummies
and statespecific time
trends
(3)

-1.870
(0.249)**
-2.733
(0.456)**
-3.339
(0.419)**
-0.404
(1.057)
0.396
(0.289)
1.034
(0.030)**
0.374
(0.032)**
0.016
(0.066)
-2.344
(0.251)**
0.127
(0.017)**
0.075
(0.005)**
-0.004
(0.034)
0.244
(0.023)**

-1.382
(0.309)**
-1.491
(0.689)*
-2.791
(0.625)**
-3.389
(1.383)*
0.061
(0.346)
1.456
(0.164)**
0.263
(0.054)**
-0.763
(0.119)**
-2.057
(0.275)**
0.154
(0.029)**
0.033
(0.006)**
0.356
(0.046)**
0.398
(0.036)**

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

Each coefficient represents the effect of a characteristic of state j and wealth class
k on ln[Pjkt(1-Pjkt)], where Pjkt is the proportion of national returns in wealth class
k that are located in state j.
Standard errors are in parentheses.
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

41

Table 6 -- Sensitivity of fiscal variable coefficients to omission or
addition of variables (conditional logit with state-wealth dummies)

Omit
LN(T5YSHR)
(1)
EIATR
INCATR
SALESTX
PROPTX
GOVEXRAT

-1.735
(0.249)**
-2.246
(0.454)**
-3.069
(0.417)**
2.353
(1.031)*
-0.552
(0.279)*

Omit LN
Omit STKSHR*
Omit LN
(DEATHRAT)
LN(SP500)
(HOUSEPR)
(2)
(3)
(4)
-1.871
(0.249)**
-2.718
(0.452)**
-3.349
(0.416)**
-0.398
(1.057)
0.392
(0.289)

Add LN(PCPI) Omit PROPTX
(5)
(6)
EIATR
INCATR
SALESTX
PROPTX
GOVEXRAT

-2.208
(0.250)**
-0.780
(0.465)
-2.376
(0.420)**
-3.316
(1.060)**
0.873
(0.288)**

-1.884
(0.247)**
-2.693
(0.444)**
-3.336
(0.418)**

-1.869
(0.249)**
-2.729
(0.455)**
-3.336
(0.418)**
-0.411
(1.056)
0.391
(0.287)

-2.012
(0.249)**
-1.801
(0.448)**
-3.474
(0.418)**
-1.683
(1.051)
0.743
(0.286)**

Omit
GOVEXRAT
(7)
-1.863
(0.249)**
-2.650
(0.452)**
-3.213
(0.408)**
0.193
(0.962)

0.350
(0.263)

Each coefficient represents the effect of a characteristic of state j and wealth
class k on ln[Pjkt(1-Pjkt)], where Pjkt is the proportion of national returns in
wealth class k that are located in state j in year t.
Standard errors are in parentheses.
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

42

Table 7 -- Linear regression estimates of how state characteristics affect the
log-odds of a federal estate tax return being filed in a state
Including dummies for each state wealth class combination
Weighted least
squares,
including stateWeighted 2SLS, wealth dummies
using 5-year lag
and statetax rates as
Weighted least
specific time
instruments
squares
trends
(1)
(2)
(3)
EIATR
INCATR
SALESTX
PROPTX
GOVEXRAT
LN(POP)
LN(T5YSHR)
LN(DTHRAT)
UNEMP
NCMPRE82
CRIME
STKSHR*LN(SP500)
LN(HOUSEPR)
State / wealth dummies?
State-specific time trends?

-1.996
(0.739)**
-1.651
(1.211)
-2.985
(0.936)**
-3.941
(2.975)
0.689
(0.798)
1.355
(0.085)**
0.387
(0.083)**
0.243
(0.228)
-1.272
(0.565)*
0.030
(0.020)
0.036
(0.011)**
0.097
(0.095)
0.219
(0.064)**
Yes
No

-2.667
(1.276)*
-3.824
(2.334)
-3.348
(2.026)
-6.626
(4.750)
0.300
(0.484)
1.270
(0.089)**
0.402
(0.086)**
0.300
(0.237)
-0.871
(0.652)
0.030
(0.019)
0.039
(0.011)**
0.098
(0.094)
0.224
(0.071)**
Yes
No

-2.161
(0.467)**
-0.406
(1.279)
-4.049
(1.079)**
-4.949
(2.859)
-0.321
(0.721)
1.518
(0.515)**
0.297
(0.109)**
-0.419
(0.366)
-1.176
(0.474)*
0.093
(0.023)**
0.023
(0.010)*
0.314
(0.108)**
0.348
(0.076)**
Yes
Yes

Dependent variable is ln[Pjkt(1-Pjkt)], where Pjkt is the proportion of nationwide
returns in a wealth class k located in state j in year t.
Robust standard errors, with clustering by state, are in parentheses.
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

43

Table 8 -- Granger causality test for effect of lagged estate tax
returns on current state estate and inheritance tax rate
Dependent variable: EIATR at time t
Lagged EIATR
Lagged LN[Pjk/(1-Pjk)]
INCATR
SALESTX
PROPTX
GOVEXRAT
LN(POP)
LN(T5YSHR)
LN(DTHRAT)
UNEMP
NCMPRE82
CRIME
STKSHR*LN(SP500)
LN(HOUSEPR)
State / wealth dummies?
State-specific time trends?

0.444704
(0.039012)**
-0.000010
(0.000203)
0.060229
(0.086142)
0.018557
(0.082846)
0.027537
(0.189695)
0.030808
(0.023357)
0.004540
(0.004373)
0.003142
(0.003913)
0.015957
(0.008999)
0.073942
(0.039200)
0.000139
(0.001442)
0.000235
(0.000720)
-0.006732
(0.002976)*
-0.003705
(0.003881)
Yes
No

"Lagged" values are from 5 years before, or the year closest to 5
years before in cases where there are gaps in the data.
Robust standard errors, with clustering by state, are in parentheses.
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

44

Table 9 -- Linear regression estimates of how state
characteristics affect the log-odds of a federal estate tax
return being filed in a state: split sample by wealth class

EIATR
INCATR
SALESTX
PROPTX
GOVEXRAT
LN(POP)
LN(T5YSHR)
LN(DTHRAT)
UNEMP
NCMPRE82
CRIME
STKSHR*LN(SP500)
LN(HOUSEPR)
State / wealth dummies?
State-specific time trends?

Top wealth class
(1)

Other wealth
classes
(2)

-3.952
(1.700)*
-4.272
(2.006)*
-1.846
(2.227)
-0.568
(7.804)
0.355
(1.372)
1.339
(0.186)**
0.369
(0.114)**
0.402
(0.371)
-2.881
(1.203)*
0.035
(0.034)
0.069
(0.016)**
0.100
(0.136)
0.036
(0.091)
Yes
No

-1.843
(0.696)*
-1.129
(1.390)
-3.190
(0.950)**
-3.540
(2.991)
0.687
(0.830)
1.358
(0.077)**
0.379
(0.087)**
0.217
(0.233)
-1.073
(0.529)*
0.029
(0.019)
0.029
(0.012)*
0.098
(0.104)
0.249
(0.067)**
Yes
No

Dependent variable is ln[Pjkt(1-Pjkt)], where Pjkt is the proportion
of nationwide returns in a wealth class k located in state j in year
t. Estimated by weighted least squares.
Robust standard errors, with clustering by state, are in
parentheses.
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

45

Table 10 -- Value of EIATR in 2006 for a state
that decouples from federal law

Size of gross estate, 2001 dollars
$625,000 - $1,000,000
$1,000,000 - $2,500,000
$2,500,000 - $5,000,000
$5,000,000 - $10,000,000
$10,000,000 - $20,000,000
$20,000,000 or more
All returns

Average state
tax rate at
mean taxable
estate in class
3.9
5.1
3.7
4.6
5.0
4.6
4.5

Assumes the state estate tax is frozen based on
parameters of federal law effective in 2001.

Table 11 -- Estimated percentage of decoupled
state estate tax revenue lost to induced
changes in reported residence
Estimated coefficient (β) on
EIATR
Table 5, column (3), β = -1.38
β=2
Table 7, column (2), β = -2.67
Table 9, β's = -3.95, -1.84

Percentage of
revenue lost
6.2
8.9
11.9
13.5

46

Figure 1 – Illustration of revenue and welfare effects
of changes in reported residence in response to a tax
m

Net benefit to individual
of reporting state j as
residence

C
A

Tax

B

n’

n*

47

Number of people claiming
residence in state j

Table A.1 -- Value of INCATR for $750,000 - $1.25 million
wealth class, selected years (expressed as percentage)
State
AK
AL
AR
AZ
CA
CO
CT
DC
DE
FL
GA
HI
IA
ID
IL
IN
KS
KY
LA
MA
MD
ME
MI
MN
MO

1965
1.9
1.5
1.4
1.0
1.4
1.9

1975
1.1
2.0
2.6
1.8
1.3
0.7
1.0
1.7

1985
1.7
1.8
2.9
1.3
2.5
0.9
1.2
1.9

1995
2.4
3.1
4.0
2.3
3.5
1.1
2.5
3.7

1.4

3.3
0.9
1.1
2.5
0.9
1.8
1.5

3.8
2.2
2.0
2.4
1.1
3.0
1.5

3.8
3.0
3.4
3.5
1.7
4.4
3.2

1.3

1.2

1.4

1.7

2.1
1.9
2.3

1.3
1.8
2.8

1.5
2.1
3.4

2.8
2.7
4.0

2.9
0.8

3.5
1.4

3.3
2.8

3.2

1.2

1.5

1.8

2.5

Std. dev.
0.9
1.0
1.1
Notes: blank indicates zero. See text for description of INCATR.

1.5

1.1
1.8
1.7
2.1
1.1
2.4
0.9
1.5
1.4
0.7
2.7
1.7

2.5
0.9

U.S. mean

1975
2.2
1.3
2.0
1.7
2.9
1.8
0.7
2.4
0.5

1985

1995

1.4
2.4
1.6
3.3
1.1
2.6
3.6
1.8

1.8
3.4
2.2
4.2
2.1
2.8
5.0
3.7

2.0
2.7
1.6
2.6
1.1
0.9
1.3
1.4
0.7
4.1
1.8
1.2
1.6
3.2
1.2

2.1
3.2
2.0
2.8
1.1
1.3
1.6
1.3
0.7
3.7
1.9
3.1
2.1
3.0
1.2

2.6
4.5
2.9
4.5
1.7
2.1
3.7
0.2
1.5
5.3
2.8
4.3
2.5
4.4
2.1

State
MS
MT
NC
ND
NE
NH
NJ
NM
NV
NY
OH
OK
OR
PA
RI
SC
SD
TN
TX
UT
VA
VT
WA
WI
WV
WY

1965
1.0
1.7
2.7
1.7
0.8
0.6
2.4
1.2
2.8

48

Table A.2 -- Value of SALESTX for $750,000 - $1.25 million
wealth class, selected years (expressed as percentage)
State
AK
AL
AR
AZ
CA
CO
CT
DC
DE
FL
GA
HI
IA
ID
IL
IN
KS
KY
LA
MA
MD
ME
MI
MN
MO

1965

1975

1985

1995

2.8
2.1
2.1
2.1
1.4
2.5
2.1

2.6
1.9
2.6
3.1
1.9
3.9
3.2

2.3
2.3
2.9
2.8
1.7
4.4
3.5

4.0
4.5
5.0
6.0
3.0
6.0
6.0

2.1
2.1
2.4
1.4

2.6
1.9
2.6
1.9
1.9
2.6
2.6
1.9
3.2
1.9
1.9
2.6
3.2
2.6
2.6
1.9

2.9
1.7
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.9
2.9
1.7
2.9
2.3
2.9
2.9
2.9
2.3
3.5
2.4

6.0
4.0
4.0
5.0
5.0
6.3
5.0
4.9
6.0
4.0
5.0
5.0
6.0
4.0
6.5
4.2

1965
2.5

1975
3.2

1985
3.5

1995
7.0

2.1
1.6

1.9
2.6
1.6

1.7
2.3
2.0

4.0
5.0
5.0

3.2
2.6
1.9
2.6
2.6
1.3

3.5
2.2
3.4
2.3
2.9
1.9

6.0
5.0
6.5
4.0
5.0
4.5

3.9
3.2
2.6
2.6
2.3
2.6
2.6
1.9
1.9
1.9
2.6
2.9
1.9
2.2

3.5
3.5
2.9
2.3
3.2
2.4
2.7
1.7
2.3
2.9
2.9
3.8
1.8
2.4

6.0
7.0
5.0
4.0
6.0
6.3
5.0
3.5
5.0
6.5
5.0
6.0
4.0
4.6

Std. dev.
1.0
0.9
1.0
Notes: blank indicates zero. See text for description of SALESTX.

1.8

2.5
1.4
1.8
2.1
1.4
2.1
2.8
2.8
2.1

U.S. mean

State
MS
MT
NC
ND
NE
NH
NJ
NM
NV
NY
OH
OK
OR
PA
RI
SC
SD
TN
TX
UT
VA
VT
WA
WI
WV
WY

2.1
1.4
0.0
2.1
1.4
3.5
2.5
2.1
1.4
2.1
1.4
2.1

2.1
2.1
2.8
1.4
1.5

49

Table A.3 -- Value of PROPTX for $750,000 - $1.25 million
wealth class, selected years (expressed as percentage)
State
AK
AL
AR
AZ
CA
CO
CT
DC
DE
FL
GA
HI
IA
ID
IL
IN
KS
KY
LA
MA
MD
ME
MI
MN
MO

1965
1.0
0.9
1.6
3.5
3.5
3.4
2.7
1.8
1.1
2.2
1.7
1.3
3.6
3.1
2.6
2.9
3.8
1.5
1.5
3.6
2.2
3.2
2.7
3.7
2.2

1985
1.2
2.9
1.1
1.5
2.2
2.4
2.3
0.7
1.1
2.3
1.4
0.9
2.5
1.4
2.2
1.2
2.2
1.0
1.8
1.6
1.3
2.3
1.5
2.3
1.0
4.4
1.7

1995
1.7
3.2
1.5
2.2
2.8
4.0
3.6
1.0
1.4
3.1
2.1
1.2
2.4
2.1
3.3
2.0
2.7
1.3
2.4
1.9
2.0
3.6
2.3
3.2
1.4
3.0
2.2

Std. dev.
0.9
0.7
0.7
Notes: blank indicates zero. See text for description of PROPTX.

0.8

U.S. mean

1975
1.0
0.6
1.0
2.2
2.8
1.8
2.7
1.4
1.0
1.5
1.7
1.1
2.3
1.5
2.2
2.1
2.2
1.0
0.9
3.7
1.6
2.4
2.6
2.0
1.7

1985
2.9
0.6
0.9
1.5
1.4
1.8
2.0
2.2
0.7
1.4
1.2
1.1
2.2
1.3
1.9
1.6
1.9
0.9
0.8
1.9
1.3
2.1
2.3
1.8
0.9

1995
3.0
0.8
1.0
2.2
2.0
2.0
3.0
2.8
1.1
2.3
1.9
1.4
2.8
1.9
2.7
2.3
2.3
1.2
1.1
2.6
1.9
3.5
1.9
2.6
1.7

State
MS
MT
NC
ND
NE
NH
NJ
NM
NV
NY
OH
OK
OR
PA
RI
SC
SD
TN
TX
UT
VA
VT
WA
WI
WV
WY

1965
1.8
4.0
1.5
3.2
3.8
3.4
3.3
1.6
2.5
3.1
2.6
1.9
2.9
1.9
2.7
1.3
4.0
1.8
2.5
2.9
1.7
3.1
2.0
3.3
1.6
3.8
2.5

1975
1.3
2.8
1.3
1.6
2.5
3.0
3.2
1.0
1.9
2.9
1.8
1.1
2.4
1.4
2.4
1.1
2.6
1.3
1.7
1.6
1.4
3.1
1.8
2.4
1.1
2.3
1.9

50

References
Anderson, J.A. (1972). “Separate sample logistic discrimination.” Biometrika Vol. 59,
No. 1 (March): pp. 19-35.
Bakija, Jon. 2004a. “Documentation for a Federal-State Inheritance and Estate Tax
Calculator Covering the Years 1900-2002.” Working paper, Williams College.
Bakija, Jon. 2004b. “Documentation for a Federal-State Personal Income Tax Calculator
Covering the Years 1900-2002.” Working paper, Williams College.
Baldwin, Richard E., and Paul Krugman. 2004. "Agglomeration, Integration, and Tax
Harmonization." European Economic Review. Vol. 48, No. 1, (February): pp. 1-23.
Bennefield, Robert L. 2003. Home Values 2000: A Census 2000 Brief. Washington: U.S.
Bureau of the Census. <www.census.gov/prod/2003pubs/c2kbr-20.pdf>.
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendil Mullainathan. 2004. “How Much Should
We Trust Difference-In-Differences Estimates?” Quarterly Journal of Economics. Vol.
Vol. 119, No. 1 (February): pp. 249-275.
Blank, Rebecca M. 1988. “The Effect of Welfare and Wage Levels on the Location
Decisions of Female-Headed Households.” Journal of Urban Economics. Vol. 24, pp.
186-211.
Blumkin, Tomer, and Efraim Sadka. 2004. “Taxation with Intended and Accidental
Bequests.” Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 88, Nos. 1-2 (January), pp. 1-21.
Conway, Karen Smith and Andrew J. Houtenville. 2001. "Elderly Migration and State
Fiscal Policy: Evidence from the 1990 Census Migration Flows." National Tax Journal.
Vol. 54, No. 1, pp. 103-123.
Conway, Karen Smith and Jonathan C. Rork. 2004a. "Diagnosis Murder -- The Death of
State ‘Death’ Taxes." Forthcoming, Economic Inquiry.
Conway, Karen Smith and Jonathan C. Rork. 2004b. " State ‘Death’ Taxes and Elderly
Migration – The Chicken or the Egg?" Working Paper, University of New Hampshire.
Cosslett, S. 1981. Efficient Estimation of Discrete-Choice Models. In Charles Manski,
and Daniel McFadden, eds., Structural Analysis of Discrete Data with Econometric
Applications, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 51-111.
Davies, Paul S., Michael J. Greenwood, and Haizheng Li. 2001. “A Conditional Logit
Approach to U.S. State-to-State Migration.” Journal of Regional Science, Vol. 41, No. 2,
pp. 337-360.

51

Duncombe, W., M. Robbins, and D. Wolf. 2003. “Place Characteristics and Residential
Location Decisions Among the Retirement-Age Population.” Journal of Gerontology:
Social Sciences. Vol. 58B: S244-S252.
Farnham, Martin, and Purvi Sevak. 2004. “Tiebout Non-Sorting? Empty-Nest Migration
and the Local Fiscal Bundle.” working paper, Population Studies Center, University of
Michigan (Report No. 04-558, May).
Feenberg, Daniel Richard, and Elizabeth Coutts. 1993. "An Introduction to the TAXSIM
Model," Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, Vol. 12, No. 1, (Winter), pp. 189194.
Feldstein, Martin, and Marian Vaillant Wrobel. 1998. "Can State Taxes Redistribute
Income?" Journal of Public Economics. Vol. 68, No. 3 (June): pp. 469-396.
Forfield Inc. 2003. “Status of State Death Taxes: Summary.” July.
<http://www.forefield.com/stateestate/> (accessed June 17, 2004).
Gramlich, Edward M., and Deborah S. Laren. 1984. “Migration and Income
Redistribution Responsibilities.” Journal of Human Resources. Vol. 19, No. 4 (Autumn),
pp. 489-511.
Greene, William H. 2000. Econometric Analysis, 4th Edition. Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Prentice-Hall, Inc.
Greene, William H. 2002. Limdep Version 8.0 Econometric Modeling Guide. Plainview,
NY: Econometric Software, Inc.
Gresenz, Carole Roan. 1997. “An Empirical Investigation of the Role of AFDC Benefits
in Location Choice.” Rand Labor and Population Program Working Paper Series, No.
97-05 (April).
Johnson, Barry W. 1994. "Estate Tax Returns, 1989-1991." In Barry W. Johnson, ed.,
Compendium of Federal Estate Tax and Personal Wealth Studies. Washington: IRS
Statistics of Income Division.
Johnson, Barry W., Jakob M. Mikow, and Martha Britton Eller. 2001. "Elements of
Federal Estate Taxation." In William Gale, James R. Hines Jr., and Joel Slemrod, eds.,
Rethinking Estate and Gift Taxation. Washington: Brookings Institution Press.
Joulfaian, David and Kathleen McGarry. 2004. “Estate and Gift Tax Incentives and Inter
Vivos Giving.” National Tax Journal, Vol. 57, No. 2, Part 2 (June): pp. 429-444.
Kaestner, Robert, Neeraj Kaushal, and Gregg Van Ryzin. 2003. “Migration
Consequences of Welfare Reform.” Journal of Urban Economics. Vol. 53, No. 3 (May):
pp. 357-376.

52

Kiefer, Donald, Robert Carroll, Janet Holtzblatt, Allen Lerman, Janet McCubbin, David
Richardson, and Jerry Tempalski. 2002. “The Economic Growth and Tax Relief
Reconciliation Act of 2001: Overview and Assessment of Effects on Taxpayers.”
National Tax Journal 55, No. 1 (March): pp. 89-117.
Kopczuk, Wojciech, and Joel Slemrod. 2001. “The Impact of the Estate Tax on Wealth
Accumulation and Avoidance Behavior.” in William G. Gale, James R. Hines, and Joel
Slemrod, eds., Rethinking Estate and Gift Taxation. Washington: Brookings Institution
Press.
Levine, Phillip B., and David J. Zimmerman. 1999. “An Empirical Analysis of the
Welfare Magnet Debate Using the NLSY.” Journal of Population Economics. Vol. 12,
No. 3 (August): pp. 391-409.
Moretti, Enrico. 2003. “Human Capital Externalities in Cities.” NBER Working Paper
No. 9641 (April).
McFadden, Daniel. 1974. Conditional Logit Analysis of Qualitative Choice Behavior.” In
P. Zarembka, ed., Frontiers in Econometrics, New York: Academic Press, pp. 105-142.
McNichol, Elizabeth. 2004. “Many States are Decoupling from the Federal Estate Tax
Cut.” Center for Budget and Policy Priorities. (Jan. 14)
<http://www.centeronbudget.org/5-23-02sfp.htm>.
McNichol, Elizabeth, Iris J. Lav and Joseph Llobrera. 2003. “States Can Retain Their
Estate Taxes Even as the Federal Estate Tax is Phased Out.” Center for Budget and
Policy Priorities, (Feb. 4) <http://www.cbpp.org/1-31-02sfp.htm>.
Mirrlees, J.A. 1982. “Migration and Optimal Income Taxes.” Journal of Public
Economics. Vol. 18, No. 3 (August): pp. 319-341 .
Moffitt, Robert. 2002. “Documentation for Moffitt Welfare Benefits File.” Mimeo, Johns
Hopkins University <http://www.econ.jhu.edu/People/Moffitt/DataSets.html>.
Moulton, Brent R. 1990. “An Illustration of a Pitfall in Estimating the Effects of
Aggregate Variables in Micro Units,” Review of Economics and Statistics,
Vol. 72, No. 2 (May): pp. 334–338.
Musgrave, Richard. 1959. The Theory of Public Finance. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Nechyba, Thomas J. and Robert P. Strauss. 1998. “Community Choice and Local Public
Services: A Discrete Choice Approach.” Regional Science and Urban-Economics. Vol.
28, No. 1, pp. 51-73.
Oates, Wallace E. 1972. Fiscal Federalism. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.

53

Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight (OFHEO). 2004. Housing Price Index.
<http://www.ofheo.gov/download.asp>.
Page, Benjamin R. 2003. “Bequest Taxes, Inter Vivos Gifts, and the Bequest Motive.”
Journal of Public Economics. Vol. 87, No. 5-6 (May): pp. 1219-1229.
Pauly, Mark V. 1973. “Income Redistribution as a Local Public Good.” Journal of Public
Economics. Vol. 2, No. 1 (February): pp. 35-58.
Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini. 1999. “Political Economics and Public Finance.”
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 7097. (April).
Prentice, R.L. and Pyke, R. (1979). Logistic Disease Incidence Models and Case-control
Studies, Biometrika Vol. 66, No. 3 (September): pp. 403-411.
Ruggles, Steven, Matthew Sobek et al. 2003. “Integrated Public Use Microdata Series:
Version 3.0” Minneapolis: Historical Census Projects, University of Minnesota.
<http://www.ipums.umn.edu/usa/>
Schoenblum, Jeffrey A. 1982. Multistate and Multinational Estate Planning. Boston:
Little, Brown and Co.
Slemrod, Joel. 1998. “Methodological Issues in Measuring and Interpreting Taxable
Income Elasticities.” National Tax Journal. Vol. 51, No. 4 (December): pp. 773-788.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. Various Years. Statistical Abstract of the United States.
Washington: GPO.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. Various Years. State Government Finances.
<http://www.census.gov/govs/www/state.html>.
U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis. 2004. National Income and Product Accounts of the
United States. <http://www.bea.gov/>.
U.S. Centers for Disease Control. CDC Wonder Web Page <http://wonder.cdc.gov>.
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. 2004. U.S. Housing Market
Conditions. 1st Quarter (May). <http://www.huduser.org/periodicals/ushmc.html>
U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation. Various Years. Uniform Crime Reports for the
United States. Washington: GPO.
U.S. National Center for Health Care Statistics. Various Years. Vital Statistics of the U.S.
Washington: GPO.

54

U.S. Office of Management and Budget. 2004. Budget of the United States Government,
Fiscal Year 2005. Washington: GPO.

55

Endnotes

1

An earlier version of this paper was titled “The Impact of Progressive State Taxes on the Locations and
Estates of the Rich.” We would like to thank Barry Johnson for providing us with the tabulations of federal
estate tax return data, and Wojciech Kopczuk for help with the data and for many invaluable suggestions.
Karen Conway, Martin Farnham, Jim Poterba, Jonathan Rork, and seminar participants at Brookings, the
Harvard/MIT joint public economics seminar, University of Michigan, University of Virginia, Wesleyan,
William and Mary, and Williams also provided helpful comments for which we are grateful. Finally, we
would like to thank Vladimir Andonov, Manijeh Azmoodeh, Sebastien Bradley, Diana Carligeanu, Misha
Dworsky, Alex Fischer, Brennan Kelly, Edvard Major, Chris Lyddy, Rochan Raichura, Hui Shan, and
Drew Thomas for outstanding research assistance that was essential to constructing the tax calculators used
in this paper.
2

Pauly (1972) discusses the implications of redistribution as a local public good.

3

Mirrlees (1982) presents a model where the government of a jurisdiction chooses a non-linear income tax
schedule to maximize the aggregate utility of its residents, income has diminishing marginal social utility
(creating a motive for redistributive taxation), and people can emigrate. He finds that the optimal degree of
redistributive taxation is inversely related to the elasticity of the number of residents with respect to
changes in their after-tax incomes. In this particular model Mirrlees abstracts from labor supply decisions
by treating pre-tax income as fixed, which is appropriate to our application, as our evidence mainly pertains
to the retirement-age segment of the population. In a model where redistribution is a local public good and
high-income people are heterogeneous in their willingness to move, Pauly (1972) also finds that the
optimal degree of redistributive taxation in a jurisdiction is a declining function of the degree of mobility in
response to taxes. He further notes that in this context, “a reduction in the total taxes of those most likely to
move, in order to induce them to stay, is a way of attaining optimality...,” a point that should carry over to
other sorts of models of optimal state tax policy as well (Pauly 1972, p. 50). This would suggest that if the
location decisions of wealthy elderly people are particularly flexible and responsive to taxation compared
to others with high incomes, it might not make sense for a state to tax them at a higher rate than others
through estate and inheritance taxation, ceteris paribus.
4

See, for example, Gramlich and Laren (1984), Blank (1988), Gresenz (1997), Levine and Zimmerman
(1999), and Kaestner, Kaushal, and Van Ryzin (2003).

5

One piece of indirect evidence comes from Feldstein and Wrobel (1998), who find, using cross-sectional
data from the Census Current Population Survey, that states which operate more progressive tax systems
also have more unequal wage distributions. This would be consistent with out-migration of high-skill labor
and in-migration of low-skill labor in response to progressive taxes, although it would also be consistent
with a number of other possible explanations, such as reverse causality due to political economy
considerations.
6

See Kiefer, et al (2002) for a summary of the provisions of the 2001 tax act affecting federal and state
estate and inheritance taxes.
7

See the discussion of Table 10 below for the basis of this estimate. Estates below $675,000 would be
exempt in this example, as that was the federal estate tax exemption that applied in 2001, and state soak-up
taxes did not begin to apply until the point where federal estate tax liability began to accrue.
8

McNichol (2004) discusses the status of state estate taxes. As of January 14, 2004, jurisdictions where the
former soak-up estate tax is scheduled to persist after the federal credit is eliminated include the District of
Columbia, Kansas, Illinois, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, Minnesota, Nebraska, New Jersey, New
York, North Carolina, Ohio, Oregon, Rhode Island, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, and Wisconsin.

56

9

Conway and Houtenville (2001) and Conway and Rork (2004), for example, both use revenue-based
measures, although they also try some alternatives – for instance, the EI tax on a $60,000 estate in the first
case, and dummy variables for whether the state imposed its own EI tax, as opposed to relying exclusively
on a soak-up tax, in the latter case.
10

As noted above, Conway and Houtenville (2001) tried this approach. Duncombe, Robbins, and Wolf
(2003) constructed a state estate tax average rate and a state inheritance tax average rate, each calculated on
an $822,000 bequest to a spouse using 1987 law, and applied it to all individuals in their sample.

11

Census PUMS micro-data, which in recent waves includes 5 percent samples of the U.S. population, also
undoubtedly includes many wealthy people, but does not contain information on wealth, and top-codes
income. It does provide information on state of residence in the current year and 5 years before, allowing
analysis of migration decisions, but it will miss many moves by people who migrate within 5 years of
dying. Nonetheless, the PUMS data sets offer a promising avenue for further migration research.

12

Slemrod (1998) provides a review of this literature.

13

See Johnson, Mikow, and Eller (1998) for an overview of historical provisions of the federal estate tax
through 1998, and Kiefer et al (2002) for a summary of changes since then.

14

See Johnson (1994), for example, for a discussion of the sample design. Note that returns in the highest
gross estate size class were sampled at a 100% rate.

15

Our measure of net worth also adds back in any “special use valuation” discount that had been subtracted
in the calculation of the gross estate. Such discounts were allowed starting in 1977 for farm and closelyheld business property that met certain restrictions. This is a minor adjustment; for example, it only applied
to about one percent of taxable estates filing between 1995 and 1998 (Johnson, Mikow, and Eller, 1998, p.
95).

16

A federal estate tax return was required of any decedent whose “gross estate” exceeded the exemption for
the federal estate tax .

17

Note that since we are dealing with data spanning multiple years, each variable in this section should also
have a subscript t representing the year of death. In this section we abstract from the time dimension and
drop the time subscript to avoid cumbersome notation.

18

A number of studies have used the conditional logit approach to model migration or location decisions.
The only ones to consider taxes are Duncombe, Robbins, and Wolf (2003), discussed above, and Nechyba
and Strauss (1998), who estimate the effect of property taxes on community choice in New Jersey. Davies,
Greenwood, and Li (2001) use a conditional logit to model individual migration choices among the states,
but do not consider taxes. Gresenz (1997) uses the conditional logit to investigate the impact of welfare
benefits on individual migration choices among the states.

19

We implement this in Stata via the following method. The data consists of 50 (prior to 1976, when DC is
unavailable) or 51 (after 1976) rows, each containing the applicable characteristics of one state and an
indicator variable for whether the state was actually chosen by the observations in the cell, for each of the
3,713 cells, for a total of 189,363 rows. We then estimate the conditional logit on this data with frequency
weights applied to each cell, where the frequency weight is the number of sampled returns in the cell. This
method is suggested by Greene (2002, section E19.4), who labels it a “conditional logit for frequency
data.”

20

The fact that each observation in our conditional logit estimation was drawn through a stratified sampling
technique is not a problem for our analysis, because the sampling rates do not vary systematically across
states. In a logit framework, the standard approach to stratified samples is to control for dummy variables
for each of the individual characteristics upon which the sample is stratified. This produces consistent

57

estimates of the parameters on the other variables -- see Anderson (1972), Prentice and Pyke (1979), and
Cosslett (1981). In the conditional logit framework, these dummy variables difference out of the likelihood
function because they are constant across the choices. The stratification in the estate tax return sample is
based on year of death and two individual characteristics: gross estate class, and age at death. These all
difference out of the conditional logit likelihood function, and are not systematically related to state of
residence, so no special procedure is required regarding the sampling in order to obtain consistent
estimates.
21

We discuss how we construct the representative characteristics of the “rest of the nation” further below.

22

As Greene suggests, the heteroskedasticity is corrected by weighting each observation by nkt P̂jkt (1-

P̂jkt ), where nkt is the number of sampled returns drawn in wealth class k in year t, and P̂jkt is the predicted
probability of someone in wealth class k and year t choosing state j. P̂jkt equals

[e

βˆ '( X jkt − X ~ j ,kt )

]/[1 + e

βˆ '( X jkt − X ~ j ,kt )

]

. As indicated in Greene, we compute initial consistent estimates of β

with an unweighted estimation of equation (7), use those initial consistent estimates to construct P̂jkt , and
then iterate until the parameter estimates converge. This approach is necessary because the information
provided by some cells is much noisier than for other cells. Intuitively, the nkt part of the weight puts a
small weight on years and wealth classes where the number of sampled returns was small, and thus likely to
suffer from larger sampling error. The P̂jkt (1- P̂jkt ) part of the weight puts a low weight on small states,
which will also suffer from larger sampling error. Note that sampling error arises both because our data
represents a random sample of the true population of estate tax returns, and because death produces a
random sample of the metric we are really interested in, the number of wealthy elderly people living in a
particular state at time t. This weighting procedure deals appropriately with variation across cells in both
sorts of sampling error. The weighted estimate of population returns in each cell is used to construct the
dependent variable (the log-odds ratio) in the linear regressions. We also tried using the unweighted
number of observations in each cell to construct the log-odds ratio, and found very similar results, which
should be expected given that the sampling rate does not vary systematically across states. Finally, a small
problem in defining the dependent variable is posed by the fact that for 1.1 percent of the cells, Pjkt=0, and
we can’t take the log of zero. We address this by adding 1 to the number of returns in each state. Note that
cells with zero observations pose no special problems in the conditional logit framework.
23

Our discussions in this section and the next one draw on a very extensive study of historical federal and
state tax laws, using sources such as federal tax returns and instructions dating back to 1917, historical state
tax laws published in each state’s Annotated Statutes and Session Laws, and a variety of secondary sources
published by organizations such as the Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations, Commerce
Clearing House, and Prentice-Hall. Bakija (2004a and 2004b) provides a complete discussion and reference
list.

24

The fact that the maximum allowable federal credit for state EI taxes was the minimum of the amount
calculated in Table 1 and federal tax liability (before applying the credit for state taxes) mattered in the
following cases. First, decedents with estates below the exemption level for the federal estate tax were not
eligible to receive any federal credit against state EI taxes. As a result, state soak-up taxes did not impose
any liability on estates below the federal estate tax exemption level. Second, once the taxable estate value
rose above the federal exemption level, substantial unused credits had already been accumulated based on
Table 1. Above the federal exemption level, federal estate tax liability began to accrue, but then was wiped
out because the state soak up tax began to impose liability exactly equal to the federal liability, and the
federal estate tax granted a full credit for it. This continued up until the taxable estate value where all of the
allowable credit for state taxes that had accumulated below the federal estate tax exemption level had been
used up. In a case where a state that formerly had a soak-up estate tax decouples from the federal law,
things typically work as follows. If the state, for example, decouples and sets its estate tax based on the

58

federal law that applied immediately before EGTRRA was adopted in 2001, then the state tax liability will
be the minimum of the amount calculated through Table 1, and what federal estate tax liability would have
been under the federal exemption and rate schedule that applied in 2001.
25

There were a handful of states that for part of our sample period did not have a provision to soak up the
maximum federal credit, but that eventually adopted one. The states, and the years they adopted a soak-up
provision, were: Utah and Oregon (1971), West Virginia (1976), Mississippi (1978), North Dakota and
South Dakota (1979), and Nevada (1987). Whether or not a state had a soak-up provision had no effect at
all on its attractiveness relative to other states – the individual’s total tax bill was the same either way, and
only the distribution of the proceeds between the federal and state governments was affected. In the cases
of Utah, Mississippi, and North Dakota, even that was largely unaffected, as during the years that they
lacked a soak-up provision, their own taxes were generally at least as large as the maximum federal credit
anyway.

26

The states that still imposed an incremental burden on $1 million bequest (in 1996 dollars) equally
divided between two children at the end of our sample period (1998), along with the year the tax was
subsequently eliminated, where applicable, were: Connecticut (2001), Delaware (1999), New York (2000),
Ohio, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, and South Dakota (2001). States that in 1998 still imposed their own EI
taxes on bequests to adult children, but where in our example the tax was smaller than the maximum
federal credit and thus imposed no incremental burden, along with the year those taxes were eliminated
where applicable, included: Indiana, Louisiana (2004), Maryland (2000), Mississippi (2000), and Nebraska.
States that still imposed their own EI taxes on distant relatives or non-relatives at the end of 1998, along
with the year that tax was eliminated, where applicable, included: Iowa, Kentucky, New Hampshire (2003),
and New Jersey. After eliminating their taxes on close relatives, the following states continued to tax
distant- and non-relatives: Connecticut (until 2005), Kansas (inheritance tax eliminated in 1998, but a
“succession” tax on distant relatives or non-relatives was re-introduced in 2002), and Maryland. See note 8
above for a list of states where incremental burdens were later re-introduced as the federal credit was
phased-out.

27

States that at some point in our sample period had a value of EIATR greater than 2 percent for our top
wealth class included California, Colorado, Connecticut, Idaho, Massachusetts, New Jersey, New York,
North Dakota, Oklahoma, Oregon, Rhode Island, Tennessee, Utah, Washington, Vermont, and Wisconsin.

28

Our income tax calculator accurately captures the treatment of the major components of income and
deductions at both the federal and state level, and incorporates features such as minimum and maximum
taxes, the alternative minimum tax, limitations on itemized deductions, and special state provisions for
retirement income, among many other things. The effective average income tax rate we calculate is a
weighted average of the rates for a single return and a married return, where the weight represents the share
of the population over age 65 in 1980 that was either single or married. The publicly available income tax
data does not report state of residence for high-income households. To impute deductions for state sales
taxes, we multiply the average value found in the individual tax return data in 1980 for the appropriate
fractile of the elderly income distribution by the ratio of the state’s statutory retail sales tax rate for the
relevant year to the national average statutory retail sales tax rate in 1980, and then convert it to the
nominal dollars of the appropriate year. We take a similar approach for state and local property taxes,
scaling this time by the ratio of state and local property tax revenue over state personal income for the
relevant year and state to the 1980 national average. For purposes of constructing the income fractile data,
we sort people by adjusted gross income excluding capital gains, to avoid an excessive influence from
transitory fluctuations in income. The denominator of the average tax rate calculation is adjusted gross
income plus any excluded capital gains, and plus any adjustments to income.

29

Source: University of Michigan World Tax Database <http://wtdb.org/index.html>.

30

The property tax revenue data come from the U.S. Census Bureau's State and Local Government
Finances, various years, and the personal income data are from the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis
(2004).

59

31

The effects of deductibility of sales and property taxes from state income taxes are incorporated into the
state income tax variable, where applicable. Note that the federal marginal tax rates used here can be zero.
This occurs, for example, when someone having the average characteristics of the relevant fractile of the
elderly income distribution (with property tax and sales tax deductions adjusted to represent state-specific
values as described in note 28 above) does not itemize deductions. The relevant marginal tax rate can also
be affected by the alternative minimum tax and limitations on itemized deductions, among other things, and
our calculator takes all of these considerations into account if they apply to someone with the mean
characteristics of the relevant fractile. The federal income tax rate we apply thus depends on the features of
federal law applying to someone with the mean characteristics of the appropriate fractile; we do not
otherwise adjust for the probability of itemizing or facing the AMT. In 1980, the percentage of income tax
filers itemizing deductions in the actual tax data ranged from 77 percent for our lowest fractile to 99
percent for our highest fractile.

32

Sources: U.S. Census Bureau State and Local Government Finances, various years, and U.S. Bureau of
Economic Analysis. Alaska is something of an outlier with respect to this variable, as oil revenues and
transfers from the federal government raise it to near 50 percent in some years. As a result, we tried reestimating our models with Alaska excluded. We found that it made virtually no difference to the results,
which makes sense given that Alaska appropriately receives a very small weight in the estimation
procedures we described above.

33

Schoenblum (1982) provides a comprehensive discussion of the legal issues involved in state death
taxation with regards to state residency, taxation of out-of-state property, taxation of non-residents,
resolution of inter-state disputes, etc. The following two paragraphs of the text draw on this source. A
detailed example of the criteria typically used by a state to establish domicile can be found in “Form C-3:
State of Connecticut Domicile Declaration” available at:
<http://www.ct.gov/drs/cwp/view.asp?a=1509&q=266218&drsPNavCtr=|41130|41285|#41289>.

34

A common misconception is that state inheritance taxes depend on the location of the heirs. A careful
review of estate tax planning guides such as Schoenblum (1982), as well as state tax laws and state tax
forms, verifies that the location of the heirs is irrelevant. Reciprocal provisions in each state’s tax laws
guarantee that intangible property will be taxed by the state where the decedent was primarily domiciled,
and tangible property taxed by the state where it is physically located. The one exception to this is North
Carolina, where the estate tax law reserves the right to tax intangible property of non-residents when the
property had some legal connection to North Carolina (an example might be stock in a North Carolina
company). Even in the case of North Carolina, though, the location of the heirs has no bearing. Schoenblum
notes that there are handful of other states where the wording of their statutes creates some potential
ambiguity about how the intangible property of non-residents will be treated, but the ambiguity is again
related to the location of the property rather than the location of the heirs.

35

To the extent that bequests are a normal good, we would expect the income/wealth effects of higher
income tax, sales tax, or property tax burdens to reduce both pre- and post-tax bequests. On the other hand,
the income/wealth effect of EI taxes would likely increase the pre-tax bequest. If the pre-tax bequest is held
constant, the after-tax bequest falls by the full amount of the decline in lifetime resources caused by the EI
tax; a one percentage point increase in the EI tax rate is a very small percentage of lifetime resources, so the
elasticity of bequests with respect to after-tax lifetime resources would have to be locally much greater than
one in order for the income effect to cause after-tax bequests to decline. As a result, the income effect of a
higher EI tax is unlikely to push people under the threshold to appear in our data, which depends on the size
of the pre-tax bequest.
36

The federal government and many states limited the scope for tax avoidance through inter vivos gifts by
implementing a gift tax. All states also counted any gifts made “in contemplation of death,” usually defined
as any gift made within a few years of death, as part of the taxable estate. Nonetheless, for a variety of
reasons, including annual gift exclusions in the gift tax, making judicious use of inter vivos gifts can still
achieve significant tax avoidance. Abundant evidence suggests, however, that there is dramatically less use

60

of inter vivos gifts than would be optimal under a tax-minimization strategy. Wealthy individuals are
apparently quite reluctant to relinquish control of their assets before death. See, for example, Joulfaian and
McGarry (2004). Page (2003) does find evidence that inter vivos gifts by the elderly are responsive to state
inheritance and estate tax rates, based on pooled cross-sectional data from the 1983 and 1986 waves of the
Survey of Consumer Finances.
37

Kopczuk and Slemrod (2001, p. 339) report that in their preferred specification, the elasticity of net
worth with respect to (1-τ) is 0.16, where τ is the marginal federal estate tax rate. If W is net worth, then
∂ln(W)/∂τ = -[∂ln(W)/∂ln(1-τ)][1/(1-τ)]. Evaluating this expression at [∂ln(W)/∂ln(1-τ)]=0.16 and τ=0.46
(the mean combined federal-state EI rate in our sample) yields ∂ln(W)/∂τ = -0.30. If this estimate were
accurate, then the percentage of people that fall below the minimum wealth threshold to appear in our data
in response to a one percentage point increase in the EI tax rate would depend on the percentage of all
estate tax returns that are within 0.3 percent of that minimum wealth threshold, which is likely to be
extremely small.
38

Baldwin and Krugman (2004) demonstrate this principle for taxation of corporations. Similar
considerations can be expected to apply to high-skill workers when there are human capital spillovers, or
when high-skill labor is a complement to the types of businesses that benefit from agglomeration
economies. Moretti (2003) reviews the evidence on human capital spillovers in cities.

39

Source: Moffitt (2002) and U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (2004).

40

T5YSHR was tabulated for each state for every 5 years from 1965 through 2000 using the Integrated
Public Use Microdata Samples (IPUMS) of the decennial U.S. Census (we know the locations of highincome people for years ending in 5 as well as zero because the Census includes a variable on state of
residence 5 years ago). For other years, we interpolate values by assuming that T5YSHR grows at a
constant annual rate in between the years for which we have data. We use the top 5 percent because
information on incomes much above the threshold for the top 5 percent is not provided in any publicly
available data set with a sufficiently large sample size to produce reliable estimates (IPUMS top-codes its
income variable, and publicly-available IRS data omits state of residence for those with high incomes).
Federal estate tax returns filed in 2001 represented 4.6 percent of the number of adult deaths in the U.S., so
the top 5 percent of income earners should be fairly representative of people likely to face estate tax
burdens later in life. The income necessary to qualify for the top 5 percent in 2000 was $147,870.

41

Source: U.S. National Center for Health Care Statistics Vital Statistics of the U.S. (various years) and the
U.S. Centers for Disease Control web site <http://wonder.cdc.gov>.

42

When those coefficients are 1 and all other coefficients are zero, the conditional logit expression for Pjkt
for j=1 reduces to
exp[ln(DTHRAT1t)+ln(T5YSHR1t)+ln(POP1t)]/Σjexp[ln(DTHRATjt)+ln(T5YSHRjt)+ln(POPjt)], which
further reduces to the state’s value of DTHRAT×T5YSHR×POP over the national value. Similar logic
applies to the linear version of our model.

43

The crime rate is taken from the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation Uniform Crime Reports (various
years) and the U.S. Census Bureau’s Statistical Abstracts of the U.S. (various years). The unemployment
rate is from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics web site <www.bls.gov> and Moffitt (2002).
44

The relevant community property states were Arizona, California, Idaho, Louisiana, Nevada, New
Mexico, Texas, and Washington (Wisconsin later became a community property state in 1986). Note that
the community property vs. jointly-owned property issue only matters to the measure of wealth for the first
spouse to die. There was not sufficient information available in the underlying estate tax return data to
construct a definition of wealth that would be completely consistent between community-property states
and other states for the full sample period.

61

45

An examination of our data reveals that Northeastern states tend to have the highest values of STKSHR,
while rural states in the Midwest and Southwest tend to have the lowest values.

46

The median price of new single-family homes is available going back to 1964 in the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development’s U.S. Housing Market Conditions (Table 8). Although the median-price
data is not a constant-quality index, during the years when both series are available, they track each other
fairly closely. For the U.S. as a whole, from 1976-2002, the median home price grew at an average annual
rate of 5.9 percent, and the housing price index grew at an average annnual rate of 5.7 percent. We thank
Albert Saiz for alerting us to the existence of the housing price index.

47

Source: Moffitt (2002) and U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (2004).

48

In cases where there is more than one weather station reported for the state, we take the average value.

49

The climate variable data are from the U.S. Census Bureau, Statistical Abstracts of the U.S.

50

Based on the estimated effect of property taxes in column (1) of Table 5, one might be tempted to
conclude that rich people would actually prefer to live in states with high property taxes. Since these taxes
tend to vary greatly across localities within a state, a state that relies heavily on property taxes creates an
opportunity for the rich to avoid the tax by living in a low-property-tax jurisdiction within the state. Since
our property tax variable is based on statewide revenue data, it might be reflecting taxes that are largely
paid by other people. However, we are controlling for the rates of other taxes paid by the elderly rich, as
well as the overall level of state and local government spending within the state, and there is no obvious
reason why someone would want other people in the state to face higher tax burdens once we hold those
other factors constant. The estimated property tax coefficients in columns (2) and (3) of Table 5 would cast
doubt on that interpretation in any event.

51

See note 42 above for an explanation of why a coefficient of one has this implication.

52

This could reflect, for example, that wealthy elderly people are especially likely migrate to states that are
becoming more attractive to people in general, or perhaps that population growth is correlated with some
omitted measures of economic conditions that affect asset values.

53

The coefficient on PROPTX also becomes a large negative when we omit the housing price index. This
would be consistent with a tax capitalization story. If property taxes are to some extent capitalized into
property values, we would expect higher property taxes to reduce the number of estate tax returns filed in a
state partly because they reduce property values and thus push more people below the minimum estate-size
threshold for our data. Controlling for property values separately should thus make the property tax
coefficient less negative, which is what we find.

54

To account for the fact that some states might be closer “competitors” for migrants than others, we also
experimented with subtracting off weighted means of the values for the other states, where the weights
were based on the amount of historical migration occurring between a particular state and each other state.
To be precise, for a particular state j, the weight attached to each other state was the share of total inmigration and out-migration (summed together) for state j that was accounted for by each other state. To
limit endogeneity, we used lagged data, derived from the 1960 U.S. census, on migration flows between
1955 and 1960. We found that the results were very similar to those obtained using simple unweighted
means. We thus chose to report results based on the simpler unweighted mean procedure, because it is less
likely to be contaminated by endogeneity. We also tried subtracting off population-weighted means, and
that had no significant impact on the estimates either.

55

This is a solution suggested in Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan (2004, p. 271, note 24).

56

Estimating the linear model without clustering produces standard errors that are only slightly larger than
in the conditional logit. The Huber-White adjustment for heteroskedasticity makes little difference, which

62

is to be expected given that our weighting procedure already addresses the most obvious source of
heteroskedasticity.
57

Note that it would have to be an increase relative to other states in order to bias our results, as our
empirical specifications effectively control for any changes that are uniform across states in a proportional
sense. For instance, if EI taxes are being eliminated because the number of rich elderly people, or their
political influence, is increasing uniformly across the country, that would have no effect on our results at
all.

58

For purposes of measuring both revenue effects and welfare effects, any revenue that is raised through
penalties on people who are discovered to be misrepresenting their true state of residence should be
subtracted from the measure of revenue loss caused by behavioral response. Also note that to the extent that
our estimates reflect changes in bequests, wealth accumulation, or tax avoidance in response to incentives,
the welfare implications would be similar to those described above. One important difference, however ,is
that deadweight loss from those sorts of responses would not be avoided by a tax implemented at the
central government level. The implications for how a state EI tax affects revenue from other kinds of state
taxes, discussed below, would also be different. We would expect that if the response reflects rich people
fleeing a state, this would have worse overall revenue consequences for the state than if the response
reflects decisions to leave smaller bequests. In the case where the wealthy people remain in the state, they
would continue to pay other types of taxes – in fact, a decision to reduce bequests might increase sales tax
revenues because of higher consumption.

59

Note that this is just one of many possible ways that different states are decoupling from the federal
estate tax. For example, some states are freezing their estate tax provisions based on 1997 federal law;
some are freezing them based on the provisions that were scheduled to apply prior to the adoption of
EGTRRA, which would mean that the exemption would increase gradually over time; and some are
retaining the pre-EGTRRA credit schedule and federal estate tax rate structure, but following the
exemptions scheduled by EGTRRA. The burden imposed by the decoupled state estate tax depends on
which year’s federal estate tax exemption and rates are used in the calculation, because the state estate tax
liability equals the minimum of the liability determined based on Table 1, and what the federal estate tax
liability (before the credit) would have been. Thus, no one with an estate below the applicable “federal”
exemption level written into state law will owe state tax liability, but once above that exemption, state
liability will begin to accrue at the applicable “federal” rates above the exemption (which started at 37%
under 2001 law), up until the point that all unused credits that accrued below the exemption level are used
up. See McNichol (2004) and McNichol, Lav, and Llobrera (2003) for discussion of these issues, and
Forfield, Inc. (2003) for a summary of the different dates that various states are choosing at which to freeze
their references to federal law.

60

The tables are available at <http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-soi/01es01gr.xls>. We grow the taxable estates
forward to 2006 based on the rate of inflation forecast in U.S. Office of Management and Budget (2004),
apply the 2001 federal credit and tax schedules to determine the tax payment made to the state, and then
calculate the effect of deductibility from the federal tax based on the rules currently scheduled to apply at
the federal level in 2006. The federal estate tax exemption for deaths in 2000 and 2001 was $675,000, and
the data in Table 10 mostly represent deaths from those years. But the initial wealth category in 2001 starts
at $625,000 because of a relatively small number of late returns filed in 2001 for deaths prior to 2000. The
average taxable estate in each wealth class, and the distribution of estates across wealth classes, is
calculated based on taxable returns only.
61

If x is the share of revenues lost due to the behavioral response, the deadweight loss as a share of
revenues actually raised is x/2(1-x).

62

Estate tax returns filed in 2001 represented 4.6 percent of adult deaths. We go to the 1995 IRS public-use
Individual Model File of individual tax returns, and calculate the average income (defined as AGI less
capital gains), average state income tax payment conditional on itemizing, and average state property tax
payment conditional on itemizing, for returns with at least one spouse aged 65 or over that would fall in the

63

top 4.6 percent of the elderly income distribution for the nation as a whole. We find that the average state
income tax payment for this group is 6.3 percent of income, and that the average state property tax payment
is 2.6 percent of income. The average 1995 income for this group, grown to a 2006 value in 2001 dollars by
the rate of growth in national per capita personal income through 2001, and then assuming growth equals
inflation for 2001-2006 (as we did for the estate tax calculations) is $227,289. Since state sales tax
deductions no longer appear on federal income tax forms because they were disallowed by the Tax Reform
Act of 1986, we go back to the 1985 individual return data and perform a similar calculation for sales taxes
as we did for the other taxes in 1995. A complication here is that most people approximated their sales tax
deductions based on state-specific tables provided in the form 1040 instruction booklet. These tables
capped the maximum deduction at the estimated state-specific sales tax liability for someone with $100,000
of income. A taxpayer could only claim a sales tax deduction larger than that if they could document it with
receipts. Few taxpayers were willing go through that degree of record-keeping burden. Thus, we calculate
the implied effective state sales tax rate based on returns with incomes above the threshold for the top 4.6
percent of elderly households, but below $100,000. This yields an average state sales tax deduction among
itemizers of 1.1 percent of income. The tax burdens reported in the text come from multiplying the tax rates
for each tax just described by the average income of $227,289. Our estimates of the average annual state
revenues collected from each member of this group for each type of tax, expressed in 2001 dollars, are
approximately $5,900 for property taxes, $14,300 for income taxes, and $2,400 for sales taxes, for a total
liability of $22,600, which represents 14.6 percent of our estimated average estate tax payment of
$155,500.
63

See, for example, Blumkin and Sadka (2004).

64

