NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE HISTORY AND POLITICS OF
CORPORATE OWNERSHIP IN SWEDEN
Peter Högfeldt
Working Paper 10641
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10641
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2004

Special thanks to Martin Holmén for help and comments and to Jan Glete for providing data. I have benefited
from constructive discussions and comments by Marco Becht, Lennart Erixon, Silvia Giacomelli, Colin
Mayer, Randall K. Morck, Marco Pagano, Krishna Palepu, Raghuram G. Rajan, Ailsa Roell, Örjan Sjöberg
and Steen Thomsen, as well as from participants at the University of Alberta Business School and NBER
conference at Lake Louise, Alberta, Canada, June 21-22, 2003 and participants at the CEPR/ECGI/INSEAD/
NBER/University of Alberta joint conference on The Evolution of Corporate Governance and Family
Firms in Fontainebleau January 30-31, 2004 for valuable comments. I also appreciate the generosity of The
Bank of Sweden Tercentenary Foundation. An article based on this paper was published in the European
and US editions of Financial Times on October 16, 2003: Socialist ideal that tied up Swedish riches. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2004 by Peter Högfeldt. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The History and Politics of Corporate Ownership in Sweden
Peter Högfeldt
NBER Working Paper No. 10641
July 2004
JEL No. G3, N2, N4
ABSTRACT
Not despite but because of persistent Social Democratic political influence since the Great Reversal
in 1932 have a few families and banks controlled the largest listed firms in Sweden. The Social
Democrats have de facto been the guarantor rather than the terminator of private capitalism since
the political and corporate incumbencies have been united by strong common interests. Incumbent
owners need the political support to legitimize that their corporate power rests on extensive use of
dual-class shares and pyramiding. While the Social Democrats only get the necessary resources and
indirect support for their social and economic policies from the private sector if the largest firms
remain under Swedish control so that capital does not migrate. The extensive use of mechanisms to
separate votes from capital however drives a significant wedge between the costs of internal and
external capital that causes an enhanced (political) pecking order of financing where new external
equity is strongly avoided. By not encouraging outsiders to create new firms and fortunes, and by
not fully activating the primary equity markets, the heavy politicized system has redistributed
incomes but not property rights and wealth. The result is an ageing economy with an unusually large
proportion of very old and very large firms with well-defined owners in control. 31 of the 50 largest
listed firms in 2000 were founded before 1914, only 8 in the post-war period and none after 1970.
Peter Högfeldt
Department of Finance
Stockholm School of Economics
Box 6501
SE-113 81Stockholm
Sweden
peter.hogfeldt@hhs.se

One of the ironies of European business history of the 20th century is the relative stability
(resiliency) of corporate ownership structures despite the unprecedented political turmoil with
devastating wars and the interregnum of socialism. It is however still impossible to understand the
strong historical path dependence without analyzing how political factors have profoundly affected
the development of corporate ownership by first setting the stage and then changing the conditions
in systematic ways (see e.g. Roe (2002a and b)). Not only through the design of the legal system
(regimes) and corporate laws, and the efficiency of legal enforcement and supervision. But also by
changing the balance of interests between labor and capital by regulation of labor, product and
capital markets, and development of tax-financed, public welfare systems with egalitarian ambitions
to redistribute resources and opportunities.
Another historical irony is that previous adversarial relations between capital and labor
have given way to a corporatist society where heavily entrenched private ownership of the largest
listed firms co-exits and cooperates with labor unions whose members enjoy strong employee
protection, and are represented on the board (see Pagano and Volpin (2001)). Since financial
markets are conducive to structural changes, which often run counter to the status quo interests of
incumbent labor and capital, they tend to be less developed in corporatist countries, and firms also
less dependent on external financing through equity markets (see e.g. Rajan and Zingales (2003a)).
This is particularly true in Continental Europe and in Scandinavia where proportional voting
systems tend to favor formation of minority or coalition governments and consensus decision
making, which fosters political rent seeking by the firms’ stakeholders, and larger public sectors.1
Corporate ownership in a country does therefore not only rest on the corporate law and on the legal
regime but ultimately on the political acceptance at large of entrenched private ownership. The

1
In a cross-country analysis of the relation between political institutions and policy outcomes, Persson and Tabellini
(2003) find that presidential regimes have smaller governments than parliamentary systems. Majoritarian elections induce
smaller governments, less welfare spending and smaller deficits than do proportional elections. In particular, they report
systematic differences in spending patterns: Proportional and parliamentary democracies alone display a ratchet effect in
spending, with government outlays as a percentage of GDP rising in recessions, but not reverting in booms. All countries
cut taxes in election years. Presidential regimes postpone fiscal contractions until after the elections, while parliamentary
regimes do not; welfare-state programs are expanded in the proximity of elections, but only in democracies with
proportional elections.

2

structure of corporate ownership and governance, as well as the development of the financial
system, are thus very much integrated parts of a country’s political history.
But how do the economic, political, legal and historical conditions interact? The challenge
in comparative historical analysis of corporate ownership is to try to separate which factors are
primarily exogenous and which are predominantly endogenously determined, and then evaluate
their relative importance and causal relations by comparing the realized, historical paths across
countries. History is of course not deterministic since the actual equilibrium path is only one of
many possible and temporary random events like financial crises and subsequent regulatory
responses may have long-term effects through path dependence (see Rajan and Zingales (2003b)).
The underlying assumption is thus that there is enough structural stability in societies for the
comparative analysis to map out the major decisive factors of corporate ownership over time.
This is of course a very tall order but fortunately some institutions and factors (e.g.
constitutions, legal regimes and enforcement, economic geography) are surprisingly stable over
time and therefore natural candidates as exogenous determinants in the causal, historical analysis.
Protection of property rights, freedom of contracting and the openness of the civic society have
basically been exogenous factors over a longer time period but sometimes exposed to the strong
winds of political change. Changes in external competition and major technological changes are
also primarily exogenous, in particular for a small open market economy, and often catalysts for
structural changes. Other pivotal factors have a much less exogenous character since they are more
influenced by changing economic and political conditions. For example, the domestic economy’s
openness to trade and capital flows, choice of exchange rate regimes and policies to promote
flexible labor markets and development of financial markets. The strongest endogenous factor in the
20th century has definitely been how political ideology (e.g. socialism or egalitarianism) in general,
and voice of parties and organized stakeholders, in particular labor, have rallied political support for
and implemented policies that absorb and assuage effects of brute, tempestuous markets forces.

3

This paper contributes to the comparative historic analysis by analyzing which factors
(economic, legal, historical and political) were decisive in the historical development of corporate
ownership (listed firms) in Sweden. In fact, Sweden is a rather suitable case for a causal analysis
since several economic factors are exogenously determined by the fact that it is a small and exportoriented economy that has exploited it base of natural resources and supplied Europe with raw
materials and manufacturing goods. Institutional and political conditions have also been very stable
since the country benefited politically and economically by staying out of the two wars. In
particular the political stability has been unprecedented among Western democracies.
The Social Democratic Party (SAP) has been in power since 1932 except for 9 years
between 1976-82 and 1991-94 but predominantly as a single party minority government with
passive support from the Communist (later Socialist) Party (SKP, VPK and Vänsterpartiet,
respectively), and more recently also from the Environmental Party (Miljöpartiet) or in coalition or
with support from the Farmers’ party (Bondeförbundet, later Centerpartiet). Consistent with the
corporatist spirit in society, the relation between the well-organized interests of capital and labor
has in general been cooperative and consensus oriented, and property rights have been respected.
The exceptions to this rule are two major political conflicts in the late 40s (about a far-reaching,
governmental interventionist program for a more planned economy to fight an expected post-war
depression) and in the late 70s and early 80s (about a proposal for partial transfer of corporate
control to the labor unions), which both resulted in electoral set-backs for the Social Democrats and
in implementation of significantly watered-down programs that later were terminated.
Despite recurrent financial and industrial crises, and increasing capital demands, corporate
control of the largest firms has been remarkably stable and increasingly concentrated since the
1930s. The political intervention and general influence in the economy at large has however been
significant, and embodied in an unusually large tax-financed public sector that redistributes
resources and opportunities between citizens in a very ambitious manner. The mixture of
institutional stability, persistent social democratic policies and stable, concentrated corporate

4

ownership in a small open economy exposed to international competitive pressure makes Sweden a
particularly interesting case.
I focus on three major questions about the history and politics of corporate ownership. First,
given the changing economic and political conditions, which factors caused the ownership of the
largest listed firms to become so concentrated and stable over time? And which are the economic
consequences thereof? Since stability breeds complacency, lock-in of inherited capital and political
rent seeking, in particular if firms are controlled by families and banks, it is important to track the
effects on investments, R&D, overall growth and creation of new firms; where does the new
entrepreneurial blood come from (see e.g. Morck, Strangeland and Yeung (2000) and He, Morck
and Yeung (2003))?
Second, the relation between labor and capital has not been without tension, but why did
the very strong egalitarian ambitions of the labor movement (the blue-collar union LO and the
Social Democratic Party-- SAP) made a halt at private ownership and accepted that the control of
the largest firms via pyramids and extensive use of dual-class shares rests with a very small elite of
old families and professional managers? Why does one of the most egalitarian societies accept one
of the most unequal distributions of power over large corporations? Neither lasting influence of an
antithetical political ideology nor ambitious redesign by occupational powers (Germany and Japan)
seems thus to hinder established mechanisms of corporate control from reproducing (replicating)
themselves in democracies. But why are the control mechanisms so strong that they survive the
whirlwinds of political and social change?
The third question concerns how the structure of the financial system has influenced and
shaped corporate ownership and how ownership in turn has affected the development of the
financial system, in particular of the primary equity markets. The question is of course motivated by
the influential literature on law and finance that finds correlations between e.g. civil law origin
dummy (significant regression coefficient), more concentrated ownership and less developed
financial markets (see e.g. La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer and

5

(Robert Vishny) (1999) and (2000)). Are there other factors besides the degree of legal protection of
minority shareholders that explains why ownership did not become dispersed in Sweden? Does e.g.
Mark Roe’s idea that ownership and control does not separate in Continental Europe because the
pressure of social democracy (in a wide sense, not necessarily political party) also apply to the
perhaps most social democratic society in Europe, Sweden?
I provide an integrated answer to the three closely related questions by focusing on a
narrow financial perspective: How did the firms finance their investments? Or more specifically:
How dependent have listed firms been on external capital from the primary equity market?2 The
importance of political, social and external economic factors will be analyzed from the perspective
of how they have influenced and shaped the firm’s dependence on external equity financing. The
basic idea is that ownership will only become dispersed if firms need to raise a significant part of
their capital in the external equity markets, and that political decisions will determine how
dependent firms are on external financing. Political support for use of pyramids and dual-class
shares that separate votes from capital will limit the controlling owners´ as well as the firm’s
dependence on equity markets. This occurs because the separation of ownership from control drives
a significant wedge between the costs of internal and external capital as new external shareholders
demand compensation (discounts) for the associated agency costs. But the firm’s internal capital is
comparatively inexpensive for the controlling owners as they have access to and exert power over
2

My ideas have been inspired by Rajan and Zingales (2003 a and b) and their interest group theory of financial
development where incumbents oppose development when it breeds competition. My analysis of the Swedish case may be
regarded as an application and elaboration of their basic framework by its focus on the interaction between political
ideology and corporate ownership. Another great inspiration is Mark Roe’s political theory about social democracy (Roe
(2002a) and his views on corporate law and corporate governance (Roe (2002b)) although I disagree on some points. My
analysis deviates from the interesting approach to a new political economy surveyed and developed by Pagano and Volpin
(2001) and (2004), respectively, since I emphasize the importance of political ideology more strongly than differences in
electoral systems but their analysis has been thought-provoking. Erixon (1997) has been an important inspiration and my
financial approach may be regarded as complementary to his real analysis of the Swedish industrial development. I have
also benefited from Henreksson and Jakobsson (2001 and 2003a and b) that emphasize the negative effect of taxes on
corporate ownership and the threat of Socialism to private ownership. But they completely ignore that the existence of
pyramids presupposes that inter-corporate dividends as well as capital gains are not taxed; see Morck (2003). Social
Democratic governments have over the years implemented such tax policies that are conducive to pyramiding; see
Holmén and Högfeldt (2004b). Applying Rajan’s and Zingales´ general reasoning, I however develop a political theory of
corporate ownership and financial markets that generates the diametrically opposite conclusion. The Social Democrats
have been the guarantor rather than the threat to entrenched corporate ownership since the political and corporate
incumbencies have been united over time by strong common interests. Glete’s (1994) historical description and analysis
of corporate networks have significantly contributed to my knowledge and ideas about corporate ownership in Sweden.

6

all of the firm’s internal cash flows via a relatively small (less than proportional) capital investment.
This generate an enhanced pecking order of financing: Strong reliance on retained earnings and
borrowing but avoidance of equity issues, in particular of large public offers as they would dilute
control and also be extra costly due to the discounts to new outside shareholders; see Holmén and
Högfeldt (2004b).3 The enhanced pecking order is reinforced by the key political decision to allow
banks to directly or indirectly own equity as the banks are more likely to provide new debt when
their closely related firms need capital. The close connections between banks and large listed firms
have had profound and lasting effects on corporate financing and ownership in Sweden over the last
100 years.
If capital for investments can be supplied primarily through retained earnings, by borrowing
in banks or by infusion of private capital, firms have no immediate need to go through the strictures
of equity offers and place a larger fraction of shares with new investors that may dilute the value of
their private benefits of control and disperse ownership. The Social Democrats have in particular
pursued three policies that tend to reinforce entrenchment of incumbent owners: (i) allowing bank
ownership of equity; (ii) strong support for control structures that rigidly separate votes from
capital, for a long time also combined with rigorous restrictions on foreign ownership of equity, and
(iii) persistently giving retained earnings and borrowing a tax advantage over equity. The policies
have de facto disfavored formation of new, fast growing firms over incumbent firms as well as
outside equity financing by supporting an enhanced pecking order of financing in established firms.
The real irony is thus that corporate ownership in Sweden is very concentrated not despite
but because of persistent Social Democratic policies since the Great Reversal in 1932. The Social
Democrats have in fact been the guarantor rather than the terminator of private capitalism since the
political and corporate incumbencies have been united by strong common interests. Incumbent
owners need the political support to legitimize that their corporate power rests on extensive use of
dual-class shares and pyramiding while the Social Democrats only get the necessary resources and
3

The pecking order is enhanced since it is caused by agency costs inherent to the ownership structure and not primarily
by asymmetric information costs, and since public offers are very strongly avoided; see Högfeldt and Oborenko (2004).

7

indirect support for their social and economic policies from the private sector if the largest firms
remain under Swedish control so that capital does not migrate.
Before elaborating on these ideas, I start by presenting a general picture of how corporate
ownership has developed historically. After an analytical description of how the ideology and
policies of the Social Democrats have affected corporate ownership, I develop my simple, political
theory of why ownership did not separate widely in Sweden that focuses on the interaction between
corporate ownership and development of the primary equity markets. Before presenting an
integrated answer to the three main questions of this chapter, I critically evaluate the Swedish model
of corporate ownership. To extract some general implications about how history and politics
interact, I speculate about the major exogenous and endogenous factors that caused corporate
ownership to follow the path it did in Sweden. I conclude by putting my analysis in a wider
historical context.

1. A Stylized History of Corporate Ownership in Sweden
Starting with economic reforms in the 1860s (e.g. freedom to establish new firms for men and
women and liberalization of foreign trade), Sweden followed a trajectory of fast industrialization
with the highest recorded rate of productivity growth between 1870 and 1913; the productivity level
was the second lowest in Europe in 1970 (Maddison (1982)). The export-oriented raw material
sector expanded very fast as it supplied the booming Western Europe with timber and iron ore. A
first wave of (domestic) innovations provided the foundation for new (genius) firms specialized in
engineering and manufacturing that became the basis of large export of investment goods: Atlas
Copco (1873), L M Ericsson (1876); Alfa-Laval (1883); ASEA (1883); AGA (1904); and SKF
(1907). Already before 1914 the newly founded firms represented half of the production value in
Swedish engineering. The very rapid industrialization until 1914 took place behind a tariff barrier
that averaged about 15%. In a second wave of innovations, primarily international adapted to

8

domestic conditions, new firms with domestic consumer goods orientation were founded:
Electrolux, Scania–Vabis, Volvo, and SAAB.
The long expansion from 1870, in particular from the 1890s, to 1914 resulted in radical
transformation of all facets of the society. Sweden is a good early example of successful export-lead
growth. The public sector, both at the central level and in municipalities, raised very significant
amounts of capital in international bond issues (primarily from France and Germany) to finance the
large infrastructural investments in e.g. railroads, harbors, cities and housing. Because of very
favorable circumstances, the loans were repaid during WWI. As part of the structural reforms, a
banking system of Scottish model with deposit banks that issue notes was built. The new firms used
almost exclusively retained earnings (about 40% of profits were reinvested), trade credits, shortterm credit notes and later short-term bank loans combined with bond financing of machinery and
buildings (see Gårdlund (1947)). Firms were controlled by a very small circle of shareholders
around the founder and his/her family (see Jörberg (1988)).
Commercial banks (equity-backed) developed fast from the 1870s when the regulation of
interest rates was abandoned. But bank loans did not become an important source of industrial
financing until around 1900. The banking industry was well organized and had political support
since an efficient banking system was regarded as crucial for the development of a relatively poor
country. Because of the large export-lead industrial expansion after 1900, a relatively large external
equity financing became necessary. More organized and regular trading started at The Stockholm
Stock Exchange in 1901 as equity replaced the traditional bond financing and borrowing from
banks increased rapidly in response to the increasing demand for capital. The development of the
financial system in Sweden seems to be demand-driven as new institutions and regulation adjusted
to the changing conditions.
However, despite significant increase in demand for investment capital from the rapidly growing
export-oriented industries (manufacturing and raw material-based industries) after 1900 when the
equity market became more important, the capital flows were mainly directed through the banking

9

system. After heavy lobbying from the banking industry, the Banking Act of 1911 allowed banks to
directly own shares and operate as investment banks; the leading bankers controlled the public
commission that wrote the law (see Fritz (1990)). The German banking system was now the role
model since significant infusion of new capital via the (universal) banking system was argued to be
the key to the German economic success. The banks fuelled the speculative stock market boom of
the 10s and 20s both by helping clients to lever up their portfolios and by buying most of the
relatively frequent equity issues via highly levered, stock-financed so called Issuing Companies
(Emissionsbolag) that were very closely affiliated with the banks (see Östlind (1944)). The
established, relation-based banking system thereby extended its influence and control also to the
new equity market that developed too late to become a large independent supplier of risk capital
before the financial markets de facto closed down in the 30s.
After the crises in the early 20s the banks owned a significant number of shares in the major
listed firms and became the controlling owner; see Table 1. However, since the innovators that
founded the first generation of firms were not equally successful as business men, they often lost
control, particularly after financial crises, or the control of their family was diluted. Given the rather
advanced technical character of the firms, an outside professional manager with background in
engineering and management was often hired to run the firm. That the banks became controlling
owners reinforced this tendency as they lacked the competence to run the firms themselves. The
previously privately controlled firms that dispersed their ownership already when issuing new
equity to finance their investments in the 10s and 20s, in effect came to be run by the management
under supervision of the controlling bank. It is thus no surprise that the overwhelming majority of
the 25 largest firms in 1925 are de facto run by the CEO. In fact, an interesting feature of corporate
ownership in Sweden until after the WWII is the very strong position of the CEO who most often
did not own any shares but often had a significant support from minority shareholders. There are
examples where the CEO won battles with the largest owners by accumulating the votes of the
minority shareholders. The firms were frequently more identified with their CEO than with their

10

controlling owners; there are several cases where the CEO built a dynasty by letting his son or son
in law succeed him. 4
After the financial crises in the 30s when banks owned very large portfolios of listed stocks
and de facto controlled the largest, listed firms, the Swedish 1934 (light) version of Glass-Steagall
prohibited them to directly own equity but a few years later they were allowed to transfer their
assets to holding companies if the shares were distributed to the bank’s shareholders. The
controlling owners of the banks thus maintained control, and, in effect, reinforced it, since the
holding companies were formally separated from the banks but were organized as (listed) closedend- investment funds (CEIFs) that became the pivotal entity around which the typical three-level
Swedish ownership pyramid is built: a controlling family or bank foundation at the apex and the
listed portfolio firms at the bottom that are controlled via the CEIF at the intermediate level. Figure
1 illustrates the transparent three-level structure of the Wallenberg ownership pyramid in 1996 with
Investor in the middle as the pivotal control vehicle of the largest listed firms in Sweden, and the
tax-exempt family foundations at the top.
Investor was founded by the Wallenberg-controlled Stockholms Enskilda Bank (today SEB)
while Industrivärden, the other leading holding company (CEIF), was founded by the managementcontrolled Svenska Handelsbanken (SHB). Starting already in the 20s, the banks exercised more
influence as shareholders and sometimes also as controlling owners at the same time as being the
major provider of loans. Since the equity markets de facto closed down in the 30s, the banking law
made the financial capital the dominant supplier of capital and the bankers became business leaders
even if the CEOs had a strong position without owning shares. The banks restructured the
financially distressed Swedish industrials using intermediated capital and active management of
their portfolio. A combination of political conditions and financial crises reversed the road to
dispersed ownership.

4

For example, three generations of Laurin were CEOs of PLM without owning any shares and despite that one father
warned the owners to let his son succeed him.

11

It is particularly interesting to observe that the two pivotal reforms of bank ownership in
1911 and 1934 both had the strong support of the Social Democrats; without their votes together
with the Liberals in 1911, there would not have been any reform.5 They wrote the new law in 1934
after gaining power in 1932. When the Social Democrats formed their first minority government in
1920, Hjalmar Branting appointed Johannes Hellner, head of the legal department at Stockholms
Enskilda Bank, to finance minister.
Because of a sequence of pivotal political decisions, supported both by the Social
Democrats and the political voice of leading capitalists, listed firms in Sweden have primarily relied
on retained earnings— the traditional but also significantly tax subsidized way of financing-- and
bank loans but have only to a very limited extent issued new shares. The largest firms were linked
to their main bank as supplier of credits while the firm’s deposited money and did their banking
with their hausbank. Analyzing credit contracts between listed firms and large banks between 1916
and 1947, Sjögren (1995) finds that 46 of 50 non-financial, listed firms entered contracts that lasted
for at least 5 years. 40% of the listed firms had contracts that lasted for the whole period. More than
30% of the firms had credit, ownership, deposit and bond issuance contracts with only one bank.
But the other side of financial interaction was a tight network of pivotal persons around the bank;
the controlling owners or CEOs of the listed firms were often represented on the bank’s board while
representatives of the bank had seats in the firms’ boards. Fig 2 illustrates the alliances and very
close relations between leading representatives of the major banks, in particular the three largest
ones: Enskilda Banken (Wallenberg), Skandinavbanken and Handelsbanken), and industrial firms in
1960 (see Hermansson (1965); former leader of the Communist Party in Sweden). The lines
(dotted) indicate a direct (indirect) link between the banks and the main borrowers as the banks’
managing directors or board members are members of the board of their main industrial clients.
5

In 1905 Marcus Wallenberg Sr argued that Sweden had great untapped resources, able engineers and good workers but
lacked entrepreneurs. His remedy was to start a business school and allow banks to buy shares in listed companies. His
family helped found Stockholm's School of Economics in 1909. And his elder half-brother K.A. Wallenberg, chief
executive of Stockholm's Enskilda Bank, chairman of the Swedish Bankers' Association and an MP, spearheaded an
initiative to allow the largest commercial banks to own shares and to begin acting as investment banks. Against the will of
the Conservative government but with the support of the Social Democrats, his proposal was adopted in 1911.

12

Table 2 shows the ownership and control of the largest listed firms right after the war in
1945. The size of the firms has become significantly larger and owners, in particular the Wallenberg
group, have advanced their position even if management control under bank supervision is the norm
while control by founding firms has diminished further. Using a Swedish Census on equity
ownership from 1945, Lindgren (1953) reports that 6–7% of shareholders controlled 65–70% of the
market value. Analyzing records from the shareholders’ general meetings, he finds that a single
individual represented the majority of votes in 60% of the large firms (more than 500 employees)
while three or fewer owners constituted the majority in +90% of these firms. In regularly quoted
firms, a single individual represented the majority in 53% of the cases while in 85% of the firms the
two largest owners represented more than 50% of the votes.
Fig 3 shows the so called 15 families and their controlling interests and financial networks
in 1960 that Hermansson (1965) identified as the ultimate controlling owners of the listed firms in
Sweden. Of the 50 largest industrial firms 41 are controlled by these families (9 are controlled by
the state or by cooperatives or municipalities). The government commission on Ownership and
influence in private industry (SOU:1968) analyzed the situation in 1963 and identified the same 15
families as well as two bank-related groups as the controlling owners. It is interesting to observe
that the 9 families that were closely tied to Handelsbanken and Skadinavbanken do not exert any
power today or are significantly marginalized; an exception might be the Klingspors who through
their association with the Stenbeck Group still exert power. Of the families with very close personal
ties to Enskilda Banken and Investor, the main family, The Wallenbergs, is still in control even if
diluted in recent years due to large international mergers (ABB, AstraZeneca and Stora Enso) and
concentration of their portfolio investments. While the Bonnier and Johnsson families have been
rejuvenated in the 5th generation and are still influential even if their relative position has declined.
The Wehtje and Throne-Holst families and to a lesser extent the Söderberg family have been
marginalized since 1967 or exert no power today.

13

But already in 1967 had the very rapid growth and international expansion of the leading
firms in the 50s and 60s undercut the family control of the largest listed firms even if the families
more frequently changed to a dual-class structure in order to maintain control when raising new
capital. Only 18% of the largest listed firms used such a control structure in 1950 but almost 1/3
used it in 1968. However, as Table 3 illustrates, the financial capital became dominant and the
Wallenberg group in particular had the financial muscles when the equity markets were dormant.
The increasing capital demands to establish a large ownership position is also evident from Table 4
that shows the frequency of ownership positions sorted both by size of ownership (capital—not
votes) and by size of the 100 largest firms in terms of employment in 1950, 1963, 1978 and 1985.
The frequency of small but identifiable holdings have decreased very significantly over the years
while the number of larger positions have increased, particularly in the larger firms, which indicates
that owners with more capital resources have become more dominant, even without considering
their extra voting power due to the frequent use of dual-class shares.
Table 5 shows that in 1990 the largest firms have become significantly larger due mergers
and acquisitions while the Wallenbergs remained in control. However, the number of management
controlled firms is still high, in particular since three of the most important— Sandvik, Skanska and
Volvo— developed an elaborate system of cross-shareholdings to fend off potential hostile
takeovers as more developed liquid markets facilitated such endeavors. New financial operators
became active during the 80s— Anders Wall, Erik Penser, Sven-Olof Johansson to name a few—
but their importance vanished during the 90s. More recent additions are Carl Bennet, Gustaf
Douglas, Sven Hagströmer, Mats Qviberg, Fredrik Lundberg, Melker Schörling and Jan Stenbeck
who have built and rebuilt existing firms into controlling groups using entrepreneurial financial
skills.
In recent years the Wallenberg power sphere has let go of control in Alfa-Laval, Esab,
KemaNobel, SAAB Auotmobile, Swedish Match, and partially of Scania and most parts of the
Incentive conglomerate and of Diligentia while established control of Gambro, WM-Data and a

14

portfolio of smaller firms. The group has also been instrumental in abolishing shares with a 1:1000
voting differential in Electrolux and SKF but not in Ericsson until 2004 when the A-shares were
finally converted to a new differential of 1:10 as the other controlling owner, Industrivärden,
(finally) accepted the negotiated compensation for old A-shares. Instead of a joint voting strength of
+80% ín Ericsson, they now only control around 40% of the votes.
The long-run survival of controlling families in Sweden looks as follows. 4 (Wallenberg,
Bonnier, Johnson and Söderberg) of the 14 families that established control before 1920 are still
exerting control while 6 (Rausing, Kamprad, Olsson, Wallenius, Persson, and Stenbeck) of the 23
families that founded firms between 1920 and 1965 are still significant and active owners today.
Other vanished slowly and maintained positions until the 80s: Kempe/Carlgren, Salén, Edstrand,
Roos, Malmros, von Kantzow, Throne-Holst, Philipson, Wendt. These families were wellconnected but most likely the entrepreneurial spirit ran out and so did their financial resources.
Newer additions have shown much worse survival rates. The addition in recent years of new family
controlled firms that have grown large very fast has been very limited indeed, the very old firms
still dominate, even if the number of family controlled firms among IPOs had been high; see
Holmén and Högfeldt (2004a).
Significant legal restrictions on foreign ownership have been an important ingredient of the
Swedish ownership model. Starting with ban on foreigners owning real estate and mines in the 19th
century, foreign ownership was in 1916 limited to 20% of voting rights in Swedish firms owning
natural resources. In the 30s foreign ownership in listed firms was limited to so called unrestricted
shares (representing at most 20% of the voting rights) while restricted shares could only be owned
by Swedish individuals and institutions. 6 There has been a dramatic increase in foreign ownership
of listed shares since 1993 when the restrictions on foreign ownership were abolished. Anticipating
that direct foreign ownership of equity will be allowed as part of the process to join the EU, many

6

In 1983 the restriction on foreign ownership of natural resources was adjusted to the dual system for foreign ownership
of shares in listed firms in the Corporate Purchase Act (Företagsförvärvslagen).

15

family controlled firms started to use dual-class shares in the 80s; an overwhelming majority of
them used it in the early 90s.
Looking further back at trends, direct ownership of listed shares by Swedish households has
decreased from 75% in 1950 to about 25% in 1990 while ownership by Swedish institutions
increased from about 20% in 1950 to 70% in 1990; foreign ownership was well below 10% during
this period but is currently around 35%. These types of portfolio investments are primarily in Bshares. The original owners have therefore most frequently managed to remain in control by using
dual-class shares more efficiently. But the institutional capital has definitely become much more
important in Sweden and has recently, somewhat reluctantly, started to exert responsibility and
power as large providers of capital but not necessarily as controlling owners.
Table 6 shows that almost 70 years after the formal legal separation from the banks, the two
closed-end funds— Investor and Industrivärden-- are still the major controlling owners of the
largest listed firms. Even if the pyramids are shallow the combined effect with dual class shares
creates a substantial control multiplier: total equity value of firms controlled by closed-end
investment funds (CEIFs) divided by value of capital invested by controlling owners. For example,
Panel A shows that in year 2000 the controlling owners’ investments in the CEIFs were worth 80
billion SEK, which amounts to 2.6 percent of the market capitalization of the SSE. The total market
value of listed firms de facto controlled by the CEIFs (largest fraction of votes) was 1 786 billion
SEK, which is 57 percent of the market capitalization of 3 135 billion SEK (excluding the market
value of CEIFs).7 The control multiplier was thus 22 (57/2.6) in 2000 and has grown over time.
Panel B shows the dominance of the two most powerful CEIFs-- Investor and
Industrivärden— where the pivotal owners controlled almost 50 percent of the market capitalization
by investing only two percent of the market capitalization. The control multiplier for the two
combined was thus 23.8

7

At the end of 2000, 4 (12) of the 10 (20) largest firms (market value equity) in Sweden were controlled by CEIFs .
The dramatic increase in the CEIF control multiplier in 1991 is due to intra group takeovers. Industrivärden acquired
Bahco (previously named Promotion), the other CEIF controlled by the SHB group, while Investor acquired another
8

16

The firms controlled by CEIFs do not only dominate the stock market capitalization. They
are also extremely important for the general economic activity in Sweden. In 2000 CEIF-controlled
firms generated 38 percent of the Swedish GDP.9 And in 1999 their investments constituted 28
percent of the gross capital formation in the business sector. By controlling a large share of the
corporate capital in Sweden, the pyramids’ investment decisions thus have significant impact on the
overall allocation of economic resources. Even if the separation of ownership and control in
pyramid structures is a well-established international phenomenon, the very large control multiplier
in CEIFs may thus have wider economic implications in Sweden.
Via Investor the Wallenbergs also exert a significant political influence both externally and
within the business community, e.g. by being the controlling owners (together with the government)
of the Stockholm Stock Exchange (SSE), and by in effect setting their own standards for listing
requirements and for ethical codes-- the Swedish version of self-regulation. After the equity markets
were reactivated in the 80s and firms needed more capital as the size of firms grew rapidly, the two
funds’ control has in fact increased because of very extensive use of dual-class shares. Overall
entrenchment of corporate ownership has increased since other listed firms as well as newly listed
IPO firms have also used dual-class shares in an unprecedented way to maintain control; around
60% of the listed firms use dual-class shares. Despite the very significant increase of institutional
capital and foreign capital, corporate ownership is as entrenched as ever in Sweden since the largest
firms are still controlled by an old financial nobility of families in the 3-5th generation, and banks
but to a much lesser extent by institutions that provide the majority of the capital.
The conflict between private control and increasing capital demands is thus handled in
Sweden by strategic pyramiding and more frequent use of dual-class shares that increases the
separation between control and ownership over time. The pivotal corporate control of the largest
listed firms thus remains in Swedish hands while the capital becomes more institutionalized and
Wallenberg-controlled CEIF: Providentia. The value under control remained roughly the same, but the value of the
controlling owners listed investments decreased. The same year Investor also acquired Saab where the Wallenbergs had a
large direct ownership. In 1994 Investor also acquired Export-Invest, another CEIF within the Wallenberg sphere.
9
GDP and capital formation numbers are collected from Statistiska Centralbyrån (SCB, Statistics Sweden)

17

international. The rest of the paper is an attempt to explain why this happened and what the longterm consequences are. It is a highly political story!

2. Social Democracy and Capitalism
The historical agenda of the Social Democrats had three stages: First, the fight for political
democracy (suffrage); then use of parliamentary power to implement social democracy (an
egalitarian welfare state) and finally economic democracy when economic decisions within firms
are not based on strict private rationality but reflect the wider social interest of the firm’s
stakeholders and society at large. The electoral victory in 1932 initiated implementation of the
social democracy. The existing industrial structure with relatively large scale production in a few
export-oriented firms, often with a well-defined controlling owner or a strong manager, suited their
vision of the road to economic democracy quite well. They did not envision direct nationalization of
industries but a stakeholder form of socialism that was more efficient than pure capitalism because
it contained elements of rational planning that would eliminate the waste that irrational, shortsighted markets create like unemployment and volatile investment cycles. But also because the
necessary economic changes would be faster and more efficiency-enhancing if they take place in
ways that are more socially acceptable for workers. Egalitarianism and economic efficiency were
thus not necessarily contradictory concepts.
The ideological motivation was the almost existential conflict built into capitalism between
private ownership of capital (firms) and the ever growing social character of production; workers
are not only a production factor but also members of society with social needs, and private
economic decisions within firms will have a wider and deeper impact on society at large. The
immediate needs of the workers within the firm would be protected by their union negotiating with
the employer about compensation and working conditions without governmental intervention
(except for basic regulation), i.e. the adversarial relations between labor and capital would be
respected without board representation of labor. Their more general social interests outside the firm

18

(e.g. employment, pension, education, and housing) would be protected via social democratic
political initiatives to build a tax-financed public sector that redistributes resources between
individuals and families and provides social services and insurance. The overriding objective was
however to create a full employment economy by promoting growth-enhancing policies that
stimulated labor mobility as well as investments and restructuring within the industrial sector.
Higher growth would not only generate higher wages but also increase welfare by financing the
public sector.
The Social Democrats´ vision of economic growth was large scale production with ever
growing firm size as resources are better used within a planned hierarchy than in markets, in
particular allocations to large investments and to large scale R&D are more efficient; see e.g.
Wigforss (1980) vol I. To realize the idea of a more efficient, higher stage of capitalism the pivotal
factor was to induce capitalists to invest more, particularly in long-term capital-intensive
production; a good capitalist is one who fulfills his/her basic economic function of investing. The
increasing dependence of very large firms would also make the social character of production more
obvious, and thus also the need to let the firm’s stakeholders and wider societal concerns affect the
private economic decisions within the firm. This was in effect a vision of a corporatist society with
capitalistic firms without capitalists as their decision power would be cut back to the decision to
invest; capital would remain within the firm as investments financed by retained earnings were
heavily tax subsidized. Firms would be run in the interests of society at large and not in the narrow,
private economic interests of essentially nominal owners. Or to use the words of Ernst Wigforss, the
leading ideologue and minister of finance from 1932 to 1949, social firms without owners. Taming
of capitalism did thus not imply immediate takeover of private ownership as long as the capitalists
invested.
The existing corporate structure of relatively few but large, export-oriented firms closely
affiliated with and often controlled by the major banks actually fitted the corporatist vision very
well. Banks are intrinsically relatively more important than individual firms as they are pivotal

19

nodes in the network that allocates capital across firms and individuals, which may make it easier
for them to assume wider societal concerns. However, perhaps more importantly, being both major
lenders and providers of equity capital to the often highly levered firms, the controlling banks in
effect acted more like bondholders with focus on long-term survival than as thorough-bred, risktaking capitalists. They are therefore more inclined to adopt a long-term perspective with less focus
on myopic profits and more ready to accept social considerations when firing and hiring people. In
particular, they are more likely to finance large, capital-intensive investments that are also socially
desirable. Such owners are also more conducive to respond to tax-based policies that strongly
stimulates re-investment of retained earnings in the large, established firms.10
The idea of social firms without owners was part of a greater vision of a socially planned
(democratic) economy that consisted of an integrated set of policies. For example, tax-based
policies to promote and direct investments, and regulations to channel household savings to
politically controlled funds that allocate capital to socially desirable objectives like investment in
housing, infrastructure and education. But also programs to stimulate growth by promotion of
innovations, labor market mobility and extensive research in cooperation with the leading capitalists
and their firms. The pivotal element was to generate a higher overall growth rate by policies that
stimulated savings and allocated investments more efficiently by also incorporating wider societal
objectives. The higher growth may then be used to finance the social reform agenda. The programs
would be implemented by the Social Democrats but in close cooperation with the capitalist. How
was it done?

The first step on the road to economic democracy: Cooperation in corporatist spirit
1938 is a pivotal year for two reasons. First, to avoid political intervention and legislation to
regulate the tempestuous labor market relations but also to appease unions that voiced more radical

10
In the 50s Galbraith’s book from 1956— American capitalism: The concept of countervailing power— and later his
1967 book-- The new industrial State-- had a strong influence on the leading social democrats with its blessing of large
scale production. He was invited by the PM for a two day conference with leading representatives of the Swedish society.

20

political demands, SAF (The Swedish Confederation of Employers) initiated talks with LO (The
TUC) that resulted in a general accord— Saltsjöbadsavtalet— that regulated their interactions. It
contained rules for negations, conflict resolution, procedures for how to fire and layoff workers, and
for how to limit the detrimental effects on third parties and society at large. The implicit trade-off in
the agreement was that SAF recognized the LO as a full and equal counterparty representing all
workers while LO accepted the employers’ right to unilaterally direct and assign the workload
between workers. The accord had a distinct corporatist character and established a spirit of
consensus and cooperation in labor market relations that stressed common economic goals-Saltsjöbadsandan— and lasted for almost 40 years until 1976 when LO abandoned the accord. It
was particularly strong after the mid-50s when SAF initiated centralized wage negotiations between
the parties (perhaps due to an increased labor shortage).
The second pivotal event in 1938 was the reform of corporate taxes to grant free
depreciation allowances for machines and equipment. This system benefited large, profitable and
capital-intensive firms as historical profits (retained earnings) determine future investments. Since
the rules were very generous also by international standards, the previous hostility towards social
democratic policies from leading CEOs of ASEA, Electrolux, LM Ericsson, Separator (Alfa-Laval)
and SKF called TBF (The Big Five) subsided even if this political pressure group existed until
1953. Starting in 1958, the corporate tax system allowed accelerated depreciation for machines and
equipment (max 40% of profits before taxes in an investment fund) while at the same time
depositing 46% of the depreciation allowance in an account in the Central Bank that did not pay any
interest and could only be used if approved by the bank as part of general business cycle policies.
These two major changes in 1938 made cooperation between labor and capital the norm for
interaction in the corporatist society but biased the firms’ investment criterion as retained earnings
became the major tax-subsidized source of financing. Almost concurrently, the major banks were
allowed to transfer the significant corporate assets they held after the crises in the early 30s to
holding companies organized as closed-end investment funds. By making their temporary

21

ownership in the aftermath of the crisis permanent, the leading banks became the major owners of
the largest listed firms even if formally only at arm’s length. These three changes shaped what
might be called The Swedish model and had long-run implications for the future political and
economic developments.
The second step: The corporatist innovation model
The social democratic vision of the social firm was a large, capital-intensive firm that invests
heavily, particularly in R&D, in order to be more productive and to grow larger. The basic idea is
that innovations are best developed in and commercially implemented by very large export-oriented
firms. Small firms may innovate but are of limited importance and can be appropriated by the larger
ones that undertake R&D in a more rational systematic way and can carry the large fixed costs
because of their size. The importance of entrepreneurs who develop innovations commercially by
founding new, viable and rapidly growing firms was heavily discounted by the leading Social
Democrats as they argued that capitalism had reached a higher and more advanced stage of large
scale production and innovation. Entrepreneurship was thus implicitly assumed to be exogenously
given despite the fact that the leading Swedish firms were founded not so long ago by innovators
who turned entrepreneurs.
In fact the Swedish model has two innovation systems (see Erixon (1997)). In the
fundamental system the large, mature firms in engineering and manufacturing produce or acquire
new ideas through their international contacts, transmit them to their domestic plants and other
firms. Exposure to foreign competition and demanding customers abroad force the export-oriented
firms to assimilate and develop new ideas into commercial products. These innovations are not of
break-through character that establishes new firms but they rather shape or reshape existing firms to
maintain their competitive edge. This innovation system is thus an integrated part of the large
export-oriented firms as it both feeds on the international network and is a prerequisite to remain
internationally competitive.

22

The regulated system of innovations is more domestically oriented and is based on the
cooperative interaction between public authorities (not primarily universities) and large domestic
firms mainly producing investment goods and advanced products. The authorities may stimulate
innovations through public procurements (military orders); technical cooperation with authorities
(between Ericsson (telecommunication systems) and Televerket (monopoly operator)); through
regulation and setting of standards (housing, energy transmission and consumption, safety and
environment) and through tax policies like the free allowance of R&D expenditures; more than 90%
of the R&D spending in the Swedish manufacturing industry during the postwar period was
financed within the firm.
The regulated innovation system has probably been the more important since it amounts to
a rather direct form of economic support of the largest firms using the taxpayers’ money, and in
particular since it was part of “planned” economy with coordinated public policies. For example,
behind tariffs and import restrictions, and with support of tax subsidizes for firms to buy trucks and
cars, and heavy public investments in the national traffic system, the transportation industry
developed very fast during the early post-war period. Using regional subsidizes, SAAB and in
particular Volvo integrated backwards and developed an elaborate network of decentralized
suppliers; the transportation industry became a very large employer and a significant export
industry. The saying that what is good for Volvo is good for Sweden was commonly accepted. But
without protection and support of specially designed public policies Sweden would not be the
domicile of two (Scania and Volvo) of the three largest manufacturers of heavy trucks in the world.
Without the public support from universities (elaborate education of engineers and advanced
research), regional subsidizes and large advanced public orders Ericsson would not have become
the largest supplier of telecommunication systems in the world. Similar programs were developed
for huge investments in energy production and systems, for highways and for housing: The Million
Program between1965-1974.

23

This cooperation in large scale projects between public authorities and the largest firms had
a significant corporatist and somewhat nationalistic flavor as the unions actively participated and
the coordinated efforts were heralded as part of the national project to build the country in a spirit of
strong consensus under Social Democratic leadership. It is striking how strong the coordination and
integration of the policies (industrial, regional, tax, and labor market policies) were towards a
common goal of developing a more rational, social economy that satisfied the peoples’ needs
through significant interventionism, in particular by directing and coordinating large scale
investments with significant externalities.
The very large, public investments projects were financed by taxes but also by channeling
of savings to public pension fund (The ATP-system with 3 original AP-funds; later supplemented
by a 4th fund that also invested in equity) that invested in public bonds. Since the equity markets in
effect were closed down until the early 80s and the Central Bank and the Ministry of Finance
controlled the capital flows in the financial system, banks and insurance companies were forced to
invest very heavily in public bonds, in particular to finance the very large housing program. To
channel household savings to collective funds and direct their investments was a very important part
of the policies to implement a social democracy and use political power to direct investments. These
policies in effect made the large listed firms even more dependent on retained earnings to finance
investments; the volume of bank loans was regulated and capped while the equity markets were not
operational.
The third step: The labor market model
An important part of the growth policies was the so called active labor market policies initiated by
LO in 1951: The Rehn-Meidner model (see Hedborg and Meidner (1984) and Korpi (1978)). To
sustain a full-employment economy that grows without inflation that idea was to support
reallocation of resources and employment away from industries that are not internationally
competitive to more productive industries with sustainable growth opportunities. Through

24

solidaristic wage policies that compress the wage differential at a high average level that maintain
the international competitiveness of the export-oriented sector, the overall productivity would
increase by speeding up the closing down of firms in less productive industries while in effect
induce firms in more competitive industries to become more efficient by investing in more capitalintensive technologies. The model tends to generate excess profits in the most competitive firms as
they pay relatively low wages. Combined with labor market policies that retrain workers and
stimulate their geographic and occupational mobility by compensating them for loss of income and
extra costs when relocating, the model enhances the dynamic efficiency in the economy without
causing too high inflationary pressure. The public sector would thus support and pay for the higher
labor mobility. The model combines an egalitarian ambition with support for reinforced dynamic
restructuring in order to maintain competitiveness, a higher growth rate and higher wages.
When the negative social consequences of the higher mobility (regional unemployment,
disparate regional economic development and unemployment; increasing geographic concentration
of jobs to the largest firms’ plants) became too costly politically in the early 70s, the labor market
policies changed from encouraging mobility to support lock-in of employees with the current
employer as the new labor market legislation focused on job tenure. At the same time the overall
unemployment rate tended to increase because of the stiffer international competition.
The result: The Swedish model
The Social Democrats accepted the private control of the largest firms while the leading capitalists
accepted their political dominance. Based on mutual acceptance, an elaborate cooperation in
corporatist spirit developed around large infrastructural and industrial projects that benefited the
largest export-oriented firms in engineering and manufacturing. Tax-based policies to stimulate a
high investment level, particularly in the transnational firms, by subsidizing investments in
machinery and buildings and R&D, and give priority to retained earnings and bank loans as the
major sources for financing— institutionalized saving in collective funds. Labor market relations

25

are peaceful and cooperative but with respect for adversarial interests; no co-determination. The
policies stimulated and supported a high growth rate and propagated the established large-scale
industrial firms with concentrated private ownership but deliberately ignored the formation of new
firms and the importance of small firms: a dynamic but aging social economy with a large public
sector.
More radical policies to implement economic democracy
Profound political, social and economic changes designate the years around 1970 as the defining
moment for the Swedish model; what might be termed its Golden Age came to an end and its
negative effects became all too apparent in a very short space of time. In response to very fierce
critique against the political incumbency, both from within and from outside the labor movement,
LO and SAP became more radical by proposing strongly egalitarian policies with more
redistribution of incomes and opportunities via the public sector that grew very fast during the 70s,
and resulted in the highest taxes in the world.11 More than half of the average income was paid in
taxes but a significant part was directly paid back to the households through redistribution
programs, in particular to families with children, students and pensioners, but also indirectly as
subsidized consumption. At the party congress in 1975 Olof Palme initiated the third stage of the
historical agenda: economic democracy. The timing could hardly have been worse as e.g. the
Bretton Woods system-- the anchor of the strongly interventionist economic policies with control
over capital flows— was collapsing, the oil crises had triggered the deepest economic crises since
the 30s; the new constitution adopted in 1973 used strictly proportional elections (which tend to and
did breed instable minority governments) and SAP was about to lose the 1976 election after 44
years in power.

11

In retrospect the perhaps most important event was the long, bitter and very politicized, illegal strike in the North in
1969 against poor and unequal working conditions in the mines of the State run corporation LKAB. It triggered a fierce
debate with uncompromising critique against the political incumbency as it made the inequalities visible (see Korpi (1978)
and Hedborg and Meidner (1984)).

26

The basic principle of non-intervention by the government in labor market relations was
abandoned in 1974 with The Employment Security Act (LAS) that was written and enacted in
response to direct demands from LO. It provides the employees with an elaborate protection against
dismissal and application of a strict last in – first out principle (LIFO); the only two legal grounds
for dismissal are gross misconduct and redundancies. The 1976 Codetermination Act granted labor
union representatives (strict minority) board representation. The laws were designed with the
conditions of the largest firms in mind as the needs and demands of small firms for more flexible
adjustment were ignored. Since tenure to the current employer becomes more important for job
security than actual skills and effort with the LIFO-principle, the costs of dynamic mismatches
increases, both in the general labor market and within the firms as workers de facto become more
locked-in with firms. To alleviate the higher costs of LAS for small firms, new and more flexible
rules were enacted in 1997.12
But the most radical proposal was the 1976 decision by the LO congress to implement Ernst
Wigforss´ vision of social firms without owners by a gradual transfer of ownership of all firms with
more than 50 employees to wage-earner funds with trade union and other stakeholder
representatives collectively exercising the funds’ voting and other ownership rights. The actual
transfer of shares would occur by private placements to the funds corresponding to 20% of the
firm’s annual profit. The more profitable the firm is, the faster the transfer of control— at a profit
rate of 10% if would take 35 years for a fund to establish a majority control. Consistent with the
established line of ideas, the fund’s capital would stay within the firm and not be reallocated. The
combined effect of the labor market laws and wage earner funds would thus be an even stronger
lock-in of both capital and labor within firms.

12
For example, by the use of prearranged temporary employment contracts all firms have the unconditional right to
employ up to 5 persons for a maximum of one year; the possibility for local collective contracts to replace the stipulations
in the law and sidestep the FIFO principle in case of dismissal; annul the right of reemployment for dismissed workers
and to extend the temporary employment beyond a year. In case of redundancies, firms with no more than 10 employees
are allowed to except 2 workers from the FIFO principle by a new law in 2001.

27

The proposal had the lukewarm support of the SAP leadership and was the catalyst that
united all members and organizations to the right of the labor movement in the most vociferous
protests ever. A watered-down and rather tame version was enacted in 1984 after the Social
Democrats returned to power in 1982, but was abolished by the Center-Right government in 1992
and not reintroduced by subsequent Social Democratic governments.13 The controversy over wage
earner funds is the only time that private ownership has been really questioned. The debate has been
silent since then.
The orthogonal trajectory away from economic democracy
It is fair to assume that outside observers of the Swedish society around 1980 would have predicted
a bumpy road ahead to economic democracy with more interventionism and stronger political
control over the economy. But the real historical irony is that the actual trajectory chosen by the
Social Democrats when returning to power was orthogonal to the conjectured one as it entailed a
radical break with past policies; e.g. far-reaching deregulation of the banking system, dismantling of
capital flow controls, privatization of state-owned firms and policies that promoted market
competitiveness, and reactivation of equity markets that were liberalized with unrestricted foreign
ownership of shares. The chosen road led to more market economy, not to more socialism.
A similar radical across the board break with the old did also happen in France with a
Socialist government (see Helleiner (1994). Given the centralist nature of both Swedish and French
political governance structures, the turnaround behavior is broadly consistent with Rajan and
Zingales´ (2003 a and b) political theory of incumbency.14 But perhaps a more direct interpretation
of the Swedish case is that it shows the profound pragmatic character of an encompassing party that
has been heavily entrenched for decades and almost inseparable from the state bureaucracy: to win
elections in order to exercise power is the primary objective. But to win elections the economy has
13
The 5 wage-earner funds were financed by a 0.2% pay-roll tax and a 20% tax on real profits above SEK 1 million
during 7 years. When abolished the funds’ capital was distributed to research and venture capital funds to promote new
firms.
14
Henreksson and Jakobsson (2003a and b) presents an alternative interpretation that emphasizes the break in policies but
does not provide a consistent explanation as they seem to argue that the threat form Socialism is as unrelenting as ever.

28

to be in order. The very radical change of policies was perceived as necessary to get the economy in
order and promote growth.
Necessary condition for the Swedish model of corporate ownership: Organized labor and capital
One important part of the Swedish model of corporate ownership is that it presupposed the
existence of two identifiable, well-organized parties— labor and capital— that both had a political
and a trade-based, corporative representation. At one level it is of course trivial to characterize the
society as corporatist but why did it become corporatist and why was it so important, in particular
for the Social Democrats?15 My answer pinpoints both external (exogenous) and ideological factors.
The fact that the industrial production was comparatively capital intensive and organized in
relatively few, large and geographically concentrated units in firms controlled by families and part
of networks around the leading banks facilitated organization of both employers and employees. So
did the smallness of the culturally homogenous society, and that industrialization came relatively
late but was then very fast. The other crucial exogenous factor was the strongly export-oriented
character of the largest firms which made both capital and labor heavily dependent on the business
cycles and fostered a sense of fighting the economic elements together. For example, after the deep
crisis in the early 20s, the strategies of both SAP and LO changed to become less adversarial and
more focused on employment and higher wages, which during the long, unprecedented expansion
since the 1890s had been taken for granted.
The ideological factor is the idea that labor and capital are the two natural adversaries in a
capitalistic economy but that capitalists are crucial for the development of an advanced social
democracy because of their strategic control over investments and thereby of the growth in the
private sector. It was thus not inconsistent with the Social Democratic ideology to accept and
respect (at least for the time being) private ownership, and even reinforce the entrenchment of welldefined private owners by political support for the use of dual-class shares and pyramiding. In
15

Reiter (2003) argues that the crucial importance of Saltsjöbadsavtalet 1938 was that it gave the Social Democratic Party
an identifiable counter-party in the countries export-oriented industrialization and the construction of the welfare state
but does not provide any arguments or theory that explains why.

29

exchange the capitalist did not move their capital or refuse to invest but accepted the political
supremacy, in particular since it involved an elaborate and profitable collaboration with the
government and the unions. The objective of social firms without owners could thus be
implemented (at least partially) via negotiations between the firms’ two major stakeholders with the
(often passive) support of the government (state). The fact that both the workers and the leading
capitalists already were united in encompassing, national and centralized organizations that stressed
overriding goals facilitated consensus-based outcomes, which fitted the ideological view that
society is progressively changed via many small and peaceful steps.
This combination of exogenous and ideological factors does not fit the political (nonideological) theory of Pagano and Volpin (2004) of a corporatist political equilibrium where low
investor protection that benefits controlling owners is exchanged for high employment protection
for labor. This outcome is more likely under a proportional voting system as it fosters the formation
of homogeneous blocks of voters, in particular if also the wealth distribution is unequal or the
production technology has low capital-intensity.16 The listed firms in Sweden did, however, (on
average) use relatively capital-intensive technologies and were primarily dependent on banks for
their financing, not on equity financing as their theory seems to suggest. The strong dependence on
a relation-based banking system thus implies that neither an unequal wealth distribution nor lowcapital-intensity technologies are necessary conditions.17 Interestingly, only since the Swedish
voting system became fully proportional in 1973 have governments without participation of the
Social Democratic Party been formed for the first time since 1932.
The one-sided emphasis on equity markets, in particular on the primary function, in theories
of political economy of corporate ownership (governance) is difficult to reconcile with the limited
dependence of such markets in Continental Europe for most of the previous century. Ownership is
16

The intuition behind this result is that proportional voting pushes political parties to cater more to the preferences of
social groups with homogenous preferences, that is, entrepreneurs and employees. This is because under this voting rule
the additional mass of voters that can be attracted by shifting a party’s platform is greater if the shift favors a
homogenous constituency; see Pagano and Volpin (2004).
17
In a more literal sense it is also difficult to imagine that shareholder minority protection should be on the top of the
minds of controlling owners and that workers should have any reason to develop preferences about such protection. In
particular since they did not own any shares and stock markets were closed down at the time when corporatism reigned.

30

not more concentrated there because of weaker legal protection of minority shareholders as the
theory seems to presuppose (see also Burkart et al (2003)) but primarily because of political support
for use of mechanisms to separate votes from capital (dual-class shares, cross-shareholdings and
pyramiding); see Holmén and Högfeldt (2004a). Politically motivated concessions, both to the
government and to the workers, are easier to obtain when firms have a well-defined private owner
in control as they are visible in the public arena. It is therefore not surprising that concentrated
private ownership seems to cluster with well-organized labor unions and formation of major parties
along the left-right spectrum. Rather than focusing on formal minority protection, it seems more
natural to pinpoint the political support for concentrated ownership built on separation of ownership
from control and how this systematically affects corporate financing and worker protection.
I sum up this section by answering one of my main questions: Why did the Social
Democrats not only accept but de facto supported that control of the large, listed firms and of the
pivotal banks, remained in private hands? A possible and plausible answer has three parts. First, the
party’s ideologically and economically pivotal objective to influence or control the large listed
firms’ investment behavior could be achieved through means that did not assume the eclipse of
private ownership. Second, since old family fortunes remained within the firms as working capital
and became foundations (institutions) because of the tax policies, the private capital in effect
became more social and institutionalized, in particular the bank capital; the remaining “private”
character of capital was not a primary problem. Moreover, since formation of large, private fortunes
in newly founded firms via equity financing was limited and controlled by tax policies and
regulations, the wealth distribution did not threaten to become too dispersed.
Third, implementation of the Social Democrats’ social agenda did not necessitate a
takeover of control of large listed private firms, but could be realized through reforms and policies
that redistribute resources and opportunities via the public sector with strong and persistent electoral
support. While their more radical agenda for economic democracy was more ideological and
abstract and did not generate enough popular support. Besides more tactical considerations, the

31

heavy and unprecedented entrenchment of the party in general and the fact that individual careers
are closely tied to being in control of the public bureaucracy in particular, de facto narrowed the
primary objective to win elections to remain in power and run the economy in a competent and
stable way to finance reforms.

3. Corporate Ownership and Development of Financial Markets
Why did not corporate ownership in Sweden separate widely as in the Anglo-Saxon countries? The
leading answer in the literature would be that it is because of weak formal minority protection (see
e.g. La Porta et al (2000) and Burkart et al (2003)). Good protection encourages both outsiders to
invest and founding families to sell out a larger fraction in an IPO since formal rules limit extraction
of pecuniary benefits by management when the firm becomes widely held; both factors stimulate
development of advanced financial markets. Lower protection thus causes founders to maintain a
larger fraction of shares to avoid being exploited, which predicts a negative relation between formal
minority protection on the one hand, and ownership concentration and size of (pecuniary) private
benefits of controlling owners, respectively, on the other. But this line of reasoning does not square
well with the history and politics of corporate ownership in Sweden for several reasons.
The empirical estimates of Dyck and Zingales (2004) suggest that contrary to the
predictions, the size of private benefits in Sweden are of about the same size as in the Anglo-Saxon
countries that are perceived to have a better formal (legal) minority protection. In particular, there is
no positive relationship between ownership concentration and size of private benefits or a negative
relation with the level of minority protection (see Holmén and Högfeldt (2004a)). Inconsistent with
the leading theory, the only legal regime dummy that is significant is the negative coefficient (lower
private benefits) for Scandinavian origin. Other behavioral factors that are related to the culture and
norms of the society like degree of tax compliance, level of corruption, openness, and crime rates
eliminate the explanatory power of legal regimes and of level of minority protection (see Dyck and
Zingales (2004)). Stock market capitalization in relation to GDP, number of listed firms per million

32

inhabitants, frequency of IPOs and household frequency of equity ownership (around 55-60%) are
if not higher at least comparable to the Anglo-Saxon countries and higher than for Continental
Europe (see Holmén and Högfeldt (2004a)). The potential for transfer of corporate assets to the
controlling is perhaps largest in pyramiding, but unlike Bertrand et al (2002) for Indian pyramids,
Holmén and Högfeldt (2004b) find no evidence of tunneling in Swedish pyramids.
Lack of minority protection did not hinder the development of active financial markets
before WW1 (see Rajan and Zingales (2003a). It was neither a prerequisite for the stock market
boom in recent decades as the protection was improved in the early 90s after public scandals
involving self-dealings, particularly in management controlled firms with cross-shareholdings. The
differences in formal minority protection between advanced countries seem too small to explain the
very significant discrepancies in ownership concentration; see also Roe (2002a and b).
Implicitly, the leading explanation seems to assume that the size of private benefits of
control is larger if the firm becomes listed than if it remains privately held because of the pecuniary
extraction from minority shareholders. But the two most successful firms in Sweden founded after
WWII-- IKEA (founded by Ingvar Kamprad) and Tetra Laval (the Rausing family)-- have both
(aggressively) avoided going public with the explicit argument that their private value of control
would be diluted. Both because of the listing (information and transparency) requirements, and
since their long-run strategy (patiently building an empire) may be compromised by the perceived
myopic character of the stock market. The third most successful firm, H&M (international chain of
clothing stores founded by Erling Persson) went public in the 70s in order to finance its future
growth, in particular its international expansion. But since H&M has consistently generated high
enough profits to fully finance its investments by retained earnings, Stefan Persson, the head of the
family and COB (former CEO), has officially announced that the family regrets the listing; it would
have been better to stay private. Private benefits of control may thus have less to do with pecuniary
extraction of minority shareholders than with the value of being in control (power) per se, which is
maximized when staying fully private. Since a public listing dilutes private benefits of control, a

33

family-controlled firm goes public only when it needs new capital. More generally, Holmén and
Högfeldt (2004a) find that Swedish IPO firms in general but in particular family firms have a strong
preference for maintained control, and their behavior is consistent with the control theories (see
Bebchuk (1999) and Bebchuk et al (1999)).
Roe´s political theory
Mark Roe’s alternative, political theory that ownership does not separate widely in Continental
Europe since it is not politically and socially acceptable in the social democracies is summarized in
his Clarendon Lectures (Roe (2002a)):
It (ownership; my remark) is concentrated in no small measure because the delicate threads that tie managers
to shareholders in the public firm fray easily in common political environments, such as those in the
Continental European social democracies. Social democracies press managers to stabilize employment, to
forego some profit-maximizing risks with the firm, and to use up capital in place rather than downsize when
markets no longer are aligned with the firm’s production capabilities. Since managers must have discretion in
the public firm, how they use that discretion is crucial to stockholders, and social democratic pressures
induce managers to stray further than otherwise from their shareholders’ profit-maximizing goals. A crucial
political prerequisite to the rise of public firm in the Unites States is the weakness of social democratic
pressures on the American business firm.

The dual side of this compelling set of arguments is thus that social democracies in Roe’s
wider sense presupposes concentrated corporate ownership but will be less efficient as necessary
changes will be delayed or not take place. The first implication is generally in line with my
arguments but the second one does not fit the history and politics of corporate ownership in
Sweden, perhaps the most quintessential social democratic society, very well. Roe’s arguments do
for example not recognize the pivotal effect in a small open economy of the international,
competitive exposure on labor market relations and conditions within the firm. Being determined by
outside conditions, it is perceived as an objective, exogenous factor that defines the necessary
adjustments and limits the set of possible actions in order to remain competitive and being paid a
higher wage in the current or in another job. As an encompassing union, the well-established
tradition within the LO has been not to fight changes motivated by rational economic arguments but
to accept and actually facilitate them in order for the whole economy to maintain its
competitiveness and growth. In fact, the general economic policy, in particular the labor market

34

policies, that the Social Democrats pursued with the active backing of the LO were at least until the
70s very growth-oriented as they stimulated structural changes and rationalizations, promoted labor
mobility and provided ambitious retraining and educational programs for the unemployed. Local
unions may voice protest but are not known to obstruct or aggressively fight back if negotiations
about lay-offs and close-downs are done in an orderly manner. Looking through the Swedish lens,
Roe ignores the crucial importance of a public sector that provides an outside protection via
insurance, education and benefit programs that assuages the effects of hardships of unemployment,
which seems to facilitate rather than obstruct necessary economic changes.
Despite corporatist tendencies and a spirit of cooperation, the adversarial interests of labor
and capital have not been mixed and diluted by co-determination since unions did not get legal
rights to elect board representatives until the 70s; it is a strict minority representation; there are no
dual boards and unions have no right to veto a firm’s decisions. Unlike in Germany, codetermination was not designed to appease aggressive unions and to fight social and political
instability. Moreover, the general rule has been that politicians should not intervene but to let the
representatives of labor and capital settle disputes and other matters by negotiations. ´
Overall, Mark Roe paints a picture in too stark colors that exaggerates the differences
between Continental Europe and the U.S. by implying that necessary economic adjustments will not
be efficiently implemented in social democracies.18 The Swedish experience suggests that
efficiency enhancing changes will be undertaken but in a different and more orderly, fair manner,
perhaps somewhat delayed due to negotiations but often with more far-reaching consequences when
they occur.19 The effect of international exposure, a large welfare sector and of different labor

18
Roe’s arguments presuppose that shareholder value maximization has consistently been the single, hard objective in the
U.S. while the firm’s objective has been diluted by stakeholder concerns in Europe. A reasonable interpretation is that
because of primarily political reasons maximization of shareholder value has been accepted only in certain time periods in
the U.S. but not uniformly, and that the importance of stakeholder value in Europe has also varied substantially with the
political tides. Implicit in Mark Roe’s theory about the negative effects of social democracy is also the idea that the
relation between labor and management is more adversarial than between labor and controlling owners. If anything the
Swedish experience however seems to suggest that the union representatives are more close to the management and that
the relations are based on consensus and trust as long as the firm pursues a reliable, long-term strategy.
19
An illustrative example is the dramatic down-sizing of Ericsson in recent years from 110 000 employees worldwide to
less than 50 000. A significant fraction of the employees worked in Sweden but very few if any protest were voiced as it

35

market institutions (encompassing, well organized unions) and ownership structures lead to
outcomes that differ perhaps more in form than in substance. The more negative, institutional
aspects of the Scandinavian model are the significant lock-in effects of both labor (e.g. strict
application of the last in first out rule) and capital within the old, established firms that will be
stable and relatively efficient while the addition of new growing firms will be hampered.
An alternative political theory why ownership does not separate widely
My analysis of the history of Swedish corporate ownership, however, suggests another political
theory why ownership does not separate widely: listed firms do not have to disperse ownership and
dilute private benefits of control in order to raise new capital since their dependence of the equity
market is limited because of political decisions and institutional factors. This is particularly true for
the largest listed firms with well-established networks. The focus is on the equity markets´ primary
function— provision of capital— and its political sensitivity; not on liquidity provision. The basic
idea is that political decisions will determine how dependent firms are on external financing: if
capital for investments can be supplied primarily through retained earnings, by borrowing in banks
or by infusion of private capital, firms have no immediate need to go through the strictures of equity
offers and place a larger fraction of shares in a wider group of investors and dilute private benefits
of control in the process.
My political theory of corporate financing starts with the assumption that corporate control
based on separation of control from ownership via mechanisms to separate votes form capital like
dual-class shares and pyramiding presupposes political support to be socially acceptable. In the
Swedish case, the political legitimacy of entrenched private ownership is traded-off against that the
implicit guarantee that the largest listed firms do not migrate and that they continue to invest,
thereby generating economic resources to finance the political reform agenda. The separation of
control from ownership has however a profound effect on corporate financing as it drives a

was done in an orderly, negotiated way. The unions did not obstruct but helped to accommodate the changes as they were
perceived as necessary in order for Ericsson to survive in the long run.

36

significant wedge between the costs of internal and external capital. New external shareholders
demand compensation (discounts) for the agency costs inherent in the separation, which makes
external equity more expensive. Shareholders seem to attach significant discounts to privately
controlled firms using dual-class shares (10-15%) and to pyramid holding companies (25-30%) to
separate votes from capital; see Holmén and Högfeldt (2004b). But internal capital is relatively
inexpensive for the controlling owners since they have access to all of the firm’s cash flows via a
small (less than proportional) capital investment.
The wedge caused by the separation of control from ownership therefore generates an
enhanced (political) pecking order of financing: Strong reliance on retained earnings and borrowing
but avoidance of equity issues, in particular of large public offers as they would dilute control and
also be extra costly due to the discounts to new outside shareholders; see Holmén and Högfeldt
(2004b). The pecking order is enhanced since it is caused by agency costs inherent to the ownership
structure and not primarily by asymmetric information costs, and since it predicts the absence or
strong avoidance of public offers; see Högfeldt and Oborenko (2004).This is the key mechanism
that explains why firms in countries with prevalent use of dual-class shares and pyramiding like
Sweden have more concentrated ownership but are also much less dependent on the primary equity
markets and why they do not need to disperse ownership.
The connection between the politics of corporate ownership and financing is particularly
conspicuous in regulation of banks’ ownership of equity since the 1930s. When the Swedish version
of the Glass-Steagal Act was enacted in 1934, commercial banks were no longer allowed to directly
own shares in other firms (a right granted them in 1911 because of the pivotal support from the
Social Democrats). Reflecting the strong political and economic interests of leading bankers but
with support of the Social Democrats, banks were, however, a few years later allowed to transfer
their portfolios of controlling interests to holding companies that were organized as closed-end
investment funds (CEIFs) and distribute the funds’ shares to the banks’ existing shareholders. The
controlling owners of the commercial banks at the apex of the pyramid thus controlled the largest

37

firms at the bottom via CEIFs at the intermediary level that were listed. Since pyramiding was
combined with use of dual-class shares the separation between votes and capital was multiplicative.
The new laws in effect made two dominating banks (SEB and Svenska Handelsbanken) the
controlling owners of the largest listed firms, and bank loans the major way to finance the firms’
investments besides retained earnings, in particular in the decades when the equity markets were
dormant. Corporate control was therefore via political decisions directly linked to the control over
intermediated capital, which tend to make equity financing much less likely. Unlike in the US, the
pyramids were politically supported via the tax system: inter-corporate dividends as well as reinvested capital gains were de facto tax-exempt; see Holmén and Högfeldt (2004b). Since this
preferential tax treatment is pivotal for the existence of pyramids (see Morck (2003)), it is the
critical element in the Social Democrats’ consistent support of the very heavy entrenched private
ownership of the largest listed firms in Sweden. It is perhaps also the very reason why capital did
not migrate.
More generally, since the Social Democrats for ideological reasons focused on the largest
established firms and supported both retained earnings via tax benefits and a relation-based banking
system, the two major ways to finance investments both had strong political support. They were
also in general very skeptical towards the turbulent equity markets that are conducive to economic
and social changes, which is antithetical to their political ambitions to provide stability and social
reforms in an orderly, planned manner. But for egalitarian reasons they were, and still are, even
more skeptical towards the equity markets’ primary function. The combination of entrepreneurship
and equity financing will facilitate creation of large private fortunes and break the social status quo,
i.e. limit the possibilities for social control and for redistribution. Since a well functioning primary
market will widen the income distribution but in particular the distribution of wealth and ownership
of assets, new equity issues have consistently been disfavored by a tax disadvantage. Reactive
financing via retained earnings that benefits incumbent owners by locking-in the capital in the
existing firms was preferred to a more proactive and aggressive financing mode via the primary

38

equity market that is more likely to implement faster and more drastic changes that are likely to
challenge the incumbents’ power. This outcome is also the most likely since the new entrepreneurs
and firms lack political power while the well-organized incumbents are united by common interests
and have political voice.
As long as this closely integrated system of ownership and financing is stable, the firms do
not need to raise substantial amounts of new capital from the equity markets. And when firms were
highly levered in the 70s and needed more equity capital as both profits and credits were squeezed,
and more restructuring takeovers occurred, there was strong political support for the incumbent
(often capital-constrained) owners to use of dual-class shares to separate votes from capital
contribution in order to maintain control also after issues of equity.20 Hence, for a combination of
political and institutional reasons, ownership does not separate widely since listed firms are not
directly dependent on equity markets to finance their investments.
My alternative political theory of corporate financing has several testable implications. The
first one is that the very entrenched and relation-based banking system will block the development
of arm’s length markets for corporate bonds; if they exist they will not be well developed. Hence, it
should not come as a surprise that there are no domestic corporate bond markets in Sweden and that
the largest listed firms use the international bond markets but only to a limited extent.
The second prediction of the theory is that the volume of IPOs and SEOs on average should
be very small. Fig 4 shows that the annual volume (2002 prices) of new equity and bond issues on
average corresponds to about 10% of gross domestic capital formation before 1931 but averages
only about 1% since then. The peak in 1917-1918 is a result of the speculative war economy fuelled
by excessive buying of new issues by the highly levered and bank-affiliated Issuing Companies
20

The legislators’ motivation for use of dual-class shares in the new corporate law (Proposition 1997/98: 99 p 120— my
translation) illustrates the political support: The use of shares with different voting rights has a long tradition in Swedish
law. Dual-class shares are very common among listed companies in Sweden. The dual-class share system has significant
advantages. It makes it possible (facilitates) to have a strong and stable ownership function even in very large companies.
Thereby creating the necessary conditions for an efficient management as well as for the long-term planning of the firm’s
activities. Shares with different voting rights also facilitate for growing companies to raise new capital without the
original owners losing control. There is no evidence that the dual-class share system has caused any noticeable negative
effects…Dual-class shares can significantly promote the efficiency and development of individual firms as well as of the
business sector in general.

39

before they were forced to close down after the deep financial crises in the early 20s (Fritz (1990)
and Östlind (1944)). 21 During 1927-1929 Ivar Kreuger capitalized heavily on the exuberant market
sentiments by issuing equity and, in particular, debentures (unsecured bonds) both domestically and
internationally to save his highly levered and very opaque empire before it collapsed after he shot
himself in Paris in 1932 and triggered the worst financial crises in Sweden.
The more recent peak in 1992 around 5% is the result of extremely low investments due to
very high interest rates in the wake of the second worst financial crises when a speculative real
estate bubble busted. It was fuelled by excessive credit expansion by the recently deregulated banks.
The large volume in 1999 is, of course, due to a record number of IT-related IPOs, particularly
related to mobile internet and IT-based services. For comparative purposes, the table does not
include the 30 Billion SEK rights issue in 2002 by the financially distressed Ericsson since it is the
largest SEO ever. It is particularly interesting to note that this single issue corresponds to 13% of
the total volume of all SEOs (2002 prices) during the last 100 years; 25% of all SEOs since 1970
and 40% of all SEOs during the exuberant 90s (about 10 billion dollars). The listed firms’
dependence on the equity markets for new capital has thus been very limited indeed in Sweden.
Because of the strong preference for control, in particular among family firms, a third
implication is that dual-class shares should be used very frequently and that SEOs should follow a
specific pecking ordering ranked by the extent to which they dilute control: first rights issues, then
private placements followed by directed issues (stock financed acquisitions) and finally public
offers that are strongly avoided. Moreover, the issues should be relatively small and only offer low
voting B-shares. Rights issues should have the largest size since they dilute control the least. The
empirical evidence from 233 IPOs between 1980 and 1997 in Holmén and Högfeldt (2004a) and
from Swedish SEOs since 1984 in Högfeldt and Oborenko (2004) are consistent with this
implication since almost 90% of the privately controlled IPO firms use dual-class shares and there
is a well-defined pecking order of SEOs. In particular, the amounts raised are very small and rights
21

The SEO volume in 1917-1918 corresponds to about 2.5% of the total stock market value while the volume in 19271929 is about 7% of the market cap.

40

issues are by far the largest. The fastest growing IPO firms are controlled by the
founder/entrepreneur and finance their expansion by rights issues, normally within 18 months after
the listing.22
It is particularly interesting to observe the absence of public offers, which are both the most
common and the largest offers in the U.S. but infrequently used outside the Anglo-Saxon countries.
Relatively large public offers are especially important in the financing of newly founded firms that
grow really fast (gazelles). But they are also instrumental to disperse ownership widely at and after
the IPO. The very infrequent use of public offers may thus explain both why ownership does not
disperse widely and why very few young firms grow to become really large in Sweden. To
understand why public offers are uncommon in say Civil Law countries may also explain why
financial markets in general and primary equity markets in particular are less developed there.23 My
theory suggests that because of the politically supported control structure combined with the strong
preference for maintained private control, public offers are last in the enhanced pecking ordering
since they by their larger size dilute control the most and are most costly because of the required
discounts to new shareholders.
More generally, my theory predicts that the following stylized facts about the corporate
system cluster: (i) concentrated ownership because of extensive use of devices to separate votes
form capital; (ii) secondary markets relatively well-developed if dual-class share are frequently used
(B-shares provide liquidity) but primary markets particularly politically vulnerable and
underdeveloped; (iii) equity financing of investments far less important than borrowing and use of
retained earnings (small volume of IPOs and SEOs) and limited market timing; (iv) pecking order
also of SEOs: rights issues (largest) and private placements most frequent while public offers are
absent or exceptionally few; (iv) very few young firms grow fast to become really large; (v)
22

If the founders relinquish control, they do so by selling their control block before the IPO, but keep the block intact both
at the IPO and afterwards until they sell it. Family-controlled firms often finance relatively small acquisitions by issuing
B-shares (see Holmén and Högfeldt (2004b) and Högfeldt and Oborenko (2004))).
23
Even if trading volumes and market caps are less developed than in the Anglo-Saxon countries because of the extensive
use of dual-class shares, the liquidity provided by trading of B-shares may still be large: The number of IPOs is not
necessarily small since dual-class shares facilitate maintained family control after the IPO and stock financed acquisitions.

41

undeveloped markets for corporate bonds (due to the strong relation-based banking system) and (vi)
relatively equal distribution of wealth and incomes. Because the separation of ownership from
control drives a wedge between the costs of internal and external capital, my theory predicts that
firms controlled by pyramids or via extensive use of dual-class shares will have higher investmentcash flow sensitivities; see Holmén and Högfeldt (2004b) for supporting empirical evidence.
The reasons why ownership did not separate widely in Sweden are thus according to my
theory profoundly political: Use of dual-class shares and pyramiding, which are politically
supported, drives a wedge between the costs of internal and external capital that causes an enhanced
(political) pecking order of corporate financing. The political support for separation of control from
ownership and for non-equity financing benefit established firms and in effect align the interests of
the incumbent political power with incumbent capital (in particular the leading banks) as corporate
control is maintained and actually reinforced (despite increasing needs for new capital) while
formation and growth of new firms by equity financing was effectively disfavored for egalitarian
reasons.
4. A Critical Evaluation of the Swedish Model of Corporate Ownership
At this point it is convenient to oversimplify and pinpoint three constituent parts of the Swedish
model of corporate ownership. The first is the primarily exogenous character of production: capitalintensive, large scale, export-oriented production (raw materials, manufacturing and engineering)
by relatively few large, transnational and privately controlled firms. The second is the changing
international market conditions due to political, economic (competition) and technological factors.
The final is the endogenous effects of prolonged social democratic policies. We focus on the longrun economic effects by looking at the impact of three major Social Democratic policies: (i)
Political support for a relation-based banking system and control of the largest listed firms via bankcontrolled closed-end investment funds. (ii) Political support for dual-class shares and other devices
to separate votes and capital in order to facilitate maintained private control with well-defined
owners despite increasing capital needs and institutionalization of ownership. (iii) Consistent
42

political focus on the largest listed firms and strong preference for retained earnings and bank loans
as the major ways to finance investment while in particular disfavoring of equity financing and
equity markets in general. These policies jointly create the foundation for the enhanced political
pecking order of financing and have three major long-run effects.
Overinvestment by large firms in old industries and underinvestment of new firms in growing
industries, biased distribution of firm size and age, and lower overall growth
The strong dependence on retained earnings and debt in the enhanced pecking order, reinforced by
the preferential tax treatment, implies that firms’ investment criterion has been systematically
biased since past profits to a significant degree influence or determine the allocation of investments,
not expected future profits.24 This benefits firms in old established and capital-intensive industries
with large real assets that have consistently been profitable and are part of a leading bank’s
network. But the policies disfavor young firms in new lines of business based on human capital and
services with strong growth potential and in need of risk capital. Since incumbent firms have access
to relative inexpensive internal capital while new firms are hampered since they use the primary
equity markets only to a limited extent, the biased investment criterion is likely to create systematic
under- and overinvestment problems that tend to have a negative effect on the overall growth in the
economy. The largest firms that will tend to invest too much are in mature industries with lower
future growth potential while the new and smaller firms tend to invest too little and are likely to be
in lines of business with higher growth potential. These effects are reinforced by the fact that IPO
firms for control reasons are not inclined to use large public offers to grow fast and since older
firms that finance their investments via retained earnings tend to have realized returns that are
24
The corporate and ownership tax policies are not the direct cause behind the enhanced pecking order of financing since
they are primarily supportive of the ownership policies that promote separation of control form ownership. The tax
policies have at the margin disfavored direct ownership by households and benefited institutional ownership, and
disfavored equity as a source of capital, in particular when the inflation rate is high, while favoring debt and retained
earnings. Table 7 shows the effective marginal tax rates for different type of owners and sources of financing at points in
time when taxes were revised. A negative marginal tax rate indicates that the rate of return is greater than before: a
marginal tax rate of -83% for a debt financed investment by a tax-exempt institution transforms to 10% real return before
tax to 18.3% return after tax. The taxes on debt, equity and retained earnings were rather differentiated before the big tax
reform in 1991 but have become more harmonized since then. Note that the most negative tax effects on equity ownership
by households occurred before 1985 when the equity markets were dormant in Sweden.

43

significantly below their cost of capital; investments financed via debt or equity do not seem to
systematically underperform, see Holmén and Högfeldt (2004b). The free cash flow problem thus
seems to be particularly serious for firms that have a well-defined owner in control and rely on
retained earnings; they also tend to have higher investment-cash flow sensitivity. Inefficient
investments due to (free) access to retained earnings may be the very reason why firms with strong
separation of control and ownership are traded at a discount.
Since the labor market laws in recent decades have promoted tenure with an employer, the
combined effect of investment and labor market policies is therefore a significant lock-in of both
labor and capital within the existing, large firms and their controlling owners. The biased
investment criterion and the lock-in effects endogenously create a stronger path dependency as the
firms’ future developments (size, investments and growth) are more directly tied to past
performance. The long-run effects on the firm structure will be a survival and growth bias: an
overrepresentation of very large and old firms in mature industries and an underrepresentation of
new and fast growing firms in new industries. Broadly consistent with this conjecture, Sweden has
one of the most skewed distributions with an extreme dominance of very large and very old
multinational firms still controlled by Investor and Industrivärden, and very limited addition of new
fast-growing firms. Fig 5 shows for example that 31 of the 50 largest firms in 2000 were founded
before 1914. No firm founded after 1970 has been added to the list. Moreover, measured by number
of the Fortune 500 firms in 1991, Sweden ranked as #6 with 15 firms on the list and with the
highest number of firms per GDP unit (one billion US (PPP adjusted)): 0.104 (see Jagrén (1993)).
The size distribution of Swedish firms (small, medium and large) is 84.1%, 12.1% and 3.7%,
respectively, compared to an international average size distribution of 87.5%, 10.2% and 2.2%,
respectively, which shows the bias towards larger firms (see Henrekson and Jakobsson (2001)).

44

He, Morck and Yeung (2003) find that greater instability in the ranking over time of a
country’s largest firms is associated with faster economic growth.25 Economic growth is thus more
likely to be caused by the rise of new large firms than by the prosperity of established large firms.
Sweden has one of the most stable rankings over time but really stands out in their analysis as the
only country where the continuity of control over time actually increases.26 That lock-in of family
control for generations may have negative effects is a well-known phenomenon. For example,
Holmén and Högfeldt (2004b) report a robust 14% discount for large listed firms that are heir
controlled. The conjecture that incumbency tends to breed complacency and stagnation, in
particular when investments are financed via retained earnings, is consistent with Morck’s at al’s
(2000) finding in a cross-country analysis that countries with a larger fraction of heir controlled
firms tend to have a significantly lower overall growth rate. The dominance of the same firms
among the very largest for decades as well as the extreme continuity of control in Sweden is thus
consistent with a lower overall growth rate in the economy.
The strong path dependency is particularly conspicuous for the very important closed-end
investment funds that control the largest listed firms since their shares trade at a significant discount
(on average 25-30%) relative their portfolio, which in effect makes it economically impossible for
them to raise new equity capital via SEOs. The funds thus prefer that their portfolio firms primarily
finance their investments by retained earnings and loans since these sources are relatively cheap
although the firms are traded at a 6-8% discount because being controlled via a pyramid; see
Holmén and Högfeldt (2004b). Since intercorporate dividends are not taxed if they just pass through
the pyramid holding company (the closed-end investment fund) on their way from the portfolio
firms to the ultimate shareholders, the controlling owners are even more inclined to retain earnings
in the portfolio firms. Since realized capital gains are not taxed if reinvested, the pyramid holding
25

The faster growth is primarily due to faster growth in total factor productivity in industrialized countries, and faster
capital accumulation in developing countries; see He et al (2003).
26
They observe a very interesting fact: Note that control continuity is always less than corporate stability, except in the
case of Sweden. This is because the Wallenberg family took control prior to 1996 of two new top ten firms that arose
between 1975 and 1996. These two new top ten firms thus have a continuity of control. This situation arises in no other
country; see He et al (2003).

45

company avoid paying dividends themselves. The combined effect of the preferential tax treatment
and the pyramid control structure is therefore that the portfolio firms systematically pay out less
dividends and tend to overinvest, which the significantly higher investment-cash flow sensitivity
and the significantly lower realized return on investments financed via retained earnings for
pyramid firms shows (Holmén and Högfeldt (2004b)). Moreover, since the two leading banks are
both controlling owners of the most important pyramids and the major providers of loans to the
portfolio firms, they tend to behave more like bondholders: accumulation of hidden reserves and
choice of conservative investment strategies that focus on long-run survival and stable cash flows,
not on risk taking and entrepreneurship.
The lock-in effect and the biased investment criterion have especially negative long-run
effects since the portfolio firms are in old and often capital-intensive industries. In particular since
these firms tend to invest heavily in R&D, often along the narrow trajectory previously chosen by a
specializing strategy (few and highly specialized areas with relatively large production volumes),
and not in a diversifying direction in alternative technologies (see Erixon (1997)). The old
established firms have their comparative advantage in the commercial implementation and
marketing of large scale research projects, not in major breakthrough patents and innovations.
While neither R&D investments nor the number of resulting patents are necessarily small, the
endogenous effect is that it perpetuates a development path that leads to an even smaller and
narrower base of highly specialized firms that might not generate high growth and that may also be
economically vulnerable due to shifts in technology. An interesting fact is that of 100 major
innovations in the Swedish industry during the post-war period more than 80 occurred in large firms
(see Granstrand and Alänge (1995)).
Through strong path dependency, the old established, large scale industrial structure is thus
pushed to its limits by political and endogenous economic decisions that determine the investment
strategies and how they are financed. After 100 years of unprecedented growth (among the 3
highest ever recorded for a 100 year period), Sweden ranked as one of the three wealthiest OECD

46

countries in 1970. Due to lack of resiliency of the stale economic and political structures, recurrent
and prolonged adjustment problems in the aftermath of the oil crises (6 devaluations), growth has
been significantly lower during the last 30 years and Sweden now ranks behind neighboring
countries. The relationships presented here between the characteristics of heavily entrenched
corporate control and growth provide a more plausible and direct explanation of why the Swedish
economy has shown signs of stagnation than the alternative that pinpoints the negative effects of
higher taxes and of a larger public sector; see Lindbeck (1997).27
Maintained private control by increasing separation of votes from capital makes the capital base
too small and increases agency costs and inefficiencies.
When the increased international competitive pressure in the 60s and 70s forced highly levered
Swedish firms to invest more, particularly in R&D, and needed to finance takeovers and mergers to
exploit scale advantages, the volume of SEOs increased considerably for the first time since the 30s.
Because of the strong preference for maintained control, the frequency of listed firms that use dualclass shares increased significantly; from 18% in 1950 to 32% in 1968; 54% in 1981 and peaked at
around 80% in 1992 to settle at 63% in 1998 and below 60% after the IT-bubble busted (see
Agnblad et al (2001), Holmén and Högfeldt (2004a) and Henreksson and Jakobsson (2003a and
b)).28 The high frequency of dual-class shares to separate votes from capital is thus a fairly recent
phenomenon and most prevalent among family controlled firms (see Agnblad et al (2001)). This
development has received political support since firms with well-defined private owners in control
are believed to be more efficient; families have a long-term commitment as the growth of private
fortune is tied to the firm’s development. In the 80s and particularly after 1993, when all restrictions
on foreign ownership of shares were abolished, the political ambition (sometimes explicit but most
often implicit) has been to promote maintained control in order to keep corporate headquarters,

27

It is ironic that since 1997 when Lindbeck presented his dire and one-sided predictions about the future development of
the Swedish economy, the macroeconomic performance and growth has at least equaled if not surpassed that of
comparable EU countries.
28
In 1950 only 18% of 100 largest firms used dual-class shares; 29% in 1963; and 42% in 1978.

47

specifically R&D, marketing and strategic functions, in Sweden. This illustrates the political
foundation and sensitivity of corporate control in Sweden. The political support for extensive use of
dual-class shares and pyramiding is traded-off against the indirect (direct) promise that the largest
firms continue to invest in Sweden and do not migrate. Dual-class shares and pyramiding are in fact
the very cornerstones of the Social Democratic model of corporate ownership. 30
Despite much larger foreign ownership (35% of outstanding shares), almost exclusively via
B-shares, and much more institutional ownership, the old families and closed-end investment funds
have been able to maintain a somewhat diluted control by increasing use of dual-class shares
combined with reinforced protection of incumbent owners via mandatory bid rules and more
stringent takeover rules that de facto increase entrenchment. However, in very large international
mergers motivated by scale effects and very large R&D costs, the separation of votes and capital
has not been enough to maintain control; Investor lost control of Stora (pulp and paper) and Astra
(pharmaceutical) in mergers with Enso and Zeneca, and earlier of ASEA in a merger with Brown
Boveri— ABB. Despite some dilution of control and much larger capital needs, it is remarkable that
established families and closed-end funds are still very often in control. But the increased separation
between votes and capital undercuts the very justification for capitalistic firms as a small capital
contribution generates control over all other investors´ capital, in particular as the vote lever is often
justified on historical grounds. The system therefore also becomes more politically vulnerable as for
example the recent EU-initiative to abolish dual-class shares shows.
The strong separation between votes and capital generates two principal types of costs that
are primarily borne by the non-controlling shareholders. Either costs because of extraction of
29

A public inquiry about voting rights states explicitly that dual-class shares could be useful to ascertain that Swedish
firms remain controlled by Swedish interests (see SOU 1986:23). More recently, the fight against EU proposals to in
effect abolish the use of dual-class shares has been spearheaded by the Wallenberg family via Investor whose shareholders
paid for the campaign. The Social Democratic government announced that it would do everything within its power to back
the Wallenbergs and fight the proposal. The right to use dual-class shares is declared to be a national interest.
30
A public inquiry about voting rights stated explicitly that dual-class shares could be useful to ascertain that Swedish
firms remain controlled by Swedish interests (see SOU 1986:23). More recently, the fight against EU proposals to in
effect abolish the use of dual-class shares has been spearheaded by the Wallenberg family via Investor whose shareholders
paid for the campaign. The Social Democratic government announced that it would do everything within its power to back
the Wallenbergs and fight the proposal. The right to use dual-class shares is declared to be a national interest. If dual-class
shares would be prohibited in the future, it is very likely that the Swedish model as we know it would disintegrate.

48

pecuniary benefits (self-dealing) by the controlling owners or agency costs due to bad (inefficient)
decision making. Since the corporate law is designed to handle the problems with self-dealing and
legal as well as tax enforcement are stringent, agency costs are the most likely reason behind the
discounts on firms with levered control structure; see Roe (2002a). For example, Holmén and
Högfeldt (2004b) did not find any indication of tunneling (corporate stealing) in Swedish pyramids
that have the most levered control structures. Moreover, since the increased use of dual-class shares
to maintain control implies that the capital base for control becomes smaller, i.e. the leverage effect
in votes increases, which tend to increase the agency costs as the difference between the power to
make pivotal decisions and the private value at risk for controlling owners increases. This effect is
amplified by the lock-in of control for generations by the same family. In Schumpeterian spirit,
such dynamic agency costs can be substantial as the entrepreneurial genes and drive do not replicate
easily; see Holmén and Högfeldt (2004a)). The discounts on family controlled firms thus most
likely gauge such agency costs due to misallocation of control rights to heirs that make inefficient
decisions, e.g. due to significant lower returns on investments financed via retained earnings; see
Cronqvist and Nilsson (2003) and Villalonga and Amit (2004).
The importance of agency costs due to a significant lock-in of control over the largest firms
for a very long time can best be illustrated by the very large discounts on closed-end investment
funds (CEIF -- the pyramid holding companies); see Holmén and Högfeldt (2004b). The vote lever
is particularly large since Swedish funds combine separation via pyramiding and dual-class shares,
which generates a multiplicative effect. Since Investor has a voting differential of 1:10 while
Ericsson was the only listed firm on the SSE (until 2004) that had a 1:1000 differential, the
multiplier for the ownership of the Wallenberg family in Ericsson is 125— their own contribution is
only about 0.8% of Ericsson’s capital while they control +80% of the votes jointly with
Industrivärden. After the reform, the two major owners control around 40% of the votes.
Fig 6 shows that the discount on Investor’s share price relative the fund’s net asset value
from 1930 to 2002 has been substantial (averages about 30%), in particular in the 70s when its was

49

around 40%. After being cut to almost 20% in the early 90s, the discount is now again back at
around 35%. In addition, the portfolio firms have a 6% discount due to being under pyramidal
control. Analyzing all CEIFs, Holmén and Högfeldt (2004b) find that the discount increases linearly
with the controlling owner’s degree of separation between votes and capital in the fund and with the
number of years the present owner has been in control. The discount is thus significantly higher for
founder-controlled pyramids, i.e. it gauges the cost of pyramidal power as it becomes more levered
and more entrenched. The results are consistent with controlling owners becoming more dependent
on the multiplicative separation between votes and capital over time. Pyramidal separation is thus
not a static phenomenon since the use of dual class shares is intensified in order to maintain control.
The discounts are primarily explained by dynamic agency costs (inefficient decisions)
associated with the heavily entrenched power. For example, Holmén and Högfeldt (2004b) report
that the CEIFs’ active portfolio management generates a return that is significantly below their cost
of capital when capital gains are re-invested instead of being distributed. In particular, a passive
portfolio management by just holding the portfolio generates a significantly higher return than
actively managing it according to the pivotal owners’ specific interests. This in effect limits their
investments to projects where they have a controlling interest, which in turn often implies that bad
projects are supported too long; the soft return requirements on retained earnings reinforce these
effects. The lower returns translate to into a loss (outflow) in the shareholders’ return stream from
the investment.
A standard neoclassical model predicts that the discount is simply the ratio of the
capitalized value of the outflow, which does not go to the CEIF’s shareholders, to the total value of
all outflows from the CEIF, i.e. including the dividends going to the shareholders, see Ross (2002).
Holmén and Högfeldt (2004b) empirical estimate of this theoretical ratio— fraction of all outflows
that do not go to the shareholders— gives a discount of 25.3 percent compared to the actual average
discount of 26 percent. The size of the agency costs is on average 0.7 percent of the CEIFs portfolio
value, and increase with separation between votes and capital in the CEIF. Since the size of the

50

discount is directly linked to the control structure and power of the controlling owners, the model in
effect explains the large discounts in Sweden, and provides a solution to the closed-end fund puzzle.
Shareholders are in principle privately compensated for the costs of pyramidal ownership
through the discounts, but pyramiding has also a negative impact on the efficiency of the capital
allocation in the economy that is probably significantly larger. Almeida and Wolfenzon (2004a) has
developed an interesting model of the equilibrium allocation of capital when the comparative
advantage of capital markets in reallocating capital, especially in time of change, is not at work.
They show that the overall efficiency may decrease in the presence of conglomerates, even when
capital is allocated efficiently within the conglomerate. The reason is that local efficiency within a
subset of firms does not correspond to global efficiency as capital is not efficiently allocated
between all firms.
Unlike with conglomerates, the problem with pyramidal control is not inefficient internal
capital markets since no direct capital transfers between pyramid firms are possible. The major
problem is instead that too much capital is locked into the separate firms within the pyramid and not
redistributed since the highly levered control structure causes an enhanced (political) pecking order
since external capital is significantly more expensive than internal capital.31 Firms controlled by
pyramids are thus likely to be overcapitalized by relatively cheap internal capital, which may lead
to overinvestment, particularly in fixed assets (PPE) and R&D, and lower returns than required by
the market (cost of capital). Pyramids may thus have a strategic negative impact on corporate
financing and investments because of their limited dependence on the primary equity markets and
because they retain too much earnings in firms that are primarily in mature industries.32 Since not
enough of the old capital (for control reasons) is reallocated via the external equity markets to e.g.
fledgling firms in new, growing industries, pyramiding hampers both the development of financial
31

Unlike the discount on conglomerates, the large discount on pyramid holding companies cannot be explained by
inefficiencies in the portfolio firms since this is already reflected in the value of the holding firm’s portfolio.
32
The reason why pyramids exist is profoundly political; see Morck (2003) and Holmén and Högfeldt (2004b). Their
structure is however not primarily explained by the controlling owners desire to exert power as such but to get control
over a large and relatively cheap source of financing; control over very large cash flows via a small but strategic
investment; see Holmén and Högfeldt (2004b).

51

markets and the overall growth. These negative effects may be particular significant in Sweden
since the pyramids have had strategic control over the largest and oldest listed firms for decades.
Preference for maintained control implies limited use of equity financing and that too few firms
grow to became large
Egalitarianism may be conducive to dynamic changes as evident from the labor market policies that
were designed to promote mobility and structural changes in socially more acceptable forms. But
when the objective to promote or contain a less dispersed distribution of wealth disfavors equity
financing in general, and, in particular, limits the possibilities for newly founded firms to grow fast
using equity financing, there exists a conflict between egalitarianism and dynamic growth. The
opportunities for entrepreneurs to build private fortunes by developing new firms have been limited
because of tax reasons but also since the strong preference for maintained control in effect limits the
volume of equity financing, and in particular the use of public offers. This preference might be
primarily a cultural trait but is more likely to be an equilibrium outcome that is endogenously
generated by the corporate ownership model reinforced by the design of the tax system, i.e. by the
enhanced political pecking order of financing. The preference for control implies limited use of
equity financing because it disperses ownership and slow growth rate since the capital infusions are
relatively small— too few firms grow fast to become large. The political disfavoring of equity
financing and favoring of retained earnings and loans have reinforced this effect. Hence, there are
effects both on the demand and on the supply side that limit equity financing in equilibrium.
In line with the pecking order theory of SEOs, the largest offers for IPO firms are rights
issues that dilute control the least (see Holmén and Högfeldt (2004a)). However, they are still too
small to generate a high growth rate for newly listed firms controlled by the founding entrepreneur.
In general, family controlled IPO firms are undercapitalized because of the preference for control.
The strong preference for maintained control and use of retained earnings as the preferred method
of financing also limits the growth rate of SMEs. For a sample of 1248 firms with 5-49 employees,
Wiklund, Davidsson and Delmar (2002) report that the entrepreneur prioritizes growth only if

52

he/she does not lose control and independence of other stakeholders while the well-being of their
employees is not compromised. They strongly prefer financing via retained earnings even if they
are aware that the firm will follow a trajectory with lower growth than with equity financing. 44%
say that they would rather sell the whole firm than share control even if it would improve
performance and growth. Moreover, firms where the founder’s family owns a smaller fraction
and/or have more ownership categories are more likely to grow faster.
Since the formation of new firms has been relatively low and decreasing until the mid-90s,
the addition of new firms that grow fast has been limited. Together with the limited use of equity
financing to support fast-growing firms this implies a skewed size and age distribution of firms with
negative effects on future growth. The incapacity to use equity financing to promote growth of new
firms in advancing industries may be the real Achilles´ heal of the Swedish model.
A summary: An integrated answer
An integrated, general answer to the three questions about how corporate ownership developed in
Sweden, why the Social Democrats accepted a very concentrated private ownership and control
over listed firms and why ownership did not separate widely in Sweden is structured as follows.
The Swedish corporate ownership model is built on a basic understanding between the
Social Democrats (labor) and capital: political support and legitimacy of heavy entrenched private
ownership is traded-off against the implicit guarantee that the largest listed firms do not migrate and
that they continue to invest. The strong separation of ownership and control causes an enhanced
(political) pecking order of financing that is endogenously supported by the interests of the two
incumbencies.
The incumbent capital’s strong preference for maintained control of listed firms implies a
priority for financing via retained earnings and loans, and only limited use of equity financing when
needed since this would disperse ownership and eventually control, in particular if public offers are

33
Using somewhat fragmentary data, Braunerhjelm and Carlsson— Entrepreneurship, small firms and industrial growth in
Ekonomisk Debatt 1995— report that annual entry rates of new manufacturing firms with more than one employee have
been very low and fell from about 4% to 2% rates from 1920 to 1950, to 1.5% in the 70s and below that in the 80s.

53

used. For different reasons, the political ordering of financing alternatives by the Social Democrats
was the same. The ideological focus on the largest listed firms and their investments combined with
skepticism towards equity markets in general, and the primary markets in particular for egalitarian
reasons, implied a strong preference for retained earnings and loans. The existing strongly relationbased banking system supported this ordering and so did the explicit political support for use of
devices to separate votes from capital via pyramids and specifically for dual-class shares when the
firms needed more equity financing. As the incumbent capital became more institutionalized while
creation of large private fortunes in new firms via significant equity financing is limited and does
not threaten to disperse the distribution of wealth too much, the order was also politically
acceptable. It is worth emphasizing that this line of arguments pinpoints the political sensitivity of
the equity markets’ primary function and not their secondary function to provide liquidity, which is
more standard.
The resulting equilibrium perpetuates and reinforces the initially concentrated ownership of
the largest listed firms since ownership does not have to disperse because of significant need for
equity financing— ownership becomes more entrenched as separation of votes and capital increases
over time. Since historical profits determine future investments and not expected future profits, the
equilibrium entails a strong path dependency: dominance of very large and old firms in mature
industries that tend to overinvest while there are relative few new and fast-growing firms in
advancing lines of business. Since the labor market policies promote tenure with the existing
employer, both labor and corporate control are locked-in with the existing firms. The old industrial
structure is thus taken to its limits by the strong path dependency of corporate control, investments,
labor and political power. The almost innate entrenchment of both the political and corporate
powers breeds economic stagnation as well as lack of social dynamics.

5. Why did corporate ownership in Sweden follow this particular historical path?

54

The purpose of this section is to very briefly outline some general factors and correlations between
them that have been particularly important determinants of the development of corporate ownership
in Sweden. My conjectures are of course subjective, very speculative and incomplete as I focus on
the overall picture from a specific financial perspective but the institutional and political stability
makes it perhaps both easier and more interesting at the same time to outline a hypothetical answer.
I conjecture that the following causal chain between some of these categories (factors) have been
particularly important.34
When Sweden started its modern economic development about 150 years ago, the country
was relatively well endowed with natural resources (e.g. minerals, forests and water power), mainly
located in the northern part of the country, but large capital investments were needed to fully exploit
the endowments. The lack of domestic capital and of a sufficiently large group of wealthy people,
left two alternative ways to raise the necessary capital: collection of many peoples small savings via
a domestic system of saving and deposit banks and borrowing via issuing of bond loans abroad
(perhaps also migration of wealthy persons and entrepreneurs). The very large emigration wave to
North America increased the political pressure to modernize the very poor country. The reasons
behind the country’s poverty and what to do about it were the major political issues. How to
organize an efficient banking system, and how to reform it as the financing demands changed were
hotly debated questions for many decades. Political reforms paved the way for a banking system of
Scottish type and very large bond loans to finance infra-structural investments were sold to French,
German but also to English investors.
Economic geography is very important since the country is located on the northern rim of
Europe but has a very long costal line. Since the Hanseatic times Sweden has been connected with
34

In general, I think (without explicitly motivating it here) that an empirically relevant theory of the historical
development of corporate ownership and its importance for financial development and growth should consider (at least)
seven broad categories: 1. Endowments (natural resources, geography and population) and production technologies; 2.
Level and distribution of wealth (poverty); 3. Openness of society (transparency and competitiveness); 4. Legal system
and enforcement; 5. Political system (ideology, electoral system, tax system); 6. Structure of financial system (relation
based – arm’s length); and 7. Major “random” events (e.g. wars and The Great Reversal). The ordering is convenient and
does not reflect the categories’ relative importance. The two literatures on finance and growth (see e.g. Beck et al (2000)
and Carlin and Mayer (2003)) and on the political economy of corporate finance (see e.g. Pagano and Volpin (2001)) have
identified specific factors for crucial for financial development but it would take me too far astray to discuss it now.

55

Continental Europe and partly integrated via the Baltic Sea but also with the British Isles,
Amsterdam and Hamburg via the North Sea, and later also part of a North Atlantic economy after
the great emigration. The export of raw materials had gone on for centuries, which developed an
awareness of being part of an international market economy and fostered market discipline.
Financial transfers had also been crucial as for example Sweden’s wars were financed out of
Hamburg and Amsterdam. Trade credits and short term borrowing were later used efficiently as
they de facto became long term capital. As people migrated to develop their know-how and skills
abroad, cultural values, ideas, technological knowledge and market knowledge were transferred to
Sweden when they returned. Being a small country, the national culture is the cumulative result of
influences from several different cultures. Despite an under-developed civic society, the country
was thus relatively open; the tensions within the elites were between the international modernity
and the parochial Swedish traditionalism. The long-time international integration into a larger
market economy provided the necessary basis for the late but fast and successful industrialization of
Sweden. The early formation of several new firms based on break-trough innovations that are still
important today would probably not have taken place if not the engineers and entrepreneurs had
traveled and been internationally connected and the basic skills and training already in place via the
long experience of export-oriented production.
When the capital demands for large scale industrial investments increased about 100 years
ago, the financial system could in principle have developed into a market-based system of equity
and bond financing but the political power of the commercial banks, combined with support from
the Social Democrats, instead extended the intermediated system into equity financing by the
banking law of 1911 that permitted banks to operate as investment banks and directly own equity.
The fledgling stock market was too speculative to become an alternative source of outside
financing. The relatively large equity issues in the 1910s and 1920s were primarily financed the
levered Issuing Companies controlled by banks at very short arm’s length, and not via public offers.

56

Without the bank law of 1911 it is likely that corporate ownership would have developed
quite differently; the law was the pivotal reason banks ended up holding large equity portfolios of
very financially distressed firms in the early 1930s. When the new bank law of 1934 prohibited
banks to directly own equity, they were allowed to transfer them to closed-end investment funds
instead of forcing the banks to sooner or later sell these assets back to the market when prices
rebounded. The leading banks could thus continue to exert control over the largest listed firms, even
if it formerly was at arm’s length. Unlike in the US, the banks were not the problem in Sweden but
the solution to the problem of how to create financial and social stability, and to restructure the
large industrials. The main banks were financially healthy enough, experienced as investment
bankers and had developed the political contacts.
Like in the US, the policies after the deep financial crises shaped the future developments
through a strong political and regulatory path dependency. This large random event had however an
even larger impact in Sweden as the crises was the start of both the political hegemony of the
Social Democrats and of the political model of entrenched corporate ownership with the banks as
the pivotal nodes for corporate control; financial intermediation was de facto extended into highly
levered corporate control via pyramiding. A short term and acute solution to the poorly functioning
financial markets was extended for decades through the political hegemony and the basic
understanding between labor and capital. Corporate ownership is thus very political indeed.
In the early 1980s when deregulation of financial markets started and stock markets were
re-activated, the increased use of dual-class shares was backed by strong political support. The Bshares provided the necessary liquidity and dispersion of ownership (capital) while the control
rested firmly with the traditional private owners that increased their separation between control and
ownership when market values and capital demands increased. Because of the control structure, the
primary market for equity did not develop fully and the system in effect continued to be very
dependent on intermediated financing and retained earnings (a reactive financing mode) even

57

though the tensions between ownership and control are growing and attracting attention from
politicians who would reform the system.
I thus think it is possible to identify a simple causal chain that explains why the Swedish
financial system has not developed into a fully market-based financial system with very active
primary markets and dispersed corporate ownership. Given the poverty and lack of wealthy
individuals, and the use relatively capital-intensive technologies and large-scale production, a
system of intermediated financing was politically chosen to collect and allocate the capital. The
defining moments for the developments of the financial system are 1911, 1934-37 and 1984 when
the intermediated system was extended into equity financing (banks were allowed to directly own
shares), when banks became the pivotal controlling owners of the largest firms and when the equity
markets were re-activated (The Great Reversal was reversed) but the heavily entrenched control
structure was maintained and reinforced by increased use of dual-class shares, respectively. At these
three turning points the development of the financial system as well as of corporate ownership and
control could have followed other paths than they did if the political decisions had been different.
Because of the strong path dependency in an intermediated financial system when it is supported by
political powers united by common interests, a genuinely market-based financial system has not
developed in Sweden.
However, it is almost impossible to underestimate the persistent effects even today of the
major random event: the crises in the early in the early 1930s that was the catalyst of both the
political hegemony of the Social Democrats and the very strong and growing entrenchment of
private corporate control. Even if these two phenomena are not always analyzed as causally
connected, it is almost inevitable not to regard them as Siamese twins in an analysis of the
development of corporate ownership in Sweden as I have done in this paper.

6. Conclusions
58

100 years ago modernity in Sweden was spearheaded by the rapidly advancing industrial sector and
carried by its two new social groups— capital and labor-- that reshaped the economic, political and
social arenas. A relatively small group of leading industrialists and bankers, most often recruited
outside the establishment, represented the commercial interests, had a pronounced Anglo-Saxon
orientation and were politically active with a stress on rational reforms to promote changes. The
well-organized labor movement (SAP and LO) transformed their more radical, original
revolutionary objectives into a reformist agenda pursued by democratic, parliamentary means, and
viewed itself as the carrier of future social and economic changes of historical proportions. Despite
significant ideological influence from Germany, the leadership was primarily stimulated by ideas
from the British labor movement that could be implemented politically. Even though labor and
capital had adversarial interests, they shared a common sense of being harbingers of modernity.
Together with the Liberal Party the Social Democrats successfully fought for general and equal
suffrage (implemented in 1921) against The old Right that was organized around the (autocratic)
king and supported by the nobility, the church, the military, the leading civil servants and the large
farmers. The Right had by tradition looked towards Germany for guidance and emphasized social
and cultural values embodied in strong Lutheranism, nationalism and traditionalism with support
for the monarchy and social order, mixed with disdain for the commercial Anglo-Saxon countries
and their (lack of) values.
Unlike in Germany where the Old Right was fuelled by revenge after WW1 and the
transition to modernity was violent and resulted in the direst consequences for Europe, the transition
in Sweden was peaceful despite weak governments and economic crises of the 20s and early 30s. In
1932 the Social Democratic vision of The Good Home (Folkhemmet) was not only the political
answer to the turbulent economic and political times with its focus on full employment policies but
represented also the democratic modernity with strong emphasis on egalitarian values, and
encompassing policies based on social and economic rationality with a (benevolent) paternalistic
flavor mixed with some mild nationalism. To implement the vision of the good society, the

59

economic policies promoted growth and full employment, particularly in the post-war period until
the 70s, and development of a large public sector. Embodied in the elaborate welfare state and in
the political hegemony of the Social Democrats, it is the most successful and long-lived political
vision ever in a democracy.
But when the industrial society reached its peak in the mid 70s, and 40 years of strong
growth turned into almost 30 years of relative stagnation and recurrent economic, financial and
budget deficit crises, and significant loss of economic welfare, the weaknesses became all too
apparent: the lack of resilience of a too small base of very large, old and highly specialized firms in
stagnating industries and lack of new growing firms in advancing industries. On ideological
grounds the Social Democrats focused on the largest listed firms, in particular their investments and
R&D spending, and promoted policies that supported financing via retained earnings and borrowing
from a strongly relation-based banking system but disfavored equity markets as supplier of capital
for egalitarian reasons. Their political support for use of dual-class shares and pyramiding in effect
aligned the interests of the incumbent political power with incumbent capital (in particular the
leading banks) as corporate control is maintained and actually reinforced. Capital is locked in with
the incumbent firms since the separation of control from ownership drives a wedge between the
costs of internal and external capital that causes an enhanced (political) pecking order of corporate
financing. Investments are thus primarily determined by historical profits, not by expected future
profits.
Listed firms have indeed not been dependent on the primary equity markets while
formation of private fortunes tied to new, fast-growing firms fuelled by equity market financing has
been very limited. This explains both why ownership did not disperse and why addition of new
firms has been so poor. Since labor market rules are designed to protect incumbent workers, both
labor and control over capital are therefore locked into the existing corporate structure while the
Social Democrats have locked in the political sector. The real problem with the Swedish model of

60

corporate ownership is thus the lack of economic and social dynamics— modernity has become
stale and embedded.
The strong historical and political path dependency is apparent in the fact that the two
socio-economic groups that spearheaded modernity 100 years ago— leading capitalists and
organized labor— are still the heavily entrenched incumbencies even if the importance of the
industrial society has been declining for decades.35 The real irony is that corporate control, although
diluted in recent years by increased institutional ownership, is still in the hands of very few, wellestablished families and banks, not despite but because of Social Democratic policies.
The Social Democrats in effect became the guarantor of heavily entrenched private
corporate ownership rather than the terminator of capitalism since the political and corporate
incumbencies have been united by strong common interests. Incumbent owners need the political
support to legitimize that their corporate power rests on extensive use of dual-class shares and
pyramiding. While the Social Democrats only get the necessary resources and indirect support for
their social and economic policies from the private sector if the largest firms remain under Swedish
control so that capital does not migrate. By not encouraging outsiders to create new firms and
fortunes, and by not fully activating the primary equity markets, the heavy politicized system has
redistributed incomes but not property rights and wealth. The result is an ageing economy with an
unusually large proportion of very old and very large firms with well-defined owners in control.

35

Path dependency is here used in a wider more general sense than in e.g. Bebchuk and Roe (1999).

61

References
Agnblad, Jonas, Erik Berglöf, Peter Högfeldt and Helena Svancar, 2001, Ownership and control in Sweden:
Strong owners, weak minorities, and social control, in Fabrizio Barca and Marco Becht (eds) The Control of
Corporate Europe, Oxford University Press
Allen, Franklin, and Douglas Gale, 1999, Diversity of opinion and financing of new technologies, Journal of
Financial Intermediation 8, 68-89.
Almeida, Heitor, and Daniel Wolfenzon, 2004a, Equilibrium costs of efficient internal capital markets,
Working paper, New York University.
Almeida, Heitor, and Daniel Wolfenzon, 2004b, A theory of pyramidal ownership and family business
groups, Working paper, New York University.
Althaimer, Hans, 1988, Börsen och företagens nyemissioner (New equity issues on The Stockhom Stock
Exchange 1902-1986) in Ingemund Hägg (ed) Stockholms Fondbörs. Riskkapitalmarknad i omvandling. SNS
Förlag, Stockholm.
Bebchuk, Lucian A., and Mark, J., Roe, 1999, A theory of path dependency in corporate governance and
ownership, Stanford Law Review 52, 127-170.
Bebchuk, Lucian A., 1999, A rent-protection theory of corporate ownership and control, NBER Working
paper #7203.
Bebchuk, Lucian A., Reinier Kraakman, and George Triantis, 1999, Stock pyramids, cross-ownership, and
dual class equity: The creation and agency costs of separating control from cash flow rights, NBER Working
paper #6951.
Becht, Marco, Patrick Bolton, and Ailsa Röell, 2002, Corporate governance and control, Working paper,
ECGI, Brussels.
Beck, Thorsten, Ross Levine, and N. Loayza, 2000, Finance and the sources of growth, Journal of Financial
Economics 58, 261-300.
Bertrand, Marianne., Paras Mehta, and Sendhil Mullanaithan, 2002, Ferreting out tunnelling: An application
to Indian business groups, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121-148.
Bonbright, J.C., and Gardiner. C. Means, 1932, The holding company: Its public significance and its
regulation, New York, McGraw-Hill Book Co.
Burkart, Mike, Fausto Panunzi, and Andrei Shleifer, 2003, Family firms, Journal of Finance. 58, 2167-2202
Carlin, Wendy, and Colin Mayer, 2003, Finance, investment, and growth, Journal of Financial Economics 69,
191-226.
Cronqvist, Henrik, and Mattias Nilsson, 2003, Agency Costs of Controlling Minority Shareholders, Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 38, 695-719.
Dahmén, Erik, 1950, Svensk industriell företagarverksamhet, Kausalanalys av den industriella utvecklingen
1919-1939 (Entrepeneurship in Sweden: A causal analysis of industrial dynamics in Sweden 1939-1939), IUI,
Stockholm.
Dyck, Alexander, and Luigi Zingales, 2004, Private Benefits of Control: An International Comparison,
Journal of Finance 59, 537-600.

62

Erixon, Lennart, 1997, The golden age of the Swedish Model: The coherence between capital accumulation
and economic policy in Sweden in the early postwar period, Report 97:9, Institute for Social Research, Oslo.
Fritz, Sven, 1990, Affärsbankernas aktieförvärvsrätt under 1900-talets första decennier, (The right of
commercial banks to acquire shares during the first decades of the 20th century) Acta Universitatis
Stockholmiensis; Stockholm Studies in Economic History 14, Almqvist & Wicksell International, Stockholm.
Galbraith, John Kenneth, 1967, The new industrial state, Houghton Mifflin, Boston.
Glete, Jan, (1994), Nätverk i näringslivet: Ägande och industriell omvandling d et mogna industri-samhället
1920-1990 (Corporate Networks: Ownership and industrial restructuring in the mature industrial society),
SNS Förlag, Stockholm
Granstrand, Ove, and Sverker Alänge, 1995, The evolution of corporate entrepreneurship in Swedish industry:
Was Schumpeter wrong, Journal of Evolutionary Economics 5, 133-156.
Gårdlund, Torsten, 1947, Svensk industrifinansiering under genombrottsskedet 1830-1913 (Financing of
Swedish firms during the formative years 1830-1913), Svenska Bankföreningen, Stockholm.
He, Kathy S., Randall Morck, and Bernard Yeung, 2003, Corporate stability and economic growth, Working
paper, School of Business, University of Alberta.
Hedborg, Anna, and Rudolf Meidner, 1984, Folkhemsmodellen (The Swedish Model), Rabén & Sjögren,
Stockholm.
Helleiner, E, 1994, From Bretton Woods to global finance: A world turned upside down, in R. Stubbs, and G.
Underhill (eds) Political economy and the changing global order, Toronto.
Henreksson, Magnus, and Ulf Jakobsson, 2001, Where Schumpeter was nearly right— the Swedish model
and Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy, Journal of Evolutionary Economics 11, 331-358.
Henreksson, Magnus, and Ulf Jakobsson, 2003a, The transformation of ownership policy and structure in
Sweden: Convergence towards the Anglo-Saxon model?, forthcoming in New Political Economy.
Henreksson, Magnus, and Ulf Jakobsson, 2003b, The Swedish model of corporate control in transition,
SSE/EFI Working Paper No. 521, Stockholm School of Economics
Hermansson, Carl-Henrik, 1965, Monopol och storfinanns—de 15 familjerna. (Monopoly and leading
capitalists: The fifteen families), Rabén och Sjögren, Stockholm
Holmén, Martin, and Peter, Högfeldt, 2004a, A law and finance analysis of Initial Public Offerings, Journal
of Financial Intermediation. 13, 324-358.
Holmén, Martin, and Peter, Högfeldt, 2004b, Pyramidal discounts: Tunneling or agency costs?, Working
paper, ECGI and Stockholm School of Economics.
Högfeldt, Peter, and Andris Oborenko, 2004, Does market timing or past profitability determine the capital
structure? Working paper, Stockholm School of Economics.
Jagrén, Lars, 1993, De dominerande storföretagen (The domineering transnational firms) in Den långa vägen,
The Research Institute of Industrial Economics, IUI, Stockholm.
Jörberg, Lennart, 1988, Svenska företagare under industrialismens genombrott 1870-1885 (Swedish
entrepreneurs during the industrial breakthrough 1870-1885), Lund Studies in Economics and Management 2,
Lund University Press, Lund

63

Korpi, Walter, 1978, The Working Class in Welfare Capitalism— Work, Union and Politics in Sweden,
Routledge & Kegan Paul, London.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, 1999, Corporate ownership around the
world, Journal of Finance 54, 471-517.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 2000, Investor protection
and corporate governance, Journal of Financial Economics 59, 3-27.
Larsson, Mats, 2002, Storföretagande och industrikoncentration (Mergers and acquistions among large listed
firms in Sweden 1913-38), ín Maths Isacson and Mats Morell (eds) Industrialismens tid: Ekonomiskhistoriska perspektiv på svensk industriell omvandling under 200 år, SNS Förlag, Stokcholm.
Lindbeck, Assar, (1997), The Swedish experiment, Journal of Economic Literature, XXXV, 1273-1319.
Lindgren, Gunnar, 1953, Shareholders and shareholder participation in the larger companies´ meetings in
Sweden, Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv 71, 281-298.
Lindgren, Håkan, 1994, Aktivt ägande: Investor under växlande konjunkturer (Active ownership: Investor in
variegating business cycles since 1916), Institute for Research in Economic History, Stockholm School of
Economics, Stockholm.
Lindgren, Håkan and Hans Sjögren, 2003, Banking systems as ideal types and as political economy: The
Swedish case 1820-1914, in D.J. Forsyth and D. Verdier (eds) The Origins of National Financial Systems.
Alexander Gerschenkron reconsidered, Routledge, London.
Maddison, A., (1982), Phases of capitalist development, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Meidner, Rudolf, 1978, Employee investment funds: An approach to collective capital formation, George
Allen & Unwin, London.
Morck, Randall K., David A. Strangeland, and Bernard Yeung, 2000, Inherited wealth, corporate control, and
economic growth: The Canadian disease, in Randall. K. Morck (ed), Concentrated Corporate Ownership.
University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Morck, Randall, 2003, Why some double taxation might make sense: The special case of inter-corporate
dividends, Working paper 9651, NBER.
NUTEK and ALMI, 2001, Tre näringspolitiska utmaningar – Allianser för hållbar tillväxt, (Three challenges
for the industrial policy – Alliances for sustainable growth) NUTEK Förlag, Stockholm.
Pagano, Marco and Paolo Volpin, 2004, The political economy of corporate governance, forthcoming in
American Economic Review.
Pagano, Marco and Paolo Volpin, 2001, The political economy of finance, Oxford Review of Economic Policy
17, 502-519.
Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini, 2003, Political institutions and policy outcomes: What are the stylized
facts?, Working paper IIES, Stockholm University.
Peterson, Tom, 2001, Promoting entrepreneurship: Bank-connected investment development companies in
Sweden 1962-1990 in Magnus Henreksson, Mats Larsson and Hans Sjögren (eds), Entrepreneurship in
business and research: Essays in honour of Håkan Lindgren, Institute for Research in Economic History,
Stockholm School of Economics, Stockholm.
Rajan, Raghuram G., and Luigi Zingales, 2003a, The great reversals: The politics of financial development in
the 20th century, Journal of Financial Economics 69, 5-50.
64

Rajan, Raghuram G., and Luigi Zingales, 2003b, Saving Capitalism from the Capitalists: Unleashing the
Power of Financial Markets to Create Wealth and Spread Opportunity, Crown Business.
Reiter, J., 2003, Changing the microfoundations of corporatism: The impact of financial globalization on
Swedish corporate ownership, New Political Economy 8.
Roe, Mark J., 2002a, Political Determinants of Corporate Governance: Political Context, Corporate Impact,
Clarendon Lectures in Management Studies. Oxford University Press.
Roe, Mark J., 2002b, Corporate law’s limits, Journal of Legal Studies 31, 233-271
Ross, Stephen A., 2002, Neoclassical finance, alternative finance and the closed-end fund puzzle, European
Financial Management 8, 129-137.
Rydén, Bengt, 191, Fusioner i svensk industri (Mergers in the Swedish industry), IUI, Stockholm
Sjögren, Hans, 1995, Long-term financial contracts in the bank-oriented financial system, Scandinavian
Journal of Management 10, 315-330.
SOU 1968:7 Koncentrationsutredningen I, Finansdepartementet, Stockholm.
SOU 1968:3, Kreditmarknadens
Finansdepartementet, Stockholm.

struktur

och

funktionssätt,

Koncentrationsutredningen

II,

SOU 1988:38, Ägande och inflytande i svenskt näringsliv: Huvudbetänkande från ägarutredningen,
Industridepartementet, Stockholm.
SIND 1980:5, Ägandet i det privata näringslivet, Statens Industriverk, Stockholm.
SNS Ownership Project, 1988, Special reports by Ragnar Boman, Anna-Karin Eliasson and Barbro
Sköldebrand.
Sundqvist, Sven-Ivan, and Ann-Marie Sundin, 1985-2002, Owners and Power in Sweden’s Listed Companies,
Dagens Nyheter, Stockholm.
Södersten, Jan, 1984, Sweden, in King, M.A. and Fullerton, D. (eds.), The Taxation of Income from Capital.
A Comparative Study of the United States, the United Kingdom, Sweden and West Germany. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Villalonga, Belen, and Raphael Amit, 2004, How do Family Ownership, Management, and Control Affect
Firm Value?, Working paper, Harvard Business School.
Wigforss, Ernst, 1980, Ernst Wigforss skrifter i urval I-IX, (A collection of Ernst Wigforss writings), Tidens
Förlag, Stockholm.
Wiklund, Johan, Per Davidsson, and Fredric Delmar, 2002, What do they think and feel about growth? An
expectancy-value approach to small business managers´ attitudes toward growth. Entrepreneurship Theory
and Practice.
Öberg, Ann, 2003, Essays on capital income taxation in the corporate and housing sectors, Economic Studies
72 (Doctoral thesis), Department of Economics, Uppsala University.
Östlind, Anders, 1944, Svensk samhällsekonomi 1914-1922: med särskild hänsyn till industrin (The Swedish
economy 1914-1922, in particular the industrial sector), Stockholm.

65

Table 1: Ownership and controlling owners in the 25 largest industrial firms in Sweden in 1925.
Type of controlling owners: F (Family control and CEO member of the founding family; E
(Entrepreneurial control; controlling owner appoints the CEO and is active in the board) and M
(Management independent of owners).
Source: Glete (1994)
Firm

# Employees

Controlling owner

Type of control

ASEA

7 000

-

M

Stora Kopparberg

7 000

Wallenberg

E(M)

Svenska Tändstricks AB

5 000

Ivar Kreuger

F

Grängesberg/LKAB

5 200

-

M

SKF

5 200

Mark/Carlander

M

Wallenberg
Skandinavbanken
Uddeholm

4 100

-

M

Höganäs-Billesholm

3 900

-

M

L M Ericsson

3 500

K F Wincrantz

FE

Ivar Kreuger
Husqvarna

3 300

-

M

Tobaksmonopolet

3 200

Government

M

Sockerbolaget

3 000

-

M

Ytterstforss-Munksund

3 000

Svenska Handelsbanken

M

Holmens Bruk

3 000

Wahren

M

Gimo-Österby

3 000

Svenska Handelsbanken

M

Sandviken

3 000

Göransson/Magnusson

F

Skånska Cement

2 600

Wehtje

FM

Götaverken

2 500

Broström

ME

Separator

2 300

Cross-holdings

M

NOHAB

2 300

Göteborgs Handelsbank

M

Billerud

2 200

-

M

Bergvik&Ala

2 200

Svenska Handelsbanken

M

A K Fernsröm

2 100

Fernström

F

Iggesund

2 000

Trygger/von Sydow

ME

Skönvik

2 000

Bunsow

M

Svenska Handelsbanken
Malmö Yllefabrik

1 900

Schmitz
Skandinavbanken

66

F

Table 2: Ownership and controlling owners in the 25 largest industrial firms in Sweden in 1945.
Type of controlling owners: F (Family control and CEO member of the founding family; E
(Entrepreneurial control; controlling owner appoints the CEO and is active in the board) and M
(Management independent of owners).
Source: Glete (1994)
Firm

# Employees

Controlling owner

Type of control

ASEA

23 200

Wallenberg

ME

Uddeholm

11 000

-

M

Bofors

9 200

Axel Wenner-Gren

M

SKF

8 500

Mark/Carlander

(E)

Wallenberg
L M Ericsson

7 500

ITT, SHB-Group

E

Wallenberg
Stora Kopparberg

7 500

Wallenberg

E

SCA

7 000

SHB-Gruppen

M

Esselte

6 700

-

M

Fagersta

6 400

SHB-Gruppen

M

Svenska Tändstricks AB

6 200

Wallenberg

E

Grängesberg/LKAB

6 200

-

M

Götaverken

6 000

AB Gillius

M

(Management)
Sandviken

5 900

Göransson/Magnusson

F

Husqvarna

5 800

-

M

Hellefors Bruk

5 300

Custos

M

Skånska Cementgjuteriet

4 500

Wehtje

E

Skånska Cement/IFÖ

4 500

Wehtje

F

Sockerbolaget

4 000

-

M

Volvo

3 700

-

M

Svenska Metallverken

3 500

-

M

Billerud

3 500

-

M

Boliden

3 500

Skandinaviska Banken

M

Separator

3 300

Wallenberg

ME

Höganäs-Billesholm

3 100

-

M

Kockums Mek

3 000

Kockum

E

Verkstad

67

Table 3: Ownership and controlling owners in the 25 largest industrial firms in Sweden in 1967.
Type of controlling owners: F (Family control and CEO member of the founding family; E
(Entrepreneurial control; controlling owner appoints the CEO and is active in the board) and M
(Management independent of owners).
Source: Glete (1994)
Firm

# of Employees

Controlling owner

Type of control

SKF

64 759

Wallenberg, Asken

M(E)

L M Ericsson

46 400

Wallenberg

E

SHB-Gruppen
ASEA

32 401

Wallenberg

E

Svenska Tändsticks AB

31 800

Wallenberg

E

Volvo

24 268

-

M

Electrolux

20 964

Wallenberg

E

Alfa-Laval

17 837

Wallenberg

E

Skånska Cementgjuteriet

17 518

Skånska Cement

M

Grängesberg

16 010

-

M

Uddeholm

15 812

Custos

M

Sandviken

14 850

Klingspor/Stenbeck

E

SCA

14 121

SHB-Gruppen

M

SAAB

13 699

Wallenberg

E

BPA

13 000

TUC

M

Facit

12 832

Ericsson

M

Bofors

12 300

-

M

AGA

12 244

SHB-Gruppen

M

Stora Kopparberg

11 371

Wallenberg

E

Atlas Copco

11 196

Wallenberg

E

Skånska Cement

9 638

-

M

Scania Vabis

9 280

Wallenberg

E

Götaverken

8 274

AB Gillius

M

(Management)
Mo&Domsjö

8 017

Kempe/Carlgren

F

Svenska Metallverken

7 775

SHB-Gruppen

F

Esselte

7 668

-

M

68

Table 4: Frequency of ownership positions sorted both by size of ownership (capital) and by size of
the 100 largest firms in terms of employment in 1950, 1963, 1978 and 1985. Source: SNS (1988).
1950
Firms 1-25
Firms 26-50
Firms 51-75
Firms 76-100

< 2.0%
347
149
128
70

2.0-5.0%
34
48
25
33

5.0-10.0%
13
14
14
15

10.0-25.0%
5
23
19
7

25-50.0%
5
6
8
8

50.0-100%
2
4
9
12

< 2.0%
388
336
169
140

2.0-5.0%
63
67
77
66

5.0-10.0%
21
19
24
23

10.0-25.0%
5
9
16
18

25-50.0%
7
6
6
4

50.0-100%
3
1
7
11

< 2.0%
10
14
1
2

2.0-5.0%
89
81
43
53

5.0-10.0%
18
35
31
11

10.0-25.0%
16
17
15
9

25-50.0%
5
4
10
12

50.0-100%
2
3
7
11

< 2.0%
28
14
14
4

2.0-5.0%
89
81
51
57

5.0-10.0%
39
44
32
17

10.0-25.0%
21
17
21
17

25-50.0%
9
10
14
17

50.0-100%
3
4
9
8

1963
Firms 1-25
Firms 26-50
Firms 51-75
Firms 76-100

1978
Firms 1-25
Firms 26-50
Firms 51-75
Firms 76-100

1985
Firms 1-25
Firms 26-50
Firms 51-75
Firms 76-100

69

Table 5: Ownership and controlling owners in the 25 largest industrial firms in Sweden in 1990.
Type of controlling owners: F (Family control and CEO member of the founding family; E
(Entrepreneurial control; controlling owner appoints the CEO and is active in the board) and M
(Management independent of owners).
Source: Glete (1994)
Firm

# of Employees

Controlling owner

Type of control

ASEA Brown Boveri

215 154

Wallenberg

E (M)

Brown Boveri
Electrolux

150 892

Wallenberg

E

Volvo

72 213

Volvo-Skanska

M

Cross-Shareholding
Stora

69 700

Wallenberg

E

Ericsson

66 138

Wallenberg

ME

SHB-Gruppen
SKF

49 305

Wallenberg

ME

Skanska
Procordia

45 193

Government/Volvo

ME

Skanska

31 746

Volvo-Skanska

M

Cross Shareholding
SCA

30 139

SHB-Gruppen

M

Saab Scania

29 388

Wallenberg

E

Nobel Industrier

26 654

Penser

E

Sandvik

26 373

Skanska

M

NCC

23 178

Johnsson’s Foundations

E

Trelleborg

21 939

Dunker’s Foundation

M

Atlas Copco

21 507

Wallenberg

E

Alfa-Laval

20 809

Wallenberg

E

Esselte

19 545

Lindholm

E

ASEA

18 066

Wallenberg

E

BPA

17 948

TUC

M

AGA

14 559

SHB-Gruppen

M

Cardo

14 080

Volvo

M

MoDo

12 961

Kempe/Carlgren (SCA)

E

Svenskt Stål AB

12 014

Government

ME

SIAB

9 814

Lundberg

E

FFV

9 709

Government

ME

70

Table 6
Closed End Investment Funds’ control of the Stockholm Stock Exchange (SSE) 1986-2000
The total market value of equity controlled by closed-end investment funds (CEIFs) and as percentage of the SSE market
capitalization (market value of CEIFs excluded), the personal investments (investments by foundations controlled by the
family/ organization included) by the controlling owners of the CEIFs (i.e the capital amount the owners themselves have
invested), the percentage of total market capitalization invested by the controlling owners of the CEIFs, and the ratio
between value under control and the net capital investment by the controlling owners of the CEIF.
Panel A: Value under CEIF control (sum of firm values in which a CEIF is part of the controlling block, i.e. the largest
voting block) in million SEK, value of SSE in million SEK with CEIFs excluded, the market value of the personal
investments by the controlling owners of the CEIFs (controlled foundations included).
Year
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000

Value under CEIF Value of % of SSE Value (CEIFs Personal Investments on
Personal
control
SSE (CEIFs excluded) under CEIF SSE by the controlling Investments as
excluded)
Control
owners of the CEIFs
% of SSE value
284328
405505
70.1
25008
6.2
235598
402100
58.6
21063
5.2
342266
566403
60.4
31218
5.5
447512
701360
63.8
41022
5.8
296758
504560
58.8
31054
6.2
352133
516247
68.2
20444
4.0
368878
505439
73.0
20050
4.0
691817
831846
83.2
40135
4.8
587787
964558
60.9
33394
3.5
743420
1137772
65.3
41223
3.6
1067296
1743868
61.2
60963
3.5
1343580
1984227
67.7
75378
3.8
1373303
2249611
61.0
73156
3.3
2151551
3644555
59.0
106431
2.9
1786520
3134973
57.0
80259
2.6

Control/
Capital
11.4
11.2
11.0
10.9
9.6
17.2
18.4
17.2
17.6
18.0
17.5
17.8
18.8
20.2
22.3

Panel B: Total market value controlled by Investor and Industrivärden (sum of firm equity values in which Investor or
Industrivärden is part of the controlling block, i.e. the largest voting block) in million SEK, market capitalization of SSE
(million SEK with CEIFs excluded), and personal equity investments on the SSE by the Wallenbergs and the SHB
(foundations included), either through the CEIFs (Investor (Providentia, Export Invest) or via Industrivärden (Promotion/
Bahco)) or through direct investments.
Year
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000

Value under
Wallenberg or
SHB control
214167
188426
284120
378846
275475
294597
310584
561866
560923
702468
1004736
1340257
1341042
2088542
1632428

Market value of
SSE (CEIFs
excluded)
405505
402100
566403
701360
504560
516247
505439
831846
964558
1137772
1743868
1984227
2249611
3644555
3134973

% of SSE Value Personal Investments on
Personal
under Wallenberg SSE by the Wallenbergs Investments as
or SHB Control
and SHB
% of SSE value
47.6
14467
3.2
42.9
12659
2.9
46.0
20589
3.3
48.9
27034
3.5
50.3
21935
4.0
53.4
14691
2.7
56.8
15459
2.8
62.9
32699
3.7
54.6
28911
2.8
58.1
36073
3.0
54.4
52806
2.9
63.4
66426
3.1
56.6
63944
2.7
55.0
96148
2.5
49.3
69707
2.2

Source: Holmén and Högfeldt (2004b)

71

Control/
Capital
14.8
14.9
13.8
14.0
12.6
20.1
20.1
17.2
19.4
19.5
19.0
20.2
21.0
21.7
23.4

Table 7 Effective marginal tax rates for different combinations of owners and sources of finance in
1960, 1970 and 1980 (real pre-tax rate of return 10% at actual inflation rates) and in 1985, 1991 and
1999 at different inflations rates for listed firms.

1960
Households
Tax exempt institutions
Insurance companies
1970
Households
Tax exempt institutions
Insurance companies
1980
Households
Tax exempt institutions
Insurance companies
1985
0% inflation rate
5%
10%
1991
0% inflation rate
5%
10%
1999
0% inflation rate
5%
10%

Debt

New share issues

Retained earnings

27.2
–32.2
–21.7

92.7
31.4
41.6

48.2
31.2
34.0

51.3
–64.8
–45.1

122.1
15.9
42.4

57.1
32.7
41.2

58.2
–83.4
–54.9

136.6
–11.6
38.4

51.9
11.2
28.7

50.4
75.0
102.1

43.7
87.6
129.2

46.0
58.8
68.8

29.0
38.8
47.7

17.6
46.4
76.6

40.3
51.5
60.4

36.2
49.1
61.9

56.2
79.2
103.1

47.3
60.2
70.5

Note: All calculations are based on the actual asset composition in manufacturing and conform to the general
framework developed by King and Fullerton (1984). The average holding period is assumed to be 10 years. A
negative tax rate implies that the rate of return after tax is greater than before tax. For instance, a tax rate of –
83 percent for a debt-financed investment owned by a tax-exempt institution in 1980 tells us that a real rate of
return of 10 percent before tax becomes 18.3 percent taking the tax effects into account.
Source: Södersten (1984) and Öberg (2003).

72

73

Fig. 1. The banks and the largest firms in 1960. The full line indicates that managing directors
and/or board members of the bank are also board members of large firms that do their major
borrowing and other financial activities with the bank. The dotted lines show that there is only an
indirect relation as old managers or non-board members affiliated with the bank are also board
members of client firms.

74

Source: Hermansson (1965) p 190.

Fig 2. The 15 financial families and their controlling interests in the 1960s. The network between
the financial families and the firms they control, their relations with the three major banks (Enskilda
Banken, Skandinavbanken and Handelsbanken) and with holding companies (closed-end investment
funds like Investor, Custos and Industrivärden) associated with the banks and with insurance
companies (e.g. Skandia, Thule and SPP).
75
Source: Hermansson (1965) p 289.

SEO activity in Sweden 1902-2002:
Relative to Gross Domestic Capital Formation (GDCF)
20000

40%
35%

16000

30%

14000

25%

12000
10000

20%

8000

15%

6000

10%

4000

5%

2000
0
1902 1912 1922 1932 1942 1952 1962 1972 1982 1992
Year

Sources: For 1902-87 Althaimer (1988), and for 1988-2002 Holmén and Högfeldt (2004b)

76

0%

% of GDCF

SEO Volume in M SEK (2002
prices)

18000

50 largest firms in 2000 sorted by the period when they were founded
1970-

0
8

1946-1969

11

1914-1945

15

1891-1913

10

1871-1890

6

-1870

0

3

6

9

Number

Source: NUTEK and ALMI (2001).

77

12

15

50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
1930

Fig 1
Discount on Investor 1930-2002:
Share Price Relative to NAV (Net Asset Value)

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

Sources: For 1930-1991, Lindgren (1994) (p 93, 149, 177 and 255) and for 1992-2002 Holmén and Högfeldt
(2004b).

