                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 SEARCH-THEORETIC MODELS OF THE LABOR MARKET:
                                   A SURVEY

                                           Richard Rogerson
                                            Robert Shimer
                                            Randall Wright

                                         Working Paper 10655
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10655


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2004




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2004 by Richard Rogerson, Robert Shimer, and Randall Wright. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Search-Theoretic Models of the Labor Market: A Survey
Richard Rogerson, Robert Shimer, and Randall Wright
NBER Working Paper No. 10655
August 2004
JEL No. E2, J6
                                       ABSTRACT

We survey search-theoretic models of the labor market and discuss their usefulness for analyzing
labor market dynamics, job turnover, and wages. We first examine single-agent models, showing
how they can incorporate many interesting features and generate rich predictions. We then consider
equilibrium models that endogenize several variables that are treated parametrically in single-agent
models, including the arrival rate of job offers and the wage distribution. We survey alternative
formulations of these models, emphasizing two key issues: how workers and firms meet, and how
wages are determined. We emphasize throughout the implications of alternative assumptions for
turnover, wage dispersion, and efficiency.

Richard Rogerson
Departement of Economics
WP Carey School of Business
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ 85287
and NBER
richard.rogerson@asu.edu

Robert Shimer
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
shimer@uchicago.edu

Randall Wright
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
rwright@econ.sas.upenn.edu
       Search-Theoretic Models of the Labor
                Market: A Survey∗
    Richard Rogerson               Robert Shimer              Randall Wright
                                   July 9, 2004



1     Introduction
The economic fortunes of most individuals are largely determined by their la-
bor market experiences. Hence, economists are naturally interested not only
in documenting and analyzing the empirical behavior of wages and employ-
ment, but also in building models within which we can study labor market
outcomes from both a positive and a normative perspective, and within which
we can assess the consequences of changes in labor market policies, regula-
tions and institutions. While the usual paradigm of supply and demand
in a frictionless labor market is useful for discussing some of the questions,
important phenomena not easily addressed in this setup include labor mar-
ket transitions, such as movements between employment and unemployment,
and the distribution of wages across individuals and over time.
    Since its inception search theory has been extremely useful for thinking
about these things, and for addressing a host of related empirical and policy
issues. Even the earliest models that study a single agent in isolation enhance
our understanding and our ability to organize observations about the work
histories of individuals. But more recently, equilibrium search theory has
embedded these agents into models that endogenously determine important
    ∗
      Rogerson: Arizona State University. Shimer: University of Chicago. Wright: Univer-
sity of Pennsylvania. We would like to thank Daron Acemoglu, Ken Burdett, Gwen Eudey,
Derek Laing, John McMillan, Dale Mortensen and Peter Rupert for their input. We also
thank the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, ERMES at Paris 2, the National Science
Foundation, and the Sloan Foundation for research support.


                                           1
variables like job creation and destruction rates and the wage distribution.
The goal of this survey is to summarize these eﬀorts, and in the process
to provide a unifying perspective within which the various models can be
seen. Throughout the presentation we will emphasize three things that search
theory helps us understand: job creation, job destruction, and wages.
    The kinds of questions that we will be concerned with include the fol-
lowing. What economic factors determine labor market transitions, and in
particular what determines the equilibrium unemployment rate? Why do
unemployed agents sometimes choose to remain unemployed, say by turn-
ing down oﬀers, and more generally what determines the length of unem-
ployment spells? How can ostensibly homogeneous workers end up with
diﬀerent wages? What are the trade-oﬀs faced by firms when they pay dif-
ferent wages? What are the interactions between wages and turnover? And
what determines the eﬃcient amount of turnover? This essay shows that
search theory provides a rigorous yet tractable framework that can be used
to address these questions, and thereby provides important insights into the
functioning of modern labor markets.
    At the outset, it is important to point out that search theory constitutes
a very large branch of economics. In addition to labor it has been used in
many applications in both micro and macro, including monetary theory, in-
dustrial organization, finance, and the economics of the marriage market, all
of which we must neglect lest this survey becomes unmanageable.1 Search
has been used in technical theoretical work, and has been a workhorse for
empirical economics, but we can neither delve into pure theory nor pay ap-
propriate attention to all of the econometric issues or empirical results here.2
Also, while the analysis will strive to be rigorous, we want to emphasize
applications and issues–that is, what can we learn about labor economics
from these models–and not models or methods per se. Hence the presenta-
tion will revolve around the ways in which the models help us think about
   1
     Examples in monetary economics include Kiyotaki-Wright (1993), Shi (1995) and
Trejos-Wright (1995); examples in the marriage literature include Mortensen (1988),
Burdett-Coles (1997, 1999) and Shimer-Smith (2000); examples in IO include Salop (1977),
Jovanovic (1982), Jovanovic-MacDonald (1994), and Jovanovic-Rob (1989); examples in
finance include Duﬃe-Garleanu-Pedersen (2002) and Weill (2003).
   2
     Examples of theoretical work studying the question of whether frictionless competitive
equilibrium can be considered the limit of search equilibrium as the frictions get small
include Rubinstein-Wolinsky (1987), Gale (1987) and Mortensen-Wright (2002). Devine-
Kiefer (1991) and Wolpin (1995) provide surveys of empirical applications.



                                            2
substantive issues related to turnover and wages.
    The essay proceeds as follows. In Sections 2 and 3 we study the problem
of a single agent, not only because this is the way the literature began but
because it is an important component of the equilibrium models that follow.
In Section 4 we consider models that build upon two main ingredients: the
matching function, which determines how workers and firms get together, and
the bargaining solution, which determines the wage once they do. In Section
5 we study a class of models where wages are posted ex ante, rather than
bargained after workers and firms meet, and where agents use directed rather
than random search. In Section 6 we discuss models with nontransferable
utility, where the focus is on determining which matches get consummated.
In Section 7 we present models where wages are posted ex ante but search is
once again random, with an emphasis on wage dispersion. In Section 8 we
discusses eﬃciency.
    Although the diﬀerent versions of the model that we present sometimes
adopt some very diﬀerent assumptions–e.g. random versus directed search,
transferrable versus nontransferable utility, bargaining versus wage posting,
and so on–we want to emphasize that they are really diﬀerent applications
of the same framework, and in each case the analysis uses the same set of
basic tools. Our goal is that, with a little work, the reader should feel at
the end of this article that search theory is a flexible and broadly applicable
paradigm for organizing our thinking about labor markets, and that this will
stimulate even more learning and research in the area.3


2       A Simple Model
We begin with the problem of an individual searching for aP
                                                          job in real time,
taking market conditions as given. He seeks to maximize E ∞
                                  4                              t
                                                            t=0 β xt , where
    3
     Earlier surveys include Lippman-McCall (1976a), Mortensen (1986) and Mortensen-
Pissarides (1999a,b). Naturally there is some overlap with the current essay, although our
approach and many of the issues we address are diﬀerent. Examples of things emphsized
here and not in those papers include the directed search models in Section 5, the non-
transferable utility models in Section 6, some of the wage dispersion models in Section 7,
and aspects of our approach to eﬃciency in Section 8.
   4
     While it is often said that the economics of search began with Stigler (1961), his
formulation was not really dynamic. McCall (1970), Mortensen (1970) and Gronau (1971)
presented the first sequential models of job search, although others had posed related
problems (including Simon 1955, who discussed looking for a house).


                                            3
β ∈ (0, 1) is the discount factor, xt is income at t, and E denotes the expec-
tation. Income is x = w if employed at wage w and x = b if unemployed.
Although we refer to w as the wage, more generally it could capture some
measure of the desirability of the job, depending on things like benefits, lo-
cation, prestige, etc. (see Hwang-Mortensen-Reed 1998). Similarly, although
we will refer to b > 0 as unemployment insurance (UI), it can also include
the value of leisure or home production.5
    The individual chooses a policy for whether to accept a job. We begin
with the case where an unemployed individual samples one i.i.d. oﬀer each
period from a known distribution with CDF F (w). If an oﬀer is rejected
the agent remains unemployed that period. Previously rejected oﬀers cannot
be recalled, although this assumption is not restrictive because the problem
is stationary, so that an oﬀer that is not acceptable today will not be ac-
ceptable tomorrow. For now we assume that if a job is accepted the worker
keeps it forever. Hence, W (w) = w/(1 − β) is the payoﬀ to accepting (W
stands for the value of working). Similarly, U = b + βE max{W (w0 ), U},
where the expectation is with respect to the next oﬀer w0 , is the payoﬀ from
rejecting, earning b, waiting and sampling again (U stands for the value of
unemployment).
    Let the value of having an oﬀer w in hand be
                                             ½                    ¾
                                                w               0
           O(w) = max{W (w), U} = max               , b + βEO(w ) .        (1)
                                               1−β
Since W (w) is increasing, there is a unique wR called the reservation wage
such that W (wR ) = U, with the property that the agent should reject w < wR
and accept w > wR . Clearly, wR = (1−β)b+(1−β)βEO(w0 ), which expresses
wR in terms of the unknown function O. To eliminate O, insert b+βEO(w0 ) =
wR /(1 − β) into (1) and integrate to get EO(w0 ) = E max{w0 , wR }/(1 − β);
then we have
                                         Z ∞
            wR = T (wR ) ≡ (1 − β)b + β      max{w, wR }dF (w).           (2)
                                                  0
   5
    We formulate the problem as though the agent is interested in maximizing expected
discounted income. This is the same as maximizing expected utility if the worker is risk
neutral, of course, but also if he is risk averse and markets are complete, since then he can
maximize utility by first maximizing income and then smoothing consumption. The case
of a risk averse agent facing incomplete markets is more diﬃcult. Early analyses include
Danforth (1979) and Hall-Lippman-McCall (1979); more recent studies include Valdivia
(1997), Costain (1997), Browning-Crossley-Smith (1999) and Lenz-Tranaes (2003).

                                             4
The function T is easily shown to be a contraction. Hence, there is a unique
solution to wR = T (wR ), and the sequence wN+1 = T (wN ) converges to wR
as N → ∞ starting from any initial value of w0 .6
    Once we know wR we know everything there is to know about the optimal
strategy. However, we also present some alternative representations often
seen in the literature. First, subtracting βwR from both sides of (2) and
simplifying, we get the usual reservation wage equation
                                    Z ∞
                                β
                    wR = b +             (w − wR )dF (w),                (3)
                              1 − β wR

which equates the utility per period from accepting wR to the payoﬀ from
rejecting, which is b plus the expected improvement next period. Using
integration by parts, we can also write
                                     Z ∞
                                 β
                     wR = b +            [1 − F (w)]dw,               (4)
                               1 − β wR

which is quite handy in some of the applications below.7
    A unifying theme of our essay is that search theory allows us to discuss
issues neglected by traditional (supply and demand) theories of labor mar-
kets. Even this extremely basic model can be used to illustrate the point.
The probability the worker gets a job each period, called the hazard rate,
is H = 1 − F (wR ), so the probability of being unemployed t periods is
(1 − H)t−1 H and the average duration of unemployment is

                                  X
                                  ∞
                                                           1
                            D=          t(1 − H)t−1 H =      .                         (5)
                                  t=1
                                                           H

Also, the observed distribution of wages paid is G(w) = F (w|w ≥ wR ).
    Consider the impact of an increase in b–say, more generous UI–which
is an experiment we will come back to repeatedly. From the reservation wage
equation the immediate eﬀect is to increase wR , which has two secondary
   6
      Here wN can be interpreted as the reservation wage from a finite-horizon search prob-
lem with N periods remaining, if we start at w0 = b, since b is the reservation wage
for a one-shot problem. One can check that wN converges monotonically to wR ; i.e. the
finite-horizon reservation wage increases as the horizon gets longer.
    7
                                                                        R w̄
      To derive (4), note that for any distribution with upper bound w̄, wR (w−wR )dF (w) =
            R w̄             R w̄
w̄ − wR − wR F (w)dw = wR [1 − F (w)]dw.

                                            5
eﬀects: the distribution of observed wages G(w) is higher in the sense of first
order stochastic dominance, since more low wage oﬀers are rejected; and the
hazard rate H is lower, increasing average unemployment duration. We will
extend things in many ways in what follows, but this simple example shows
how search-based models are well designed for discussing unemployment and
wages.8


3     Extensions
Although the above model permits a rudimentary discussion of unemploy-
ment duration and the wage distribution, it is inadequate along several di-
mensions. For example, since workers receive 1 oﬀer per period, a change b
aﬀects things only through the reservation wage and not the oﬀer arrival rate.
Also it does not allow us to discuss the duration of employment, since by as-
sumption jobs last forever. Here we consider some extensions to remedy this.
These extensions, including search intensity, on-the-job search, wage changes
and learning, are important ingredients into equilibrium models of the type
discussed in later sections.

3.1     Search Intensity
As a first step, consider a worker who receives n oﬀers per period where
n is a Poisson random variable with parameter α; i.e. the probability of
n ∈ {0, 1, 2, . . .} is αn e−α /n!. If a worker receives multiple oﬀers, he either
accepts the best, which is a random variable with CDF F (w)n , or rejects
them all and continues searching. The logic used to derive (3) now implies
                                      Z
                           β X αn e−α ∞
                                ∞
                wR = b +                  (w − wR )dF (w)n .                           (6)
                         1 − β n=1 n!  wR

   8
     Other results from this model that are not easy to discuss using supply and demand
include the eﬀects of changes in F . For some of these experiments it is useful to assume
F is log-concave (i.e. log F is concave), which as first pointed out by Burdett (1981) is
often useful in search theory. As an example, suppose we increase wages, in the sense of
increasing every w in the support of F either by a constant or proportionally. Then perhaps
surprisingly, one can show that E[w|w ≥ wR ] may go down, but it can be guaranteed to
go up under log-concavity (Wright-Loberg 1987 show this under the interpretation that
the changes in w are due to tax changes).



                                            6
    For some applications it is useful to consider the case where the length of
a time period is very short. Thus, let ∆ denote the period length and write
       1
β = 1+r∆  . The number of oﬀers per period is now Poisson with parameter
α∆, and (6) becomes
                                            Z
                        1 X (α∆)n e−α∆ ∞
                            ∞
             wR = b +                           (w − wR )dF (w)n .          (7)
                       r∆ n=1        n!      wR

Taking the limit as ∆ → 0 gives
                                        Z   ∞
                                  α
                         wR = b +               (w − wR )dF (w),                       (8)
                                  r       wR

since all terms in the summation except the first are of order ∆2 , and hence
become negligible when ∆ is small. This is the continuous-time version of
reservation wage equation (3); the continuous-time version of (4) follows from
again integrating by parts.9
    We now allow workers to choose their search intensity, making α endoge-
nous. Assume that the (utility) cost of achieving arrival rate α is g(α), where
g0 > 0 and g00 > 0. Unemployed workers choose α to maximize the value of
unemployed search, rU = wR , where now
                                      Z
                                    α ∞
                   wR = b − g(α) +         (w − wR )dF (w).                 (9)
                                    r wR
The first order condition for α (assuming an interior solution, which we can
always guarantee with standard curvature conditions) is
                        Z ∞
                            (w − wR )dF (w) = rg0 (α).                  (10)
                             wR

   From (9) and (10), an increase in b raises wR and reduces α. Thus endoge-
nous intensity introduces a new channel through which things like b influ-
ence the outcome. Notice that here the hazard is H = α [1 − F (wR )], and the
probability of finding a job after an unemployment spellRof length t is He−Ht .
                                                         ∞
Hence, the average duration of unemployment is D = 0 tHe−Ht dt = 1/H,
the same as (5).10
   9
      When ∆ is small, the time until the arrival of the next oﬀer is an exponential random
variable t with distribution 1 − e−αt . This implies the expected time until the next oﬀer
is 1/α, independent of history. We say this arrival process is memoryless.
   10
      As a exercise, one can show ∂H/∂α > 0 if F is log-concave, but not in general (see
Flinn-Heckman 1983 or Burdett-Ondrich 1985).

                                               7
3.2     Turnover
So far we have assumed that once an oﬀer is accepted it is permanent. Sadly,
perhaps, not all relationships last forever, so here we add the possibility that
jobs end. Returning to the case of exogenous search intensity for now, sup-
pose layoﬀs arrive according to a Poisson process with parameter λ. We
endogenize this in various ways below, but for now λ is constant.11 Also,
because it will be useful for some applications, we introduce the possibility
that the individual may die or otherwise permanently exit the market ac-
cording to an independent Poisson process with parameter δ, after which he
gets utility normalized to 0.
                                                         1
    Let the period length be ∆, the discount factor 1+r∆    , the probability of
an oﬀer α∆, the probability of a layoﬀ λ∆, and the probability of death δ∆
per period (we implicitly ignore the possibility of multiple events within a
period, and assume that ∆ is suﬃciently short so that all these probabilities
are less than 1). Bellman’s equations are
                         ·    Z ∞                                        ¸
                 1 − δ∆
      U = b∆ +             α∆       max{W (w), U}dF (w) + (1 − α∆)U (11)
                 1 + r∆         0
                  1 − δ∆
  W (w) = w∆ +            [λ∆U + (1 − λ∆)W (w)] .                           (12)
                  1 + r∆
Taking limits as ∆ → 0 gives
                                         Z    ∞
                    (r + δ)U = b + α              max{W (w) − U, 0}dF (w)               (13)
                                          0
              (r + δ)W (w) = w + λ[U − W (w)].                                          (14)

   Again, the reservation wage satisfies W (wR ) = U, and the methods lead-
ing to (4) now yield
                                       Z ∞
                                α
                   wR = b +                [1 − F (w)]dw.              (15)
                            r + δ + λ wR

Notice λ and δ aﬀect wR only by changing the eﬀective discount rate to
r + λ + δ, but they also aﬀect labor market transitions directly. Thus, the
worker now goes through repeated spells of employment and unemployment,
  11
    It is also interesting to let λ vary across jobs, since then a reservation strategy needs
to be defined in terms of the pair (w, λ) (Burdett-Mortensen 1980; Wright 1987).


                                              8
and if he starts unemployed, on average he spends a fraction (λ+δ)/(H+λ+δ)
of his life unemployed. The model can be used for organizing micro data
on individual wage and employment histories. But although it generates
turnover, this model does so only through exogenous events like layoﬀs and
deaths. We next consider extensions that endogenize job separations.

3.2.1   On-the-job Search
In reality much turnover is accounted for by job-to-job transitions with no in-
tervening period of unemployment. The on-the-job search model of Burdett
(1978) allows for this, and in addition explains how tenure at a particular job
is correlated with other variables, such as the wage and quit rate. Following
the presentation in Mortensen and Neumann (1984), suppose new oﬀers ar-
rive in continuous time at rate α0 while unemployed and α1 while employed.
Each oﬀer is a random draw from the same F . For now, search intensity and
hence α0 and α1 are exogenous. Also, to reduce notation, for the rest of this
section we set δ = 0. The strategy of an employed worker is obvious: accept
any oﬀer greater than your current wage. What needs to be determined is
the strategy of an unemployed worker.
    The methods leading to (13) and (14) now imply
                           Z ∞
           rU = b + α0         [W (w) − U]dF (w)                           (16)
                            wR
                            Z ∞
       rW (w) = w + α1          [W (w0 ) − W (w)]dF (w0 ) + λ[U − W (w)], (17)
                            w

where the second term in (17) represents the event that an outside oﬀer
arrives while employed. Evaluating (17) at w = wR and combining it with
(16),                           Z   ∞
             wR = b + (α0 − α1 )        [W (w0 ) − W (wR )]dF (w0 ).      (18)
                                   wR

Observe that wR is greater or less than b as α0 is greater or less than α1 .
Thus, when oﬀers arrive more frequently while employed, individuals may
accept w < b, just to get other oﬀers.
   To eliminate W from (18), integrate by parts and insert W 0 (w) = {r +
λ + α1 [1 − F (w)]}−1 , which we get by diﬀerentiating (17), to yield
                                 Z ∞·                         ¸
                                             1 − F (w)
            wR = b + (α0 − α1 )                                 dw.    (19)
                                  wR   r + λ + α1 [1 − F (w)]

                                        9
This is a generalized version of (4), which was the special case α1 = 0. The
basic results are similar to those in the simpler model, including ∂wR /∂b > 0,
but now we have interesting new predictions. For instance, when wR is higher
workers do not accept low wage jobs, and so are less likely to experience job-
to-job transitions. In other words, an increase in UI reduces turnover. The
model is also obviously consistent with the facts that wages increase with
tenure and turnover decreases with tenure since higher wage workers are less
likely to leave.12

3.2.2    On-the-job Wage Changes
Another factor contributing to turnover is that w may change at a given job.
Suppose that according to a Poisson process with parameter λ, it changes
from w to a new w0 drawn from F (w0 |w). Notice the exogenous layoﬀ model
discussed above can be thought of a special case where w0 = 0 with probabil-
ity 1, so that at rate λ the job eﬀectively disappears. Here, when the wage
changes the worker can stay employed at w0 or quit to unemployment, but
in contrast to the model in the previous section, he cannot reject w0 in favor
of the current w. Ignoring on-the-job search for simplicity, we have
                      Z ∞
     rW (w) = w + λ       max[W (w0 ) − W (w), U − W (w)]dF (w0 |w).      (20)
                          0

    If F (w |w2 ) first order stochastically dominates F (w0 |w1 ) whenever w2 >
            0

w1 , W (w) is increasing and there is a single reservation wage wR for employed
and unemployed agents. When employed at w, if the wage falls to w0 < wR
the worker quits to unemployment. It is easy to see that the quit rate is
decreasing in w. In the simplest case where F (w0 |w) = F (w) (independence),
we have                                 Z
                                  α−λ ∞
                       wR = b +              (w − wR )dF (w).                (21)
                                  r + λ wR
Notice λ > α implies that individuals accept w < b–they prefer to take a job
paying less than UI and wait for the wage to change rather than continuing
to search while unemployed. An increase in b still raises wR , which in general
aﬀects transitions in and out of unemployment.
  12
     To make search intensity endogenous with on-the-job search, let g0 (α) denote the cost
of searching with intensity α for an unemployed worker and g1 (α) denote the cost for an
employed worker. If g00 (α) ≤ g10 (α) for all α, then unemployed workers will always search
harder than employed workers. In any case, workers employed at higher wages search less,
with search intensity declining to zero at very high wages.

                                            10
3.2.3    On-the-job Learning
Another framework with implications for turnover is the Jovanovic (1979a)
learning model, which can rationalize some of the same observations the on-
the-job search model explains.13 Jovanovic studies the case where agents
have to learn in real time about how good they are at any job based on noisy
productivity observations. Here we present the simple version in Wright
(1986), where all learning takes place in one period (see Pries 2004 for an
intermediate case). Assume an oﬀer is a signal ω, where ω is drawn from
H(ω), depending on both the true wage w and some noise; e.g., we could have
ω = zw where z is random. Using Bayes rule, we can back out the posterior
distribution of the wage conditional on the signal, F (w|ω). Assume F (w|ω 2 )
first order stochastically dominates F (w|ω1 ) whenever ω 2 > ω 1 .
    In discrete time, the value of search is now
                             Z ∞
                  U =b+β         max{E [W (w)|ω] , U}dH(ω).             (22)
                                  0

The value of employment at a known w is given by
                           W (w) = w + β max[W (w), U],                                (23)
since the worker can stay or quit. If he quits, his payoﬀ is U , assuming he
must wait one period for the next oﬀer. Since W (w) is increasing, stochastic
dominance implies E[W (w)|ω] is increasing in ω. Hence there is a reservation
signal ω R such that oﬀers should be accepted if ω ≥ ω R . Once w is revealed,
the worker quits if w < wR . Notice that in this model workers may willingly
accept jobs they would prefer to reject if information were perfect, and vice-
versa. Of course these eﬀects are not symmetric: a bad job that is accepted
soon leads to a quit; a good job that is rejected is lost forever.
    More general learning models have the implication that reservation signals
increase with tenure. This is because at the beginning of an employment
  13
     See also Wilde (1979) and Jovanovic (1979b). Also, note that the kind of learning we
consider here is distinguished from learning about the distribution F while searching, which
is also interesting; Burdett-Vishwanath (1998a) provide an example and references. It is
worth mentioning that with learning about F , it is not even guaranteed that a reservation
strategy will be optimal. Suppose, e.g., we know either: a) w = w0 with prob 1; or b)
w = w1 with prob π and w = w2 with prob 1 − π. If w2 > w1 > w0 and π is small, it
can be optimal to accept w0 but not w1 since an oﬀer of w1 signals that there is a good
chance of getting w2 . Rothschild (1974) gives conditions to guarantee a reservation policy
is optimal.

                                            11
spell there is a lot of uncertainty, so a low value of the signal does not
necessarily imply that things are so bad. Similarly, a good signal is also not
that informative, but since the worker can always quit there is an option value
to staying. The more that is known about a situation, the more demanding
one tends to be. Individuals with a long tenure at a job have already learned
a lot and so they are less likely to quit. Furthermore, given that they are still
there, they are more likely to be earning higher wages. Hence, this model
also predicts quit rates fall and wages rise with tenure.

3.3     Discussion
There are many other interesting applications and generalizations of the ba-
sic model that we do not have space to cover.14 Suﬃce it to say that the
framework would seem to have appeal for both micro and macro economists.
For the former there are explicit predictions about things like individual labor
market histories and wages; for the latter there is a foundation for a model
of the “natural” rate of unemployment and how it is aﬀected by policies such
as changes in UI. Despite this, these models are not fully satisfactory for our
purposes, because they are decision-theoretic (single-agent) models. For the
remainder of the essay we want to move to equilibrium models.
    We emphasize that the issue is not general versus partial equilibrium per
se. For example, there is not necessarily a problem of internal consistency
with assuming F is given exogenously, as we can simply consider workers
searching for jobs in nature–say, good fishing spots.15 The more interesting
issue is that one might want to allow F to change endogenously with changes
in policy, rather than simply assuming it is given by nature. To this extent
we want models where wages are endogenous. Similarly we want models
where the rates at which matches form and break up are endogenous. We
have already discussed how we can make these things depend on workers’
  14
      For example, one can consider more complicated dynamic versions of the problem,
including the case where oﬀers are serially correlated as in Lippman-McCall (1976b),
Jovanovic (1987) and Lippman-Mamer (1989). Or one can study the case where UI varies
over time as in Burdett (1979), Mortensen (1977), Albrecht-Vroman (2000) and Coles-
Masters (2000). Also, there are dynamic extensions such as “systematic search” where you
first look at the locations that are best according to a prior, and if those are unsuccessful
you proceed to other locations, typically lowering your reservation wage along the way, as
in Salop (1973).
   15
      This is one interpretation of Ljungqvist and Sargent (1998), who use a version of the
model described above to discuss macro issues.


                                             12
behavior, including endogenous search intensity, on-the-job search, etc., but
it seems clear that firms’ behavior may also have an impact on them. When
we say we want to move to equilibrium models, we mean that we want to get
firms involved more explicitly.
    However, there is no single way to proceed. Any equilibrium search model
is going to require that we confront several issues, including two that we will
emphasize: 1. how do parties meet; and 2. how do they determine wages. We
will consider various assumptions along these lines. Although some people
may prefer a single “one-size-fits-all” model, we think that it is a virtue of the
approach that there are diﬀerent sets of assumptions at our disposal. Given
there is variation in actual wage setting practice, and the process by which
workers and firms get together, we need to be flexible in our theories, and
we want to understand how variation in assumptions influences outcomes.
Moreover, all of the models discussed below are really just diﬀerent ways of
embedding workers, each of whom solves some version of the basic search
problem studied above, into an environment where firms make interesting
decisions.


4      Random Search and Bargaining
This section discusses a prominent line of research emanating from the work
of Pissarides (1985, 2000), that studies underlying determinants of oﬀer ar-
rival rates, match dissolution rates, and wages. We will present a sequence
of models that emphasize diﬀerent margins, including entry by firms, the
decision to consummate matches, and the decision to terminate matches.
Before we do so, as we just said above, there are two key issues that need
to be addressed: how do workers and firms meet, and how are wages deter-
mined. This class of models assumes meeting rates are determined through a
matching function and wages through bargaining. We begin with these ideas.

4.1     The Matching Function
Suppose that at some point in time there are v vacancies posted by firms
looking for workers and u unemployed workers looking for jobs.16 Building
on ideas in Diamond (1981, 1982a,b), Mortensen (1982a,b), Pissarides (1984,
  16
   For now we assume search intensity is fixed, but see Section 8 for a matching function
where it is endogenous.


                                           13
1985) and elsewhere, we assume the number of contacts between firms and
workers is given by a matching technology m = m(u, v). This function is
an exogenous specification, like a production function. Assuming all workers
are the same and all firms are the same, the arrival rates for unemployed
workers and employers with vacancies are then given by
                                 m(u, v)          m(u, v)
                          αw =           and αe =         .                            (24)
                                   u                v
    It is standard to assume the function m is continuous, non-negative, in-
creasing in both arguments and concave, with m(u, 0) = m(0, v) = 0 for
all (u, v). In discrete-time models we also assume m(u, v) ≤ min{u, v}.
It is also convenient to assume m displays constant returns to scale, i.e.
χm(u, v) = m(χu, χv). While alternative assumptions are interesting–e.g.
increasing returns potentially generates multiple equilibria, as emphasized by
Diamond–constant returns is not inconsistent with the empirical work going
back to Pissarides (1986) and Blanchard-Diamond (1989) (see the survey by
Petrongolo-Pissarides 2001). Also, in our context, constant returns generates
a big increase in tractability. In particular, it implies that αw and αe depend
only on the ratio v/u, often referred to as a measure of market tightness,
where αw is an increasing and αe a decreasing function of v/u. Equivalently,
there is a continuous, decreasing, and 1-to-1 mapping between αw and αe ,
which will be very useful below.
    The meeting technology is meant to represent in a simple if somewhat
reduced-form fashion the notion that it takes time for workers and firms to
get together. Just as a production function maps labor and capital into out-
put, m maps search by workers and firms into meetings. There are papers
that model this more deeply, some of which we discuss below. But start-
ing with an exogenous matching function allows us to be agnostic about
the actual mechanics of the process by which agents meet. An advantage
of this approach is that it is a flexible way to incorporate features that
seem desirable–e.g. more search by either side of the market yields more
meetings–and one can regard the exact specification as an empirical issue.
This may make matching a bit of a black box, but it has proved to be a very
useful approach.17
  17
    We do want to mention an interesting alternative to the specification in the text, where
the number of meetings depends on the flows of new unmatched workers and firms rather
than the stocks of existing unemployment and vacancies; see Coles-Smith (1996,1998). See
Lagos (2000) for another alternative approach.

                                            14
4.2     Bargaining
Now we consider the situation of a worker and a firm who have met and have
an opportunity to produce a flow of output y. Suppose that if the worker
gets w, his expected lifetime utility is W (w) while the firm earns expected
discounted profit J(π), where π = y − w (again W stands for the value of
working, and now J stands for the value to the firm of a job that is filled).
If they fail to reach agreement, the worker’s payoﬀ falls to U and the firm’s
to V (again U stands for the value of unemployment, and now V stands
for the value to the firm of a vacancy). We will soon determine U and V
endogenously, but for now take them as given. We are of course interested
in situations where W (w) > U and J(y − w) > V for some w, so that there
is something to bargain over.
    A standard approach is to assume that the wage is determined by the
generalized Nash bargaining solution with threat points U and V ,

                  w = arg max [W (w) − U ]θ [J(y − w) − V ]1−θ ,                     (25)

where θ ∈ (0, 1) is the worker’s bargaining power. The solution to the maxi-
mization problem satisfies

            θ[J(y − w) − V ]W 0 (w) = (1 − θ)[W (w) − U]J 0 (y − w),                 (26)

which can be solved for w. Since it is an important building block in this
class of models, and since wage determination is one of the key themes of this
essay, we think that it is important to discuss the Nash bargaining solution
carefully.
    Nash (1950) did not actually analyze the bargaining process, but took as
given four simple axioms and showed that his solution is the unique outcome
satisfying these axioms.18 The solution, while elegant and practical, is again
a bit of a black box. However, as is well known, one can provide a game-
theoretic description of the bargaining process along the lines of Rubinstein
(1982) that has a unique subgame perfect equilibrium that approximates the
Nash solution. That is, as the time between counteroﬀers in the negotiation
game becomes small, the equilibrium outcome converges to that predicted by
  18
    Nash actually showed that the unique outcome consistent with his axioms has θ = 1/2.
Relaxing his symmetry axiom, (25) with any θ ∈ (0, 1) satisfies the other axioms, and this
is what is called the generalized Nash solution. See Osborne-Rubinstein (1990).



                                           15
the Nash solution, for particular choices of the threat points and bargaining
power that depend on the details of the underlying game.19
    For instance, suppose that each agent has a given probability of proposing
(as opposed to responding to) an oﬀer in each round of the bargaining game;
other things being equal, this bargaining game generates the same outcome as
the Nash solution in which the bargaining power equals that probability. Of
course, this only pushes θ one level back–where does that probability come
from? In fact the nature of bargaining may well diﬀer across industries,
countries, and so on, and varying θ is one way to try and capture this. Also,
at least in simple models, as we vary θ between 0 and 1 we trace out the
set of bilaterally eﬃcient and incentive compatible employment relationships,
which would seem to cover the cases of interest. So, while Nash bargaining
may not be the last word on wage determination, we think that it has proven
(like the matching technology) to be a useful approach that one ought to
know.
    To proceed, suppose as above that workers and firms are risk-neutral,
infinitely-lived, and discount future payoﬀs in continuous time at rate r, and
that matches end exogenously at rate λ. Then we have

                           rW (w) = w + λ [U − W (w)]                             (27)
                            rJ(π) = π + λ[V − J(w)].                              (28)
                                   1
This implies W 0 (w) = −J 0 (π) = r+λ . Inserting these into (26) and rearrang-
ing gives
                 W (w) = U + θ[J(y − w) − V + W (w) − U ].                 (29)
This says that in terms of total lifetime expected utility, the worker receives
his threat point U plus a share of the surplus, defined by

                       S(y) = J(y − w) − V + W (w) − U.                           (30)

   Also note from (27) and (28) that we can write W (w) − U = w−w
                                                                r+λ
                                                                   R
                                                                      and
            π−π R
J(π) − V = r+λ where wR and π R are reservation wage and profit levels for
the worker and firm. Then (25) reduces to

                    w = arg max [w − wR ]θ [y − w − πR ]1−θ ,                     (31)
  19
    Again see Osborne-Rubinstein (1990), although note that they only consider station-
ary environments; for the nonstationary case see Coles-Wright (1998).



                                          16
which has the solution

                           w(y) = wR + θ(y − π R − wR ).                            (32)

Hence, in this model the Nash solution also splits the surplus in terms of
the current period utility. Notice that w(y) ≥ wR iﬀ y ≥ yR = πR + wR .
Similarly, π(y) = y − w(y) ≥ π R iﬀ y ≥ yR . This implies the worker and firm
necessarily agree to consummate a relationship iﬀ y ≥ yR .

4.3     Job Creation
We now combine matching and bargaining in a model where a firms’ deci-
sion to post a vacancy is endogenized using a free entry condition.20 Let k
be the flow cost of posting a vacancy. Let y be the output of any match.
All matches face an exogenous breakup rate λ. There is a unit mass of ho-
mogeneous workers, and unmatched workers search costlessly, while matched
workers cannot search. We focus here on steady states, and let u and v rep-
resent steady-state levels of unemployment and vacancies. The steady-state
unemployment rate is u = λ/ (λ + αw ), where αw = m(u, v)/u and m is the
meeting technology. As discussed above, assuming constant returns, once we
know αw we know αe since both are functions of u/v.
    The value of posting a vacancy is

                             rV = −k + αe [J(π) − V ],                              (33)

since it costs k and the job is filled at rate αe . As free entry drives V to 0,
we need not keep track of V , and we can write (33) as

                                     αe J(π) = k.                                   (34)

Also, the value of unemployment satisfies

                             rU = b + αw [W (w) − U],                               (35)

while the equations for W and J are unchanged from (27) and (28). Formally,
an equilibrium includes the value functions (J, W, U ), the wage w, and the
  20
    In this basic version of the model, entry by firms is (almost) the only endogenous
variable, but in this or any other version one can alternatively assume a fixed number of
firms, and equilibrium will then determine V endogenously.


                                           17
unemployment and vacancy rates (u, v), satisfying Bellman’s equations, the
bargaining solution, free entry and the steady-state condition.21
    Next we discuss how to solve the model. One approach would be to try to
find the equilibrium wage. Start with some arbitrary w, solve (28) for J(π),
and then use (34) to solve for αe and αw . This determines W and U . This
w is an equilibrium iﬀ the implied values for J, W and U are such that the
bargaining condition holds. While this works, here we bypass w by working
directly with the surplus S. Substitution of J and W from (27) and (28) into
(30) yields
                            (r + λ)S(y) = y − rU                        (36)
Now (29) allows us to rewrite (35) as rU = b + αw θS(y). Now (36) gives

                             (r + λ + αw θ)S(y) = y − b.                              (37)

   The next step generally in this method is to obtain expressions that char-
acterize optimal choices for each of the decisions made outside of a match,
given S. In this particular model the only such decision is whether to
post a vacancy. Using (34) and the fact that bargaining implies J[π(y)] =
(1 − θ)S(y), we have
                             k = αe (1 − θ)S(y).                         (38)
Now (37) and (38) completely characterize equilibrium. In this simple model
we can combine them as
                                r + λ + αw θ   y−b
                                             =     .                                  (39)
                                  (1 − θ)αe     k
Under standard regularity conditions a unique solution for αw exists. From
this we can recover the wage,

                          w(y) = y − (r + λ)(1 − θ)S(y).                              (40)

   A number of results now follow easily. For example, an increase in b
reduces the rate at which workers contact firms αw , raises the rate at which
  21
    Although we focus on steady states, dynamics here are straightforward. The key
observation is that the free entry condition pins down αe and therefore αw . Hence, given
any initial unemployment rate, vacancies adjust so that u/v jumps to the steady state
level, which implies all other variables are constant along the path as u and v converge to
their steady state levels. See Mortensen (1989,1999) for models that are related, but have
dynamics that can be much more complicated.

                                            18
firms contact workers αe , reduces S(y), and raises w(y). The conclusion
that unemployment duration and wages increase with UI is similar to what
we found in the single-agent model with endogenous search intensity, but
the interpretation here is diﬀerent. In that model an increase in b induced
workers to reduce their search intensity and raise their reservation wage. Here
an increase in b raises the bargained wage, which discourages job creation,
thereby increasing unemployment duration.22
    In the above model it takes time for workers and firms to get together,
but every contact leads to a match, and w is the same in every match.
This seems quite special when compared to the models in Sections 2 and
3, since it corresponds to workers sampling from a degenerate distribution.
Moreover, in applications, changes in the probability that a contact leads
to job creation may be important. Hence we want to generalize things so
that not every contact results in a match and not every match yields the
same wage. Thus, assume that when a worker and firm meet they draw a
match-specific productivity y from some distribution F , where for simplicity
y is observed by both parties and constant for the duration of the match.
We know from Section 4.2 that workers and firms agree to match iﬀ y ≥ yR ,
where yR will be characterized below.
    An equilibrium is described by the same objects as above, except now J,
W , etc. are indexed by y, plus the new variable yR . Equilibrium will also
determine the distribution of productivity across existing relationships, or
equivalently, given w(y), the wage distribution G(w). The only things that
change from the previous model are Bellman’s equation for an unemployed
worker and the free entry condition, which become
                  Z ∞                                   Z ∞
     rU = b + αw       [W (y) − U(y)]dF (y) = b + αw θ       S(y)dF (y)    (41)
                    yR                                    yR
              Z ∞                          Z ∞
      k = αe       J(y)dF (y) = αe (1 − θ)     S(y)dF (y).                 (42)
                yR                             yR

To solve this model, combine these to get rU = b + ααe (1−θ)
                                                        w θk
                                                             , then substitute
into (36) to get
                                             αw θk
                     (r + λ)S(y) = y − b −            .                   (43)
                                           αe (1 − θ)
  22
    One special case merits mention: suppose m(u, v) = µv, so vacancies are the only
input into the matching function. Then an increase in b reduces v/u, which increases u,
but has no eﬀect on w or workers’ payoﬀs conditional on employment status.

                                          19
In particular, yR satisfies S(yR ) = 0, or
                                               αw θk
                                yR = b +                .                          (44)
                                             αe (1 − θ)
                               1
   Finally, since S 0 (y) =   r+λ
                                  ,   S(y) = (y − yR )/(r + λ) for y > yR , and (42)
can be written
                                              Z   ∞
                    (r + λ)k = αe (1 − θ)             (y − yR )dF (y).             (45)
                                                 yR

We can now solve for yR and αw from (44) and (45). The first of these
equations describes an increasing relationship between αw and yR (when it is
easier for a worker to find a job, he is more willing to turn down a potential
match with low productivity). The second gives a decreasing relationship
between yR and αw (when yR is higher, meetings are less profitable for firms so
they post fewer vacancies). There exists a unique equilibrium under standard
conditions. One can now recover the wage function: since w(yR ) = yR and
w0 (y) = θ if y > yR , we have w(y) = yR + θ(y − yR ). Since the distribution of
match productivity is F (y) truncated at yR , the equilibrium wage distribution
G(w) is given by F (y) and w(y).
    It is now easy to discuss turnover and wages. For example, an increase in
b shifts (44) but not (45), resulting in an increase in yR , a reduction in αw ,
and a reduction in H = αw [1 − F (yR )]. From a worker’s perspective, things
here closely resemble the single-agent problem, in the sense that he receives
oﬀers at rate αw from a given distribution and needs to decide which ones
to accept, although of course here the wage distribution and arrival rate are
endogenous. As in the single-agent problem, two things need to happen in
order for a worker to transit from unemployment to employment: he needs
to contact a firm, and the draw y needs to be good enough.

4.4     Job Destruction
We now endogenize the job destruction rate, following Mortensen-Pissarides
(1994), by incorporating on-the-job wage changes as in Section 3.2.2.23 The
resulting framework is interesting because it captures endogenously both the
flows into and out of unemployment. Given that these flows vary a lot across
  23
    Other extensions from Section 3 can also be added, including on-the-job search (Pis-
sarides 1984,1994) and learning (Pries 2004; Pries-Rogerson 2000).

                                            20
countries and over time, it allows one to begin thinking formally about various
factors that can account for these diﬀerences. To proceed, let y be the current
output produced in a match and assume that at rate λ we get a new draw
from F (y 0 |y), with y 0 ∈ [0, ȳ] for some ȳ. Also assume F (y 0 |y2 ) first order
stochastically dominates F (y 0 |y1 ) whenever y2 > y1 to ensure a reservation
strategy. It remains to specify the level of productivity in new matches. One
can assume new matches start at some random y, but here we assume they
begin with the same y0 (some papers assume y0 = ȳ).
    An equilibrium is defined as the natural extension of the previous model,
and we can jump directly to the equation for the surplus
                                                Z ȳ
                  (r + λ)S(y) = y − rU + λ           S(y 0 )dF (y 0 |y).         (46)
                                                yR

Since rU = b + αw θS(y0 ), this can be rewritten
                                                Z       ȳ
          (r + λ)S(y) = y − b − αw θS(y0 ) + λ               S(y 0 )dF (y 0 |y).   (47)
                                                       yR

To close the model we again use free entry,

                              k = βαe (1 − θ)S(y0 ).                               (48)

Finding equilibrium amounts to solving (48) and (47) for yR and αw .
    The argument is slightly more complicated here because we are now look-
ing for a fixed point in a system of functional equations–(47) defines both
yR and S(y) as functions of αw . Nevertheless, an increase in αw reduces S(y)
for all y and hence raises the reservation wage yR . Thus, (47) describes an in-
creasing relationship between αw and yR , called the job destruction curve. At
the same time, (48) indicates that when αw is higher S(y0 ) must be higher,
so from (47) yR must be lower, and this defines a decreasing relationship
between αw and yR called the job creation curve. The intersection of these
curves gives steady-state equilibrium, which exists uniquely under standard
conditions. See Mortensen-Pissarides (1994, 1999b) for further discussion.

4.5     Extensions and Applications
Cole-Rogerson (1999) discuss how well the model accounts quantitatively for
the behavior of job creation and destruction over the business cycle. Shimer

                                         21
(2004) also studies the model quantitatively, pointing out that it predicts rel-
atively small fluctuations in αw in response to reasonably calibrated shocks
to y or λ. Costain-Reiter (2003) argue that if one calibrates to generate re-
alistic business cycle fluctuations in the job-finding rate, the model predicts
an unrealistically large impact of UI on the job-finding rate. Hall (2003)
pursues one possible resolution of this puzzle by assuming wages are more
backward looking than Nash bargaining permits. He shows that a modi-
fication to the wage equation can significantly improve the performance of
this model. Other authors who use the framework for business cycle analysis
include Andolfatto (1996), Merz (1995, 1999) and den Haan-Ramey-Watson
(2000).
    One issue that has received attention in business cycle versions of these
models is “cleansing”–the notion that in bad economic times low productiv-
ity matches are destroyed, as discussed in Caballero-Hammour (1994,1996).
More recently, Barlevy (2002) argues that recessions are “sullying” rather
than “cleansing” because they inhibit workers’ ability to move up the job
ladder. We alluded earlier to a literature that uses these models to study
the behavior of worker and job flows across countries as well as over the
business cycle. Millard-Mortensen (1997) show how diﬀerent policy regimes
in the US and UK can account for their diﬀerent labor market outcomes.
Delacroix (1999, 2003) and Blanchard-Portugal (2001) study the eﬀect of
various employment protection policies.
    There is also a literature that allows heterogeneous workers and firms.
Acemoglu (1999, 2001) and Albrecht-Vroman (2002) consider workers that
diﬀer in skill and show how this can aﬀect the types of jobs firms create and
the wage and unemployment levels for diﬀerent groups. Mortensen-Pissarides
(1999c) examine how various policies impact diﬀerently across skill groups.
Shimer (1999) considers heterogeneous workers, allows multiple workers to
show up for a given vacancy, and studies how this can aﬀect unemployment
dynamics for low-skill workers. Shimer-Smith (2000) ask whether matching is
assortative in an environment in which workers and firms are heterogeneous.
While we cannot do justice to all the work in the area, we want to say that
it represents a very active and productive research area.24
  24
    A related literature follows the Lucas-Prescott (1974) approch, which does not use a
matching function (although it could) and assumes wages are determined competitively;
recent examples include Greenwood-MacDonald-Zhang (1996), Gomes-Greenwood-Rebelo
(2001) and Alvarez-Veracierto (1999). Another related model was presented by Howitt
and McAfee (1987) and Howitt (1988).


                                          22
5      Directed Search and Posting
A key aspect of any decentralized mechanism in an equilibrium search model
is wage determination. In the previous section we studied bargaining, and
here we discuss another possibility: ex ante wage posting. In addition to
posting, the models in the section also adopt the idea of directed search,
which means that agents can, as the name suggests, direct their search eﬀorts
towards particular wages. Following Moen (1997) and Shimer (1996), models
with the combination of posting and directed search are referred to in the
literature since as competitive search models. It is important to emphasize
that it is the combination of these features that is important; in Section 7
we will study posting with random search, which is quite diﬀerent.
    The literature has proposed several alternative but equivalent approaches
to competitive search. One approach posits a group of agents called market
makers who publicly set up submarkets with posted wages, with the property
that any match consummated in their submarket must be at the posted wage.
Within each submarket there is still random matching with a constant returns
function m(u, v), so that q = u/v determines the meeting rates αw and αe
(obviously q is the inverse of market tightness as defined in Section 4.1).
Each unemployed worker and each firm with a vacancy take as given w and
q in every submarket, and go to the one oﬀering the highest expected utility.
In equilibrium, two things are true: q in each submarket must be consistent
with what agents take as given; and no market maker can post w a diﬀerent
from what is already posted and attract both workers and employers.25
    Another approach supposes that employers themselves post wages, and
unemployed workers direct their search to the most attractive wage oﬀers.
A high posted w attracts more applicants, which reduces workers’ contact
rate αw and raises the employer’s contact rate αe . In equilibrium, workers
are indiﬀerent about where to apply, at least among posted wages that at-
tract some workers. Firms choose wages to maximize expected profit. Still
another approach assumes that workers post wages, and firm apply (direct
their search) to workers. As we said, these approaches are equivalent, in
the sense that they give rise to identical equilibrium conditions. Hence for
brevity in this section we consider only the case where firms post wages.
  25
    The idea here is that market makers compete to attract workers and firms to their
submarkets since they can charge them an entrance fee, but in equilibrium this fee is 0
due to free entry into the market making business.



                                          23
5.1    A One-Shot Model
We first illustrate how the basic mechanism works in a static setting, then
extend things to a dynamic framework in order to facilitate comparison with
other models. Thus, at the beginning of the period, there are large numbers
u and v of unemployed workers and vacancies, and we let q∗ = u/v. Each
firm with a vacancy must pay cost k, and we can either assume free entry
(making v endogenous) or fix the number of vacancies. Any match within
the period produces output y. At the end of the period, unmatched workers
get b, while unmatched vacancies get 0. Then the model ends.
    First consider a worker facing a menu of diﬀerent wages. Let U denote
the highest value that he can get by applying for a job at some firm. Then
a worker is willing to apply to a particular job oﬀering a wage w ≥ b only if
he believes the queue length q at that job–i.e. the number of workers who
apply–is suﬃciently small. Equivalently, he is willing to apply only if the
hiring probability αw (q) is suﬃciently large, in the sense that

                         U ≤ αw (q)w + [1 − αw (q)]b.                    (49)

In fact, if this inequality is strict, all workers would want to apply to this
firm, reducing the right hand side. Therefore, in equilibrium, if any workers
apply to a particular job, q will adjust to satisfy (49) with equality.
    From an employer’s perspective, (49) describes how a change in his wage
w aﬀects his queue length q. Therefore he chooses w to maximize

                        V = max −k + αe (q)(y − w),                      (50)
                                 w,q


taking (49) as a constraint. Eliminating w using (49) at equality, and also
using αe (q) = qαw (q), we get

                 V = max {−k + αe (q)(y − b) − q(U − b)} .               (51)
                        q

The first order condition is

                               α0e (q)(y − b) = U − b.                   (52)

Since αe inherits the concavity of the matching function, this is necessary
and suﬃcient for profit maximization.


                                         24
   In particular, it implies that all employers choose the same q, which in
equilibrium must equal the economy-wide q∗ . Hence (52) pins down the
equilibrium value of U . Then (49) at equality determines the market wage
                                q ∗ α0e (q ∗ )
                   w∗ = b +                    (y − b) = b + ε(q ∗ )(y − b),          (53)
                                 αe (q ∗ )
                   ∗ 0    ∗
where ε(q ∗ ) = q ααe (q
                      e (q )
                         ∗)  is the elasticity of αe (q ∗ ), which is in (0, 1) by our
assumptions on m. Hence, w∗ ∈ (b, y). Comparing (53) with the results
in Section 4.2, notice that this wage rule operates as if the worker and
firm bargained over the gains from trade, with the workers’ share θ given
by the elasticity ε(q ∗ ); this has important implications for the eﬃciency of
competitive search, as we discuss below.
    Substituting (53) into (50) pins down

                         V = −k + [αe (q∗ ) − q ∗ α0e (q ∗ )] (y − b).                (54)

If the number of vacancies v is fixed this gives profit; or we can use free entry
V = 0 to endogenize v and hence q ∗ . In either case the model is simple to
apply, and can be used, e.g., to discuss the eﬀects of changes in b. Indeed,
things look a lot like a one-shot version of the model in the previous section.26
There is one key diﬀerence, however: w is determined as a share of the surplus
with the share θ now endogenously determined by ε(q∗ ).
    Some interesting issues that show up even in this simple static model.
Montgomery (1991) had a nascent version of the above model (see also Peters
1984, 1991). He starts by exploring the case with two unemployed workers
and two vacancies, where firms post wages and then each worker applies for
a job. A firm that receives at least one application fills the job at the posted
w, and if more than one worker applies the firm randomly selects one.27
Suppose firms oﬀer the same w > 0. Then there are three Nash equilibria in
the application subgame: worker 1 applies to firm 1 and worker 2 applies to
firm 2; worker 1 applies to firm 2 and worker 2 applies to firm 1; and both
workers use identical mixed strategies, applying to each firm with probability
1/2. It seems reasonable to argue that the coordination implied by the first
two equilibria is implausible, at least in a large labor market, and hence the
  26
   We will discuss explicitly a one-shot version of the Pissarides model in Section 8.1.
  27
   By assumption here firms post wages rather than more general mechanisms. Coles-
Eeckhout (2003) relax this (e.g., they allow w to be contingent on the number of applicants
who turn up) and show it does not aﬀect the main conclusions.

                                              25
mixed-strategy equilibrium is the natural outcome (see Montgomery 1991
and Burdett-Shi-Wright 2001). This introduces a coordination friction, as
more than one worker may apply for the same job.
    Generalizing this reasoning, suppose there are u unemployed workers and
v vacancies, for any u and v. If each worker applies to each ¡   firm
                                                                    ¢ with equal
                                                                  1 u
probability, any firm gets a worker with probability 1 − 1 − v . By taking
the limit of this expression as u and v go to infinity while q = u/v remains
fixed, we find that in a large market the fraction αe (q) = 1 − e−q of firms get
a worker. This is a standard result in statistics: suppose there are u balls
independently placed with equal probability into each of v urns. Then for
large u and v, the number of balls per urn is a Poisson random variable with
mean u/v, and in particular a fraction e−u/v of the urns do not get any balls.
For this reason, the matching process generated by this type of coordination
friction is often called the urn-ball matching function.28
    Because the urn-ball matching process provides an explicit microeconomic
story of both meetings (a ball is put in a particular urn) and matches (a ball
is chosen from that urn), it is suitable for environments with heterogeneous
workers (not all balls are the same). For instance, suppose there are u1
type 1 workers and u2 types 2 workers, with u = u1 + u2 . If a firm hires
a type 1 worker in preference to a type 2 worker whenever it receives an
appropriate application, then it hires a type 1 worker   ¡ with  probability
                                                                      ¢      1−
  −u1 /v                                          −u1 /v       −u2 /v
e        and a type 2 worker with probability e           1−e          . Summing
                                                        −u/v
these, it hires some worker with probability 1 − e           . This implies that
an increase in the number of undesirable type 2 workers does not adversely
aﬀect the matching rate for desirable type 1 workers, but desirable workers
adversely aﬀect the employment rate of undesirable workers. See Coles-
Eeckhout (2000), Shi (2002), and Shimer (2003) for more on competitive
search models with heterogeneity.
    There are several other generalizations of this matching process. Burdett-
Shi-Wright (2001) let some firms hire multiple workers. Albrecht-Gautier-
   28
      Notice that in the above discussion we ignored strategic interaction between firms: in
maximizing (50) subject to (49), the firm takes as given that a worker’s market payoﬀ
is U , but of course in general if any firm changes its w then U should change. Burdett-
Shi-Wright (2001) solve the model with any finite number of firms and workers, where
each firm must compute the eﬀect of a change in its w on the probability that any worker
applies to each firm and on the implied U . In the limit as u and v grow, they show that
the problem reduces to the one analyzed here, where firms treat U as a parameter. This
makes competitive search relatively simple with large markets.


                                            26
Vroman (2003) and Albrecht-Gautier-Tan-Vroman (2004) allow workers to
make multiple applications. If workers can apply simultaneously for every
job, this eﬀectively flips the standard urn-ball problem around, so workers
are urns and firms are balls, and a worker is employed if at least one firm
oﬀers him a job, which occurs with probability 1 − e−v/u ; this is explored in
detail by Julien-Kennes-King (2000). The intermediate case in which workers
can apply only for a subset of jobs delivers additional possibilities. In any
event, directed search models seem like a potentially interesting way to get
inside the black box of the matching process.

5.2    A Dynamic Model
To get something like the basic Pissarides model with directed search, start
with an unemployed worker. Suppose he anticipates an unemployment-
vacancy ratio q and a wage w. Then

                           rU = b + αw (q)[W (w) − U]                    (55)
                       rW (w) = w + λ[U − W (w)].                        (56)

It will be convenient to combine these into
                                     αw (q)(w − rU)
                          rU = b +                  .                    (57)
                                          r+λ
Similarly, for firms

                       rV = −k + αe (q) [J(y − w) − V ]                  (58)
                 rJ(y − w) = y − w + λ [V − J(y − w)] .                  (59)

Free entry V = 0 yields
                                  αe (q)(y − w)
                             k=                 .                      (60)
                                      r+λ
    Now suppose firms choose w and q to maximize rV , or equivalently by
free entry, to maximize αe (q)(y − w). They take (57) as given. Eliminating
w = rU +(rU −b)(r +λ)/αw (q) using the constraint, and again using αe (q) =
qαw (q), we can reduce this to
                          ½                          ¾
                                 y − rU
                     max αe (q)           − q(rU − b) .                (61)
                      q           r+λ

                                      27
The necessary and suﬃcient first order condition α0e (q)(y − rU) = (rU −
b)(r + λ) has a unique solution, so all firms choose the same q. Solving for

                                     α0e (q)y + b(r + λ)
                              rU =                       ,                           (62)
                                        r + λ + α0e (q)

it is now a matter of algebra to find w and insert it into (60) to arrive at

                               r + λ + α0e (q)     y−b
                                                 =     .                             (63)
                               αe (q) − qα0e (q)    k

This pins down the equilibrium q, or equivalently the arrival rates αw and
αe . Under standard conditions the solution is unique. We can again perform
our usual exercise of increasing b, with a similar result: it raises the u/v
ratio, which reduces αw , and through the zero profit condition increases w.
But although the conclusions are similar to those reached in the random
search model with bargaining, the economic mechanism is quite diﬀerent.
An increase in b here makes workers more willing to accept an increase in
the risk of unemployment in return for an increase in w. Firms respond by
oﬀering workers what they want–fewer jobs at higher wages.

5.3     Discussion
In addition to having a more explicit description of the matching process,
an advantage of competitive search models is that they provide a deeper
explanation for wages than bargaining, where w divides the surplus into
exogenous shares. Here workers face a trade-oﬀ between a higher w and a
lower probability of getting a job, while firms face a trade-oﬀ between profit
and the probability of hiring. Competition among wage setters, whether
these be firms, workers or market makers, yields a unique point along the
indiﬀerence curves of both agents, optimally trading oﬀ wages and matching
rates (see Section 8). However, perhaps a disadvantage of any posting model
is that it makes a strong assumption when it says agents commit to the
posted terms of trade. If the market is truly decentralized, what prevents
them from trying to bargain for a diﬀerent w after they meet?29
  29
    Another apparent drawback is that the simplest competitive search model predicts
there is a single wage, but this is easily remedied. One can introduce match-specific
productivity y, and have agents post a wage contract w(y) rather than a single w. In equi-



                                           28
    In terms of extensions, Shi (2001,2002) and Shimer (2003) add hetero-
geneous agents to competitive search models, which introduces wage disper-
sion among heterogeneous workers, and among identical workers depending
on their employer. Acemoglu-Shimer (1999) consider a model where work-
ers are risk-averse, which has a similar basic structure except that it is no
longer possible to eliminate the wage from the employer’s objective function
and solve the model explicitly. They show that an increase in risk-aversion
reduces the equilibrium wage, while an increase in b raises it. Put diﬀerently,
market incompleteness lowers w, and this can potentially be oﬀset through
UI policy. Building on this, Acemoglu-Shimer (2000) show in a calibrated
model UI can enhance productivity.


6     Nontransferable Utility
Economists usually model employment relationships under the assumption
of transferable utility: if a worker and firm together produce y, it is divided
between them so that the former gets w and the latter π = y − w. Note that
transferable utility in the jargon of the literature means perfectly linearly
transferable: every increase in the worker’s payoﬀ comes 1-for-1 with a de-
crease in the firm’s payoﬀ. The above models all have this feature. However,
it is clear that there can be aspects of employment relationships that do not
fit this description, such as the job’s location or how one gets along with one’s
boss.30 Moreover, it is not uncommon to observe regulations or wage-setting
institutions that eﬀectively fix w or at least limit its flexibility for a given
type of labor, including minimum wage laws, occupation- or industry-wide
unions, and so on.
     Motivated by these considerations, some researchers have explored la-
bor market models with nontransferable utility. Moving beyond the labor
market, many search-based models of the marriage market view nontrans-
ferable utility as the natural benchmark. Hence, it seems worth reviewing
the framework. Note that while in general these models could assume util-
librium the worker and firm agree on whether to match, using a reservation productivity
rule yR . The exact structure of the wage contract is ambiguous, as long as the parties are
risk neutral, but in any case the basic structure of the model is unchanged. On-the-job
productivity changes also fit naturally and can generate wage dispersion.
   30
      Even if you could get an increase in w to compensate for not liking your boss, it is
unlikely that every unit reduction in profit would yield a unit increase in your utility.



                                            29
ity is partially transferable, but just not linearly, the relevant results can be
captured by the case where it is not transferable at all, so this is what we
consider. One reason why nontransferable utility models are of particular in-
terest is because they imply, in contrast to what we have seen elsewhere, that
two parties may not agree on whether it is a good idea to form or maintain a
relationship, thereby providing an alternative perspective on match creation
and destruction.

6.1     Homogeneous Agents
Assume a large fixed number of workers and, for simplicity, an equal number
of firms. Given workers and employers match in pairs, the fraction of work-
ers who are unemployed is always equal to the fraction of employers with
vacancies. Hence, with constant returns m(u, u) = α0 u, so αe = αw = α0
is constant. Also assume for now that agents are ex ante identical, but
each worker and employer has idiosyncratic tastes over matches. Follow-
ing Burdett-Wright (1998), we formalize this by assuming that in a random
meeting the payoﬀs to the worker and employer are given by zw and ze , where
zw and ze are independent draws from distributions Fw and Fe . These pay-
oﬀs can include both pecuniary and non-pecuniary attributes. Workers and
employers die at rate δ w and δ e , at which point they are replaced by identical
agents who start life unmatched. There is also an exogenous separation rate
λ0 . Agents cannot search while matched.31
     A key feature of this setup is that when two agents meet their payoﬀs
from consummating the match are not perfectly correlated–e.g. it may be
good for the worker but not the firm, but by assumption there is nothing the
former can do to aﬀect the latter’s evaluation (again, what is critical is only
that they cannot transfer utility linearly). For a match to be consummated
it must be mutually acceptable. Since a given agent may not be acceptable
to everyone he meets, the eﬀective arrival rates αw and αe are not necessarily
the same as the contact rate α0 , and need to be determined endogenously.
     First note that every agent of type j ∈ {w, e}, taking αj and δ j para-
  31
    We assume search is costless for all unmatched agents–e.g. there is no cost k to posting
a vacancy. Cornelius (2000, 2003) and Burdett-Imai-Wright (2004) relax some of these
assumptions, and in particular allow on-the-job search. This leads to some interesting
outcomes, including endogenous instability: it may be an (ineﬃcient) equilibrium for a
worker to be looking for another job because he believes his employer is trying to replace
him, which is true because the worker is looking for a new job.


                                            30
metrically, faces a standard single-agent search problem, which is solved by
a reservation utility level wj satisfying a version of (15) (although wj is a
reservation utility level rather than a reservation wage, the same methods
still). For a worker,
                                        Z ∞
                                 αw
                 ww = b +                    [1 − Fw (zw )] dzw ,        (64)
                            r + δ w + λw ww
where αw and λw are his (expected) arrival and layoﬀ rates. A symmetric
equation holds for firms, giving their reservation utility level we .
    In equilibrium, as we said, not all contacts result in an oﬀer. For workers,
αw = α0 [1 − Fe (we )], since to get an oﬀer they need a contact and the
employer must be willing to hire them, which requires ze ≥ we . Also, even if
λ0 is exogenous, agents still have to worry about death on the other side of
the market. Hence, for workers, e.g., λw = λ0 + δe . Substituting αw and λw
into (64) we have
                                            Z ∞
                          α0 [1 − Fe (we )]
               ww = b +                         [1 − Fw (zw )] dzw .       (65)
                         r + δ w + δ e + λ0 ww
This implies a relation ww = ρw (we ), which is the best response function of
workers to the strategy of firms.32 Symmetrically, we have we = ρe (ww ). A
steady-state equilibrium is given by an intersection of the two best response
functions in (ww , we ) space.
    One can show that equilibrium exists, and is unique under a log-concavity
assumption. However, without log-concavity equilibrium is not generally
unique. The intuition is as follows. Suppose one side of the market, say
workers, are very demanding about the kinds of oﬀers they accept (ww is
high). Then on the other side, firms get few oﬀers, and so they cannot aﬀord
to be too demanding (we is low). This means the workers get plenty of oﬀers,
which justifies being demanding. So, high ww and low we could be a self-
fulfilling prophecy, but so could exactly the opposite scenario. In general,
the steady-state equilibrium unemployment (equals vacancy) rate is given by
                                       λ0 + δ e + δ w
                              u∗ =                      ,                           (66)
                                     λ0 + δ e + δ w + H
  32
     Here the dependence of ww on we occurs only through αw = α0 [1 − Fe (we )]. But
suppose z changes during the relationship at rate λ, as in Section 3.22; then λw = λ0 +
δ e + λFe (we ). Hence, generally both the arrival and layoﬀ rates for one side depend on
strategies on the other side of the market.

                                           31
where H = α0 [1 − Fw (ww )][1 − Fe (we )] depends on which equilibrium we
select. See Burdett-Wright (1998) for more discussion.
    Even when there is a unique equilibrium, this model has interesting im-
plications. A neat example is Masters (1999), who adds to the above frame-
work an ex ante stage where the wage is determined endogenously, but still
assumes that utility is nontransferable ex post when agents meet. Again
under a log-concavity assumption, there is a unique symmetric equilibrium
in the ex ante wage game, w∗ . Given w∗ , some meetings result in a match
being consummated while others do not, depending on the random non-wage
characteristics. His key result is that w∗ is less than the value that minimizes
unemployment. Hence, an increase in the legislated minimum wage leads to
a reduction in unemployment.33

6.2     Heterogeneous Agents
Burdett-Coles (1997) consider a version of the model in which individuals are
ex ante heterogeneous (see also Eeckhout 1999). For simplicity, suppose that
a random worker is valued by a firm at ze ∼ Fe , while a random employer is
valued by a worker at zw ∼ Fw . In the homogeneous-agent model, all workers
were equally likely to be accepted by any firm, and similarly for workers. Here
better workers are acceptable to a larger subset of firms, and similarly better
employers are acceptable to a larger set of workers.34 Hence we define an
indicator function such that aw (ze , zw ) = 1 if a type ze worker is willing to
accept a type zw firm and 0 otherwise, and analogously define ae (zw , ze ) as
the willingness of a type zw firm to hire a type ze worker. Because utility is
nontransferable, aw (ze , zw ) need not equal ae (zw , ze ).
    As in previous models, agents use reservation strategies, so aw (ze , zw ) = 1
iﬀ zw ≥ ww (ze ) and ae (zw , ze ) = 1 iﬀ ze ≥ we (zw ). The usual methods lead
to the worker’s reservation equation
                                    Z ∞
                         α0
  ww (ze ) = b +                             ae (zw , ze )[zw − ww (ze )]dFw (zw ), (67)
                 r + δ w + δ e + λ0 ww (ze )
while firms have a similar equation for we (zw ). Using (67) it is straightforward
to see that if a type ze0 worker has worse matching opportunities than a
  33
      A similar story can be found in labor economics textbooks–i.e., market power by
firms yields a w that is too low, and hence a minimum wage can reduce unemployment.
But these stories usually do not model unemployment in a serious way.
   34
      An interesting extension is to let agents choose their type, as in Burdett-Coles (2001).

                                             32
type ze worker–i.e. if ae (zw , ze ) ≥ ae (zw , ze0 ) for all zw –then ze0 will have a
lower reservation utility level than ze , and if the matching opportunities are
identical the reservation utility levels are identical. A similar result holds for
employers.
    This leads to the following insight: in equilibrium, workers and employers
will endogenously match in classes. Within any class, any worker is willing
to take any job and any employer is willing to hire any worker. A worker
refuses a job from any employer in a lower class, while employers refuse to hire
any worker in a lower class. In such an equilibrium all workers within a class
have the same matching opportunities and therefore use the same reservation
utility level. Workers in lower classes have worse matching opportunities and
hence are willing to accept worse employers. The class structure follows
immediately.
    Burdett-Coles (1997) also show that multiple equilibria can exist. Indi-
vidual reservation utility levels depend on matching opportunities as sum-
marized by Fe and Fw . But diﬀerent individuals have endogenously diﬀerent
probabilities of finding a job. This implies matching decisions aﬀect matching
opportunities. Suppose, for example, that there are two types of workers and
two types of jobs, with good workers and good employers scarcer than bad
workers or bad employers. There can exist two equilibria. In one, all matches
are consummated, so all workers have the same unemployment rate and all
employers the same vacancy rate. In the other, good workers only match
with good employers. Since good workers and good employers are scarce,
these matches form less frequently than matches between bad workers and
bad employers. This increases the presence of good types in the searching
population, justifying individuals’ decision to be choosy.35

6.3        Discussion
Nontransferable utility models can sometimes be interpreted, as in Masters’
(1999), as describing situations where w can adjust endogenously before
meetings occur, but not after. In this sense they are similar to competi-
tive search models, although the models in this section do not allow agents
to direct their search. In the next section we also consider models where
wages are not negotiable within the match and search is random, but the
focus is on deriving equilibria with nondegenerate wage dispersion.
  35
       Once again, one can show that log-concavity precludes this type of multiplicity.


                                              33
7      Wage Dispersion
We have considered theories with various assumptions about job creation,
job destruction, and wage formation, but they all have one thing in common:
two identical workers, with the same productivity at a given firm and the
same outside options, earn the same w. In this sense the models do not
provide a pure theory of wage dispersion. While obviously many models
generate wage dispersion for heterogeneous workers, in this section we are
interested in dispersion across workers of a given type. One reason such
models are of interest is as follows. Early (decision-theoretic) work suggested
that search is relevant only if the distribution from which you are sampling
is non-degenerate. So theorists were naturally led to try to develop models
of wage dispersion. It is also true that some people believe dispersion is a
fact of life, and for them the issues were empirical rather than theoretical.36
In any case, a model of pure dispersion was the goal.
    Diamond (1971) provides an early attempt to construct such a model,
and although it did not work, it is very useful to understand why. Consider
an economy where homogeneous workers each face the basic search problem
described earlier. We do not give all the particulars here, since the underlying
model is a special case of ones described in detail below, but the key is that
the oﬀer distribution F is generated by wage-posting firms, each of which
has a constant returns to scale technology with labor as the only input and
commits to hire any worker it contacts who is willing to accept the posted
wage. Consider an individual firm with productivity p, where the discussion
does not depend on p being constant or diﬀerent across firms. Letting F
be the distribution of wages posted by other firms, he wants to maximize
expected profit taking F as given. By definition, in equilibrium every wage
posted with positive probability earns the same profit and no other wage
earns greater profit.
    Diamond proves a rather striking result: there is a unique equilibrium,
and in equilibrium all employers set the same wage, equal to workers’ unem-
ployment income, w = b. The proof is simple. Given any F , since workers
  36
     As Mortensen (2003, p.1) reports, “Although hundreds if not thousands of empirical
studies that estimate so-called human capital wage equations verify that worker charac-
teristics that one could view as indicators of labor productivity are positively related to
wages earned, the theory is woefully incomplete in its explanatory power. Observable
worker characteristics that are supposed to account for productivity diﬀerences typically
explain no more that 30 percent of the variation in compensation.”


                                            34
are homogeneous they all choose the same reservation wage wR . Clearly, no
firm will post w < wR as this would mean they cannot hire, and no firm will
post w > wR as they can hire every worker they contact at w = wR . To
see why it turns out that w = b in equilibrium, consider an individual firm
when all firms are posting w > b. If it deviates and oﬀers a wage slightly
less than w it will still hire every worker it meets. Since this is true for
any w > b, we must have w = b. There is a single wage. The model not
only fails to rationalize wage dispersion in the data, it fails to explain why
workers are searching in the first place! Many researchers subsequently tried
to develop models where the equilibrium distribution is non-degenerate, and
we will review several alternatives.37

7.1     Worker Heterogeneity
To motivate the various models that follow, ask yourself why might one
expect to find pure wage dispersion? One answer is that search frictions
produce a natural trade-oﬀ for firms: while posting a higher wage results
in lower profit per worker, it potentially could get you more workers. In
the Diamond model this trade-oﬀ is non-existent, since in equilibrium if you
increase your wage above wR there is no increase in the rate at which you
hire, given all workers use the same reservation wage. The Albrecht-Axel
(1984) model allows for heterogeneity in workers and hence in reservation
wages, making the trade-oﬀ operational. In particular, assume there are two
types of workers, some with b = b1 and others with b = b2 > b1 (one could
generalize to N worker types but the point can be made with N = 2).
    Now for any wage distribution F , there are two reservation wages, w1
and w2 > w1 . The generalization of Diamond is that no firm posts a wage
other than w1 or w2 , but it seems possible that these two wages could yield
equal profit, since low-wage firms hire only workers with b = b1 while high-
wage firms hire everyone. Albrecht-Axel show that wage dispersion is the
equilibrium outcome for a large set of parameter values.38 To see how this
   37
      In addition to the models presented below, contributions to the wage or price distribu-
tion literature include Butters (1977), Reinganum (1979), MacMinn (1980), Burdett-Judd
(1983), Robb (1985) and Diamond (1987).
   38
      Several details deserve mention. First, Albrect-Axel do not actually have firms earning
equal profit, but allow p to vary and look for a cutoﬀ p∗ such that firms with p < p∗ pay
w = w1 and those with p > p∗ pay w = w2 . Also, in some of the models in this section we
assume firms care only about steady state profit, which is reasonable when r ≈ 0. Also,


                                             35
works, normalize the measure of firms to 1, and let the measure of workers be
L = L1 + L2 where Lj is the measure with bj . As we said, all type 1 workers
have reservation wage w1 , all type 2 have w2 > w1 , and in equilibrium all
firms post either w1 or w2 . Let σ be the endogenous fraction of firms posting
w2 . Any candidate equilibrium wage distribution is completely summarized
by w1 , w2 and σ.
    It should be easy to see that the highest wage posted is w2 = b2 . To
determine w1 , note that type 1 workers accept both w = w1 and w = w2 ,
and so their value functions satisfy:
                           rU1 = b1 + ασ [W1 (w2 ) − U1 ]                        (68)
                      rW1 (w1 ) = w1                                             (69)
                      rW1 (w2 ) = w2 + λ [U1 − W1 (w2 )]                         (70)
Note that although b1 workers accept w = w1 , they get no capital gain from
doing so and suﬀer no capital loss when laid oﬀ from w1 . Using W1 (w1 ) = U1
and w2 = b2 , we obtain an equation relating w1 to σ,
                                    (r + λ)b1 + ασb2
                             w1 =                    .                           (71)
                                       r + λ + ασ
                                                            λ                λ
    The unemployment rates for the two types are u1 = α+λ      and u2 = ασ+λ        ,
and the employment rates are e1 = 1 − u1 and e2 = 1 − u2 . For firms, the
expected value of contacting a worker is the product of the probability he
accepts and the profit if he accepts. The acceptance probability is L1 uL11+L
                                                                            u1
                                                                               2 u2
for firms paying w1 and 1 for firms paying w2 , while discounted profit is p−w
                                                                            r+λ
                                                                                  i
                                                                                    .
Therefore,
                                   λ                 (r+λ)b1 +ασb2
                                     L
                                 α+λ 1
                                                p−      r+λ+ασ
                    V1 =      λ        λ
                                                                                 (72)
                                L + ασ+λ
                             α+λ 1
                                         L2           r+λ
                          p − b2
                    V2 =         .                                               (73)
                          r+λ
Algebra reveals that the profit diﬀerence V2 − V1 is proportional to
     T (σ) = (r + λ + ασ) {(p − b2 ) [λL1 + (α + λ)L2 ] − (p − b1 )λL1 }
             −rασL1 (b2 − b1 ).                                          (74)
instead of random matching, one could alternatively assume you are more likely to meet
large firms (Burdett-Vishnawath 1988b; Robin-Roux 1998). Finally, we simply assume
firms can commit to w even though they may have incentive ex post to change; Coles
(2001) supports this by reputational considerations.

                                         36
    Hence σ = 0 is an equilibrium if T (0) < 0; σ = 1 is an equilibrium if
T (1) > 0; and σ ∈ (0, 1) is an equilibrium if T (σ) = 0. It is easy to show
there exists a unique equilibrium, and 0 < σ < 1 iﬀ p < p < p where

                       λL1 (b2 − b1 )                 rαL1 (b2 − b1 )
           p = b2 +                   and p = p +                      .                  (75)
                        (α + λ)L2                 (r + α + λ)(α + λ)L2

When productivity is low all firms pay w1 = b1 , when it is high all firms
pay w2 = b2 , and when it is intermediate there is wage dispersion. When
σ ∈ (0, 1), we can solve T (σ) = 0 for σ and use (71) to derive w1 explicitly,
and the distribution of wages across employed workers is constructed by
noting that ej = 1 − uj workers earn wj . Note that σ will be less than e2
(the fractions of firms posting w2 is less than the fraction of workers earning
w2 ) since high wage firms succeed in hiring more workers. Of course, it is
precisely this fact that equates V1 and V2 .

7.2      A Shirking/Crime Model
In the Albrecht-Axel model firms may pay higher wages in order to recruit
at a faster rate. An alternative idea is that they may pay higher wages
to retain workers. Here we present one such model, which can either be
interpreted in terms of shirking or crime, since regardless of the interpretation
the outcome is similar.39 Thus, any employed worker randomly comes across
an opportunity to shirk or engage in crime at rate µ, with gross reward K.
However, there is a probability ν of getting caught and being forced into
unemployment–more generally, in crime models when a worker is caught he
can be put in jail for a while, but for simplicity here we assume jail time
is zero since what matters for the purpose of generating wage dispersion is
simply that the match ends.40
    To show how things diﬀer from Albrecht-Axel, assume that workers are
homogeneous. This implies that there is a common reservation wage wR , and
  39
      See Shapiro-Stiglitz (1984) or Weiss (1980) for eﬃciency-wage models with shirking,
and Burdett-Lagos-Wright (2003, 2004) or Huang-Laing-Wang (2004) for search-based
models of crime. The presentation here follows Burdett-Lagos-Wright (2003).
   40
      One reason that jail is interesting in the model is the following. In basic eﬃciency
wage models, the firm is supposed to punish a worker caught shirking by laying him oﬀ,
but this is not really in the firm’s interest: what is the point of getting rid of a worker only
to search for another who will behave the same? If the police take him away, however, the
issue does not come up (i.e., third party enforcement helps on this dimension).


                                              37
firms can hire any worker they contact by posting wR . However, a plausible
alternative is to pay something above wR to induce a worker to refrain from
the activity in question (shirking or crime). Firms may find this profitable
since, after all, they suﬀer a capital loss when workers leave. To see how
it works, let wC > wR denote the critical wage at which a worker would
refrain from the activity in question rather than risk losing his job, defined
by K + ν[U − W (wC )] = 0. It is clear that in equilibrium no firm would post
anything other than wR or wC . As above, let σ be the fraction posting the
higher wage.
    Bellman’s equation for a worker are:

                          rU = b + ασ[W (wC ) − U]                       (76)
                     rW (wR ) = wR + µK                                  (77)
                     rW (wC ) = wC + λ[U − W (wC )]                      (78)

Although they accept wR , they get no capital gain from doing so and suﬀer no
capital loss from losing wR . Using K + ν[U − W (wC )] = 0 and W (wR ) = U,
we can solve for

                        wC = b + (r + λ + ασ)K/ν                         (79)
                        wR = b − µK + ασK/ν.                             (80)

    All firms recruit at the same rate αLu, but those paying wR lose workers
at rate λ + µν while those paying wC lose workers at rate λ. Hence,

                        p − wR     p − b + µK − ασK/ν
                 VR =            =                                       (81)
                      r + λ + µν         r + λ + µν
                      p − wc   p − b − (r + λ + ασ)K/ν
                 VC =        =                         .                 (82)
                       r+λ               r+λ
Algebra reveals that VC − VR is proportional to

           T (σ) = µν(p − b) − (r + λ)2 K/ν − µ(2r + 2λ + ασ)K.          (83)

As in Albrecht-Axel, there is a unique equilibrium and 0 < σ < 1 iﬀ p is
in some intermediate region. Although the details of the two models are
diﬀerent, the economics is similar: the reason for paying higher wages is that
in the end this gets you more workers.


                                     38
7.3    On-the-Job Search
In the previous two models firms may pay higher wages to either increase the
inflow or reduce the outflow of workers. The Burdett-Mortensen (1998) model
incorporates both of these ideas by featuring on-the-job search. As in Section
3, the arrival rates here are α0 and α1 while unemployed and employed,
and every oﬀer is a random draw from F (w). For ease of presentation we
begin with the case α0 = α1 = α, which implies wR = b by (19), and
return to the general case later. Since all unemployed workers use a common
reservation wage, and clearly no firm posts w < wR , all jobs are accepted by
the unemployed and we have u = λ/(λ + α).
    In this model, the worker inflow for a firm posting w depends upon the
distribution of wages across employed workers G(w), since to steal an em-
ployed worker you need to beat his current wage.41 We now compute G(w),
given a distribution of oﬀers F (w). At any w, the number of workers em-
ployed at a wage no greater than w is G (w) (1 − u). This increases over time
at rate αuF (w), the rate at which unemployed workers contact a firm paying
less than w, and decreases over time at rate {λ + α[1 − F (w)]G (w)}(1 − u),
the rate at which workers employed at less than w are terminated for exoge-
nous reasons plus the rate at which they move to firms paying more than w.
Equating these flows and inserting u = λ/(λ + α), we have

                                          λF (w)
                           G (w) =                     .                       (84)
                                     λ + α [1 − F (w)]

   If a firm posts w ≥ wR , a worker he contacts accepts if he is currently
unemployed or currently employed but at a lower wage, which occurs with
probability u + (1 − u)G(w). The employment relationship then yields flow
profit p − w until the worker leaves either due to an exogenous separation
or a better oﬀer, which occurs at rate λ + α[1 − F (w)]. Therefore, after
simplification,

                                       λ(p − w)
             V (w) =                                               .           (85)
                       {λ + α [1 − F (w)]} {r + λ + α [1 − F (w)]}

Again, equilibrium requires that any posted w yields the same profit, which
is at least as large as profit from any other wage. Clearly no firm posts
  41
    The basic model assumes that firms do not respond to outside oﬀers with counter-
oﬀers, but this can be relaxed; see Postel-Vinay-Robin (2002).


                                        39
w < wR = b or w > p. In fact, one can show that the support of F is [b, w̄]
for some w̄ < p, and there are neither gaps nor mass points on the support.
    We now construct F explicitly. The key step is to use the fact that
firms earn equal profits from all posted wages, including the lowest wage
b: V (w) = V (b) for every w ∈ [b, w̄]. Since F (b) = 0, we have V (b) =
αλ(p − b)/ (α + λ) (r + α + λ). Combining this and (85) gives an equation
in F (w) that can be solved for F (w). In the case where r ≈ 0, the result is
                                      µ     r       ¶
                               λ+α            p−w
                      F (w) =           1−            .                  (86)
                                 α             p−b

We know the lower bound is b, and the upper bound w̄ can easily be found
by solving F (w̄) = 1. This yields the unique distribution consistent with
equal profit for all wages posted.
    In words, the outcome is as follows. All unemployed workers accept the
first oﬀer they receive since all firms post w ≥ wR = b. Then workers move
up the wage ladder each time a better oﬀer comes along, but also return to
unemployment periodically due to random layoﬀs. There is a nondegenerate
distribution of wages posted by firms, F , and of wages earned by workers,
G. The model has job-to-job transitions and is consistent with several of
the other observations about workers that on-the-job search models display.
Additionally, it makes predictions about firms, including e.g. the prediction
that high wage firms are bigger.
    There are many interesting extensions. First, with α0 6= α1 the same
methods lead to                        µ     r        ¶
                               λ + α1           p−w
                      F (w) =            1−             ,                (87)
                                  α1           p − wR
where now wR is endogenous (with α0 = α1 we knew wR = b). To determine
wR , integrate (19) to get

                            (λ + α1 )2 b + (α0 − α1 ) α1 p
                     wR =                                  .            (88)
                             (λ + α1 )2 + (α0 − α1 ) α1

One can check that in the limit as α1 → 0, w̄ → wR , which means there is a
single wage, w = wR = b; this is the Diamond result as a special case. Also,
one can show that in the limit as α1 → ∞, w̄ = p and G(w) = 0 for all
w < p; hence all workers earn w = p. Moreover, as α0 → ∞, clearly u → 0.
Hence, the competitive solution emerges when α0 and α1 get large.

                                       40
    One can also let firms be heterogenous with respect to p. In equilibrium
there is a distribution of wages paid by each type of firm, and all firms
with productivity p2 pay more than all firms with p1 < p2 . Thus, higher
productivity firms are more likely to hire and less likely to lose any worker.
With heterogeneous firms, van den Berg (2003) shows there may be multiple
equilibria, while in the base case there is a unique equilibrium (the one we
constructed). Perhaps more significantly, firm heterogeneity is an important
extension empirically, because with homogeneous firms the equilibrium wage
distribution (86) has an increasing density, which is not consistent with the
data. With heterogeneity F can have a decreasing density. See Mortensen
(2003) for additional discussion and references.
    In another generalization, Stevens (2004) allows firms to post wage-tenure
contracts, rather than simply a constant w. She shows firms have an incen-
tive to back load wages to reduce turnover. If workers can make an up-front
payment for a job, an optimal contract extracts an initial fee and then pays
w = p. If firms are homogeneous this contract eliminates all voluntary quits.
In equilibrium all firms demand the same initial fee, and this leaves unem-
ployed workers indiﬀerent about accepting the position. Stevens also shows
that if initial payments are impossible, say because of liquidity constraints,
there is an equilibrium where all firms oﬀer a contract that pays the worker 0
for a fixed apprenticeship period and then pays w = p. Again, if firms are ho-
mogeneous they extract all of the surplus, there are no job-to-job transitions,
and all contracts are identical.
    However Burdett-Coles (2003) show that Stevens’s results can be over-
turned if workers desire smooth consumption. They allow firms to commit to
wage-tenure contracts, but assume workers are risk-averse and do not have
access to financial markets, and so must consume w each period. They prove
all equilibrium wage-tenure contracts are described by a common baseline
salary scale, which is an increasing, continuous relationship between w and
tenure. Firms oﬀer diﬀerent contracts in the sense that they start workers
at diﬀerent point on the scale. For instance, a firm might start a worker
with an eﬀective tenure of 1 month. Three months later, his eﬀective tenure
has increased to 4 months. If he then gets an outside job oﬀer which starts
with tenure of less than 4, he turns it down, but he accepts any more lucra-
tive oﬀer, getting a discrete increase in w when he does. Thus, consumption
smoothing reintroduces wage dispersion, both in the sense that workers get
diﬀerent wages depending on their tenure, and in the more fundamental sense
that firms oﬀer diﬀerent contracts.

                                      41
7.4    Other Issues
We have reviewed three distinct models of wage dispersion, but of course
one can combine them–for example, by integrating on-the-job-search into
the crime model (Burdett-Lagos-Wright 2004). It is especially important
to combine on-the-job search with worker heterogeneity. This is because,
although Burdett-Mortensen (with heterogeneous firms) does a good job ac-
counting for wages, it does less well accounting for individual employment
histories, especially the fact that hazard rates decrease with the length of the
spells. Albrecht-Axel does better at accounting for this, but not so well for
wages. Models that combine on-the-job search and worker heterogeneity can
potentially account for both (Bontemps-Robin-van den Berg 1999).
    It is also possible to add a free-entry condition and thereby endogenize
the arrival rate of oﬀers. Mortensen (2000) does this for Burdett-Mortensen;
for variety we will do it for Albrecht-Axel. Thus, rather than having a fixed
number of firms that meet workers at some constant rate, hiring as many as
they can, suppose now that, to attract workers, firms post vacancies, where
each vacancy can be filled by at most 1 worker. The rest of the setup is
the same as Albrecht-Axel. Thus, any equilibrium wage distribution has a
fraction σ of vacancies posting w2 = b2 and the remaining 1 − σ posting w1 ,
                      λ               λ
and we have u1 = α+λ     and u2 = ασ+λ    .
    We now need to be more careful with the arrival rates. In general one
can assume any matching function, but for simplicity consider m(u, v) =
A min{u, v}. Assume that firms enter, or post vacancies, as long as expected
profit exceeds the fixed cost of entry, k. Clearly, we will have v ≥ L as long
as the cost of entry is not too high, since firms make positive profit when
v = L. Given v ≥ L we know v ≥ u; so the arrival rate for workers is the
fixed constant α = A, and the arrival rate for firms is αu/v. The rate at
which a firm meets type j workers is therefore αv Lj uj . Let Vj and Jj be the
value functions for a firm given it posts wj . Since a firm posting w1 hires
only type 1 workers,
                                    α
                         rV1 =        L1 u1 (J1 − V1 )                      (89)
                                    v
                          rJ1 = p − w1 + λ(J1 − V1 ).                       (90)
   The entry condition says that if any firms paying w1 enter, we must have
V1 = k. Inserting this and solving we get
                                   α      p − w1 − rk
                       rV1 = rk = L1 u1               .                (91)
                                   v         r+λ

                                      42
Repeating the exercise for any firm posting w2 , we have
                                    αu p − w2 − rk
                        rV2 = rk =                  .                     (92)
                                     v    r+λ
Entry by both types implies rV1 = rk = rV2 , or

              T (σ) = u(p − w2 ) − L1 u1 (p − w1 ) − L2 u2 rk = 0.        (93)
Comparing this with (74), it reduces to exactly the equilibrium condition for
our version of the Albrecht-Axel model when r is small.


8     Eﬃciency
An advantage of equilibrium models is that we can discuss welfare. What
form do eﬃcient allocations take? Under what conditions are decentralized
equilibria eﬃcient? We now turn our attention to these questions. Before
we begin, note that in an economy with many agents there can be many
Pareto eﬃcient allocations. Here, we focus on those that maximize the sum
of agents’ utility, or equivalently, that maximize the present discounted value
of output, net of the disutility of work and search, and of the cost of posting
vacancies.

8.1    A One-Shot Model
Initially, u workers are unmatched. Firms decide how many vacancies v to
post, each at cost k, and then m(u, v) matches form. Let q = u/v, and assume
constant returns, so m(u, v) = vm(q, 1) = vαe (q). Each match produces y at
an opportunity cost b to each worker. Then the economy ends. Firms post
vacancies until the free entry condition
                           αe (q)(1 − θ)(y − b) = k                       (94)
holds. Assume provisionally that wages are determined by bargaining, w =
θy + (1 − θ)b. This is a static version of the basic Pissarides model.
   Now consider a social planner who decides how many vacancies should be
posted to maximize output, net of workers’ opportunity cost and the cost of
posting vacancies. Equivalently, the planner chooses q = u/v, knowing that
each vacancy will contact a worker with probability αe (q), to maximize
                                         u
                uαw (q)(y − b) − vk = [αe (q)(y − b) − k] .             (95)
                                         q

                                      43
The necessary and suﬃcient condition for a solution is
                             [αe (q) − qα0e (q)] (y − b) = k.                       (96)
Denote the planner’s solution by q ∗ .
   The following is immediate from (94) and (96): the planner’s solution and
the decentralized solution coincide iﬀ
                                       θ∗ = ε(q∗ ),                                 (97)
                   ∗ 0   ∗
where ε(q ∗ ) = qααe (q
                     e (q )
                        ∗)  was defined in Section 5 as the elasticity of αe (q).
This is called the Hosios condition (Hosios 1991). It determines the share
of the surplus that must go to workers, θ∗ = ε(q ∗ ), for bargaining to be
eﬃcient.42 Alternatively, in terms of wages, equilibrium is eﬃcient if w =
w∗ = θ∗ y + (1 − θ∗ )b. If θ is too high, e.g., then w > w∗ and v is too low.
    Now consider competitive search. Recalling (53), in competitive search
equilibrium we have w = w∗ , and equilibrium is necessarily eﬃcient. One
could say that the Hosios condition holds endogenously (i.e. although there
is no bargaining, the surplus is still being split, and the shares are consistent
with eﬃciency). To understand why, it is useful to think of competitive search
in terms of competition between market makers, as discussed in Section 5. In
an environment with free entry, a market maker in his attempt to earn profit
eﬀectively maximizes workers’ expected utility, αw (q)(w − b), recognizing
that firms must earn zero profits αe (q)(y − w) = k to participate Using
the constraint to eliminate w shows that this is identical to the planner’s
objective function.
    Now consider adding search intensity by workers. The total number of
matches is m(s̄u, v), where s̄ is average intensity. Again assuming constant
returns, a firm hires with probability αe (s̄q) = m(s̄q, 1), while a worker with
search intensity s gets hired with probability sαw (s̄q) = sαe (s̄q)/s̄q. An
unemployed worker chooses s to maximize
                                             sαe (s̄q)θ(y − b)
                             b − g(s) +                        .                    (98)
                                                     s̄q
In equilibrium all workers choose the same s = s̄, where
                                            αe (s̄q)θ(y − b)
                               g 0 (s̄) =                    ,                      (99)
                                                    s̄q
  42                                   qα0 (q)     qα0 (q)
    Because αe (q) = qαw (q), we have αee(q) + αww(q) = 1; hence the condition can equiv-
alently be stated as firms’ bargaining power 1 − θ must equal the elasticity of αw (q).

                                              44
and free entry by firms implies

                          k = αe (s̄q)(1 − θ)(y − b).                  (100)

   Alternatively, the planner solves
                         ½                                ¾
                                     αe (s̄q)(y − b) − k
                   max b − g(s̄) +                       u .           (101)
                    q,s̄                       q

The necessary and suﬃcient conditions are

                   g 0 (s̄) = α0e (s̄q)(y − b)                         (102)
                         k = [αe (s̄q) − s̄qα0e (s̄q)] (y − b).        (103)

Notice something interesting: (99) and (102) coincide if the Hosios condition
θ = ε(s̄q) holds, while (100) and (103) coincide under the same condition.
That is, bargaining equilibrium achieves eﬃcient search intensity and entry
under the Hosios condition. This seems genuinely surprising, as there are
two variables to be determined, s̄ and v, and 1 free parameter, θ.
    Since we have already shown that in competitive search equilibrium we get
the Hosios condition endogenously, competitive search equilibrium achieves
eﬃcient search intensity and entry. As suggested above, market makers ef-
fectively choose the terms of trade to ensure that both workers and firms
behave optimally. There is nothing special about endogenous entry deci-
sions or search intensity. We could consider various other extensions (e.g.,
match-specific productivity with the reservation match value yR determined
endogenously), and we would find the same thing: bargaining equilibrium is
eﬃcient iﬀ the Hosios condition holds, and competitive search equilibrium
generates this condition endogenously. Rather than go through these exer-
cises we now move to dynamics.

8.2    A Dynamic Model
Here we formulate the planner’s problem for the benchmark Pissarides model
recursively. The state variable is the measure of matched workers, or the
employment rate, e. The current payoﬀ is y for each of the e employed
workers, b for each of the 1 − e unemployed workers, and −k for each of
the v = (1 − e)/q vacancies. The employment rate follows a law of motion


                                       45
ė = αeq(q) (1 − e) − λe. Putting this together, the the planner’s problem can
be written
                    ½                                 ·                   ¸¾
                                     k(1 − e)      0    αe (q)(1 − e)
    rY (e) = max ye + b(1 − e) −              + Y (e)                 − λe
                 q                       q                    q
                                                                           (104)
One can easily show that Y (e) is aﬃne; i.e., we have Y (e) = a0 + a1 e for
some constants a0 and a1 .43 These constants have useful interpretations: a0
is the value to the planner of an unemployed worker, and a1 the added value
having a worker matched, or the surplus from a match.
    The first order condition from (104) simplifies to
                               k = a1 [αe (q) − qα0e (q)] .                        (105)
Now use the fact that Y (e) = a0 + a1 e and the envelope theorem to diﬀeren-
tiate both sides of (104):
                                           ·          ¸
                                    k        αe (q)
                      ra1 = y − b + − a1            +λ                 (106)
                                    q          q
Combining (105) and (106) to eliminate a1 , we arrive at
                               r + λ + α0e (q)    y−b
                                          0
                                                =     .                            (107)
                               αe (q) − qαe (q)    k
This completely characterizes the optimal policy q = q(e); notice that in fact
q does not depend on the state e, only on exogenous parameters.
    How does this compare with equilibrium? Recall that equilibrium in the
bargaining model of Section 4.3 satisfies (39). It is easy to see that the
solutions are the same, and hence bargaining equilibrium coincides with the
planner’s solution, iﬀ the Hosios condition holds, θ = ε(q). Now looking at
(63) from the competitive search version of the model, we see that competitive
search equilibrium is necessarily eﬃcient. Hence the results from the static
model generalize directly. Again, for bargaining to be eﬃcient the Hosios
condition must hold, since otherwise agents are not getting the share of the
surplus that generates eﬃcient behavior, while with competitive search the
agents who post the terms of trade internalize this behavior, and an eﬃcient
division of the surplus emerges endogenously.
  43
    The mapping defined by (104) is a contraction and takes aﬃne functions into aﬃne
functions. Since the set of such functions is closed, the result follows immediately. This
method also works and is especially useful when there is a distribution of productivity
across matches.

                                           46
8.3     Discussion
We have demonstrated in several contexts that competitive search is eﬃcient,
while bargaining is eﬃcient iﬀ the Hosios condition holds. Although these
results are in some sense general, it would be misleading to suggest that we
can get eﬃcient equilibria in all search models. A very general understanding
of the nature of eﬃciency in these models is still being developed. Mortensen-
Wright (2002) discuss some results for related models, but only for constant
returns matching functions; with increasing returns, equilibria are unlikely
to be eﬃcient. Also, Shimer-Smith (2001) show that in some models with
heterogeneity, even with constant returns, the eﬃcient outcome may not be
a steady state but a cycle.44
    The eﬃciency of search equilibria with ex ante investments is an interest-
ing topic. For example, in Masters (1998), agents decide on how much capital
to acquire prior to searching.45 Generically there is no θ that makes the equi-
librium outcome under bargaining eﬃcient–the value of θ that provides the
right incentive for investment in human capital by workers is diﬀerent from
the value of that provides the right incentive for firms (whether firms choose
the number of vacancies, the types of jobs to create, or physical capital).
However, Acemoglu-Shimer (1999) show competitive search equilibrium with
ex ante investments is eﬃcient. Another case where there is no θ such that
bargaining yields the eﬃcient outcome is discussed by Smith (1999), who
assumes firms have concave production functions and hire a large number of
workers, but bargain with each one individually. Could competitive search
correct this?
    One can also ask about the eﬃciency of the wage-posting models in Sec-
tion 7. In general, if firms commit to pay the same w no matter the circum-
stances, it is unlikely to yield eﬃcient outcomes. In the Albrecht-Axel model,
e.g., a planner would want all meetings to result in matches, but this does
not happen. In the basic Burdett-Mortensen model, on the other hand, eﬃ-
ciency does result because all meetings involving unemployed workers result
in matches and other meetings are irrelevant from the planner’s perspec-
  44
     The intuition is simple: when the pool of unmatched agents contains mostly high
productivity types, it is eﬃcient for agents to be demanding and hold out for a high
productivity partner. However, as the pool becomes depleted, they should lower their
standards. By lowering their standards they reduce the fraction of low productivity types
in the pool, and we are back to where we started.
  45
     See also Acemoglu (1996), Burdett-Smith (2001), Coles-Masters (2000), and Laing-
Palivos-Wang (1995, 2003) for other models with human capital.


                                           47
tive since productivity is the same. Finally, nontransferable utility models
typically deliver equilibria that are ineﬃcient. Are there institutions that
correct these ineﬃciencies? These are examples of interesting open questions
in search theory.


9      Conclusion
We have reviewed various search-based model of the labor market. In con-
trast to standard supply-and-demand models, search theory emphasizes the
frictions inherent in the exchange process, and this leads to many novel in-
sights. There is no single canonical search model, and we have discussed
versions that diﬀer along many dimensions, including wage determination,
the meeting process, and so on. The specification that is best suited for a
particular application depends on the issues at hand. At the same time, it
should be clear that there is a common framework underlying all of these
specifications, and there are several phenomena that can be analyzed natu-
rally in all the various models, such as wage dispersion and turnover. We
have only scratched the surface. But hopefully, this essay will at least convey
the basic ideas in search theory and stimulate additional research.


References
    [1] Acemoglu, Daron, “A Microfoundation For Social Increasing Re-
        turns in Human Capital Accumulation,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
        nomics, 1996, 111, 779-804.

    [2] Acemoglu, Daron, “Changes in Unemployment and Wage Inequal-
        ity: An Alternative Theory and Some Evidence,” American Economic
        Review, December 1999, 89, 1259—78.

    [3] Acemoglu, Daron, “Good Jobs and Bad Jobs,” Journal of Labor
        Economics, 2001, 19, 1-22.

    [4] Acemoglu, Daron and Robert Shimer, “Holdups and Eﬃciency
        with Search Frictions,” International Economic Review, 1999, 40, 827—
        850.



                                      48
 [5] Acemoglu, Daron and Robert Shimer, “Eﬃcient Unemployment
     Insurance,” Journal of Political Economy, 1999,107, 893—928.

 [6] Acemoglu, Daron and Robert Shimer, “Productivity Gains from
     Unemployment Insurance,” European Economic Review, 2000, 44,
     1195—1224.

 [7] Albrecht, James and Bo Axell, “An Equilibrium Model of Search
     Unemployment,” Journal of Political Economy, 1984, 92, 824—40.

 [8] Albrecht, James, Pieter Gautier, Serene Tan, Susan Vroman,
     “Matching with Multiple Applications Revisited,” 2004, forthcoming,
     Economics Letters.

 [9] Albrecht, James, Pieter Gautier, Susan Vroman, “Matching
     with Multiple Applications,” Economics Letters 2003, 78, 67-70.

[10] Albrecht, James and Susan Vroman, “Wage Dispersion in a Job
     Search Model with Time-Varying Unemployment Benefits,” mimeo,
     Georgetown University, 2000.

[11] Albrecht, James and Susan Vroman, “A Matching Model with
     Endogenous Skill Requirements,” International Economic Review,
     2002, 43, 283-305.

[12] Alvarez, Fernando and Marcelo Veracierto, “Labor Market Poli-
     cies in an Equilibrium Search Model,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual,
     1998, 265—304.

[13] Andolfatto, David, “Business Cycles and Labor Market Search,”
     American Economic Review, 1996, 86, 112—32.

[14] Barlevy, Gadi, “The Sullying Eﬀects of Recessions,” Review of Eco-
     nomic Studies, 2002, 69, 65—96.

[15] Blanchard, Olivier J. and Peter A. Diamond, “The Beveridge
     Curve,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1989, 1, 1—60.

[16] Blanchard, Olivier J. and Pedro Portugal, “What Hides Behind
     an Unemployment Rate: Comparing Portuguese and U.S. Labor Mar-
     kets,” American Economic Review, 2001, 91, 187-207.

                                  49
[17] Bontemps, Christian, Jean-Marc Robin, and Gerard J. van
     den Berg, “An Empirical Equilibrium Job Search Model with Search
     on the Job and Heterogeneous Workers and Firms,” International Eco-
     nomic Review, 2000, 40, 1039—74.

[18] Browning, Martin, Thomas Crossley and Eric Smith, “Asset
     Accumulation and Short Term Employment,” mimeo, University of
     Essex, 1999.

[19] Burdett, Kenneth, “A Theory of Employee Job Search and Quit
     Rates,” American Economic Review, March 1978, 68, 212—20.

[20] Burdett, Kenneth, “A Useful Restriction on the Oﬀer Distribution
     in Job Search Models,” in Proceedings of a Symposium at the Industrial
     Institute for Economic and Social Research. Stockholm, 1981.

[21] Burdett, Kenneth and Melvyn G. Coles, “Marriage and Class,”
     Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1997, 112, 141—68.

[22] Burdett, Kenneth and Melvyn G. Coles, “Long-Term Partner-
     ship Formation: Marriage and Employment,” Economic Journal, 1999,
     109, 307—34.

[23] Burdett, Kenneth and Melvyn G. Coles, “Transplants and Im-
     plants: The Economics of Self-Improvement,” International Economic
     Review, 2001, 42, 597-616.

[24] Burdett, Kenneth and Melvyn G. Coles, “Equilibrium Wage-
     Tenure Contracts,” Econometrica, 2003, 71, 1377—1404.

[25] Burdett, Kenneth, Ryoichi Imai and Randall Wright, “Un-
     stable Relationships,” Frontiers of Macroeconomics 2004, 1(1), article
     1.

[26] Burdett, Kenneth and Kenneth L. Judd, “Equilibrium Price Dis-
     tributions,” Econometrica, 1983, 51, 955—70.

[27] Burdett, Kenneth, Ricardo Lagos and Randall Wright,
     “Crime, Inequality, and Unemployment,” American Economic Review,
     2003, 93, 1764—1777.


                                   50
[28] Burdett, Kenneth, Ricardo Lagos and Randall Wright, “An
     On-the-job Search Model of Crime, Inequality, and Unemployment,”
     2004, forthcoming, International Economic Review.

[29] Burdett, Kenneth and Dale T. Mortensen, “Search, Layoﬀs, and
     Labor Market Equilibrium,” Journal of Political Economy, 1980, 88,
     652—72.

[30] Burdett, Kenneth and Dale T. Mortensen, “Wage Diﬀerentials,
     Employer Size, and Unemployment,” International Economic Review,
     1998, 39, 257—73.

[31] Burdett, Kenneth and Jan Ondrich, “How Changes in Labor De-
     mand Aﬀect Unemployed Workers,” Journal of Labor Economics, 1985,
     3, 1-10.

[32] Burdett, Kenneth, Shouyong Shi and Randall Wright, “Pricing
     and Matching with Frictions,” Journal of Political Economy, 2001, 109,
     1060-1085.

[33] Burdett, Kenneth and Eric Smith, “The Low Skill Trap,” Euro-
     pean Economic Review, 2001, 46, 1439-1451

[34] Burdett, Kenneth and Tara Vishwanath, “Declining Reservation
     Wages and Learning,” Review of Economic Studies, 1988a, 5, 655—65.

[35] Burdett, Kenneth and Tara Vishwanath, “Balanced Matching
     and Labor Market Equilibrium,” Journal of Political Economy, 1988b,
     96, 1048—65.

[36] Burdett, Kenneth and Randall Wright, “Two-Sided Search with
     Non-Transferrable Utility,” Review of Economic Dynamics, January
     1998, 1, 220—45.

[37] Butters, Gerard R., “Equilibrium Distributions of Sales and Adver-
     tising Prices,” Review of Economic Studies, 1977, 44, 465—91.

[38] Caballero, Ricardo J and Mohamad L. Hammour,“The Cleans-
     ing Eﬀect of Recessions,” American Economic Review 84:5 (1994),
     1350—1368.


                                   51
[39] Caballero, Ricardo J and Mohamad L. Hammour, “On the
     Timing and Eﬃciency of Creative Destruction,” Quarterly Journal of
     Economics, 1996, 111, 805—52.

[40] Cole, Harold L. and Richard Rogerson, “Can the Mortensen-
     Pissarides Matching Model Match the Business Cycle Facts?” Inter-
     national Economic Review, 1999, 40, 933—60.

[41] Coles, Melvyn G. “Equilibrium Wage Dispersion, Firm Size and
     Growth.” Review of Economic Dynamics, 2001.

[42] Coles, Melvyn G. and Jan Eeckhout, “Heterogeneity as a Coor-
     dination Device,” 2000, mimeo.

[43] Coles, Melvyn G. and Jan Eeckhout, “Indeterminacy and Di-
     rected Search,” Journal of Economic Theory, 2003, 111, 265—276.

[44] Coles, Melvyn G. and Adrian Masters, “Long Term Unemploy-
     ment and Retraining in a Model of Unlearning by Not Doing,” Euro-
     pean Economic Review, 2000.

[45] Coles, Melvyn G. and Adrian Masters, “Duration Dependent UI
     Payments and Equilibrium Unemployment,” 2000, forthcoming, Eco-
     nomica.

[46] Coles, Melvyn G. and Eric Smith, “Cross Section Estimation of
     the Matching Function: Evidence from England and Wales,” Econom-
     ica, 1996, 63, 589—87.

[47] Coles, Melvyn G. and Eric Smith, “Marketplaces and Matching,”
     International Economic Review, 1998, 39, 239—54.

[48] Coles, Melvyn G. and Randall Wright, “A Dynamic Equilibrium
     Model of Search, Bargaining and Money,” Journal of Economic Theory,
     1998, 78, 32-54.

[49] Cornelius, Tracy, “A Search Model of Marriage and Divorce,” Review
     of Economic Dynamics, 2003, 6, 135—155.

[50] Cornelius, Tracy, “Equilibrium Quits and Layoﬀs in a Model with
     On-the-Job Search,” mimeo, University of Wales, 2000.

                                  52
[51] Costain, James, “UI in a General Equilibrium Model of Job Search
     and Precautionary Savings.” Ph.D Dissertation. University of Chicago,
     1997.

[52] Costain, James and Michael Reiter, “Business Cycles, UI, and
     the Calibration of Matching Models,” Universidad Carlos III Mimeo,
     2003.

[53] Danforth, John P., “On the Role of Consumption and Decreasing
     Absolute Risk Aversion in the Theory of Job Search,” in Studies in the
     Economics of Search, S. Lippman and J. McCall (eds.) North-Holland,
     1979.

[54] Delacroix, Alain, “Transitions into Unemployment and the Nature
     of Firing Costs,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 2003, 6, 651-671.

[55] Delacroix, Alain, “Firing Costs, Minimum Wage and the Outside
     Option Principle,” mimeo, Purdue University, 1999.

[56] den Haan, Wouter J., Garey Ramey and Joel Watson, “Job
     Destruction and the Propagation of Shocks,” American Economic Re-
     view, 2000, 90, 482—98.

[57] Devine, Theresa J. and Nicholas M. Kiefer, Empirical Labor Eco-
     nomics: A Search Approach, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1991.

[58] Diamond, Peter A., “A Model of Price Adjustment.” Journal of
     Economic Theory, 1971, 3, 156—68.

[59] Diamond, Peter A., “Mobility Costs, Frictional Unemployment, and
     Eﬃciency,” Journal of Political Economy, 1981, 89, 798—812.

[60] Diamond, Peter A., “Aggregate Demand Management in Search
     Equilibrium,” Journal of Political Economy, 1982a, 90, 881—894.

[61] Diamond, Peter A., “Wage Determination and Eﬃciency in Search
     Equilibrium,” Review of Economic Studies, 1982b, 49, 217—227.

[62] Diamond, Peter A., “Consumer Diﬀerences and Prices in a Search
     Model,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1987, 102, 429—436.



                                   53
[63] Duﬃe, Darrell, Nicolae Garleanu, and Lasse Pedersen, “Securi-
     ties Lending, Shorting, and Pricing,” Journal of Financial Economics,
     2002, 66, 307—339.

[64] Eeckhout, Jan, “Bilateral Search and Vertical Heterogeneity,” Inter-
     national Economic Review, 1999, 40, 869—888.

[65] Flinn, Christopher J., and James J. Heckman, “Are Unemploy-
     ment and Out of the Labor Force Behaviorally Distinct Labor Force
     States?,” Journal of Labor Economics, 1983, 1, 28-42.

[66] Gale, Douglas, “Limit Theorems for Models with Sequential Bar-
     gaining,” Journal of Economic Theory, 1987, 43, 20—54.

[67] Gomes, Joao, Jeremy Greenwood and Sergio Rebelo, “Equi-
     librium Unemployment,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2001, 48,
     109—152.

[68] Greenwood, Jeremy, Glenn M. MacDonald and Guang-Jia
     Zhang, “The Cyclical Behavior of Job Creation and Job Destruction:
     A Sectoral Model, ” Economic Theory, 1996, 7, 95—112.

[69] Gronau, Reuben, “Information and Frictional Unemployment,”
     American Economic Review, 1971, 61, 290—301.

[70] Hall, Robert E., “Wage Determination and Employment Fluctua-
     tions,” mimeo, Hoover Institution, Stanford University, August 2003.

[71] Hall J., Steven A. Lippman and John J. McCall, “Expected
     Utility Maximizing Job Search,” in Studies in the Economics of Search,
     S. Lippman and J. McCall (eds.) North-Holland, 1979.

[72] Hosios, Arthur J., “On the Eﬃciency of Matching and Related Mod-
     els of Search and Unemployment,” Review of Economic Studies, 1990,
     57, 279—98.

[73] Howitt, Peter, “Business Cycles with Costly Search and Recruiting,”
     Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1988, 103, 147—65.

[74] Howitt, Peter and R. Preston McAfee, “Costly Search and Re-
     cruiting,” International Economic Review, 1987, 28, 89—107.

                                   54
[75] Huang, Chieh-Chieh, Derek Laing, and Ping Wang, “Crime
     and Poverty:” A Search-Theoretic Approach,” International Economic
     Review, 2004, 45, 905-935.

[76] Hwang, Hae shin, Dale T. Mortensen, and Reed, W. Robert,
     Hedonic Wages and Labor Market Search, Journal of Labor Economics,
     1998, 16, 815-47.

[77] Jovanovic, Boyan, “Job Matching and the Theory of Turnover,”
     Journal of Political Economy, 1979a, 87, 972—90.

[78] Jovanovic, Boyan, “Firm-specific Capital and Turnover,” Journal of
     Political Economy, 1979b, 87, 1246—60.

[79] Jovanovic, Boyan, “Selection and the Evolution of Industry,” Econo-
     metrica, 1982, 50, 649—70.

[80] Jovanovic, Boyan, “Work, Rest, and Search: Unemployment,
     Turnover, and the Cycle,” Journal of Labor Economics, 1987, 5 131-
     148.

[81] Jovanovic, Boyan and Glenn M. MacDonald, “Competitive Dif-
     fusion,” Journal of Political Economy, 1994, 102, 24—52.

[82] Jovanovic, Boyan and Rafael Rob, “The Growth and Diﬀusion of
     Knowledge,” Review of Economic Studies, October 1989, 56, 569—82.

[83] Benoit Julien, John Kennes, and Ian King, “Bidding for Labor,”
     Review of Economic Dynamics 2000, 3, 619—649.

[84] Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro and Randall Wright, “A Search-Theoretic
     Approach to Monetary Economics,” American Economic Review,
     March 1993, 83, 63—77.

[85] Lagos, Ricardo, “An Alternative Approach to Search Frictions,”
     Journal of Political Economy, 2000, 108, 851—73.

[86] Laing, Derek, Theodore Palivos, and Ping Wang, “Learning,
     Matching, and Growth,” Review of Economic Studies, 1995, 62, 115-
     129.



                                  55
[87] Laing, Derek, Theodore Palivos, and Ping Wang, “The Eco-
     nomics of New Blood,”Journal of Economic Theory, 2003,112, 106-56.

[88] Lenz, Rasmus and Torben Tranaes, “Job Search and Savings:
     Wealth Eﬀects and Duration Dependence,” 2003, forthcoming in Jour-
     nal of Labor Economics.

[89] Lippman, Steven A. and John J. McCall, “The Economics of Job
     Search: a Survey,” Economic Inquiry, 1976a, 14, 347—68.

[90] Lippman, Steven A. and John J. McCall, “Job Search in a Dy-
     namic Economy,” Journal of Economic Theory, 1976b, 12, 365—90.

[91] Lippman, Steven A. and John W. Mamer, “A Simple Search
     Model with Procyclical Quits,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and
     Control, 1989, 13, 247—53.

[92] Ljungqvist, Lars and Thomas J. Sargent, “The European Unem-
     ployment Dilemma,” Journal of Political Economy, 1998, 106, 514—50.

[93] Lucas, Robert E., Jr. and Edward C. Prescott, “Equilibrium
     Search and Unemployment,” Journal of Economic Theory, 1974, 7,
     188—209.

[94] MacMinn, Richard D., “Search and Market Equilibrium,” Journal
     of Political Economy, 1980, 88, 308—27.

[95] Masters, Adrian M., “Eﬃciency of Physical and Human Capital In-
     vestments a Model of Search and Bargaining,” International Economic
     Review, 1998, 39, 477-494

[96] Masters, Adrian M., “Wage Posting in Two-Sided Search and the
     Minimum Wage,” International Economic Review, 1999, 40, 809—26.

[97] McCall, John J., “Economics of Information and Job Search,” Quar-
     terly Journal of Economics, 1970, 84, 113—26.

[98] Merz, Monika, “Search in the Labor Market and the Real Business
     Cycle,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 1995, 36, 269—300.




                                  56
 [99] Merz, Monika, “Heterogeneous Job-Matches and the Cyclical Be-
      havior of Labor Turnover,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 1999, 43,
      91—124.

[100] Millard, Stephen P. and Dale T. Mortensen, “The Unemploy-
      ment and Welfare Eﬀects of Labour Market Policy: A Comparison of
      the USA and the UK,” in Unemployment Policy: Government Op-
      tions for the Labour Market. D.J. Snower and G. de la Dehesa, eds.
      New York: Cambridge University Press, 1997.

[101] Moen, Espen R., “Competitive Search Equilibrium,” Journal of Po-
      litical Economy, 1997, 105, 385—411.

[102] Montgomery, James D., “Equilibrium Wage Dispersion and In-
      terindustry Wage Diﬀerentials,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 106,
      1991, 163—179.

[103] Mortensen, Dale T., “A Theory of Wage and Employment Dynam-
      ics,” in Microeconomic Foundations of Employment and Inflation The-
      ory, E. S. Phelps, et. al. (eds), New York: W.W. Norton, 1970.

[104] Mortensen, Dale T., “UI and Job Search Decisions,” Industrial and
      Labor Relations Review, 1977, 30, 505—17.

[105] Mortensen, Dale T., “The Matching Process as a Noncooperative
      Bargaining Game,” in The Economics of Information and Uncertainty,
      ed. John J. McCall, Chicago: University of Chicago Press for the Na-
      tional Bureau of Economic Research, 1982b.

[106] Mortensen, Dale T., “Property Rights and Eﬃciency in Mating,
      Racing, and Related Games,” American Economic Review, 1982b, 72,
      968—979.

[107] Mortensen, Dale T., “Job Search and Labor Market Analysis,” in
      Handbook in Labor Economics, O. Ashenfelter and R. Layard (eds.),
      Amsterdam: North Holland, 1986.

[108] Mortensen, Dale T., “Matching: Finding a Partner for Life or Oth-
      erwise,” American Journal of Sociology, 1988, 94, S215—S240.



                                   57
[109] Mortensen, Dale T., “The Persistence and Indeterminacy of Unem-
      ployment in Search Equilibrium,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics,
      1989, 91, 347—370.

[110] Mortensen, Dale T., “Equilibrium Unemployment Dynamics,” In-
      ternational Economic Review, 1999,40, 889-914.

[111] Mortensen, Dale T., “Equilibrium Unemployment with Wage Post-
      ing: Burdett-Mortensen Meets Pissarides,” in Panel Data and Struc-
      tural Labor Market Models, H. Bunzel, B.J. Christianesen, N.M. Keifer,
      and D.T. Mortensen (eds.), Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2000.

[112] Mortensen, Dale T., Wage Dispersion, Cambridge: Zeuthen Lecture
      Book Series, 2003.

[113] Mortensen, Dale T., “Equilibrium Unemployment with Wage Post-
      ing: Burdett-Mortensen Meets Pissarides,” in Panel Data and Struc-
      tural Labor Market Models, H. Bunzel, B.J. Christianesen, N.M. Keifer,
      and D.T. Mortensen (eds.), Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2000.

[114] Mortensen, Dale T. and George. R. Neumann, “Choice or
      Chance? A Structural Interpretation of Individual Labor Market His-
      tories,” in Studies in Labor Market Dynamics, G.R. Neumann and W.
      Westergaard-Neilsen (eds.), Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 1984.

[115] Mortensen, Dale T. and Christopher A. Pissarides, “Job Cre-
      ation and Job Destruction in the Theory of Unemployment,” Review
      of Economic Studies, 1994, 61, 397—415.

[116] Mortensen, Dale T. and Christopher A. Pissarides, “New De-
      velopments in Models of Search in the Labor Market,” in Handbook
      in Labor Economics, O. Ashenfelter and D. Card (eds.), Amsterdam:
      North Holland, 1999a.

[117] Mortensen, Dale T. and Christopher A. Pissarides, “Job Real-
      location, Employment Fluctuations, and Unemployment Diﬀerences,”
      in M. Woodford and J. Taylor (eds.), Handbook of Macroeconomics,
      Amsterdam; North Holland, 1999b.




                                    58
[118] Mortensen, Dale T. and Christopher A. Pissarides, “Unemploy-
      ment Responses to ‘Skill-Biased’ Shocks: The Role of Labour Market
      Policy,” Economic Journal, 1999c, 109, 242—65.

[119] Mortensen, Dale T. and Randall Wright, “Competitive Pricing
      and Eﬃciency in Search Equilibrium,” International Economics Re-
      view, 2002, 43, 1-20.

[120] Nash, John, “The Bargaining Problem,” Econometrica, 1950, 18,
      155—62.

[121] Osborne, Martin J. and Ariel Rubinstein, Bargaining and Mar-
      kets, London: Academic Press, 1990.

[122] Peters, Michael, “Equilibrium with Capacity Constraints and Re-
      stricted Mobility,” Econometrica, 1984, 52, 1117—1129.

[123] Peters, Michael, “Ex Ante Price Oﬀers in Matching Games: Steady
      States,” Econometrica, 1991, 59, 1425—1454.

[124] Petrongolo, Barbara and Christopher A. Pissarides, “Looking
      into the Black Box: A Survey of the Matching Function,” Journal of
      Economic Literature, 2001, 38, 390—431.

[125] Pissarides, Christopher A., “Search Intensity, Job Advertising, and
      Eﬃciency,” Journal of Labor Economics, 1984, 2, 128—143.

[126] Pissarides, Christopher A., “Short-run Equilibrium Dynamics of
      Unemployment, Vacancies, and Real Wages,” American Economic Re-
      view, 1985, 75, 676—90.

[127] Pissarides, Christopher A., “Unemployment and Vacancies in
      Britain,” Economic Policy, 1986, 3, 499—559.

[128] Pissarides, Christopher A., “Search Unemployment with On-the-
      Job Search,” Review of Economic Studies, 1994, 61, 457—75.

[129] Pissarides, Christopher A., Equilibrium Unemployment Theory,
      second edition, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000.




                                   59
[130] Postel-Vinay, Fabian and Robin, Jean-Marc, “The Distribution
      of Earnings in an Equilibrium Search Model with State-Dependent Of-
      fers and Counter-Oﬀers ,” International Economic Review, 2002, 43,
      989-1016.
[131] Pries, Michael J., “Persistence of Employment Fluctuations: A
      Model of Recurring Job Loss,” Review of Economic Studies, 2004,71,
      193-215.
[132] Pries, Michael J and Richard Rogerson, “Labor Market Institu-
      tions and Hiring Policies,” mimeo, University of Pennsylvania, 2000.
[133] Reinganum, Jennifer F., “A Simple Equilibrium Model of Price
      Dispersion,” Journal of Political Economy, 1979, 87, 851—8.
[134] Rob, Rafael, “Equilibrium Price Distributions,” Review of Economic
      Studies, 1985, 52, 487—504.
[135] Robin, Jean-Marc and Sebastien Roux, “Equilibrium Search De-
      cisions with Decreasing Returns to Scale and Hiring Costs: Theory and
      Estimation,” mimeo, 1998.
[136] Rothschild, Michael, “Models of Market Organization with Imper-
      fect Information: A Survey,” Journal of Political Economy, 1973, 81,
      1283—308.
[137] Rubinstein, Ariel, “Perfect Equilibrium in Bargaining Model,”
      Econometrica, 1982, 50, 97—109.
[138] Rubinstein, Ariel and Asher Wolinsky, “Equilibrium in a Market
      with Sequential Bargaining,” Econometrica, 1985, 53, 1133—50.
[139] Salop, Steven C., “Wage Diﬀerentials in a Dynamic Theory of the
      Firm,” Journal of Economic Theory, 1973, 6, 321—44.
[140] Salop, Steven C., “The Noisy Monopolist: Imperfect Information,
      Price Dispersion and Price Discrimination,” Review of Economic Stud-
      ies, 1977, 44, 393-406.
[141] Shapiro, Carl and Joseph E. Stiglitz, “Equilibrium Unemployment
      as a Worker Discipline Device,” American Economic Review, 1984, 74,
      433—44.

                                    60
[142] Shi, Shouyong, “Money and Prices: A Model of Search and Bargain-
      ing,” Journal of Economic Theory, 1995, 67, 467—96.

[143] Shi, Shouyong, “Frictional Assignment, Part I: Eﬃciency,” Journal
      of Economic Theory, 2001, 98, 232—260.

[144] Shi, Shouyong, “A Directed Search Model of Inequality with Het-
      erogeneous Skills and Skill-Biased Technology,” Review of Economic
      Studies, 2002, 69, 467—491.

[145] Shimer, Robert, “Contracts in Frictional Labor Markets,” mimeo,
      MIT, 1995.

[146] Shimer, Robert, “Job Auctions,” mimeo, Princeton University, 1999.

[147] Shimer, Robert, “The Assignment of Workers to Jobs in an Economy
      with Coordination Frictions,” mimeo, Univeristy of Chicago, 2003.

[148] Shimer, Robert, “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemploy-
      ment and Vacancies, 2004, forthcoming American Economic Review.

[149] Shimer, Robert and Lones Smith, “Assortative Matching and
      Search,” Econometrica 68:2 (2000a).

[150] Shimer, Robert and Lones Smith, “Nonstationary Search,”
      Princeton University mimeo, 2001.

[151] Simon, Herbert A. “A Behavioral Model of Rational Choice,” Quar-
      terly Journal of Economics, 1955, 69, 99-118.

[152] Smith, Eric, “Search, Concave Production and Optimal Firm Size,”
      Review of Economic Dynamics, 1999, 2, 456—471.

[153] Smith, Eric and Kenneth Burdett, “The Low Skill Trap,” Euro-
      pean Economic Review, (2003), 46,1439-1451.

[154] Stevens, Margaret, “Wage-Tenure Contracts in a Frictional Labour
      Market: Firms’ Strategies for Recruitment and Retention,” Review of
      Economic Studies, 2004, forthcoming.

[155] Stigler, George, “The Economics of Information,” Journal of Polit-
      ical Economy, 1961, 69, 213—225.

                                   61
[156] Trejos, Alberto and Randall Wright, “Search, Bargaining, Money
      and Prices,” Journal of Political Economy, 1995, 103, 118—41.

[157] Valdivia, Victor, “Evaluating the Welfare Benefits of UI,” mimeo,
      1995.

[158] van den Berg, Gerard J., “Multiple Equilibria and Minimum Wages
      in Labor Markets with Informational Frictions and Heterogeneous Pro-
      duction Technologies,” International Economic Review, 2003, 44, 1337-
      1357.

[159] Weill, Pierre-Olivier, “Leaning Against the Wind,” mimeo, Stanford
      University, 2003.

[160] Weiss, Andrew, “Job Queues and Layoﬀs in Labor Markets with
      Flexible Wages,” Journal of Political Economy, 1980, 88, 526—38.

[161] Wilde, Louis L., “An Information-Theoretic Approach to Job Quits,”
      in Studies in the Economics of Search, S.A. Lippman and J.J. McCall
      (eds.), Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1979.

[162] Wolpin, Ken. I., Empirical Methods for the Study of Labor Force
      Dynamics, Luxembourg: Harwood Academic Publishers, 1995.

[163] Wright, Randall, “Job Search and Cyclical Unemployment,” Journal
      of Political Economy, 1986, 94, 38—55.

[164] Wright, Randall, “Search, Layoﬀs, and Reservation Wages,” Journal
      of Labor Economics, 1987, 5, 354—365.

[165] Wright, Randall and Janine Loberg, “Unemployment Insurance,
      Taxes, and Unemployment,” Canadian Journal of Economics, 1987,
      20, 36—54.




                                    62
