                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             DO A FIRM’S EQUITY RETURNS
                        REFLECT THE RISK OF ITS PENSION PLANS?

                                                 Li Jin
                                              Robert Merton
                                                Zvi Bodie

                                          Working Paper 10650
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10650


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2004




We thank Anna Yu, Alvaro Vivanco and especially Jason Oh for excellent research assistance, and the
Department of Research at Harvard Business School, especially Sarah Woolverton, for help in obtaining data
used in this paper. We benefited greatly from discussions with Lisa Meulbroek, Akiko Mitsui and Mitchell
Peterson. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Li Jin, Robert Merton, and Zvi Bodie. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Do a Firm’s Equity Returns Reflect the Risk of Its Pension Plan?
Li Jin, Robert Merton, and Zvi Bodie
NBER Working Paper No. 10650
August 2004
JEL No. G14, G23, G31
                                        ABSTRACT

This paper examines the empirical question of whether systematic equity risk of U.S. firms as
measured by beta from the Capital Asset Pricing Model reflects the risk of their pension plans. There
are a number of reasons to suspect that it might not. Chief among them is the opaque set of
accounting rules used to report pension assets, liabilities, and expenses. Pension plan assets and
liabilities are off-balance sheet, and are often viewed as segregated from the rest of the firm, with
its own trustees. Pension accounting rules are complicated. Furthermore, the role of Pension Benefit
Guaranty Corporation further clouds the real relation between pension plan risk and firm equity risk.

The empirical findings in this paper are consistent with the hypothesis that equity risk does reflect
the risk of the firm's pension plan despite arcane accounting rules for pensions. This finding is
consistent with informational efficiency of the capital markets. It also has implications for corporate
finance practice in the determination of the cost of capital for capital budgeting. Standard procedure
uses de-leveraged equity return betas to infer the cost of capital for operating assets. But the de-
leveraged betas are not adjusted for the risk of the pension assets and liabilities. Failure to make
this adjustment will typically bias upwards estimates of the discount rate for capital budgeting. The
magnitude of the bias is shown here to be large for a number of well-known U.S. companies. This
bias can result in positive net-present-value projects being rejected.

Li Jin                            Robert C. Merton                   Zvi Bodie
Harvard Business School           Graduate School of Business        Boston University
ljin@hbs.edu                      Harvard University                 School of Management
                                  Morgan 397                         zbodie@bu.edu
                                  Soldiers Field Road
                                  Boston, MA 02163
                                  and NBER
                                  rmerton@hbs.edu
1. Introduction

In this paper, we examine the empirical question of whether real-world equity returns reflect the
risk of corporate pension plans. We focus on the systematic risk of the firm and use beta from
the Sharpe (1964) Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) as the measure of such risk1.


There are many reasons why pension risk might not be reflected in equity returns. Pension plan
assets and liabilities are off-balance sheet, and are often viewed as segregated from the rest of the
firm. Pension plans indeed have their own trustees, and pension accounting rules are
complicated. Furthermore, the role of the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (PBGC) as
guarantor of corporate pension benefits to employees complicates the actual relation between the
risk of the pension plan and the risk of the firm equity.

There is a substantial literature in economics and finance studying “value transparency”, or
whether pension assets and pension liabilities affect the market valuation of firms.
Representative papers include Oldfield (1977), Feldstein and Seligman (1981), Feldstein and
Morck (1983), Bodie et al. (1987), Bulow et al. (1987) and Bodie and Papke (1992). These
papers provide considerable empirical evidence that the equity market valuation of firms takes
into account the difference between the value of pension plan assets and its liabilities, i.e., the
pension surplus or deficit (if that difference is negative). Carroll and Niehaus (1998) confirm
those findings in a parallel test of debt market recognition of the value of the pension surplus or
deficit, by empirically examining the positive relation between funding of defined-benefit
pension funds and debt ratings. Furthermore, in both equity and debt markets, there seems to be
an asymmetric pattern in the impact of changes in pensions assets and liabilities on the market
value of the firm and on debt ratings: while each dollar increase in liabilities lowers the market
value of the firm by about a dollar, an equal increase in pension assets raises the firm’s market
value by less than a dollar. Similarly, a pension deficit reduces debt ratings by more than the
same size pension surplus increases debt ratings. This is consistent with the view that, while an


1
  Although the explicit measure of systematic risk used here is in the context of the CAPM, the same approach can
be applied to “multiple beta” asset pricing models, such as the Fama-French Three-Factor Model (1996), the Ross
(1976) Arbitrage Pricing Theory, and the Intertemporal CAPM (Merton, 1992, Chapter 15). We are confident that
the core empirical findings given here for the CAPM will remain robust with respect to these alternative
specifications of systematic risk.


                                                                                                                    3
under-funded pension liability should be fully reflected as a corporate liability, over-funded
pension assets are not entirely a corporate asset, due to the difficulty of converting an over-
funded pension plan’s assets into unemcumbered corporate assets.

However, there has been almost no analysis in the literature, either theoretical or empirical, about
how the risk level of a defined-benefit pension plan affects the risk of the market value of the
firm. As we shall see, value transparency does not necessarily imply risk transparency. The
former is a static measure, whereas the latter is a dynamic measure. To our knowledge, our paper
is the first to focus on dynamic measurement by testing whether pension-plan systematic risk is
reflected in firm equity risk.


Since estimates of beta play a pivotal role in performance evaluation and in the estimated cost of
capital calculation, accurate estimation of beta is crucial. The question we address therefore has
important implications for the correct calculation of operating-asset beta and tests of market
efficiency, regardless of the direction of the answer.


    i)      On the one hand, if pension risk is not accurately reflected in the firm’s equity beta
            (which implies that the market is informationally inefficient) then, standard analysis
            will usually underestimate the true systematic risk of the firm. This underestimation
            of risk may lead to the appearance of superior corporate performance on a risk-
            adjusted basis and that in turn would lead to a pattern of overvaluation of the firm.


    ii)     On the other hand, if the firm’s equity beta does accurately reflect its pension plan
            risk, it can have significant implication for corporate finance in estimating a firm’s
            cost of capital. The standard methodology for calculating the cost of capital treats it
            as a weighted average of the cost of equity and the after-tax cost of debt (which is the
            pre-tax cost of debt adjusted for the tax shield generate by the corporate debt)2. Such
            calculation implicitly neglects the pension plan, or, it assumes that the pension
            assets/liabilities have just the same risk characteristics as the operating asset and
            therefore do not need to be counted separately. The plain facts are that pension plan

2
 See, for examples, Brealey and Myers (2002), Copeland and Weston (1992), Ross, Westerfield and Jaffe (2002)
and Van Horne and Wachowicz (1995).


                                                                                                               4
               assets and liabilities are substantial for many firms, and they would only
               coincidentally have the same risk characteristics as the operating assets. As will be
               demonstrated, large estimation biases for the firms’ operating betas can exist in such
               cases.


The paper is organized into three sections: (1) a theory section in which we derive the theoretical
asset beta for the firm’s operating asset as a function of the firm’s equity beta, pension-asset beta,
debt and pension liability beta. From this, we derive the specification errors in the estimation of
the operating asset beta if pension assets and liabilities are completely ignored, and if the value
of the pension plan is correctly taken into account but not its risk. For a selected sample of firms
we show as an empirical matter that the resulting overstatement of the cost of capital can be
substantial; (2) an empirical section in which we use the theoretical specifications to study U.S.
pension-plan risk using time series data from 1993 to 1998 for companies filing ERISA form
5500. This period was prior to the sharp and sustained decline in the stock market, particularly
NASDAQ, in 2000-2002, and the subsequent media spotlight on pension-plan risk. We find that
the market risk of the firm’s equity reflects the risk level of the pension plan; (3) a robustness
section to examine the sensitivity of test findings to our assumptions. We find our results to be
robust.


      1. The Theory3


In the United States, when a company sponsors a defined-benefit pension plan, the plan’s assets
and liabilities, although segregated, are, in economic terms, assets and liabilities of the company.
The company and its pension plan as a consolidated entity have three groups with a claim on the
firm’s total assets: (1) the employees,--retired and active, (2) the investors -- shareholders and
creditors, and (3) the government, through corporate taxes and corporate pension benefit
guarantees. The employees’ claim on the retirement benefits, the pension liability, is a debt-like
liability of the firm, secured by the pension assets as specific collateral.




3
    This section is based on Merton (2002).


                                                                                                        5
Ignoring the effect of taxes and the PBGC, we derive the relations between pension-plan risk and
firm equity risk, and discuss how the firm’s operating-asset risk can be correctly estimated from
the pension-plan risk and observed equity risk. We then derive the structure of estimation
specification errors in measuring firm operating-asset risk when pension risk is accounted for
improperly. In doing so, we analyze two circumstances: 1) that the entire pension plan, assets
and liabilities, is totally neglected in the estimation of operating-asset risk; 2) the values of
pension assets and liabilities are correctly taken into account, but the risks of plan assets and
liabilities are not. We then discuss the effect of corporate tax and the role of PBGC.


2.1 The estimation of operating-asset risk from pension and stock market data

Consider the case where there are no taxes and we have no Pension Benefit Guaranty
Corporation.


Define:
OA as the value of operating assets, E as the value of Equity, D as the value of Debt, PA as the
value of pension assets, PL as the value of pension liabilities, S=PA-PL as pension surplus, L =
D/E as the leverage ratio. By the balance sheet identity we have that:


                         Assets = OA + PA = E + D + PL = Liabilities

We examine three possible cases:


Correct Case: The calculation of operating-asset risk correctly incorporates both the value and
the risk characteristic of the pension plan;


The beta of operating assets, βOA , when both the pension value and pension risk are correctly
taken into account is:


                 βOA = OAE
                            β E + OA
                                   D
                                     β D − [ OA
                                              PA
                                                 β PA − OA
                                                         PL
                                                            β PL ]
                                                                                    (1)
                 = OA
                   E
                      ( β E + β D ) + DOA
                                        −E
                                           β D − OA
                                                  PA
                                                     ( β PA − β PL ) − OA
                                                                        S
                                                                          β PL


                                                                                                    6
Error Case 1: The calculation of operating-asset risk ignores the pension plan, both its value and
its risk4.


If both the value and the risk of the pension plan are ignored, then the estimated operating-asset
beta becomes
                                  ˆ
                                 βˆOA =    D
                                          E+D   β D + E +ED β E                     (2)


Subtracting (1) from (2), we have that the resulting estimation specification error, defined as
        ˆ
εˆˆOA = βˆOA − β OA , is:



                            εˆˆOA = OA
                                     ˆ ( β PA − β PL ) − OAˆ [ β OA − β PL ]
                                    PA                    S
                                                                                          (3)

where OAˆ = OA + S .


Proof: see appendix.

By inspection of (3), a sufficient condition for εˆˆOA ≥ 0 is β PA ≥ β PL , β OA ≥ β PL , and , S ≤ 0 .
These conditions are often satisfied in reality, indicating that there is specification error on the
estimate of the operating-asset beta, which generally has a positive bias, if one ignores the risk
and value of defined-benefit pension plans.


Error Case 2: The calculation of risk includes the pension plan value, but neglects any difference
in risk between pension assets and pension liabilities5.


If we assume that pension asset and pension liability risk are the same and equal to the risk of the

debt of the firm: βˆPA = βˆPL = β D ,6 then the risk of the operating assets is given by:


4
  The standard textbook treatments typically calculate the WACC as the weighted average cost of debt and equity,
with no adjustment for pension risks. See examples cited in footnote 2.
5
  It recognizes the surplus or shortfall in pension-plan value, perhaps because it appears as a net entry on the firm’s
balance sheet but it treats that surplus or shortfall as having the same beta as debt.


                                                                                                                          7
                                     βˆOA = β E     E
                                                    OA   + βD   ( D−S )
                                                                  OA              (4)

Thus, subtracting (1) from (4), the specification error in the estimated beta is given by:

                           εˆOA =    PL
                                     OA   ( β D − β PL ) + OA
                                                           PA
                                                              ( β PA − β D )                (5)

Proof: see appendix.


In practice, the risk levels of pension liabilities and firm debt are similar for firms with normal
leverage ratios, whereas the portion of pension assets that are invested in equities will have
significantly higher beta risk than the firm debt. Neglecting this higher pension asset risk will
lead to a positive bias in the estimation of the beta of the operating assets.


The biases from ignoring the pension asset risk can be substantial. The biases from counting the
value of the pension plan but ignoring the risk of pension plans can also be large. In Table 1.1.
and Table 1.2. we underscore this point with four examples of well-known large firms.


                                 [Insert Table 1.1 and Table 1.2 around here.]


In Table 1.2 we posit that the pension liability has the same beta as the firm’s debt, both assumed
to be 0.175. We further posit that 60% of the pension fund is invested in the equity market and
the rest are invested in debt with a beta of 0.175, and thus the overall beta for pension assets is
assumed to be 0.67. This is a conservative estimate of the pension asset beta for typical firms.
Indeed, the PBGC recommended that pension plans invest 60%-80% of the pension asset in
equities7, and during the bull market of the 1990s many firms did just that.


                  Substituting these assumed beta values into equation (5), we get:




6
  Once the value of the pension plan is taken into account, some risk level has to be assigned to its assets and
liabilities for the calculation of firm operating-asset risk. It is generally incorrect to assume that pension assets have
the same risk as pension liabilities. If the debt of the firm is highly rated with a similar duration as the pension
liabilities, it is reasonable to treat them as having the same systematic risk.
7
  For example, see Bodie (1996).


                                                                                                                         8
                      εˆOA = (0.67 − 0.175) OA
                                            PA
                                               = 0.495 OA
                                                       PA
                                                                              (6)


By inspection of Table 1.1., three of the firms’ plans are over-funded, and the fourth, Du Pont,
has a small pension deficit. All four firms, however, have pension assets that are very large
relative to their market capitalization. The correct estimates of operating-asset beta for these four
firms are 0.16, 0.45, 0.35 and 0.26, respectively, but the flawed procedure that ignores the
pension plan altogether produces estimates of operating-asset betas of 0.54, 0.63, 0.68, 0.43,
respectively. The estimation errors are large, and the operating-asset betas are overstated by
between 40% and 250%. The last column shows that, when pension value but not pension risk is
incorporated in the calculation, the resulting betas are still significantly different from their
correct values.


Thus, standard cost-of-capital calculations, which do not distinguish between the operating-asset
risk and pension-plan risks, can materially overestimate the discount rate for operating projects.
For an equity risk premium of 7%, and a risk free rate of 5%, the correct cost of capital for the
existing operating assets of Boeing is 6.09%, but the standard approach yields 8.80%, an
overestimate of about 45%. For DU PONT, EASTMAN KODAK, and TEXTRON, the correct
cost of capital are 8.15%, 7.47%, and 6.81%, respectively, while the standard approach yields
9.44%, 9.75%, and 7.98%, respectively, for a 15% to 30% error.


Effect of Corporate Taxes


Now consider the effect of corporate taxes on the relation between the risk of the pension plan
and the risk to investors in the firm. There is a considerable range in the theory of corporate
finance about the effect of taxes on the valuation of a firm and thus, on the risk of the firm. The
original controversy is focused on whether debt financing increases the total value of the firm
relative to its value under all-equity financing. As shown by Miller (1977), the answer hinges on
the complex interaction between corporate and personal taxation in a general model of capital
market equilibrium.




                                                                                                      9
Black (1980) and Tepper (1981) examine the effect of corporate taxes on the valuation of
corporate pension assets and liabilities. Under symmetric assumptions about contribution
opportunities, tax payments and rebates, they conclude that a $1 change in the pre-tax value of
pension surplus (i.e., assets minus liabilities) causes $(1-t) change in the value of the firm where
t is the effective corporate tax rate. Thus, the government bears fraction t of the pension-surplus
risk through taxes.


Bulow, Morck and Summers (1987) revisit the question and conclude that depending on the
extent to which the ceiling on pension fund contributions can be binding, the relation ranges
from (1-t) to 1.0. Beyond the theoretical complexities, there are further empirical ones: the
effective versus statutory tax rates for real-world firms vary considerably in cross-section and for
the same firm over time. Accounting rules that govern how pension surplus is computed for
determining contribution limitations currently have multi-year smoothing features. Thus, in the
absence of individual firm tax-rate data, we make no adjustment for taxes in our test
specification in Section 3.


2.2 Effect of PBGC Insurance


The PBGC covers any shortfall in funding for pension plans of bankrupt firms, in effect
providing the plan participants with a put option on the pension fund collateral for their benefits8.
The price charged for this PBGC insurance is not a function of either the credit quality of the
plan sponsor or of the risk of the plan’s assets. Thus, its premium for coverage is not equal to its
fair market value. Distressed firms are charged less than the fair value and healthy firms are
charged more9. Even if PBGC insurance were fairly priced, the insurance transfers part of the
risk associated with the pension assets and liabilities from the corporate sponsor to the PBGC.
PBGC insurance creates an incentive for distressed firms to underfund the pension plan and
invest the plan in risky assets. Bodie et al (1985) find some empirical evidence of this effect.
At the theoretical level, the existence of the PBGC introduces a complex non-linear relation
between the value and risk of pension assets and liabilities and the risk of investor capital for

8
 There is a ceiling on benefits covered of $44,386 per year per employee, for the year 2004.
9
 The detailed procedures for setting pension premium can be found from the PBGC website, at
http://www.pbgc.gov/publications/factshts/PREMFACT.htm.


                                                                                                    10
corporations that are in financial distress10. Partly for this reason, we focus in our empirical
analysis on firms that are not in distress.


3. Empirical Analysis


In the preceding section we derive the risk relations among the firm’s assets and liabilities when
they are fully recognized by investors and measured at market prices. In this section we explore
the question: do those relations hold in practice? We consider, as an empirical matter, the extent
to which a company’s pension funding status and asset mix are incorporated in the risk of its
equity. Specifically we test the hypothesis that a higher pension-plan risk translates into a higher
overall firm market risk, and we also try to estimate the magnitude of the pension risk-firm risk
relation.


3.1 Data and measurement of variables


The data used in our study cover the period from 1993-1998. They come from three sources—
IRS Form 5500 filings, COMPUSTAT, and CRSP. The Form 5500 provides asset class
information for each plan sponsored by a company. The assets are disaggregated into categories
such as certificates of deposit, U.S. government securities, corporate debt instruments and
common stocks and reported at market value. COMPUSTAT provides company-level data about
total pension liabilities and other balance sheet and income statement variables reported by the
firm. We match data from the two sources to create a merged company-level data set.11
COMPUSTAT data are created from company 10-K reports, which is released with a much
shorter time lag than Form 5500 data. The COMPUSTAT data is also more widely used by
market participants. CRSP data are used to calculate equity betas for the firms in our sample.


From these data, we compute the market risk exposure from the pension plan by making certain
assumptions about the beta risk of various categories of assets and liabilities. Table 2 contains



10
 See Bodie (1996) for the discussion about the PBGC “pension put”.
11
 The Form 5500 data tape is made available to the public with roughly a 2-year lag. Sponsors of any plan with
more than 100 employees are required by law to file the form.


                                                                                                                11
the assumptions about beta for various asset classes that we use in computing the total risk of
pension assets and pension liabilities.12


                                        [Insert Table 2 around here]


From the firm’s balance sheet identity we have that E + D = OA + PA − PL , the firm’s invested
capital, defined as debt plus equity, equals the value of operating assets plus the pension-plan
surplus.


Define the capital-structure risk, i.e., the systematic risk borne by the equity and debt holders of
                             E        D                              β PA β PL PL βOAOA
the firm as β E + D = β E       + βD     . It follows that: β E + D = PA −       +
                            E+D      E+D                             E+D E+D E+D
Thus there is a one-to-one relation between the risk of the firm’s capital structure, measured by
the weighted average of equity and debt risk, and the net pension-plan risk, measured as
              β PA PA β PL PL
β Pension =         −           . Namely, we have that
              E+D       E+D
                                                                OA
                                       β E + D = β Pension +       βOA (6)
                                                               E+D


To estimate the equity betas, we use weekly data for one year (up to 52 observations). To make
sure our beta estimate is meaningful, we eliminate stocks that have not been traded for more than
43 weeks during a year. Since we are using relatively higher frequency data, to adjust for non-
synchronous trading, we employ Dimson’s (1979) adjustment with one lag and no leads to
calculate the beta. To test robustness, we also examined different specifications of leads and lags
and did not find a qualitative change in the results.




12
 These estimates of the beta risk for asset categories are drawn from a study done by Harvard Management
Company to calculate the portfolio choices for the firm. The numbers are cited from Light (2001).


                                                                                                           12
Restriction to non-distressed firms


We restrict our attention to firms that are not in financial distress, for several reasons. First, for
distressed firms, one must take into account the effect of the guarantee provided by the Pension
Benefit Guarantee Corporation. Second, we do not have data on the market value of the debt of
the firm, so we use the book value of debt as an approximation for market value. This proxy will
work reasonably well when the firm is not in distress, since the market value of the debt typically
does not deviate significantly from the book value of debt13. But this is not true for debt of firms
in financial distress, which can sell at a discount to book value and often trades with an equity-
like beta. Third, the betas of the debt and equity of firms in distress are nonlinear functions of
the value of the firm14.


We use three empirical measures to identify the financially distressed firms: 1) return on
investment as a measure of operating-business distress, 2) leverage as a measure of financial
distress, and 3) book/market value as a combination measure of both types of distress.15 In each
year in our sample, we rank all firms in the previous year by each measure of distress, and take
the decile of firms with the most severe measure as distressed, and the rest as non-distressed. We
subsequently run regressions for the next year only on firms that are not in distress in the
previous year. Most of the tables in the body of the paper only report regression results using the
book-market ratio as the measure of distress16. However, the full results, using all three measures
of distress, are presented in the appendix.




13
   A caveat: even for non-distressed firms, interest-rate changes can cause significant changes in the value of fixed-
rate debt value. Indeed, the 0.175 estimate for the beta of debt used throughout the paper is primarily the result of
estimated correlations between interest rate changes and equity returns during the sample period and not the risk of
default. With the widespread use of interest-rate swaps by corporations, it is not easy to determine the effect of
interest-rate changes on firm and equity values. We have nevertheless explored this effect and tried to adjust the
book value of debt by the change in the market interest rate to better approximate the market value of debt. Such
adjustments give results that are consistent with those reported in the paper, suggesting that the adjustment for book-
market value difference in debt is not driving the results of the paper. Detailed results are available upon request.
14
   See Merton (1992), chapters 11, 12.
15
   Use of these measures as indicators for financial and operating-business distress can be found in Andrade and
Kaplan (1998).
16
   We recognize that for the Fama-French (1992) model, book-to-market is a systematic risk factor, not necessarily
associated only with distress. As discussed in Section 4.A, excluding or including this group in the firm sample does
not affect our findings.


                                                                                                                    13
3.2 Test results and interpretation


We fit the following time-series regression:


                                     β E + D = a + γβ Pension + ε   (7)


Perhaps not surprisingly, pension liabilities exhibit strong serial correlation. In addition, firm
pension asset allocation decisions also change slowly over time. This gives a justification that we
could still run the regressions in the paper, even that some of the information from pension asset
holdings might not be immediately revealed to all the market participants: most of the difference
in pension asset risk is cross-sectional, rather than time-series, thus by observing the lagged
pension asset allocation decision of a firm, one can infer with reasonable accuracy the current
period pension risk profile17. To guard against cross-correlation and serial correlation, we
employ the Fama and MacBeth (1973) methodology, and further adjust the t-statistics using the
approach by Pontiff (1996)18.


The regression coefficients and their t-statistics are reported in Table 3. The results indicate a
positive relation between pension-plan risk and firm risk: one unit of pension risk increases the
firm risk by 1.7-2.0 units. The relation is statistically significant, although the point estimates are
larger than the theoretical value of 1.0.


                                          [Insert Table 3 around here.]


Consider now the further implicit assumption underlying the specification in (7). By inspection
of equation (6), firm risk is affected by the risk of both pension assets and non-pension assets.


17
   As shown in Appendix A, it is not entirely clear when the public get information about pension positions, as some
pension asset holding information might be released to the public rapidly. To the extent that insiders but not the
general public know the current pension positions, our test of the relation between current period pension risk and
current period capital structure risk would constitute a test of the strong form of efficient market hypothesis.
18
   Pontiff (1996) realizes that, in a setting of serious serial correlation, because the slope coefficients in the Fama-
MacBeth regressions are persistent through time, the Fama-MacBeth standard errors could still be biased downward.
He proposes correcting for such bias by regression the time-series of the parameter estimates on an intercept term
and modeling the residuals as an autoregressive process. As we have six years of data, we model the residuals as an
AR(1). Changing the specification to AR(2) doesn’t qualitatively affect the results in the paper.


                                                                                                                     14
The regression specification in (7) gives an unbiased estimate of the impact of pension risk only
if the omitted variable, non-pension operating-asset risk, is uncorrelated with the pension-asset
risk. Such an assumption is clearly unfounded. Much of the risk in the pension fund comes from
its equity holdings and these are of course highly correlated with non-pension asset risk of the
firm. As another, more subtle source of correlation, some firm managements may take an
integrated perspective in managing their firms’ pension and non-pension risk, causing pension
and non-pension risk to potentially be correlated. We do not have a direct measure of the non-
pension asset risk and so in an expanded specification, we substitute control variables as proxies
for differences in the non-pension operating asset risks across the firms. Our choice of control
variables is influenced by prior research identifying selected variables that are significant in the
study of the impact of pension value on firm value. By using these variables in an expanded
specification, we can also see if our significant findings in the univariate analysis of pension-
fund risk recognition by the market in (7) is just a surrogate for the variables that were used in
earlier studies to test whether pension plan value is recognized in a firm’s stock price. As we
shall see, that is not the case.


The list of control variables and the detailed procedure to construct them is in Table 4.


                                    [Insert Table 4 around here.]


The results of the regression with control variables are listed in Table 5, which reports explicitly
only the coefficient estimates and their significance for the pension-plan risk variable as in (7).
The complete regression results, including coefficients for all control variables and using all
three measures of financial distress, are in the appendix.


                                    [Insert Table 5 around here.]


As can be seen, the coefficient on pension risk is smaller in magnitude, but still statistically very
significant. Furthermore, the point estimate of the coefficient is not significantly different from




                                                                                                      15
the theoretically predicted 1.019, if the market correctly incorporated pension-plan risk into its
estimate of equity risk.


4. Robustness Checks


A. Distressed firms

As discussed, distressed firms are likely to have a distinctly different pattern than non-distressed
firms. Thus we re-run the regression analysis specified in Table 5 with the distressed firms
subsample. The results are reported in Table 6.


                                           [Insert Table 6 around here]


Inspection of Table 6 shows that the relation between pension risk and firm risk is insignificant
for these firms.


We also re-run the regressions of Table 5, with the full sample (both distressed and non-
distressed firms). The results are in Table 7.


                                          [Insert Table 7 around here.]


We see that even when the full sample is used, the relation between pension risk and firm risk is
still significant and in the predicted direction. Thus, the a priori choice to exclude distressed
firms does not change the core findings.




19
   We have also estimated the model with separate coefficients on pension asset risk and pension liability risk. We
find that the pension asset risk has a positive impact on firm risk, and pension liability risk has a negative impact on
firm risk. Both effects are statistically significant. Furthermore, the coefficient on pension asset risk is smaller than
the coefficient on pension liability risk, mirroring the findings in the studies looking at the differential impacts on
firm value of the level of pension assets versus pension liabilities. Our potential explanation for the larger weighting
on pension liabilities than on assets is that the change in pension liabilities is strongly correlated with interest rate
changes and the change in pension assets are strongly correlated with stock returns and the CAPM single-variable
descriptor is not adequate to deal with it.



                                                                                                                      16
B. filtered tests


One concern with the interpretation of our findings is that there are likely to be many firms that
have negligible pension assets/liabilities compared with the firm assets. For these firms, we
would expect that pension risk would not have a first-order impact on the overall firm risk,
especially considering the various other factors that might affect the firm risk. Thus, including
these observations in our regression analysis would not likely add information, and thus dilute
the fit of the true relation we are attempting to estimate. With this in mind, we also run
regressions which require either 1) that pension assets represent greater than a certain percentage
                                  PA
of the total firm book asset (       > threshold ), or 2) that the product of pension asset beta risk
                                 E+D
                                                     β PA PA
and PA/TA is greater than a specified threshold (              > threshold ). We use threshold levels
                                                      E+D
ranging from 2% to 20%, and the results are qualitatively the same.


Table 8 reports the filtered test results for a 2 percent threshold with non-distressed firms
selected by book-to-market ratio only. Other measures of distress give qualitatively similar
results and are presented in the appendix.


                                      [Insert Table 8 around here.]


Again, our test results support the hypothesis that market seems to react to the risk level of the
pension plan as predicted: a higher pension risk will increase the total market risk of the firm
asset, while a lower pension risk would decrease the asset market risk of the firms.


5. Conclusion


This paper focuses on an important but previously neglected area of corporate finance: namely
the impact of off-balance-sheet and non-operating risks on the risk of a firm's equity and the bias
it may induce in estimation of the firm’s cost of capital for capital budgeting. The paper's
specific focus is a corporation's defined-benefit pension plan, which for many firms is as large as



                                                                                                        17
the market capitalization of the firm sponsoring the plan. Current accounting rules for corporate
pensions are complicated and opaque. We examine the potential biases that can be introduced in
the market's perception of a company's equity risk by ignoring the risk of its pension assets and
liabilities, and we perform empirical tests to determine whether such a bias exists in practice.


The central empirical finding of the paper is that the stock market seems to process the available
pension information without bias despite the practical difficulties of deciphering corporate
pension accounts. Using the best publicly available U.S. data, our regression tests indicate that
equity betas of firms do appear to accurately reflect the betas of their pension assets and
liabilities. That is good news for market efficiency of the capital markets.


The bad news is that standard cost-of-capital calculations used in corporate finance, which do not
distinguish between the operating-asset risk and pension-plan risk, can greatly overestimate the
discount rate for Net Present Value analysis of operating projects. When calculating a firm's
operating cost of capital for use in performance measurement and in capital budgeting, the
standard approach to estimation fails to take proper account of the pension plan sponsored by the
firm. The resulting estimate of operating-asset beta and cost of capital are almost always too
high. As we show in Table 1.2, for some well-known companies, the calculated cost of capital
can be more than 40% higher than its true value. In such cases, capital projects with positive Net
Present Value may be rejected by management.


In this paper, we have focused on just one non-operating risk item of the firm--- the company
pension plan. There are other non-operating-asset-related risk exposures that might have a
significant impact on the risk of a firm's equity and on the calculation of its cost of capital. A
perhaps prosaic, but important one, especially for established hi-tech firms, is the net cash and
marketable securities held by the firm. Off-balance sheet risks of the firm from derivatives and
other significant contractual obligations including performance guarantees can potentially distort
cost of capital estimates for its operating businesses. Empirical research on their actual impact
remains a task for the future.




                                                                                                     18
References


Andrade, G., Kaplan, S., 1998. How costly is financial (not economic) distress? evidence from
highly leveraged transactions that became distressed. Journal of Finance. 53 (5). 1443-93.


Black, F., 1976. The investment policy spectrum: individuals, endowment funds and pension
funds. Financial Analyst Journal, 32 (1). 23-31.


Black, F., 1980. The tax consequences of long-run pension policy. Financial Analyst Journal, 36
(4). 21-28.


Bodie, Z., 1996. What the pension benefit guaranty corporation can learn from the federal
savings and loan insurance corporation. Journal of Financial Services Research. 10 (1). 83-100.


Bodie, Z., Light, J., Morck, R. and Taggart, R., 1985. Corporate pension policy: an empirical
investigation. Financial Analysts Journal, 41 (5). 10-16.


Bodie, Z., Light, J., Morck, R. and Taggart, R., 1987. Funding and asset allocation in corporate
pension plans: an empirical investigation. In: Bodie, Z., Shoven, J. and Wise, D. (Ed.), Issues in
Pension Economics. National Bureau of Economic Research Project Report Series, Chicago and
London: University of Chicago Press, Chicago.


Bodie, Z., Papke, L., 1992. Pension fund finance. In: Bodie, Z. and Munnell, A. (Ed.), Pensions
and the Economy, University of Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia.


Brealey, R., Myers, S., 2002, Principles of Corporate Finance, Irwin/McGraw-Hill, New York
City, New York.


Bulow, J., Morck, R. and Summers, L., 1987. How does the market value unfunded pension
liabilities? In: Bodie, Z., Shoven, J. and Wise, D. (Ed.), Issues in Pension Economics. National




                                                                                                   19
Bureau of Economic Research Project Report Series, Chicago and London: University of
Chicago Press.


Carroll, T., Niehaus, G., 1998. Pension plan funding and corporate debt ratings. Journal of Risk
& Insurance. 65 (3). 427-43.


Copeland, T. and Weston, J., 1992. Financial Theory and Corporate Policy, Addison-Wesley
Publishing Company. New York City, New York.

Coronado, J., Sharpe, S., 2003. Valuing the earnings effect of defined benefit pension plans: did
higher stock prices cause stock prices to rise? Federal Reserves Board Working paper.


Dimson, E., 1979. Risk measurement when shares are subject to infrequent trading. Journal of
Financial Economics, 7 (2), 197-226.


Fama, E., MacBeth, J., 1973. Risk, return, and equilibrium: empirical tests. Journal of Political
Economy. 81 (3). 607-36.


Fama, E., French, K., 1992. The cross-section of expected stock returns. Journal of Finance, 47
(2). 427-65.


Feldstein, M., Morck, R., 1983. Pension funding interest rate assumptions, and share prices. In:
Bodie, Z. and Shoven, J. (Ed.), Financial Aspects of the United States Pension System,
University of Chicago Press, Chicago.


Feldstein, M., Seligman, S., 1981. Pension funding, share prices, and national savings. Journal of
Finance. 36 (4). 801-24.


Light, J., Harvard Management Company, 2001. Harvard Business School Case No. 9-201-129.


Merton, R., 1992. Continuous-Time Finance. Revised Edition, Basil Blackwell, Oxford, U.K.




                                                                                                    20
Merton, R., 2002. Financial engineering: the underlying discipline for financial innovation and
risk management. Presentation at MIT Sloan School of Management.


Miller, M., 1977. Debt and Taxes. Journal of Finance, 32 (2). 261-75.


Oldfield, G., 1977. Financial aspects of the private pension system. Journal of Money, Credit &
Banking. 9 (1). 48-54.


Papke, L., 1999. Are 401(k) plans replacing other employer-provided pensions? evidence from
panel data. Journal of Human Resources. 34 (2). 346-68.


Pontiff, J., 1996, Costly arbitrage: evidence from closed-end funds. Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 111 (4). 1135-1151.


Ross, S., 1976. The arbitrage theory of capital asset pricing. Journal of Economic Theory. 13
(3). 341-60.


Ross, S., Westerfield, R. and Jaffe, J., 2002. Corporate Finance, McGraw-Hill/Irwin, New York
City, New York.


Sharpe, W., 1964. Capital Asset Prices: A theory of market equilibrium under conditions of risk.
Journal of Finance 19 (3). 425-442.


Tepper, I., 1981. Taxation and corporate pension policy. Journal of Finance. 36 (1). 1-13.


Van Horne, J., Wachowicz, J., 1995. Fundamentals of Financial Management, Prentice Hall,
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.




                                                                                                  21
                   Table 1.1. Selected Company Balance Sheet Information for 2001



                                                                     Mkt                 Operating
                                                       Pension       Cap.     Book       Asset (=
                                Pension    Pension     Surplus       Of       Value of   E+ D -
                                Asset      Liability   (shortfall)   Equity   Debt       PA + PL)
             Company            ($MM)      ($MM)       ($MM)         ($MM)    ($MM)      ($MM)

             BOEING              33,810     32,693         1,117     30,942    12,265      42,090

             DU PONT             17,923     18,769          (846)    42,593     6,814      50,253
             EASTMAN
             KODAK                 7,942     7,439           503      8,562     3,200      11,259

             TEXTRON               4,480     3,908           572      5,856     7,149      12,433



Note: Pension Asset and Pension Liability and Market Cap information are as estimated based on the
Global Equity Research Report published by UBS Warburg, September 19, 2002. Beta of equity are
estimated using CAPM, using data on three year monthly stock returns, obtained from CRSP, and by
using the value-weighted return on all stocks on NYSE/AMEX/NADDAQ as the proxy for the market. Beta
of debt is assumed, as throughout the paper, to be 0.175. Book values of debt are obtained from
COMPUSTAT. Operating asset Beta Correct is the Operation Asset Beta when correctly accounting for
pension value and risk, Operating Asset Beta Error 1 is the Operating Asset Beta, ignoring pension plan
altogether, and Operating Asset Beta Error 2 is the Operating Asset Beta, counting pension value but
mis-representing pension risk.




                                                                                                     22
                       Table 1.2. Estimated Equity and Operating Asset Betas for 2001
                                   Operating      Operating                        Operating
                                  Asset Beta     Asset Beta                       Asset Beta
Company           Equity Beta        Correct         Error1    %overestimate          Error2    %overestimate
BOEING                   0.69           0.16           0.54            250%             0.55            256%
DU PONT                  0.71           0.45           0.63             41%             0.63             39%
EASTMAN
KODAK                    0.87           0.35            0.68             93%             0.70             99%
TEXTRON                  0.73           0.26            0.43             64%             0.44             69%


Note: Pension Asset and Pension Liability and Market Cap information are as estimated based on the Global
Equity Research Report published by UBS Warburg, September 19, 2002. Beta of equity are estimated using
CAPM, using data on three year monthly stock returns, obtained from CRSP, and by using the value-weighted
return on all stocks on NYSE/AMEX/NADDAQ as the proxy for the market. Beta of debt is assumed, as
throughout the paper, to be 0.175. Book values of debt are obtained from COMPUSTAT. Operating asset Beta
Correct is the Operation Asset Beta when correctly accounting for pension value and risk, Operating Asset Beta
Error 1 is the Operating Asset Beta, ignoring pension plan altogether, and Operating Asset Beta Error 2 is the
Operating Asset Beta, counting pension value but mis-representing pension risk.




                                                                                                             23
Table 2       Pension Asset Categories as reported in Form 5500, and Assumed Beta Risk



                                                                          Assumed
Pension Asset Categories                                                  Beta
Equities            preferred stock                                              1.000
                    common stock                                                 1.000
                    joint venture                                                1.000
                    employer securities                                          1.000
                    interest in registered investment companies                  1.000
Bonds               governmental bonds                                           0.175
                    corporate debt instruments (preferred and other)             0.175
                    loans secured by mortgages (residential and
                    commercial)                                                  0.175
                    loans to participants                                        0.175
                    other loans                                                  0.175
cash                non-interest bearing cash                                    0.006
                    certificates of deposit (CD)                                 0.006
Real Estate         income producing real estate                                 0.150
                    non-income producing real estate                             0.150




                                                                                         24
                        Table 3: relation between pension risk and firm risk

      measure of distress                       (1)                     (2)                     (3)

                 intercept                  0.8730                  0.8733                  0.9108
                                          (9.7376)                (9.8763)                 (8.9652)
             pension risk                   2.0117                   1.699                   1.9601
                                          (5.7812)                (4.6538)                 (4.1523)
              Adjusted R2                   0.0132                  0.0112                   0.0134

Note: This table reports regression results using ERISA form 5500 filing data from 1993 to 1998.
The regression being run is: β E + D = α + γβ Pension + ε
All results are estimated with company betas estimated using market model with one lagged term,
and with the end-of-year pension data. Three measures of distress are tried: (1) return on
investment; (2) financial leverage; (3) book-market ratio. T-statistics are reported in parenthesis
and under each regression coefficients;




                                                                                                      25
                            Table 4 List of control variables


Variable Description     Calculation using COMPUSTAT Codes or Other Source


market share by value    calculated using market value and 3 digit SIC code
market share by sales    calculated using total sales and the 3 digit SIC code
capital intensiveness    DATA4/DATA6
cash position            DATA1/DATA6
financial leverage       Debt/DATA6
growth rate              Log(DATA6/DATA6_lag)
liquidity                DATA4/DATA5
return on investment     DATA172 / DATA6
firm size                Log(DATA6)
concentration index      calculated using market value and the 3 digit SIC code
advertisement            DATA45/DATA6, missing value is taken to be 0
Research and development DATA46/DATA6, missing value is taken to be 0




                                                                                  26
               Table 5: relation between pension risk and firm risk: simple test



Intercept                                                                           -0.3378
                                                                                   (-1.0238)
pension risk                                                                          1.1188
                                                                                   (3.7825)
Adjusted R-squared                                                                   0.2291



Note: This table reports regression results using ERISA form 5500 filing data from 1993
to 1998. The regression being run is: β E + D = α + γβ Pension + λ control + ε
All results are estimated with company betas estimated using market model with one
lagged term, and with the end-of-year pension data. The following control variables are
included but their coefficients are not reported: market share by value, market share by
sales, capital intensiveness, cash position, financial leverage, growth rate, liquidity,
return on investment, firm size, concentration index, advertisement, research and
development. The regression are run for firms that are not in distress, proxied by the
book-to-market ratio.T-statistics are reported in parenthesis and under each regression
coefficients;




                                                                                               27
            Table 6: relation between pension risk and firm risk: distressed firms only



Intercept                                                                                    0.3359
                                                                                           (3.7837)
Pension Risk                                                                                 0.1133
                                                                                           (0.1932)
Adjusted R-squared                                                                           0.2031


Note: This table reports regression results using ERISA form 5500 filing data from 1993 to
1998. The regression being run is: β E + D = α + γβ Pension + λ control + ε
All results are estimated with company betas estimated using market model with one lagged
term, and with the end-of-year pension data. The following control variables are included but
not reported: market share by value, market share by sales, capital intensiveness, cash
position, financial leverage, growth rate, liquidity, return on investment, firm size, concentration
index, advertisement, research and development. The regression are run for firms that are not
in distress, proxied by the book-to-market ratio.T-statistics are reported in parenthesis and
under each regression coefficients;




                                                                                                       28
                 Table 7: test with both distressed and non-distressed firms


                                             (1): without control                (2): with control
Intercept                                                 0.8506                         -0.3015
                                                        (9.7832)                       (-1.0132)
Pension Risk                                              1.6507                          1.0192
                                                        (3.8982)                        (3.5237)
Adjusted R-squared                                        0.0109                          0.2351


Note: This table reports regression results using ERISA form 5500 filing data from 1993 to
1998. The regression being run is: β E + D = α + γβ Pension + λ control + ε


Note: All results are estimated with company betas estimated using market model with one
lagged term, and with the end-of-year pension data. The following control variables are
included in the second column, but not reported: market share by value, market share by
sales, capital intensiveness, cash position, financial leverage, growth rate, liquidity, return on
investment, firm size, concentration index, advertisement, research and development. The
regressions are run for firms that are not in distress, proxied by the book-to-market ratio. T-
statistics are reported in parenthesis and under each regression coefficients;




                                                                                                     29
                                   Table 8: filtered test results


filter used                                  beta_PA*PA/TA>0.02                        PA/TA>0.02
Intercept                                                   -0.4698                         -0.3778
                                                           (-1.2138)                       (-1.0253)
Pension Risk                                                 1.7806                          1.3519
                                                           (2.1372)                        (3.9832)
Adjusted R-squared                                           0.2575                          0.2277



Note: This table reports regression results using ERISA form 5500 filing data from 1993 to
1998. The regression being run is: β E + D = α + γβ Pension + λ control + ε
All results are estimated with company betas estimated using market model with one lagged
term, and with the end-of-year pension data. The following control variables are included but
not reported: market share by value, market share by sales, capital intensiveness, cash
position, financial leverage, growth rate, liquidity, return on investment, firm size, concentration
index, advertisement, research and development. The regression are run for firms that are not
in distress, proxied by the book-to-market ratio.T-statistics are reported in parenthesis and
under each regression coefficients;




                                                                                                       30
Appendix A. Issues with the data


       Despite the amount of different data files that were eventually incorporated, there is quite
a bit of homogeneity between the data sources. The control variables, the pension liabilities data
all came from COMPUSTAT. These information are released to the general public through the
10K form, thus market should be able to incorporate these information pretty rapidly.


       Tracing the first date that firm pension plan investment is released is a bit tricky. While
corporate insiders know the pension asset allocation decision pretty rapidly, the market may or
may not immediately get that information. The FORM 5500 data is released by ERISA with
roughly a two-year lag. However, part of the pension funds asset allocation information might be
available to the general public sooner, especially if these pension funds are large and self-
managed: funds are typically required by various other regulations to reveal certain information
to the public. For example, SEC regulation 13F requires institutions (including pension funds) to
report quarterly holdings of securities when the total holdings are above $100 million. In any
case, the lack of timely information in pension asset allocation decisions might not be as severe a
problem as it appears: pension asset allocation decisions empirically don’t change much over
time, for a specific firm. A simple correlation analysis reveals that the first order auto-correlation
between pension risk over time is more than 0.95. Thus, knowing the past asset allocation
decisions of a firm will generally give one a very good idea about its current asset allocation
decisions.


       Research and Development and Advertisement both had many missing values. In our
main analysis, missing values were taken to be 0. Alternatively, adding a dummy for missing
variables don’t qualitatively change any of our results.


       We combine the CRSP returns data and the COMPUSTAT data through the merged
COMPUSTAT/CRSP database file, by merging PERMNO and GVKEY (the unique identifiers
in CRSP and COMPUSTAT respectively). The pension asset data from Form 5500 is matched
with the COMPUSTAT through matching the Employment Identification Number (EIN). This
proved better than CUSIP (there are a number of redundant CUSIPs), and a test of the first 100



                                                                                                     31
data points showed that there was remarkably high success rate in the combination (no incorrect
matches – although there were a handful of companies that had merged and had different names
in one data set or the other). The only problem is, this method works to the extent that firms have
a unique EIN. Often, but not always, when a firm is purchased by another plan, the acquired
firms keep their old EIN as all the employment taxes are filed by the subsidiary. Thus larger firm
and more acquisitive firms present a problem. To our knowledge, the only way to partially
address this is to search the names of the sponsors, and this works only if it isn't an unrelated
name of a subsidiary20.


           The beta of pension asset is calculated by assigning different asset types to broad
categories (real estate, cash, bonds, and equities), and assigning beta for each asset types. If a
company had more than one defined benefit pension plan, the assets in the multiple plans were
summed up. Admittedly, if we could get more accurate estimate of the exact holdings of pension
assets, and/or more precise measures of each of the assets’ beta, that would likely improve our
test results.




20
     We thank Mitchell Peterson for sharing with us his experience on merging pension data with COMPUSTAT data.


                                                                                                            32
Appendix B. Derivation of Equations in Section 2.

1. Proof of Equation (3):

If both the value and the risk of pension are ignored, then the estimated operating asset risk
becomes
                                             ˆ
                                            βˆOA =    D
                                                     E+D   β D + E +ED β E

If we define ÔA = E + D as the “pseudo operating asset”, then, from accounting identity,
ÔA = OA + S , and

                                    ˆ
                                   βˆOA = OA
                                          ˆ β D + OA
                                          D
                                                  ˆ β E = 1+ L β E + 1+ L β D
                                                  E        1          1



Thus we have:

                                 βOA = OA
                                       E
                                          β E + OA
                                                D
                                                   β D − [ OA
                                                           PA
                                                              β PA − OA
                                                                     PL
                                                                        β PL ]
                                            ˆ
                                 = OAOA+ S βˆOA − OAPA
                                                       ( β PA − β PL ) − βOAPL S
                                    ˆ              ˆ
                                 = βˆOA + OA  S
                                                ( βˆOA − β PL ) − OA
                                                                   PA
                                                                       ( β PA − β PL )

                                          ˆ
The estimation error, defined as εˆˆOA = βˆOA − β OA , is given by:

                                    ˆ
                       εˆˆOA = βˆOA − β OA
                                  ˆ
                        = − OA
                             S
                               ( βˆOA − β PL ) + OA
                                                 PA
                                                    ( β PA − β PL )
                        =   PA
                            OA   ( β PA − β PL ) − OA
                                                    S
                                                      [ 1+1L ( β E − β D ) − ( β PL − β D )]

Plug in the definition of εˆˆOA , we have εˆˆOA = OA
                                                  PA
                                                     ( β PA − β PL ) − OA
                                                                        S
                                                                          [ βOA − β PL + εˆˆOA ] . Re-arranging,
we have:

                                    εˆˆOA = OA
                                            ˆ ( β PA − β PL ) − OA
                                            PA
                                                                ˆ [ β OA − β PL ]
                                                                 S




Thus one sufficient condition for εˆˆOA ≥ 0 is β PA ≥ β PL , βOA ≥ β PL , and , s ≤ 0

QED.




                                                                                                                   33
Proof of Equation (5):
From the accounting identity, OA + S = E + D, we have,

OA = E + (D – S)

i.e., pension deficit is treated as a negative debt.

In terms of risk calculation, we have the miscalculated operating asset beta satisfies:

βˆOAOA = β E E + β D ( D − S )

Thus the bias in the beta is given by:

                     εˆOA = βˆOA − βOA
                     = βE    E
                             OA    + βD   ( D−S )
                                            OA      − OA
                                                      E
                                                         β E − OA
                                                               D
                                                                  β D + [ OA
                                                                          PA
                                                                             β PA − OA
                                                                                    PL
                                                                                       β PL ]
                     =        β D + OA
                         PL − PA
                          OA
                                     PA
                                        β PA − OA
                                                PL
                                                   β PL
                     = OA
                       PL
                          ( β D − β PL ) + OA
                                           PA
                                              ( β PA − β D )
QED.




                                                                                                34
Appendix C. Complete Regression Results for tables 5, 6, 7 and 8


Complete Regression results for Table 5:


                 Table 5: relation between pension risk and firm risk: simple test

measure of distress             return on investments     financial leverage     book-market ratio
Intercept                                     -0.7952                -0.3622             -0.3378
                                              -2.9235                -0.8926             -1.0238
Gamma                                          1.0416                 1.0193              1.1188
                                               2.9398                 3.2879              3.7825
market share by value                          8.8420                10.7988             12.8760
                                               1.2326                 1.7299              1.7414
market share by sales                         -7.4401                -8.7870            -11.4165
                                              -0.8755                -1.1598             -1.3662
capital intensiveness                          0.3015                 0.4115              0.4017
                                               1.2566                 1.0877              1.2693
cash position                                 -0.2083                 0.2686              0.5398
                                              -0.2710                 0.4395              1.1857
financial leverage                            -0.0622                -0.4140             -0.0133
                                              -0.2244                -0.5403             -0.0478
growth rate                                    0.2633                 0.1517             -0.0598
                                               0.7492                 0.5050             -0.1757
liquidity                                     -0.0248                -0.0436             -0.0445
                                              -1.1109                -1.1748             -1.4243
return on investment                           9.6204                 5.1357              3.8693
                                               6.4126                 2.3879              4.9011
firm size                                      0.1217                 0.1149              0.1019
                                               2.8725                 2.7580              1.8682
concentration index                            0.6260                 0.8150              0.9069
                                               0.4512                 0.5232              0.5495
advertisement                                  2.0965                 2.2420              2.1677
                                               1.0060                 0.7462              1.0245
research and devel                             8.0776                 8.6934              8.7364
                                               1.5815                 1.8014              1.9204
Adjusted R-squared                             0.3100                 0.2686              0.2291


Note: All results are estimated with company betas estimated using market model with one
lagged term, and with the end-of-year pension data. T-statistics are reported under each
regression coefficients;




                                                                                                     35
Complete Regression Results for Table 6:


            Table 6: relation between pension risk and firm risk: distressed firms only

     measure of distress       return on investments    financial leverage   book-market ratio
Intercept                                     0.2319                0.7395            0.3359
                                              0.6590                1.7873            3.7837
Gamma                                        -0.6708               -0.1679            0.1133
                                             -0.7805               -0.0897            0.1932
market share by value                         5.1595               14.1931            0.1050
                                              1.0923                2.0565            0.0117
market share by sales                        -4.7247               -9.6382            3.0802
                                             -0.8849               -1.3145            0.9460
capital intensiveness                        -0.0490               -0.0265            0.1271
                                             -0.0829               -0.0740            0.5332
cash position                                 0.5619               -1.2075            0.2867
                                              0.5017               -1.2898            0.4263
financial leverage                            0.0498                0.0616           -0.0995
                                              0.1232                0.0614           -0.2932
growth rate                                  -0.0896               -0.2691            0.1077
                                             -0.2062               -1.0461            0.3293
liquidity                                    -0.0041               -0.0415           -0.0318
                                             -0.0424               -0.9517           -1.0174
return on investment                          0.1402                0.9626            0.0602
                                              0.1687                0.8215            0.0866
firm size                                     0.0437                0.0013           -0.0075
                                              0.3699                0.0194           -0.2473
concentration index                           0.1241               -1.1822           -0.3516
                                              0.0301               -0.2903           -0.7573
advertisement                                -2.0094                0.8650           -1.5842
                                             -0.7099                0.4698           -0.8687
research and devel                            5.3577                5.2189           -0.3865
                                              1.0959                1.2303           -0.1976
Adjusted R-squared                            0.2578                0.2567            0.2031


Note: All results are estimated with company betas estimated using market model with
one lagged term, and with the end-of-year pension data. T-statistics are reported under
each regression coefficients;




                                                                                                 36
Complete Regression Results For Table 7:


                Table 7: test with both distressed and non-distressed firms

Intercept                                                     0.8506          -0.3015
                                                              9.7832          -1.0132
Gamma                                                         1.6507           1.0192
                                                              3.8982           3.5237
market share by value                                                         12.2483
                                                                               2.0389
market share by sales                                                         -9.6723
                                                                              -1.3450
capital intensiveness                                                          0.4059
                                                                               1.7938
cash position                                                                  0.5403
                                                                               1.1372
financial leverage                                                            -0.0833
                                                                              -0.2325
growth rate                                                                   -0.0176
                                                                              -0.0695
liquidity                                                                     -0.0456
                                                                              -1.6812
return on investment                                                           3.4136
                                                                               2.7642
firm size                                                                      0.0993
                                                                               1.9959
concentration index                                                            0.7627
                                                                               0.4440
advertisement                                                                  2.2807
                                                                               1.1027
research and devel                                                             8.7918
                                                                               1.9139
Adjusted R-squared                                            0.0109           0.2351


Note: All results are estimated with company betas estimated using market model with
one lagged term, and with the end-of-year pension data. T-statistics are reported under
each regression coefficients;




                                                                                          37
Complete Regression Results For Table 8:


                           Table 8: filtered test results

filter used                                beta_PA*PA/TA>0.02       PA/TA>0.02
Intercept                                              -0.4698          -0.3778
                                                       -1.2138          -1.0253
Gamma                                                   1.7806           1.3519
                                                        2.1372           3.9832
market share by value                                 12.2776          13.0770
                                                        2.1581           2.0683
market share by sales                                  -6.8838        -12.2163
                                                       -0.7549          -1.4842
capital intensiveness                                  -0.0158           0.3165
                                                       -0.0308           0.8110
cash position                                           1.5404           0.7277
                                                        0.8461           1.2188
financial leverage                                      0.3047          -0.0203
                                                        0.7244          -0.0751
growth rate                                            -0.0511          -0.0562
                                                       -0.0806          -0.1901
liquidity                                              -0.0585          -0.0510
                                                       -0.7900          -1.3850
return on investment                                    5.0331           3.8123
                                                        4.4008           4.6131
firm size                                               0.0922           0.1067
                                                        1.2762           1.6245
concentration index                                     1.9302           1.9984
                                                        0.8029           0.9116
advertisement                                           1.6628           2.0816
                                                        0.6059           1.1534
research and devel                                      8.0885           8.4191
                                                        1.7966           1.9554
Adjusted R-squared                                      0.2575           0.2277

Note: All results are estimated with company betas estimated using market model
with one lagged term, and with the end-of-year pension data. T-statistics are
reported under each regression coefficients;




                                                                                  38
