NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GO DOWN FIGHTING:
SHORT SELLERS VS. FIRMS
Owen A. Lamont
Working Paper 10659
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10659
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2004

I thank Nicholas Barberis, Douglas Diamond, Karl Diether, Toby Moskowitz, Rob Stambaugh, Will
Goetzmann, and seminar participants at Berkeley, Boston College, Carnegie Mellon, the Chicago Quantitative
Alliance, the London School of Economics, the NASD, the NBER, the Q Group, and Stanford for helpful
comments. I thank Karl Diether and Yan Zhang for research assistance. I thank the NYSE and Toby
Moskowitz for data. I gratefully acknowledge support from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, the Center for
Research in Securities Prices at the University of Chicago Graduate School of Business, the National Science
Foundation, and the Q group. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Owen A. Lamont. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Go Down Fighting: Short Sellers vs. Firms
Owen A. Lamont
NBER Working Paper No. 10659
August 2004
JEL No. G14
ABSTRACT
I study battles between short sellers and firms. Firms use a variety of methods to impede short
selling, including legal threats, investigations, lawsuits, and various technical actions intended to
create a short squeeze. These actions create short sale constraints. Consistent with the hypothesis
that short sale constraints allow stocks to be overpriced, firms taking anti-shorting actions have in
the subsequent year very low abnormal returns of about -2 percent per month.
Owen A. Lamont
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
owen.lamont@yale.edu

Short sale constraints can allow stocks to be overpriced. Constraints include various
costs and risks, such as the expense and difficulty of borrowing stock, legal and institutional
restrictions, and the risk that the short position will have to be involuntarily closed due to recall
of the stock loan. If these impediments prevent investors from sufficiently shorting certain
stocks, these stocks can be overpriced and thus have low future returns until the overpricing is
corrected. By identifying stocks with particularly high short sale constraints, one can identify
stocks with particularly low future returns. These constraints are difficult to measure, however,
and researchers have struggled to find appropriate data to test the overpricing hypothesis.
In this paper, I test whether overpricing increases when firms deliberately raise the level
of short sale constraints. Firms can take a variety of actions to impede short selling of their
stock. Firms take legal and regulatory actions to hurt short sellers, such as accusing them of
crimes, suing them, hiring private investigators to probe them, and requesting that the authorities
investigate their activities. Firms take technical actions to make shorting difficult, such as splits
or distributions specifically designed to disrupt short selling. Firms can coordinate with
shareholders to withdraw shares from the stock lending market, thus preventing short selling by
causing loan recall. These battles between short sellers and firms can be extraordinarily
acrimonious. The following statement from the sample used in this paper gives a flavor of
attitudes toward short sellers: "Your activities are mean, shameful and loathsome. They are
motivated by appalling avarice and greed, and they will not be permitted to go unanswered."
(Fulman, 1998)
An example of the various anti-shorting strategies used by firms is provided by Solv-Ex,
a firm that claimed to have technology for economically extracting crude oil from tar-laden sand.
Short sellers claimed that Solv-Ex was a fraud. On 2/5/96, the management of Solv-Ex faxed a

Go down fighting – Page 1

letter to brokers and shareholders: “To help you control the value of your investment…we
suggest that you request delivery of the Solv-Ex certificates from your broker as soon as
possible.” (Weiss, 1996). This suggestion, entirely legal on the part of Solv-Ex, was essentially
an attempt at market manipulation. The letter was an attempt to orchestrate a short squeeze
using the stock lending system (the mechanics of stock lending are described further in section
I).
Any shareholder heeding Solv-Ex’s suggestion would have withdrawn his shares from
the stock lending market, potentially forcing short sellers to cover their positions. On 2/2/96,
before the letter, Solv-Ex’s price was at $24.875. By 2/21/96, the price had risen to $35.375,
perhaps due to Solv-Ex’s attempted squeeze. Solv-Ex took other action against short sellers as
well. Later in 1996, Solv-Ex said that it had hired private investigators to find out who was
spreading misinformation about the firm, and subsequently it filed suit against a well-known
short seller, claiming he had spread false information. However, in this case it was Solv-Ex
which was engaged in illegal activities, not the short sellers. Solv-Ex delisted at 7/1/97 at $4.25,
it entered Chapter 11 bankruptcy in 1997, and in 2000 the court ruled that the firm had indeed
defrauded investors.
In this case, the evidence is consistent with the idea that Solv-Ex was overpriced in
February 1996, since it subsequently fell sharply. This paper looks at long-term returns for a
sample of 266 similar firms who threaten, take action against, or accuse short sellers of illegal
activities or false statements. The sample is constructed using publicly observable actions from
news reports and firm press releases.
It turns out that (as in the Solv-Ex case) sample firms have very low returns in the year
subsequent to taking anti-shorting action. Abnormal returns are approximately -2 percent per

Go down fighting – Page 2

month. While this degree of underperformance may seem implausibly large, it is in line with
other estimates from Jones and Lamont (2002), Lamont and Thaler (2003), and Ofek,
Richardson, and Whitelaw (2003). Thus the evidence is consistent with the idea that short sale
constraints allow very substantial overpricing, and that this overpricing gets corrected only
slowly over many months. As a secondary issue, this paper also examines the behavior of short
interest and prices around anti-shorting actions. There is weak evidence at best that deliberate
short squeezes can temporarily raise stock prices.
The idea that short sale constraints can prevent negative information or opinions from
being expressed in stock prices comes from Miller (1977). Although constraints are necessary in
order for mispricing to occur, they are not sufficient. Constraints can explain why a rational
arbitrageur fails to short the overpriced security, but not why anyone buys the overpriced
security. To explain that, one needs investors who are willing to buy overpriced stocks. Thus
two things, trading costs and some investors with downward sloping demand curves, are
necessary for substantial mispricing. This willingness to hold overpriced stocks can be
interpreted either as reflecting irrational optimism by some investors, or rational speculative
behavior reflecting differences of opinion. I discuss the underlying theory more in section I.
This paper is organized as follows. Section I discusses the general issues of short sale
constraints and reviews related research. Section II describes how the sample was constructed.
Section III describes the sample characteristics. Section IV examines long run returns for sample
stocks. Section VI examines shorting costs and short interest around anti-shorting events.
Section VI looks at short term price movements around attempted short squeezes. Section VII
summarizes and presents conclusions.

Go down fighting – Page 3

I.

Background and literature review

A. Mechanics of shorting stock
To be able to sell a stock short, one must borrow it, and because borrowing shares is not
done in a centralized market, finding shares can sometimes be difficult or impossible. In order to
borrow, an investor needs to find an institution or individual willing to lend. These lenders
receive a daily lending fee from the borrowers, determined by supply and demand in the lending
market.
Brokers have the ability to lend shares of their customers, provided customers have given
written permission. Once a short seller has initiated a position by borrowing stock, the borrowed
stock may be recalled at any time by the lender. If the short seller is unable to find another
lender, he is forced to close his position. This possibility leads to recall risk, one of many risks
that short sellers face.
There are several reasons that a shareholder might initially refuse to lend stock, or might
later withdraw his shares from the stock lending market. First, if the lender sells his stock, he
must recall his stock loan so that he can deliver his shares to the buyer. Second, in some unusual
cases (which are studied here), firms devise technical actions which force shareholders not to
lend. For example, one firm required shareholders to send their stock certificates to the firm's
transfer agent in order to receive a distribution. An owner cannot send in the certificate unless he
is in physical possession of it. Third, shareholders may refuse to lend their stock because they
fear that by helping short sellers, they will be helping drive stock prices down. This idea (the
basis of the Solv-Ex example) obviously makes no sense in a competitive market where no
individual investor is big enough to affect prices. Fourth, for individual investors, brokers
typically only have the ability to lend out of margin accounts, not cash accounts. Fifth, some

Go down fighting – Page 4

institutions do not have stock lending programs at all, perhaps because the income generated by
lending would not be enough to compensate for the fixed cost of setting up a lending program.
Generally, it is easy and cheap to borrow most large cap stocks, but it can be difficult to
borrow stocks which are small, have low institutional ownership, or which are in high demand
for borrowing. A somewhat paradoxical description of the stock lending market is that it usually
works very well, except when you want to use it, in which case it works terribly. By this I mean
that it can be difficult or expensive to short stocks that many people believe are overpriced and
many people want to short. Of course, this point is the essence of the overpricing hypothesis:
stocks are only overpriced when informed investors are unable or unwilling to short them. No
one would want to short them if they weren’t overpriced, and they wouldn’t be overpriced if they
weren’t hard to short.
Since the data collection strategy is based on public anti-shorting actions taken by firms
(and in the case of lawsuits depends on firms being able to identify short sellers), it is useful to
consider the conflicting incentives for secrecy faced by short sellers. Short sellers sometimes
attempt to remain anonymous, while other times publicize their activities. On the one hand,
when shorting a stock, one has the incentive to publicize the opinion that the stock is overpriced.
The sooner one can convince other investors that the stock price is too high, the sooner the price
will fall, minimizing holding costs and price risk.
On the other hand, recall risk, and more generally the cost of maintaining a short position,
gives short sellers an incentive for secrecy, since holding costs generally rise when other
investors are also trying to short. For stocks that are hard to short, a short seller would like the
stock price to go down, but he may not want other people to short the stock. The cost and
difficulty of shorting is determined by supply and demand in the securities lending market. If

Go down fighting – Page 5

more people try to short a stock, the cost of shorting might rise and existing stock loans may be
called in by the stock lender. In addition, secrecy might be preferred if the short seller wants to
avoid being sued or harassed by the firm he is shorting.
B. Other short sale constraints
In addition to the problems in the stock lending market, there are a variety of other short
sale constraints. US equity markets are not set up to make shorting easy. Regulations and
procedures administered by the SEC, the Federal Reserve, the various stock exchanges,
underwriters, and individual brokerage firms can mechanically impede short selling. Legal and
institutional constraints inhibit investors from selling short. For example, Almazan et al. (2000)
find that only about thirty percent of mutual funds are allowed to sell short, and only two percent
actually do sell short.
In addition to regulations, short sellers also face hostility from society at large. Policy
makers and the general public seem to have an instinctive reaction that short selling is morally
wrong. Short selling is characterized as inhuman, unAmerican, and against God (Proverbs
24:17: "Do not rejoice when your enemy falls, and do not let your heart be glad when he
stumbles."). Hostility is not limited to America. In Malaysia in 1995, the Finance Ministry
proposed mandatory caning as the punishment for short sellers (the beating "will be light, similar
to the punishment carried out on juveniles") (Jayasankaran, 1995).
Short sellers face periodic waves of harassment from governments and society, usually in
times of crisis or following major price declines as short sellers are blamed. Short sellers are
often thought to be in league with America’s enemies. The general idea seems to be that short
selling is bad, and when bad things happen (such as war) it probably involves short sellers in
some way. For example, the New York Stock Exchange imposed special short selling

Go down fighting – Page 6

regulations during World War I (in November 1917), in response to both a substantial market
decline and a fear that the Kaiser would send enemy agents to drive down stock prices. Jones
and Lamont (2001) and Jones (2002) discuss another historical episode following the crash of
1929. This historical pattern has continued in recent years, following both the terrorist attack of
September 11, 2001 and the more general market fall starting in 2000. Media reports indicate
that authorities in Britain and Japan have sought to discourage shorting.
C. Overpricing: Theory
Harrison and Kreps (1978) construct a model with rational investors where differences
of opinion, together with short sale constraints, create a “speculative premium” in which stock
prices are higher than even the most optimistic investor’s assessment of their value (see also
Duffie et al, 2002). These differences of opinion can be interpreted as arising from different
prior beliefs which rationally converge as information arrives (Morris 1996), or as irrational
overconfidence (Scheinkman and Xiong, 2003). In any case, short sale constraints generate a
pattern of overpricing leading to subsequent low returns.
Here I give an example that illustrates Harrison and Kreps (1978). In the model of Miller
(1977) short sale constraints cause stock prices to reflect only the views of the optimists. The
Harrison and Kreps (1978) story goes beyond Miller (1977) to say that the stock can be priced
even higher than the most optimistic assessment of its true value. In their model, everybody
agrees that stocks are overpriced but are still willing to hold stocks.
Suppose investor A and investor B have different beliefs about the prospects for a risky
asset. Each one knows what the other one believes, but they agree to disagree, so there is no
asymmetric information. Assume a simple set up with three dates, date 0, 1, and 2, and for
simplicity assume risk neutral agents behaving competitively, a discount rate of zero, and there

Go down fighting – Page 7

are sufficient numbers of type A and type B investors for each type to hold all the asset by
themselves. Suppose it is currently date 0, and both A and B believe that the asset is worth 200
today. Specifically, they both believe that at date 2 it will be worth 300 with 50% probability
and 100 with 50% probability. However, A thinks that at date 1 some news will arrive that will
resolve all uncertainty, while B thinks there will be no relevant news released until date 2. This
belief about when news gets released is the only disagreement between A and B (it is not
necessary to state who, if either, is right in their beliefs). The Harrison and Kreps (1978) model
has the remarkable property that in the presence of short sale constraints, both A and B would be
willing to hold the asset at 250 at date 0, despite the fact they both think it is only worth 200.
To get to this result, work backward from date 1, using the principle that with short sale
constraints the optimist always sets the price. At date 1, if good news has arrived then A will
value the asset 300 while B still thinks it is worth 200, thus the price will be 300 (A will hold all
the asset, B will hold none of it). If bad news arrives at date 1, the price will be 200 (B will hold
all of it). Since these two states happen with 50-50 probability, the date 0 expected price for date
1 is 250. Thus at date 0, both A and B are willing to hold the asset at a price of 250. Although
everyone thinks it is overvalued at date 0, they are willing to buy at date 0 because they believe
they are following a dynamic trading strategy that will take advantage of the other investor. This
example formalizes the notion of the “greater fool” theory of asset pricing. Note that everyone
agrees that long-term expected returns between date 0 and date 2 are low (as the value is
expected to fall from 250 to 200), and thus a buy and hold strategy is a bad idea. Volume is a
key part of the story. Since everyone is following a dynamic trading strategy, you see lots of
trading at date 1 as traders try to take advantage of one another. Without volume, there would be
no overpricing.

Go down fighting – Page 8

D. Overpricing: Evidence
A variety of empirical evidence confirms the prediction that binding short sale constraints
lead to low returns, although much of the evidence is circumstantial because it is hard to observe
the level of short sale constraints for different stocks. Looking across stocks, the prediction is
that when constraints bind more tightly, subsequent returns will be lower. One can test this
hypothesis either by finding stocks with higher constraints (if constraints vary across stocks), or
finding stocks with higher unexpressed shorting demand (if the demand for shorting varies
across stocks). The basic idea of looking at shorting demand is that some investors want to short
a stock but are impeded by constraints, thus the stock is overpriced. If one can estimate the size
of this group of investors, one can measure the extent of overpricing. In practice measures of
shorting constraints and shorting demand tend to be highly correlated, since both are reflecting
the same mechanism that constraints prevent informed investors from immediately correcting
overpricing.
One measure of short sale constraints is the cost of shorting reflected in the stock loan
market. A variety of recent papers study the market for borrowing stock (D’Avolio (2002),
Geczy et al. (2002), Mitchell et al. (2002), Ofek and Richardson (2003), and Reed (2001)),
unfortunately using sample periods of short duration. Jones and Lamont (2002), using a longer
sample of shorting costs, show that stocks that are expensive to short or that enter the lending
market have high valuations and low subsequent returns. Indirect costs of shorting can come
from options as in Figlewski and Webb (1993), Sorescu (2000), Lamont and Thaler (2003),
Ofek, Richardson, and Whitelaw (2003).
Proxies for shorting demand include breadth of ownership (Chen, Hong, and Stein
(2002)), dispersion of beliefs (Diether, Malloy, and Scherbina, 2002), or the level of short

Go down fighting – Page 9

interest (Figlewski (1981), Figlewski and Webb (1993), and Dechow et al. (2001)).
Unfortunately, using short interest as a proxy for shorting demand is problematic, because the
quantity of shorting represents the intersection of supply and demand. The quantity of shorting
should respond to both the cost and benefit of shorting the stock, so that stocks that are very
costly to short will have low short interest. Stocks that are impossible to short have an infinite
shorting cost, yet the level of short interest is zero. Lamont and Thaler (2003), for example,
examine a sample of technology carve-outs that appear to be overpriced. In one case they study,
the apparent overpricing and the implied cost of shorting fall over time, while the level of short
interest rises. Thus short interest can be negatively correlated with shorting demand,
overpricing, and shorting costs. The problematic nature of short interest leads to weak empirical
results.
E. Reaction to news
Another strand of literature looks at the reaction of prices to news about short sales. In
rational models such as Diamond and Verrecchia (1987), informed investors sell short, but once
short interest is announced stock prices should immediately adjust to take into account the
negative information. Consistent with this idea, Aitken et al. (1998) find that stock prices fall
immediately in response to announced increases in short interest.
The anti-shorting actions studied here might reveal something both about the presence of
informed pessimists, and the information possessed by the firm. For example, perhaps only
firms that believe themselves to be overpriced engage in anti-shorting actions, since underpriced
firms know that the market will eventually recognize their true worth. As in the Solv-Ex case,
empirically many firms accuse short sellers of fraud, but are in fact themselves guilty of fraud
(“The lady doth protest too much, methinks.” Hamlet. Act iii. Sc. 2.). One short seller in the

Go down fighting – Page 10

sample noted “we can look at a company that is attacking us. When we have the goods on that
company, it tells us we are onto something. The louder they scream, the better the short.”
(Pender, 1989)
While the information revealed by anti-shorting actions is an interesting topic, it isn’t
explored here. Rather, the hypothesis tested is whether anti-shorting actions lead to predictable
low returns. Under the hypothesis of efficient markets with no frictions, prices should
immediately adjust to new information, and post-event returns should be unpredictable. The
empirical question studied here is not reaction to news, but rather long-term returns based on
lagged public information.
II.

Constructing the sample

I searched Lexis, Dow Jones Interactive, and other text sources for episodes featuring
reported disputes between short sellers and firms, ending in June 2002. These sources contained
newspaper and magazine articles, newswire items, transcripts of broadcast media, and press
releases. “Firms” were in most cases firm management, but in a few cases were large
shareholders of the firm. I searched on key words such as “short seller”, “lawsuit,”
“conspiracy,” and so on. Finding the relevant events was a time-consuming and labor-intensive
process that involved reading several thousand pages of text. Coding the events sometimes
required judgment calls, and information was often incomplete or ambiguous.
I find 327 events from 266 different firms, the earliest event in March 1977, and the latest
in May 2002. Media coverage is thinner in earlier years, and 77% of the events occur after 1990.
In addition to events, I also have (up to June 2002) returns, market equity, and volume from
CRSP, book values from Compustat, and short interest from the NYSE (from 1992 to 2001) and
NASDAQ (from 1995 to 2001). To get in the sample, a firm must be common stock in CRSP

Go down fighting – Page 11

with data available within the first 12 months after the event (this excludes OTCBB stocks,
which are the source of many extraordinary anti-shorting episodes). I exclude cases involving
merger arbitrage or convertible securities arbitrage.
The sample includes events where the firm mounts some sort of defense against short
sellers, or accuses short sellers of wrongdoing (and thus implicitly raise the threat of legal
action). The sample includes nine types of events, sorted into three categories. The first
category is belligerent statements about short sellers, ranging from threats of legal action to
detailed refutations of short seller’s claims. The second category is taking legal or regulatory
action against short sellers. The third category is taking technical action to prevent short selling.
Table I lists the different events types of events.
A. Belligerent statements
The first category, belligerent statements, is when the firm claims that short sellers are
acting improperly to cause the stock price to go down. I include in this category cases when the
firm expends some effort refuting or denouncing short sellers, but falls short of taking specific
actions. Belligerent statements often contain explicit or implicit threats of legal action against
short sellers. Although belligerent statements themselves do not impede short sellers, they do
indicate a greater likelihood that the firm will take some anti-shorting action in the future.
Belligerent statements include any case in which firms explicitly accuse the short sellers of
making illegal or improper actions, or disseminating false information. I exclude from the
database cases where the firm mentioned short sellers but did not accuse them of improper
action.
Belligerent statements come in three types. The first is when the firm claims some sort of
conspiracy by short sellers, and includes claims of illegal shorting or stock price manipulation.

Go down fighting – Page 12

A typical statement is “We continue to firmly believe that ...stakeholders have been victimized
by stock manipulators.” (Knight, 1998) This category also includes claims that short sellers
were harassing or manipulating customers, investors, or suppliers.
The second type (which was often difficult to distinguish from the first) was the claim the
short sellers were spreading misinformation about the firm. Typical cases claimed lies, rumors,
or planting negative stories in the media. To get into the database, firms had to either explicitly
discuss the role of short sellers in spreading these lies, or to be rebutting someone who was
publicly acknowledged to be shorting the stock. A typical statement is “These false rumors
regarding both the company and its products have been spread by short sellers of the company's
stock.” (System Software Associates Inc., 1995)
Third, firms state they are considering their legal options and thus threaten potential legal
action against short sellers or critics. A typical statement is “The Board of Directors has directed
legal counsel to protect the Company's integrity and reputation and they will be assessing the
legal remedies which the Company may pursue.” (Quigley Corporation, 1997) This category
also includes cases where the firm states they are undertaking their own investigation of short
sellers, including hiring outside counsel or hiring private investigators.
B. Legal actions
I break legal or regulatory actions into two types of events. The first is when firms publicly
announce that they are requesting an investigation by regulatory authorities, usually the relevant
exchange or the SEC. This category also includes cases where the firm claims the SEC is
already investigating short sellers. It is sometimes the case that when short sellers claim the SEC
is investigating the firm for accounting shenanigans, the firm will respond by claiming that the
SEC is investigating the short sellers for price manipulation.

Go down fighting – Page 13

This category also contained five cases when the media (as opposed to the firm) reports
that the SEC or exchange actually are investigating short sellers. Although not every case
reveals that the firm alleged wrongdoing, in each of the cases the reports occur after other antishorting activities by the firm. It seems reasonable to infer that the firm complained to
regulators. This category also includes eight cases involving 1989 Congressional hearings about
short selling. Media reports indicated that the hearings were initiated by disgruntled firms (these
hearings are discussed further in Section VII).
The second type of legal action is lawsuits initiated by the firm or by shareholders against
short sellers or critics. Sometimes these lawsuits were against short sellers or brokers, and
sometimes against media outlets or analysts. Of the 35 lawsuits, 7 were “cybersmear” lawsuits
involving electronic postings by unknown persons. These lawsuits usually speculated that the
posters were short sellers: “In its libel suit, Hollis-Eden alleges the defendants, named only by
their screen aliases, could be disgruntled former employees and shareholders or people working
with short sellers to manipulate the stock.” (Crabtree, 2001)
C. Technical actions
Firms can make it difficult to short their stock by disrupting the ability to borrow shares.
One technical action taken by firms in the sample was to switch stock exchanges from the
NASDAQ to AMEX or NYSE. For much of the sample period, NASDAQ was perceived as
being more lax in its short selling rules (it did not adopt the uptick rule until 1994). The sample
includes six firms announcing that they were changing or applying to change exchanges
explicitly to impede short selling (event dates range from 1988 to 1996).
Second, as in the example of Solv-Ex (discussed in the introduction), 29 firms urge or
suggest that shareholders collectively withdraw their shares from the stock lending market. A

Go down fighting – Page 14

prominent example is Irwin Jacobs, an investor who owned 5% of Conseco. In July 2000 he
waged a personal campaign against short sellers, spending $400,000 for full-page ads in the New
York Times and Wall Street Journal, calling on fellow shareholders to take their shares "inhouse." (02/19/2001 Forbes).1
Third, firms attempt in a variety of ways to get shares into the hands of friendly owners,
who presumably will not lend their shares. I classify 7 events of this type, and they include a
number of loosely related actions. Again, all require that the stated action be explicitly in
response to short sellers or taking place within the context of a battle with short sellers. Two are
when the CEO of the firm announces that he is setting up an entity to buy and sell firm shares,
using his own personal money. Three are when the firm announces it is repurchasing its own
shares (I require that the announcement specifically mention short sellers). One is when it is
announced that a large shareholder is withdrawing his shares from the lending market. One is
when a firm announces that the employee stock ownership plan is acquiring shares. A last is
when a firm offers to lend money to its shareholders to replace margin loans, so that the
shareholders can place their stock in cash accounts (brokers typically can lend shares of their
customers in margin accounts but not cash accounts).
The last category contains miscellaneous trading-related actions to impede short selling.
There are six cases where firms do splits or distributions which are apparently designed to force
short sellers to close out their positions. For example, one firm required holders to send their
stock certificates to the firm's transfer agent to be eligible to receive a stock dividend. Another
firm did what was effectively a 1.1 for 1 stock split, with the same intention.
In three other cases, firms initiated trading halts explicitly in response to short sellers.
The policy of the New York Stock Exchange is that firms should warn the NYSE ten minutes

Go down fighting – Page 15

prior to major announcements, and sometimes the NYSE halts trading for a brief period, often 10
or 20 minutes, while the information is disseminated. One of these cases is described by Asensio
(2001). After Asensio (a short-seller) had released a negative report on a firm, the firm informed
the NYSE that a major announcement was forthcoming and trading stopped at 10.44 am.
Trading did not finally resume until 3.52 pm, eight minutes before the exchange closed, and in
those eight minutes the price rose. According to Asensio, “someone had done a helluva job
rallying the troops...By that time the institutions had galvanized enough buyers to run up the
stock.” The firm did not make a major announcement, but only released a press release
denouncing Asensio.
D. Limitations of the database
The database is surely an incomplete record of anti-shorting action taken by firms. First,
it does not reflect private anti-shorting actions, such as private lawsuit threats made by firms.
Many events only appear in the sample because they are deemed interesting or newsworthy. It is
undoubtedly the case that many anti-short selling actions do not get into the database because
they are not reported in the media. As a result, the database is only a partial reflection of reality,
and in particular it is likely that when firms take multiple actions, only some of them are
reflected in the database. Coverage is particularly incomplete in the early years of the sample.
Some firms appear multiple times in the database since they took multiple actions. For
this reason, the totals in the rightmost column of Table I are not always the sum of the individual
categories. My coding strategy is to stop collecting belligerent statements on the first date that
technical or legal events take place, so by construction the sample contains no belligerent
statements after a legal or technical event. Probably many of the firms making belligerent
statement subsequently take technical/legal actions that are not reflected in the database because

Go down fighting – Page 16

they are not reported in the media. In addition, in each subcategory I collect only the first event
and so subsequent instances are ignored.
E. Excluded cases
I exclude a variety of other forms of harassment of short sellers and suppression of
criticism, since these anti-shorting actions were difficult to systematically classify. These cases
range from the farcical to the tragic.
According to sworn testimony, Charles Keating Jr. (of the famous Keating Five) wanted
to buy every copy of Forbes magazine sold near branches of his Lincoln Savings, because the
magazine contained critical comments (The Dallas Morning News, 1991). In other cases, firms
attempt to prevent short sellers from asking questions at conference calls or annual meetings. In
one case, when a short seller tried to ask a question at the annual meeting of Cineplex Odeon, he
was drowned out by a “prolonged and very loud coughing fit” which made his question inaudible
(Hubbard, 1990). Both Keating’s firm and Cineplex are included in the sample because of other
reported incidents.
There are various reports of short sellers (and sometimes journalists or analysts) receiving
death threats, requiring bodyguards, and arming themselves. In at least one case, someone may
have been killed because of short selling. The case involves Tel-Com Wireless Cable TV, whose
official spokesperson was Ivana Trump. On 12/14/1998, Barron’s reported that “several terrified
investors told Barron's and the police that their families had been threatened by convicted
criminals who accused the investors of selling short” (the firm gets in the sample, not because of
this accusation, but because of the firm’s subsequent rebuttal). A year later, 11/01/1999 ,
Barron’s reported that one of the threatened individuals had been found murdered, executionstyle, in Colts Neck, New Jersey.

Go down fighting – Page 17

The sample includes only explicit anti-shorting actions. I exclude from the sample some
events which seemed to be anti-shorting but where the participants denied trying to hurt short
sellers. For example, octogenarian potato tycoon J.R. Simplot was a major shareholder of
Micron Tech, and also controlled an unrelated firm, the J.R. Simplot Company. He offered to
his workers at Simplot the following employee benefit: "Mr. Simplot will make whole any loss"
on Micron shares they buy (essentially giving employees a put option as long as they bought
shares) (Lowenstein, 1989). Although it was speculated in the press that this was intended to
hurt short sellers (by increasing share prices and putting more shares into friendly hands), the
J.R. Simplot Company denied this allegation.
In addition to the public manipulation of the stock loan market discussed previously,
there are also allegations of private manipulation by institutional owners. One such accusation
(Browning, 1996) is that Fidelity Investments deliberately withdrew its shares of Chesapeake
Energy from the stock loan market in order to drive up the price. Fidelity denied this allegation.
An extreme example of stock loan manipulation the “corner”. Suppose B borrows shares
from A and sells them short. Now A acquires 100 percent of the shares (or at least 100 percent
available in the market) of the stock and demands that B return the shares. In this case the only
way B can return the shares is to buy them (at an inflated price) from A. Corners probably
occurred (in US equity markets) more frequently in the late 19th and early 20th century, a
prominent late case being the Stutz Motor corner of 1920 (Meeker, 1932). Two recent cases in
the US occurred in the late 1980’s. The president of Southland Communications was tried and
convicted for driving his stock price up by cornering the firm's stock through secret trades
(Lansner, 1998). In another case, the SEC determined that two individuals had orchestrated a
corner in Chase Medical and that they controlled 109% of the public float (Siconolfi, 1989).

Go down fighting – Page 18

Neither of these cases are reflected in the sample since they were not public anti-shorting actions.
III.

Characteristics of the sample

Table II shows the characteristics of the 266 firms in the sample. It shows the
characteristics of the firms in the month prior to the month in which the first event takes place.
For example, in the “all events” row, the statistics are for the month end preceding the first event,
even if multiple events take place. The table shows the percentile ranking of the variable relative
to all stocks in CRSP in the same month.
Looking first at size, the average ranking for all events is 67 percent, so that event firms
are above median relative to the universe of firms in CRSP. This characteristic may reflect the
fact that larger firms are more newsworthy. Market-book ratios show that event firms are growth
firms, since they are in the upper quartile of valuation. Strikingly, event firms have very high
trading volume in the month before the event (trading volume is measured as share turnover
relative to other stocks on the same exchange). Part of this high volume of 87 percentile may
reflect information released around the event date. However, 12 months before the event month,
it is still the case that event firms have percentile turnover of 77 percent. One interpretation is
that volume proxies for differences in opinion (agents trade when they disagree), and thus these
are firms where investors have very dispersed opinions. Under short sale constraints, high
volume may predict low future returns (see for example Diether 2004). Looking at pre-event
returns, the differences are less dramatic. Prior one year returns are slightly above median and
prior month returns are about the same as the median stock. Thus events do not seem to be
triggered by extreme stock price movements at the monthly or yearly level. Last, looking at the
ratio of short interest to shares outstanding, it is not surprising to see that immediately prior to
the event, firms have very high short interest relative to the other stocks.

Go down fighting – Page 19

In summary, event firms are high volume, high short interest, growth firms of above
median size.
IV.

Long run returns

A. Event time returns
Under the overpricing hypothesis, post-event returns should be low. Table III shows monthly
returns subsequent to the event, for different time horizons. It shows event time returns with a
very simple risk-adjustment procedure: returns are market-adjusted by subtracting out the return
on the CRSP value weighted index (later I show calendar time returns with different risk
adjustments). The table shows average monthly returns earned by buying the event stock on the
last day of the month in which the event is publicly observed. Thus it measures post-event longterm performance.
First looking at the all event, one year cell, Table III shows that event firms have very
low returns.2 In the twelve months subsequent to any event, firms have returns that are a
whopping 2.34 percent per month lower than the market, and this difference is highly statistically
significant. In terms of the magnitude, the two percent per month is in the same ballpark as the
large estimates found in other cases of extreme short sale constraints. Jones and Lamont (2002)
found that highly constrained firms had abnormal returns of -1 percent per month in the year
subsequent to becoming constrained, for the period 1926-1933. Lamont and Thaler (2003) find
abnormal returns of -10 percent per month over an approximately six month period for a sample
of six cases involving short sale constraints, for the period 1998-2001. Ofek, Richardson, and
Whitelaw (2003) find abnormal returns of about -2 percent per month for a sample of short sale
constrained stocks, for the period 1999-2002.

Go down fighting – Page 20

Looking now at the different time horizons, two facts emerge. First, the low returns are
highly persistent, and continue for years. In the 36 months after any event, the market adjusted
returns are -1.48 percent per month, so that the cumulative fall is 42 percent. The last column
shows that, even after excluding the first year (so that the sample is firms which had an event in
the past three years but not in the last year), market adjusted returns are a substantial -0.89
percent per month. While this number has a t-statistic that is less than two, partially because the
sample contains fewer observations since many have gone bankrupt or been delisted, it is
economically large. Thus the time pattern is consistent with overpricing that is only slowly
corrected through time. The effect is not primarily a short-term under-reaction to bad news that
gets quickly corrected. Rather, it is a long-term overpricing phenomenon, with time pattern
similar to the value effect.
Second, it is clear that the returns are lowest immediately after the event, and gradually
the effect weakens over time. Thus there is no evidence in Table III to support the idea that one
should buy stocks after an event occurs, in anticipation of a short squeeze (Section VI examines
in more detail a subset of these events, and look at daily returns around event dates).
Looking across the different types of events, there does not seem to be much difference in
mean returns. In drawing inferences about the effect of short sale constraints, the legal and
technical categories may be more reliable, since the belligerent statement category is somewhat
more ambiguous. Belligerent statements are just cheap talk, and require more researcher
judgment to define the event. In contrast, technical and legal events are tangible actions. Since
all three categories of events predict large and statistically significant underperformance of
returns in the subsequent year, it is not necessary to use the belligerent category to draw
inferences about the effect of events. Even excluding belligerent statements, there is strong

Go down fighting – Page 21

evidence that anti-shorting events are followed by very low returns. In regressions not shown,
there is no statistically significant difference in returns between the three classes of events
(belligerent, legal, and technical). Measurement error may be responsible for some of these
similarities, since some belligerent firms probably also take unobserved legal or technical
actions. Since there are not detectable differences between the categories, the rest of the paper
discusses the “all events” row only.
The effect is robust to different methods. First, the calculations in Table III include the
effects of delisting returns: 30 of the 266 firms delist in the twelve months after the event.
Excluding these delisting returns, the average market adjusted return at the one year horizon is
-2.05 instead of -2.34.3 Second, the effect is large and significant both before and after 1990.
B. Calendar time
Table IV reports calendar time portfolio returns for the one year horizon, showing both
market adjusted returns and two other adjustment methods. One should be cautious using
calendar time returns here, since in the early years there are very few firms per month in the
event portfolios, often only one. As it turns out, calendar time and event time calculations give
about the same answer. The first column shows market adjusted returns. For all events, market
adjusted returns are -2.85 percent per month over the 257 months of the sample, slightly higher
than Table III’s number.
As shown in Table II, event firms tend to be growth firms, so it is important to test
whether the return effect reflects only this fact. The next column of Table IV shows
characteristic adjusted returns which control for size, value, and momentum. Following Daniel,
Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers (1997), it subtracts from the event firm return the return on a
portfolio of firms matched on market equity, market-book, and prior one-year return quintiles (a

Go down fighting – Page 22

total of 125 matching portfolios).4 As expected, this adjustment decreases the magnitude of the
effect, but the remaining effect is still strikingly large and significant.
An alternate way to adjusted for value, size, and momentum is to calculate alpha’s from a
factor regression. The last column of Table IV reports intercepts from a four factor model where
the factors are the market, size, and value as in Fama and French (1993), augmented with a prior
year return factor as in Carhart (1997).5 Again, after this risk adjustment, a large and significant
effect remains.
The last row of Table IV shows the value weight instead of equal weight returns. Here
the returns are somewhat less dramatic, though the effect is still substantial and statistically
significant (it is significant for the two-sided hypothesis for the factor regression, and for the
one-sided hypothesis for the market adjusted and characteristic adjusted means). The fact that
value weighting gives a smaller effect is consistent with the idea that smaller stocks are more
difficult to short and thus can be more overpriced.
Table V shows the coefficients from the four factor regressions. Most notable are the
coefficients on value and momentum factors. For the value factor, the coefficient is
insignificantly different from zero, suggesting that these firms’ returns do not behave much like
other growth firm returns. For the momentum factor, the coefficient is significant and negative,
suggesting these firms returns are behaving like firms with negative momentum. This finding is
not surprising: these firms have falling prices during the 12 month post-event period in which
these factor loadings are estimated, so one might expect their returns to be correlated with other
firms with falling prices. Table II showed that prior to the event, the firms had positive (not
negative) momentum since their prior year returns were above median. If one re-estimates the
regression for the one month after the event (rather than the 12 months), one gets a positive

Go down fighting – Page 23

loading on the momentum factor. So going into the event the firms have positive momentum,
after the event they have negative momentum.
In summary, event firms have extremely low subsequent returns that are not explained by
value, size, or momentum, using either characteristic adjustment or factor models. Event firms
have returns are two to three percent lower than non-event firms.
V.

Effect on shorting costs and short interest

This section looks at direct evidence on the ability to short the event firms. One measure
of the cost and difficulty of shorting comes from the stock lending market. While I do not have
access to data on rebate rates in the stock lending market for the sample firms (these data are
proprietary and generally go back only a few years), I can compare the sample with a list of high
cost stocks provided in D’Avolio (2002). He lists 35 firms with very high shorting cost in his
sample of April 2000 – September 2001 (the annual shorting costs range from 10% to 79%). In
April 2000, there are 6647 valid firms in the CRSP database, so about 0.5% of the universe has
very high shorting costs. I compare his list to the firms in my sample with initial events between
April 1999 (one year before his sample starts) to September 2001 (when his sample ends). There
are 36 firms in my sample during this period. The overlap of the two groups consists of six
firms; thus 16% of the event firms have very high shorting costs, a much higher rate than the
0.5% in the general population of stocks. It is clear that the probability of such a high degree of
overlap is miniscule. Thus the sample is much more expensive to borrow than a random sample
of firms, consistent with the hypothesis that the sample firms are subject to short sale constraints.
Other evidence comes from reported short interest for each stock. Here, one lacks a
natural null hypothesis to test. Unlike the case of returns, where the natural null hypothesis is
that post-event returns are unpredictable, it is difficult to tell simple by looking at the quantity of

Go down fighting – Page 24

shorting whether the anti-shorting events have any effect.
Figure 1 shows the average ratio of short interest to shares outstanding in event time.6
Six months prior to the event, the ratio is already elevated at around 5.5% (a level which is the
78th percentile relative to the universe of all stocks). It rises steadily over time, peaking two
months after the event at 10.7% (the 92nd percentile), and remains roughly constant thereafter.
One interpretation is that the rising level of short interest causes the firms to take the antishorting actions.
While it is difficult to interpret these results in the absence of a null hypothesis, it seems
clear that something is happening around the event date, since the rapid rise in short interest
halts. In that sense, it could be that the anti-shorting actions are effective at stopping the growth
of short interest. On the other hand, the actions certainly do not cause the level of short interest
to substantially and rapidly decrease. Since one doesn’t know what short interest would have
been in the absence of an anti-shorting event, it is impossible to draw solid inferences from this
evidence.
In summary, the anti-shorting firms are expensive to short, and there is a large increase in
short interest prior to the event itself.
VI.

Short squeezes

This section examines in more detail the events where firms attempt to coordinate a short
squeeze by asking their shareholders to withdraw shares from the stock loan market. I focus on
this event since it is the most common of the technical events designed to create a squeeze.
Journalists and market participants often cite short squeezes as explanations for
movements in stock, bond, and commodity markets. One common definition is that a short
squeeze occurs when the price of a security rises, causing the short sellers to experience a decline

Go down fighting – Page 25

in net wealth. Either because of lower wealth, increased risk aversion, fear of further price rises,
or margin calls, the short seller then covers his position, increasing the demand for the security
and driving the stock further up. In contrast, the definition of a short squeeze used here is when
a short seller is involuntarily forced to cover his short position because he is no longer able to
borrow the security. Most of the literature on short squeezes focuses on either theoretical issues
or empirical findings in the bond, commodity, and derivative markets (for example Jarrow 1992,
1994, Jegadeesh 1993, Kumar and Seppi 1992, Merrick, Naik, and Yadav 2002, Nyborg and
Sundaresan 1996, and Pirrong 1993, 2001). D’Avolio (2002), using data from the stock lending
market, finds little evidence for short squeezes in his 18 month sample.
Wall Street wisdom suggests that high short interest stocks are good to own because they
may rise due to a short squeeze. According to this view, one should be willing to buy overpriced
stock in anticipation of a short squeeze that will drive prices still higher. An example of this idea
is given in the case is GenesisIntermedia (which also illustrates direct manipulation in an attempt
to enrich specific individuals). On April 25, 2001, Chief Executive Ramy El-Batrawi sent a
letter to shareholders asking them to contact their brokers and have shares put into cash accounts,
making the shares unavailable for lending to short sellers. Between April 25 and May 25, the
stock rose 39%.
GenesisIntermedia was 92% owned by a group of four insiders, including 45% owned by
its chairman, Saudi financier and arms merchant Adnan Khashoggi (a central figure in the IranContra affair). According to Hirsch (2001):
"I think that after our chairman sent out his letter, our shareholders started to take
possession of some of their shares, forcing the shorts to cover their positions," said
Douglas Jacobson, the company's chief financial officer. "There also may be upward
pressure on the stock from people seeing the letter and then buying in anticipation that
the short squeeze will get more dramatic." Indeed, Jacobson conceded that Khashoggi
might be among those investors and might eventually sell shares to bring his holding
Go down fighting – Page 26

closer to the third of the company he owned previously. According to documents filed
with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Khashoggi purchased more than 60,000
shares at about $11.30 each since El-Batrawi's letter. "It could end up being very good
for him to have the shorts buy back shares from him," Jacobson said.
There are 29 cases where firms attempt a coordinated loan withdrawal. For the purposes
of this section, I discarded five of these. Two had event dates that were identified only by month
(these events are reflected in the long term returns shown in section IV). Three have no clear
event date, since media reports simply mentioned that discouraging lending was a continuing
policy of the firm (these events are reflected in the long term returns shown in section IV, with
the event date set equal to observation date). Of the remaining 24 cases, 22 were clearly public
information that was available in real time, and in two cases the event was semi-private, and only
appeared in the media subsequent to the event (these two cases are reflected in the long term
returns shown in section IV, with the event date set equal to observation date).
Before reviewing the evidence on these actions, it is instructive to consider how these
events differ from other events typically studied in financial economics. First, these events are
not clean and exogenous. Unlike, for example, earnings announcements, which come at preannounced and regular intervals, these events are entirely endogenous and occur partly in
response to the level of stock prices. Other news (including about other anti-shorting activities)
may also be occurring in the same window. Second, these events are not only information
events, but also technical events reflecting the operations of the stock loan market. In a world
with frictions (as opposed to the standard assumption of frictionless and informationally efficient
markets), it is not clear whether one would expect prices to immediately reflect the short
squeeze, or to slowly respond as the squeeze is put in effect. It presumably takes some time for
investors, after receiving the suggestion, to contact their brokers to withdraw their shares from
the loan market, and short sellers who have their loans withdrawn have several days to deliver
Go down fighting – Page 27

the shares. Last, the evidence will necessarily have a limited ability to measure the efficacy of
anti-shorting actions. It is hard to tell whether an anti-shorting action has any effect because one
doesn’t know how much shorting there would be in the absence of action. It could be that prices
would have fallen faster if the action had not been taken. All that can be said is that one can be
fairly confident that the anti-shorting actions did not make life easier for short sellers.
Figure 2 shows volume around event days (days are trading days, not calendar days).
The volume is expressed as the percentile of exchange-adjusted turnover relative to the CRSP
universe. As shown in Table II, event firms tend to be high volume firms in general, and before
the event the firms tend to be in the top quartile of turnover. Volume spikes up on the event date,
suggesting that something is indeed happening on that day. Even with only 24 firms, this spike
in volume on the event day is statistically significant. D’Avolio (2002) reports that high recall
days have extremely high trading volume, consistent with the event causing recall of stock loans.
Of course, this spike does not prove that the anti-shorting action is causing volume to increase; it
could be that the action is taken in response to higher volume or to some other unobserved event.
Figure 3 shows cumulative average market adjusted returns around event days. Since
returns are so volatile and there are only 24 firms, standard errors are large, and one would need
incredibly large mean returns in order to get statistical significance. Figure 3 shows that
cumulative returns are not incredibly large, and thus there is generally nothing in Figure 3 that is
statistically significant. Looking at the point estimates, there is some evidence that the actions
do succeed in slightly raising prices temporarily. Cumulative returns are 4.6 percent from day t5 to day t+5. By day t+20, a month after the event, however, nothing much has changed. The
most notable feature of Figure 3 is the pre-event increase in returns, reflecting perhaps insider
buying in anticipation of the squeeze, or perhaps other events. Figure 3 also shows cumulated

Go down fighting – Page 28

alpha’s from the Fama-French 3-factor model estimated on daily data, which are about the same
as cumulated average market adjusted returns.
Summarizing, these actions do not seem to have much ability to raise prices, although it
could be that absent these events prices would have fallen more. What is clear is that this ability,
if it exists, is only temporary, and that long-term returns on these stocks are abysmal.
VII.

Conclusion

The evidence shows that when firms take anti-shorting actions, their stock returns are
extraordinarily low over the subsequent months and years. The evidence confirms the hypothesis
that short sale constraints allow stocks to become overpriced. While the underperformance of -2
per month is very large, it is similar in magnitude to the -1 to -10 range found in other studies of
stocks with very high short sale constraints.
The 25 years of evidence studied here is valuable because of the difficulty of finding
direct data on short sale constraints. Jones and Lamont (2002) find data for six years (19261933) while Lamont and Thaler (2003), and Ofek, Richardson, and Whitelaw (2003) studied data
for a few years around the year 2000. Each one of these four data sets has unique characteristics,
and it is conceivable that any one result reflects chance or an unusual sample period. But taken
together, the evidence shows that in extreme cases where short sellers want to short a stock but
find it difficult to do so, overpricing can be very large.
What should an investor do if he sees a firm taking an anti-shorting action? The evidence
here cannot say whether it is a good idea to short this stock. Although one can make large gross
returns on average if one is able to maintain a short position for months, maintaining the short
position might be difficult or expensive. Even if there are no problems borrowing the stock, a
short seller may need to spend time and money dealing with lawsuits and investigations. It is

Go down fighting – Page 29

unclear how these costs and benefits net out. It is clear, however, that it is a bad idea in general
to own stock in a firm that is taking these actions. Investors seeking high returns should look
elsewhere.
The fact that firms take anti-shorting actions tells us that they must believe these actions
are worth doing. A substantial body of research studies whether firms opportunistically take
advantage of mispricing by issuing equity when it is overpriced and buying it back when it is
underpriced (for example Loughran and Ritter, 1995). Corporate managers certainly say they are
trying to time the market (Graham and Harvey, 2001). However, it is usually difficult to
discriminate between the hypothesis that firms are responding to rational changes in discount
rates as opposed to over- or under-pricing (see for example Lamont (2000), Polk and Sapienza
(2004)). The anti-shorting actions studied here show that firms are not just passively responding
to market signals, but are in fact actively trying to prop up their stock prices. In this respect the
phenomenon is similar to the evidence on earnings accruals, which can be interpreted as firms
actively manipulating accounting numbers to cause overpricing. Similarly, firms encourage
analysts to issue optimistic forecasts, and reward optimistic analysts with investment banking
business (see for example Michaely and Womack 1999).
Although I interpret the evidence as consistent with short sales constraints causing
overpricing, there are two alternative explanations of the results. The first alternative
explanation is that anti-shorting actions are a signal that insiders know that the firm is
overvalued, so that the low returns reflect inside information instead of short sale constraints.
While it is certainly true that anti-shorting actions may reveal negative inside information, this
story does not explain why it takes so long for the information to be reflected in stock prices.
With no frictions, the information should be immediately incorporated. In contrast, short sale

Go down fighting – Page 30

constraints provide an explanation for the slow reaction of prices to information. Since the effect
persists for years, the low returns are not primarily a short-term under-reaction to bad news.
Rather, the low returns reflect persistent overpricing.
A second alternative explanation, favored by the firms used in the sample, is that short
sellers are actually manipulating prices, driving prices down over long periods of time. The
problem with this explanation is that many of the sample firms are subsequently revealed to be
fraudulent. Thus the short sellers are identifying firms having bad fundamental value. This
paper has presented a rogues gallery of shady characters, ranging from Charles Keating to Adnan
Khashoggi. In public battles between short sellers and firms, short sellers usually are vindicated
by subsequent events. The evidence suggests that short sellers play an important role in
detecting not just overpricing, but also fraud. Policy makers might want to consider making the
institutional and legal environment less hostile to short sellers.
Consider, for example, one episode from the sample. In 1989 Congress held hearings
about the evils of short selling, featuring testimony from supposedly victimized firms. During
the hearings, Congressman Dennis Hastert (later speaker of the US House of Representatives),
described short selling as “blatant thuggery”. But who was the victim and who was the thug?
During the hearings, an SEC official testified that “many of the complaints we receive about
alleged illegal short selling come from companies and corporate officers who are themselves
under investigation by the Commission or others for possible violations of the securities or other
laws.” (U.S. House of Representatives, 1991, Pages 434-435). Officials from three firms
testified. Subsequent to this testimony, the presidents of two of these three firms were
prosecuted for fraud (for the third firm, the SEC determined the company had made materially
false and misleading statements, but that the evidence was insufficient to prosecute). 7

Go down fighting – Page 31

More

systematic evidence on this point comes from Dechow et al (1996), who study SEC enforcement
actions for earnings manipulation, and Griffin (2003) who studies earnings restatements leading
to shareholder lawsuits. Both find that short interest rises surrounding these negative events, and
starts to rise several months prior to the public announcement of bad news. This evidence
indicates that short sellers are able to anticipate bad news about earnings and identify fraud.
Most firms do not take anti-shorting actions, and for most large cap stocks it is not
difficult to sell short. Thus one cannot conclude from the evidence that short sale constraints are
pervasive phenomena in stock pricing. What we do know is that for most stocks, very little short
selling occurs (relative to other trading activity) and most investors never go short. Thus
something is constraining short selling, perhaps lack of knowledge about shorting, institutional
constraints, risk, or cultural issues. Generalizing from the narrow (but dramatic) evidence
presented in this paper, one can speculate that these more general short sale constraints also
affect stock prices.

Go down fighting – Page 32

ENDNOTES
1

One complication is that these letters were not always reported in the media in real time (in the

case of Solv-Ex, the February letter was not reported until August). Thus sometimes these letters
are semi-public information, known to large shareholders but not necessarily to all investors.
When examining long-term returns, I use only completely public information (in section VI, I
look at event studies and consider the semi-public information as well).
2

There are a small number of firms for which the event date is clear and occurs in a month prior

to the observation date (the first time the event is mentioned in the media). These firms are
included in the long-term returns after the observation date, but the “first 12 months” is in
reference to event date. So if the event occurs in January and I observe it in March, it gets into
long-term return portfolio in March but stays for only 10 months not 12. The same holds true for
firms which are not in CRSP in the event month but are subsequently added. In cases where
there is no well defined event date, I use the observation date for the event date. To eliminate
double counting, a firm only is reflected in a given average once in any given month. For
example, a firm is included in the all event calculation in month t if any event occurred in
months t-12 to t-1.
3

I plugged in the delisting return from CRSP into the monthly return sequence in the month after

the last available regular return. So if a firm delists in February, has the last monthly return in
January, and CRSP records a delisting return in April, I plug that delisting return in for February.
Following Shumway (1997), in the very few cases where no delisting return is available, I plug
in -30%.
4

These 125 portfolios are reformed every month based on the market equity, M/B ratio, and
Go down fighting – Page 33

prior year return from the previous month. However, following Fama and French (1993), the
M/B ratio is only updated annually in July, based on the value as of the previous December.
5

I am grateful to Ken French for this data. All four factors come from his web page. They are

RMRF, the excess market return, SMB (the return on small stocks minus big stocks) and the
HML (the return of high book-market stocks minus low book-market stocks), and a price
momentum factor, UMD (the return of stocks with high prior year returns minus stocks with low
prior year returns). UMD is created by French and is slightly different from the factor
constructed by Carhart (1997).
6

The data on short interest is limited (from 1992 to 2001 for the NYSE, and from 1995 to 2001

for NASDAQ) and data availability cuts the sample by more than half.
7

The three firms, with citations to the subsequent SEC charges, were American City Business

Journals (Wall Street Journal, 1991), Carrington Laboratories (U.S. House of Representatives,
1991, p. 513), and IGI, Inc. (Wall Street Journal, 2002). As mentioned in Section II, there are a
total of eight firms involved in the Congressional hearings, but these were the only three in
which company officials actually testified.

Go down fighting – Page 34

REFERENCES
Aitken, M., Frino, A., McCorry, M., Swan, P., 1998. Short sales are almost instantaneously bad
news: evidence from the Australian Stock Exchange. Journal of Finance 53, 2205-2223.
Asensio, Manuel P., 2001, Sold Short: Uncovering Deception in the Markets
Browning, E.S., 1996, Short Sellers Feel `Squeeze' Of Chesapeake, The Wall Street Journal,
Section C, Page 1, September 24.
Carhart Mark M., 1997, On persistence in mutual fund performance, Journal of Finance 52, 5782.
Chen, Joseph, Harrison Hong, and Jeremy C. Stein, 2002, Breadth of ownership and stock
returns, Journal of Financial Economics, November 2002
Crabtree, Penni, 2001, S.D. biotech sues over messages on Internet, The San Diego UnionTribune, Section C, Page 3, February 3.
The Dallas Morning News, 1991, Keating effort to buy up negative Forbes issues told, Section
H, Page 11, November 3.
Daniel, K., Grinblatt, M., Titman, S., Wermers, R., 1997. Measuring mutual fund performance
with characteristic-based benchmarks. Journal of Finance 52, 1035-1058.
D’Avolio, Gene, 2002, The market for borrowing stock, Journal of Financial Economics,
November 2002.
Dechow, Patricia M., Richard G. Sloan, and Amy P. Sweeney, 1996, Causes and consequences
of earnings manipulation: An analysis of firms subject to enforcement actions by the SEC.
Contemporary Accounting Research 13, 1-36.
Dechow, P., Hutton, A., Meulbroek, L., Sloan, R., 2001. Short-sellers, fundamental analysis,
and stock returns. Journal of Financial Economics 61, 77-106.
Diether, Karl B., 2004, Long-run event performance and opinion divergence, working paper
Diether, Karl B., Christopher J. Malloy, and Anna Scherbina, 2002, Differences of opinion and
the cross-section of stock returns, Journal of Finance 57, 2113 - 2141.
Diamond, Douglas W. and Robert E. Verrecchia, 1987, Constraints on short-selling and asset
price adjustment to private information, Journal of Financial Economics 18, 277-311.

Go down fighting – Page 35

Duffie, Darrell, Garleanu, Nicolae, Pedersen, Lasse Heje, Securities lending, shorting, and
pricing, Journal of Financial Economics, November 2002.
Fama, E., French, K., 1993. Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds. Journal of
Financial Economics 33, 3-56.
Jayasankaran, S., 1995, Fear of flaying, Far Eastern Economic Review 158, p. 60.
Figlewski, S., 1981. The informational effects of restrictions on short sales: some empirical
evidence. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 16, 463-476.
Figlewski, S., Webb, G., 1993. Options, short sales, and market completeness. Journal of
Finance 48, 761-777.
Fulman, Ricki, 1998, Good Investment Or Bad? Short Seller, Money Managers At Odds Over
Avant! Stock, Pensions & Investments, January 12
Geczy, Christopher C., David K. Musto, and Adam V. Reed, 2002, Stocks are special too: An
analysis of the equity lending market, Journal of Financial Economics, November 2002.
Graham, John R., and Campbell Harvey, 2001, The Theory and Practice of Corporate Finance:
Evidence from the Field, Journal of Financial Economics 60, 187-243.
Griffin, Paul A., 2003, League of Their Own? Financial Analysts’ Responses to Restatements
Journal of Accounting, Auditing & Finance 18, 479-518.
Harrison, J. Michael and David M. Kreps, 1978, Speculative investor behavior in a stock market
with heterogeneous expectations, Quarterly Journal of Economics
Hirsch, Jerry, 2001, Genesis Puts Squeeze on Stock Bears Wall St.: 'Short' sellers who bet
against the direct marketer are rushing to buy the stock to close their positions, Los Angeles
Times, Section C, Page 1, May 11.
Hubbard, Jaimie, 1990, The Cineplex Shootout: High noon for Garth Drabinsky, The Financial
Post, Section 1, Page 9, November 12.
Jarrow, Robert A., 1992, Market Manipulation, Bubbles, Corners, and Short Squeezes, Journal
of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 27, 311-336.
Jarrow, Robert A., 1994, Derivative Security Markets, Market Manipulation, and Option
Pricing Theory , Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 29, 241-261.
Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, 1993, Treasury Auction Bids and the Salomon Squeeze, Journal of
Finance 48, 1403-1419.
Go down fighting – Page 36

Jones, Charles M., 2002, Shorting restrictions, liquidity, and returns, working paper
Jones, Charles M., and Owen A. Lamont, Short Sale Constraints and Stock Returns, Journal of
Financial Economics, November 2002
Knight, Jerry, 1998, Computer Learning's Profit Drops 82%; Fairfax Firm Blames Quarter's
Slide on Regulatory Problems, Discloses Texas Probe, The Washington Post, Section B, Page 16,
December 10.
Kumar, P., and D.J. Seppi, 1992, Futures manipulation with cash settlement, Journal of Finance
47, 1485-1502.
Lamont, Owen A., 2000, Investment plans and stock returns, Journal of Finance 55, 2719-2745.
Lamont, Owen A., and Richard H. Thaler, 2003. Can the market add and subtract? Mispricing
in tech stock carve-outs, forthcoming Journal of Political Economy
Lansner, Jonathan, 1998, Bull market a bear for short sellers, Austin American-Statesman, March
28.
Loughran, Tim, and Jay R. Ritter, 1995, The New Issues Puzzle, Journal of Finance 50, 23-51.
Lowenstein, Roger, 1989, Micron Technology Gets Novel 'Boost' From Potato King, The Wall
Street Journal, March 2.
Meeker, J., 1932. Short Selling. Harper & Brothers Publishers, New York.
Merrick, John J. Jr., Narayan Y. Naik, and Pradeep K. Yadav, 2002, Strategic trading behavior,
price distortion and market depth in a manipulated market: Anatomy of a squeeze, working
paper.
Michaely, Roni, Kent L. Womack, 1999, Conflict of interest and the credibility of underwriter
analyst recommendations, Review of Financial Studies 12: 653-686.
Miller, Edward M., 1977, Risk, uncertainty, and divergence of opinion, Journal of Finance 32,
1151-1168.
Mitchell, Mark; Pulvino, Todd; and Stafford, Erik. “Limited arbitrage in equity markets." J.
Finance 57 (April 2002): 551-584.
Morris, Stephen, 1996, Speculative investor behavior and learning, Quarterly Journal of
Economics 110, 1111-1133.
Go down fighting – Page 37

Nyborg, KG, and S Sundaresan, 1996, Discriminatory vs. uniform Treasury auctions: Evidence
from when-issued transactions, Journal of Financial Economics 42, 63-104.
Ofek, Eli and Matthew Richardson, 2003, DotCom mania: The rise and fall of Internet stock
prices, Journal of Finance 58, 1113-1137.
Ofek, Eli, Matthew Richardson, and Robert F. Whitelaw, 2003, Limited arbitrage and short sales
restrictions: evidence from the options market, NBER Working Paper 9423.
Pender, Kathleen, 1989, Empire Built on Bad Stocks, The San Francisco Chronicle, Section C,
Page 1, June 16.
Pirrong, S. Craig, 1993, Manipulation of the commodity futures market delivery process, Journal
of Business 66, 335-369.
Pirrong, Craig, 2001, Manipulation of cash-settled futures contracts, Journal of Business 74,
221-244.
Polk, Christopher, and Paola Sapienza, 2004, The Real Effects of Investor Sentiment, Kellogg
working paper.
Quigley Corporation, 1997, Quigley Corporation Victimized by Second Counterfeit Press
Release; Is Assessing Legal Action to Halt Continuing Smear Campaign Against Company, PR
Newswire, January 14
Reed, Adam, 2001, Costly short-selling and stock price adjustment to earnings announcements,
Wharton School working paper
Scheinkman, Jose, and Wei Xiong, 2003, Overconfidence and speculative bubbles, Journal of
Political Economy 111, 1183-1219.
Shumway, Tyler, 1997, The delisting bias in CRSP data, Journal of Finance 52, 327-340.
Siconolfi, Michael, 1989, SEC Says Brokers Cornered Market In Chase Medical, The Wall Street
Journal, January 26.
Sorescu, Sorin M., 2000, The effect of options on stock prices: 1973 to 1995, Journal of Finance
55, 487-514.
System Software Associates Inc., 1995, SSA refutes rumors, Business Wire, November 27.
U.S. House of Representatives, 1991, Short-selling Activity in the Stock Market: The Effects on
Small Companies and the Need for Regulation, Hearings before the Commerce, Consumer, and
Go down fighting – Page 38

Monetary Affairs Subcommittee of the Committee on Government Operations, U.S. Government
Printing Office.
Wall Street Journal, 1991, Former Chairman Of KPERS Charged With Securities Fraud, Section
B, Page 6, November 21.
Wall Street Journal, 2002, SEC Seeks to Force Surrender Of Stock Options in IGI Case, Section
B, Page 6, March 14.
Weiss, Gary, 1996, The Secret World Of Short-Sellers, Business Week, Pg. 62, August 5

Go down fighting – Page 39

Table I
Distribution of events
The sample is firms which have at least one monthly return in the 12 months following the event.
Description

Comment

Number Number
Events Firms

Claims
conspiracy
Alleges lies

Conspiracy/bear raid/manipulation/illegal
Lies/rumors/planting stories/inaccurate statements

Considering Consider options or conducting investigation using outside
options
counsel or private investigator
All belligerent
Requests
investigation
Lawsuit

Requests investigation by authorities (usually SEC or
exchange), or claims one is underway, or media reports
that authorities are investigating shorters
Announcement of lawsuit or of retraction based on litigation

All legal

All legal

Exchange
exchange switch/seeking exchange switch
switch
Urge not lend Urges (or "suggests") that shareholders not lend shares to
shorters
Friendly
CEO sets up system to buy own stock, or firm announces
owners
repurchase explicitly in response to shorters, Friendly
owners withdraw shares from lending market, lending
by firm to shareholders, or employee stock ownership
plan buying shares
Other
Split/distribution/halt
technical
All technical
All events

Go down fighting – Page 40

29

29

125

125

21

21

175

159

66

66

35

35

101

98

6

6

29

29

7

7

9

9

51

43

327

266

Table II
Characteristics of event firms (percentiles) in month prior to event
Percentile variables in the month prior to event, compared to the universe of CRSP firms. For
firms which do not have data for the month prior to the event, the characteristic is from the
month preceding the first return observation. Size is market equity. M/B is market-book ratio
(market value of equity divided by Compustat book value of equity). The timing of M/B follows
Fama and French (1993) and is as of the previous December year-end. Volume is monthly
turnover (volume divided by shares outstanding) minus the median turnover of all stocks on the
same exchange. Short interest ratio is the ratio of short interest to shares outstanding.
Number

---------------------- Percentiles ----------------------

Firms

Size M/B Volume Rt-12,t-1 Rt-1,t Short interest
ratio

Claims conspiracy

29

68

78

95

71

49

89

Alleges lies

125

72

75

88

68

53

88

Considering options

21

78

81

89

61

60

86

All belligerent

159

72

76

89

67

52

88

Requests investigation

66

67

81

85

69

58

86

Lawsuit

35

60

84

86

56

49

92

All legal

98

64

82

85

65

54

88

Exchange switch

6

67

96

68

42

76

82

Urge not lend

29

55

71

81

47

43

87

Friendly owners

7

76

66

84

75

75

74

Other technical

9

46

83

89

71

58

76

All technical

43

56

77

81

56

52

81

All events

266

67

77

87

64

53

86

Go down fighting – Page 41

Table III
Market adjusted returns subsequent to events
Average monthly market-adjusted returns in percent. Market-adjusted returns are returns minus
the return on the CRSP value weighted index. The t-statistics, in parenthesis, use standard errors
adjusted for the clustering of dates in calendar time.
One month Three month One year
t to t+1

t to t+3

t to t+12

Three years 2 to 3 Years
t to t+36

t+12 to t+36

Claims conspiracy

-2.64 (0.33) -2.28 (0.68) -4.37 (2.73) -2.77 (2.54) -1.63 (1.22)

Alleges lies

-1.62 (0.67) -2.08 (1.61) -1.71 (1.96) -1.31 (2.03) -1.06 (1.55)

Considering options

-5.10 (0.63) -8.19 (2.48) -5.79 (3.44) -2.76 (2.53) -0.82 (0.62)

All belligerent

-2.63 (1.00) -2.70 (2.08) -2.28 (2.86) -1.62 (2.73) -1.19 (1.93)

Requests investigation -4.59 (1.52) -1.30 (0.66) -1.99 (2.17) -1.19 (1.73) -0.72 (0.81)
Lawsuit

-3.48 (1.15) -3.30 (1.03) -2.65 (1.72) -1.44 (1.48) -0.59 (0.48)

All legal

-4.22 (1.87) -1.89 (1.09) -2.24 (2.59) -1.31 (2.04) -0.73 (0.92)

Exchange switch
Urge not lend

3.54 (0.47) -1.69 (0.38) 0.12 (0.06) -2.84 (2.37) -4.26 (2.95)
-4.55 (1.00) -4.66 (1.82) -3.17 (1.65) -2.66 (2.29) -2.14 (1.54)

Friendly owners

-11.46 (0.87) -10.07 (1.66) -4.96 (1.90) 0.23 (0.07) 3.01 (0.60)

Other technical

-8.17 (1.35) -12.39 (2.93) -8.54 (2.61) -5.60 (2.23) -1.52 (0.40)

All technical

-3.86 (1.08) -5.19 (2.62) -2.66 (1.95) -2.04 (2.13) -1.50 (1.14)

All events

-3.09 (1.85) -2.58 (2.63) -2.34 (3.69) -1.48 (2.80) -0.89 (1.51)

Go down fighting – Page 42

Table IV
Calendar time portfolio returns for one-year horizon returns
Monthly returns in percent for the twelve months following an event, calculated using calendar
time portfolios. Portfolios are equal weighted except for last row, which is value weighted.
Market adjusted returns are returns minus the return on the CRSP value weighted index.
Characteristic adjusted are returns minus the returns on a value weighted portfolio of all CRSP
firms in the same size, market-book, and one year momentum quintile. Four-factor alpha is the
intercept from a regression of returns in excess of t-bills on the three factors of Fama and French
(1993), size, value, and market, plus a fourth price momentum factor similar to Carhart (1997).
“N months” is the number of calendar months available for market adjusted returns (the number
may be lower for the other columns). T-statistics in parentheses.
Description
N months

Market
adjusted

Characteristic
adjusted

Fourfactor α

Claims conspiracy

166 -3.33 (2.22) -2.77 (2.05) -2.06 (1.32)

Alleges lies

229 -2.06 (2.22) -1.09 (1.32) -1.76 (1.79)

Considering options

125 -5.46 (3.37) -4.66 (3.05) -4.90 (2.91)

All belligerent

251 -2.26 (2.66) -1.36 (1.85) -1.94 (2.31)

Requests investigation

220 -2.67 (2.94) -2.04 (2.47) -2.11 (2.17)

Lawsuit

179 -3.07 (2.06) -1.95 (1.39) -2.93 (1.88)

All legal

241 -2.82 (3.32) -1.91 (2.48) -2.55 (2.89)

Exchange switch
Urge not lend

53 0.58 (0.27) 1.32 (0.70) -0.83 (0.33)
132 -4.52 (3.07) -4.55 (3.18) -4.00 (2.48)

Friendly owners

51 -4.69 (1.82) -3.15 (1.25) -6.95 (2.19)

Other technical

58 -8.81 (2.45) -7.26 (1.99) -9.93 (2.42)

All technical

180 -2.79 (2.36) -1.97 (1.87) -2.90 (2.33)

All events

257 -2.85 (4.32) -1.88 (3.41) -2.40 (3.81)

All events,
value weighted

257 -1.31 (1.81) -1.23 (1.72) -1.95 (3.22)

Go down fighting – Page 43

Table V
Four factor regressions for one-year horizon returns
Regression results using calendar time monthly returns in percent for the twelve months
following an event. Portfolios are equal weighted except for last row, which is value weighted.
RMRF is returns on the CRSP value weighted portfolio minus T-bill returns. HML is the value
factor (the return of low M/B stocks high M/B stocks), SMB is the size factor (the return on
small stocks minus big stocks), and UMD is the momentum factor (the return of stocks with high
prior year returns minus stocks with low prior year returns). T-statistics in parentheses.
Description

α

RMRF

HML

SMB

UMD

R2

Claims conspiracy

-2.06 (1.32) 1.19 (3.07) -0.33 (0.60) 1.88 (3.93) -1.17 (2.89) 0.26

Alleges lies

-1.76 (1.79) 0.89 (3.48) -0.56 (1.52) 1.36 (4.32) -0.47 (1.77) 0.25

Considering options

-4.90 (2.91) 1.45 (3.95) 0.20 (0.31) 1.59 (2.91) -0.56 (1.07) 0.20

All belligerent

-1.94 (2.31) 1.23 (6.16) -0.42 (1.35) 1.53 (5.54) -0.58 (2.54) 0.36

Requests investigation -2.11 (2.17) 1.31 (5.71) 0.00 (0.01) 0.75 (2.25) -0.79 (2.70) 0.23
Lawsuit
-2.93 (1.88) 0.73 (1.97) -0.60 (1.10) 1.58 (3.19) -0.37 (0.94) 0.16
All legal
-2.55 (2.89) 0.99 (4.73) -0.14 (0.42) 1.34 (4.63) -0.40 (1.69) 0.25
Exchange switch

-0.83 (0.33) 1.59 (2.34) -0.07 (0.07) 1.95 (2.35) 0.79 (0.81) 0.22

Urge not lend

-4.00 (2.48) 0.86 (2.45) 0.25 (0.38) 1.28 (2.29) -0.45 (1.11) 0.15

Friendly owners

-6.95 (2.19) 2.73 (2.86) 1.51 (1.39) 1.79 (1.83) 0.43 (0.43) 0.19

Other technical

-9.93 (2.42) 2.71 (1.96) -2.08 (1.14) 0.81 (0.48) -0.67 (0.41) 0.17

All technical

-2.90 (2.33) 1.28 (4.40) 0.55 (1.10) 1.70 (4.05) -0.02 (0.05) 0.22

All events

-2.40 (3.81) 1.06 (7.11) -0.34 (1.47) 1.50 (7.21) -0.55 (3.24) 0.44

All events,
value weighted

-1.95 (3.22) 1.45 (10.19) 0.02 (0.09) 0.74 (3.75) -0.47 (2.89) 0.43

Go down fighting – Page 44

Figure 1: Short interest ratio for all events

6

Short interest ratio, percent
8
10

12

The figure shows the monthly ratio of short interest to share outstanding, in event time. Month
zero is the first month that any anti-shorting event takes place for the firm.

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0
Month

1

2

3

Go down fighting – Page 45

4

5

6

Figure 2: Volume for urge events
The figure shows trading volume in event time. Trading volume is measured as share turnover,
and is expressed as percentile turnover relative to other stocks on the same day and in the same
exchange. Day zero is the trading day on which the first urge event occurs, where the firm urges
shareholders not lend shares to shorter sellers
90

Percentile turnover

85

80

75

70
-25

-20

-15

-10

-5

0
Day

5

10

15

Go down fighting – Page 46

20

25

Figure 3: Cumulative returns for urge events
The figure shows cumulative returns in event time. Market adjusted returns are returns minus
the return on the CRSP value weighted index. Three-factor alpha is the intercept from a
regression of returns in excess of t-bills on the three factors of Fama and French (1993), size,
value, and market. Day zero is the trading day on which the first urge event occurs, where the
firm urges shareholders not lend shares to shorter sellers

3-factor adjusted

Market-adjusted

15

10

5

-25

-20

-15

-10

-5

0
Day

5

10

15

Go down fighting – Page 47

20

25

