NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SEX DIFFERENCES IN MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY
Anne Case
Christina Paxson
Working Paper 10653
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10653
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2004

We thank Angus Deaton, Noreen Goldman, Burt Singer, and seminar participants at RAND Summer Institute,
Princeton University, the University of Pennsylvania and the University of Michigan for useful comments
and suggestions, and the NIA for support for this research through R01 AG20275-01. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Anne Case and Christina Paxson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Sex Differences in Morbidity and Mortality
Anne Case and Christina Paxson
NBER Working Paper No. 10653
August 2004
JEL No. I0, J1, J16
ABSTRACT
Women have worse self-rated health and more hospitalization episodes than men from early
adolescence to late middle age, but are less likely to die at each age. We use 14 years of data from
the U.S. National Health Interview Survey to examine this paradox. Our results indicate that the
difference in self-assessed health between women and men can be entirely explained by differences
in the distribution of the chronic conditions they face. Although on average women have worse selfrated health than men, women and men with the same chronic conditions have the same self-rated
health. The results for hospital episodes are somewhat different. While the effect of poor health on
hospital episodes is the same for men and women, men with respiratory cancer, cardiovascular
disease, and bronchitis are more likely to experience hospital episodes than women who suffer from
the same chronic conditions, implying that men may experience more severe forms of these
conditions. The same is true for mortality. Although the effects of many chronic conditions on the
probability of death are the same for women and men, men who report having cardiovascular disease
and certain lung disorders are significantly more likely to die than women with these conditions.
While some of the gender difference in mortality can be explained by differences in the distribution
of chronic conditions, an equally large share can be attributed to the larger adverse effects of these
conditions on male mortality. Is smoking the smoking gun? Conditions for which we find excess
male hospitalizations and mortality are generally smoking-related.
Anne Case
367 Wallace Hall
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
accase@princeton.edu
Christina Paxson
316 Wallace Hall
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
cpaxson@princeton.edu

I. Introduction
Research on gender differences in health has brought to light an important paradox. Studies from a
large number of countries find that women use more health services and report worse self-rated
health than men. However, women are less likely to die than same-aged men throughout life,
indicating that they may in fact be healthier.
There are several possible explanations for the worse self-rated health but lower mortality of
women. There may be gender differences in the distributions of chronic conditions, driven by
biological, behavioral or psychosocial factors (Verbrugge, 1989; Lawlor et al, 2001; Molarius and
Janson, 2002). Women may be more likely than men to suffer from health conditions such as
arthritis or headaches that result in poorer self-rated health but contribute relatively little to mortality
risk; men may be more likely to have conditions such as cardiovascular disease or respiratory
conditions that, although they contribute to worse self-rated health, also have relatively large effects
on the probability of death. Although this explanation does not address why women and men have
different distributions of health conditions, it can potentially account for the gender differences in
self-rated health and mortality observed in the data.
Another possible explanation is that women are in fact healthier than men (as evidenced by
their lower mortality), but simply report worse health on surveys. A commonly-held view is that
women, being less stoical than men, are more likely to factor less serious ailments into their reports
of poor health (Spiers et al, 2003). A twist on the same idea is that women are more accurate health
reporters than men: they know more about their own health, perhaps due to their greater health care
utilization, and are more willing to discuss their health and admit health problems to interviewers
(Verbrugge 1989, Idler 2003). While these ideas are expressed in many papers, they are not
uncontroversial. Some evidence contrary to this view comes from MacIntyre, Ford and Hunt (1999),
who report on a study that asked men and women open-ended questions about health problems,
followed by probes for specific health conditions. They find that men provided more complete
information than women in response to the open-ended question. Although this evidence is not

paired with “objective” data on health that could be used to assess the accuracy of reports, it suggests
that men are not less forthcoming than women in interviews.
A final possible explanation for the paradox is that the ‘facts’ underlying it are incorrect.
Although the higher mortality of men is not in dispute, there is a literature that questions whether
women have worse self-rated health and, more generally, higher rates of many measures of
morbidity than men (Hunt and Annandale 1999). For example, MacIntyre, Hunt and Sweeting
(1996) find evidence from two (relatively small) British samples that gender differences in reports
of fair or poor health are significant only in very early adulthood, and that although women have
higher rates of psychological distress than men, they do not have higher rates of many specific
physical conditions. Some researchers find that gender differences in self-rated health become
smaller at older ages (Case and Deaton 2003), and others find gender difference in self-rated health
disappear in old age (Leinonen et al, 1997; Arber and Cooper, 1999).
The first explanation of the paradox — that gender differences in self-rated health and
mortality are driven by differences across genders in the distributions of chronic conditions—is
entirely consistent with women having higher rates of some illnesses than men, but lower rates of
others. In fact, this first explanation requires that gender differences in prevalence rates vary across
health conditions. Much of the literature that disputes whether women have higher rates of
morbidity than men is concerned with establishing that women do not suffer from excess levels of
all measures of ill health—a point with which we agree, and will provide evidence in support of
below. We are concerned with the more precise issue of why women have worse self-rated health
but lower mortality than men. As part of our investigation into gender differences in self-rated
health and mortality, we also examine gender differences in hospital episodes. Unlike doctor’s
visits, which may be influenced by patient’s demand for health care and perceptions of illness,
hospital episodes provide a more “objective” measure of health status that can be compared with
both self-rated health and mortality, and help provide a bridge between these two health measures.

2

Our analyses are based on fourteen years of U.S. data from the National Health Interview
Survey (1986-1994, 1997-2001 NHIS) and its associated Multiple Cause of Death file, which
provides information on deaths of those interviewed between 1986 and 1994. The surveys are ideal
for our purpose because they contain information on self-rated health, hospital episodes and
mortality, as well as detailed information on chronic health conditions that may contribute to both
self-rated health and mortality. In addition, the survey covers large numbers of adult men and
women: our analyses of self-rated health and hospitalization use a sample of 147,996 adult men and
women surveyed between 1997 and 2001, and our analyses of mortality use a sample of 237,140
men and women ages 45-84 surveyed from 1986 to 1994. These large samples make it possible to
obtain precise estimates of the gender differences in health measures at each age and of the effects
of (sometimes rare) chronic health conditions on self-rated health and mortality.
Section II discusses the data and show that it is consistent with the basic facts of the puzzle:
women have worse self-rated health and more hospitalization episodes than men from early
adolescence to late middle age; but they are less likely to die at each age. Section III examines the
validity of the explanations offered for this paradox. Our results indicate that the difference in selfassessed health between women and men can be entirely explained by differences in the distribution
of conditions. Although on average women have worse self-rated health than men, women and men
with the same sets of chronic conditions have the same self-rated health. The results for hospital
episodes are somewhat different. While the effect of poor health on hospital episodes is the same for
men and women, men with respiratory cancer, cardiovascular disease, and bronchitis are more likely
to experience hospital episodes than women who suffer from the same chronic conditions, implying
that men may experience more severe forms of these conditions. The same is true for mortality.
Although the effects of many chronic conditions on the probability of death are the same for women
and men, men who report having cardiovascular disease and certain lung disorders are significantly
more likely to die than women with these conditions. While some of the gender difference in

3

mortality can be explained by differences in the distribution of chronic conditions, an equally large
share can be attributed to the larger adverse effects of these conditions on male mortality.
Our results move us some distance in understanding the paradox between self-assessed
health and mortality. That men and women with the same health conditions report the same selfrated health status, and the fact that poor health is equally predictive of hospitalization episodes for
men and women, casts doubt on the idea that women and men use different standards for assessing
self-rated health. However, our mortality results cannot be explained solely by differences in the
distribution of chronic conditions. Men with smoking-related conditions are significantly more
likely to die within two years than are women with the same conditions. These men will, on
average, have had longer exposure to smoking in their lives, and their reports of (say) emphysema
may indicate more advanced cases than do women’s reports.
Our findings and their interpretation are important for several reasons. Self-reported health
status is a tool often used to assess wellbeing. If women and men take different aspects of health
into account, or weight them differently in their self assessments, it is important to understand why
and how this is the case. In addition, if historically higher rates of smoking are responsible for the
higher mortality rates men face in middle age, then we would anticipate the gap in age-adjusted
mortality rates will close, given the changes observed in women’s and men’s smoking patterns over
the last century. Finally, if the chronic conditions that lead to higher risk of mortality are given
budget priority over those that lead to poorer self-assessed health, then research and treatment of
important health conditions observed in women may be underfunded.

II. Data and Preliminary Evidence
A. Data
The data for this study are drawn from the National Health Interview Surveys (NHIS) conducted
between 1986 and 1994, and 1997 to 2001, and from the associated NHIS Multiple Cause of Death
Public Use Data File that contains information on deaths (as of 1997) of individuals surveyed
4

between 1986 and 1994. The NHIS is a cross-sectional household interview survey that covers the
civilian non-institutionalized population living in the United States. The survey collects information
on self-rated health, chronic health conditions, health care utilization, and socio-demographics.
Between 1986 and 1996, health information was collected for each member of sampled
households. While all households were administered the same basic questionnaire, each household
was randomly assigned to one of six “Condition Lists,” and information was collected only on
household members’ experience with the chronic conditions included on the assigned list. The
structure of the survey changed in important ways in 1997. While basic health information
continued to be collected for all household members, information on chronic conditions among
adults was collected only from a single “sample adult” in each household, who was asked about a
full range of chronic conditions.
Because of the redesign and the timing of the Multiple Cause of Death File, we mainly rely
on two distinct samples to study self-rated health and mortality. The 1997-2001 sample, consisting
of 147,996 “sample adult” men and women ages 18 to 84, is used mainly for our analyses of selfrated health. We remove women who are either pregnant or have a child aged 1 or younger, in order
to focus on non-pregnancy related health and hospitalizations. The fact that we have a complete set
of information on chronic conditions on all sample adults is an advantage, since it permits us to
more easily deal with co-morbidities across chronic conditions. The 1986-1994 sample is used
primarily for our analyses of mortality. The sample includes men and women for whom vital status
can be identified from the Multiple Cause of Death File. Because there are so few deaths among
younger adults, we restrict our sample to 237,140 men and women ages 45-84 for whom vital status
is known. Details on variable definitions are included in the Appendix.

B. Gender Differences in Self-Rated Health and Mortality
The NHIS data can be used to illustrate the paradox discussed in the last section. The two left-hand
panels of Figure 1 present data on self-rated health status (SRHS), which in the NHIS is asked on a
5

5-point scale, where 1=Excellent, 2=Very Good, 3=Good, 4=Fair and 5=Poor. These figures use
data on all household members from the combined 1986-2001 surveys, and show the average of
SRHS, and the fraction of those who rate themselves in fair or poor health, by exact year of age for
males and females.1 These measures yield similar patterns of changes in health status with age.
Boys have somewhat worse health status than girls prior to adolescence. However, the health status
of girls becomes worse than that of boys around age 14. The gender gap in self-rated health status is
greatest at age 20, and then slowly declines. By age 65 (using mean SRHS) or age 60 (using the
indicator of fair or poor health), the female disadvantage in self-rated health status has vanished.
The top right panel shows the average number of hospitalization episodes over the previous
12 months, by age, for women and men. Between the ages of 20 and 60, women’s number of
hospitalizations is roughly constant, at 0.10 episodes a year. Only after age 60 do we observe the
average number of episodes rising with age for women. In contrast, men’s reports of
hospitalizations rise with age from age 20. The pattern here mirrors what we observed for selfassessed health: women’s excess hospitalizations is greatest at age 20. By late middle age, men’s
and women’s reported hospitalizations equalize.
The bottom right panel of the figure shows the fraction of respondents in the 1986-1994
surveys (aged 25 to 74 at the time of the survey) who died within 24 months of their interviews.2
This graphs show the well-known pattern of excess mortality among men at all ages. Although
mortality is much lower at younger ages, the “excess” of male mortality is greatest at the youngest
ages. The ratio of male to female mortality is fairly flat after age 40, increasing slightly at the oldest
ages.

1

These results are based on data for 1,602,650 individuals. Sample weights are used in the
calculations. The health of those aged 16 and under is rated by an adult respondent. Children
aged 17 have the option of reporting for themselves.
2

This graph is based on 586,703 respondents of all ages for whom vital status could be
determined.
6

Although women report worse health than men at all but the oldest ages, they are not
uniformly more likely to report suffering from all chronic health conditions. Figure 2 shows
prevalence rates for a selection of chronic health conditions for women and men by exact year of
age. These chronic conditions were chosen to illustrate the diversity of patterns that appear in the
data. Several of the chronic conditions, including frequent headaches, arthritis, and depression, are
more prevalent for women at all ages. Others, such as asthma, display higher prevalence for women
than men in middle age but not at the oldest ages. Yet others, such as reproductive cancers and
cardiovascular disease, are more prevalent for women at younger ages but cross over to greater
prevalence among men at older ages. Diabetes is equally prevalent for men and women at all ages.
Emphysema and, to some extent, hypertension, are equally prevalent among younger men and
women but more prevalent among men past age 60. These varied patterns confirm the view that
women are not uniformly more likely than men to suffer from all types of ailments. However, they
also suggest that women are more likely than men to suffer from conditions such as arthritis and
frequent headaches that are not life-threatening but which could lead to poor self-rated health, and
that men are more likely, at least at older ages when most deaths occur, to suffer from diseases such
as cardiovascular disease and emphysema that are risk factors for mortality.

III. Chronic Conditions, Self-Rated Health and Mortality
A. Self-Rated Health
Methods
To assess routes into women’s poorer health, we examine the prevalence and severity of chronic
conditions collected in the 1997-2001 National Health Interview Surveys. We ruled out conditions
that were benign enough to pose little health hazard (for example, hay fever), and restrict our
attention to conditions for which a consistent definition was used over all years. We analyze 18
conditions that fall into six broad categories: pain (headache; neck/back ache; arthritis); respiratory
conditions (bronchitis, emphysema, asthma, lung problems); circulatory conditions (cardiovascular
7

disease, diabetes, hypertension, circulatory problems); cancers (skin, stomach, reproductive,
respiratory); chronic vision and hearing problems; and depression. Our ‘condition’ list is comprised
of both diseases (for example, emphysema), and illnesses that may be symptoms of diseases (e.g.
vision problems may be due to diseases of the eye, or a bi-product of diabetes.)
To quantify the extent to which sex differences in health status are due to differences in the
presence of chronic conditions, or to differences in the impact of these conditions, or to unobserved
factors, we need a method for decomposing health status. Initially, assume that only one chronic
condition (C) exists, and that some subset of people suffer from this condition. (We extend this to
multiple conditions in the empirical work below.) Then the probability of reporting fair or poor
health (here referred to as “poor” health), can be decomposed into the probability of reporting poor
health, conditional on the presence of the chronic condition, times the probability of observing the
condition, plus the probability of reporting poor health, in the absence of the chronic condition,
times the probability that the condition is absent:

Using this decomposition, and noting that the probability of the condition’s absence is equal to 1
minus the probability of the condition’s presence, we can characterize the difference in the
probability that women and men report poor health, as follows:

(1)

This expression decomposes the gender difference in poor health into three components. The first
quantifies the difference in poor health due to the difference in prevalence of the chronic condition
between women and men. We will refer to this as the prevalence effect. The second term quantifies
the difference in poor health due to the gender difference in the impact of the chronic condition on
poor health. This we will refer to as the severity effect. The last term captures the difference in the
probability of reporting poor health that is not due to the chronic condition.
8

This framework can be extended to multiple chronic conditions. Assume that the probability
of reporting poor health depends linearly on indicators for the presence of a set of N chronic
conditions (denoted as

, i=1...N) and indicator variables for age, race, and survey year, and a

control for education (X):
(2)
We estimate equations of this form separately for men and women, and use the parameter estimates
to compute prevalence and severity effects in the difference in poor health between women and
men.
We estimate two variants of (2) that differ in their measures of chronic conditions. In the
first variant, each of the N chronic condition indicators measures the presence or absence of one
single ailment (e.g. arthritis, asthma, etc.) Individuals may have values of 1 for more than one of the
18 conditions we consider. This specification is parsimonious, but does not account for the fact that
interactions between conditions may have additional effects on health status. In other words, the
probability of poor health, given two chronic conditions, may not be the simple sum of the
probability of poor health for each chronic condition observed individually:

In our NHIS data, 45% of respondents suffer from more than one chronic condition. The second
variant allows for a large number of interactions between chronic conditions. In theory, we can
incorporate the presence of multiple conditions by redefining our chronic conditions to measure
each unique combination of ailments. In practice, it is not possible to allow for all possible
combinations of the 18 ailments we follow. There are, for example, 153 different ways in which a
person could suffer from exactly 2 of the 18 ailments, and 816 different ways in which a person
could suffer from exactly 3 ailments. We can, however, capture the first-order interactions between
conditions by defining “conditions” as single chronic ailments and all possible combinations of two
chronic ailments. Individuals who suffer from cardiovascular disease and emphysema have a
“CVD/emphysema” condition. To avoid double-counting, these individuals are not assigned the
9

“CVD only” or “emphysema only” conditions. We thus define 171 new conditions: 18 singletons
plus 153 pairs of ailments (so that N=171). 73% of individuals report 2 or fewer ailments. For this
group of respondents, the conditions we identify provide a complete accounting of the ailments that
they face. For the remainder, the estimation yields an approximation for the effects of their
conditions on health.

Results
We present a preliminary look at the extent to which the 18 ailments we follow affect men’s and
women’s health status in Figure 3, which graphs the coefficients from ordinary least squares
regressions as in equation (2), run separately for men and women. We regress an indicator variable
for reporting fair or poor health (which we will refer to as ‘poor’ health) on all 18 chronic ailments,
together with a complete set of age indicators, race indicators, survey year indicators, and a control
for years of completed schooling. For both men and women, the condition that has the largest effect
on self assessed health is stomach cancer, which is associated with an increased probability of
reporting poor health of roughly 25 percentage points. Respiratory cancer and diabetes are each
associated with an 18 percentage point increase in the probability of reporting poor health, for both
men and women; depression and cardiovascular disease with a 15 percentage point increase; neck
and back pain with a 5 percentage point increase. One condition that is not significantly associated
with reported health status is skin cancer, which takes a small, negative insignificant coefficient for
both men and women. Skin cancer is the only condition on our list that is not significantly
associated with poor health.
The solid line in Figure 3 marks the 45 degree line: if the increase in the probability of
reporting poor health in the presence of a given chronic condition were equal for men and women,
then the regression coefficients reported for the two sexes would fall on this line. Figure 3 shows
remarkable similarity between the sexes in the association between poor health and the presence of
each chronic ailment. Tests for differences between men and women in the 18 ailment coefficients
10

were significant for only 6: headaches, back and neck pain, arthritis, hypertension, depression, and
lung problems. Of these six, only the difference associated with lung problems is large in
magnitude, where the probability of poor health is 7.0 percentage points higher for men than for
women. Lung disorders, and more generally chronic illnesses associated with smoking, will be seen
to affect hospitalizations and mortality in what follows.
The near equality between men and women in their health responses to chronic conditions
suggests that gender differences in response to chronic conditions is unlikely to lead to an
explanation of gender differences in reported health status. Indeed, in the formal decomposition
presented below, we find no role for the severity effect in explaining the self-assessed health
differentials.
Table 1 presents prevalence rates for chronic conditions, and the differences in the
prevalence rates between women and men for the 18 ailments we use in our analysis. The last
column shows the age- and race-adjusted excess percentage point prevalence among women for
each ailment, above that expected for men. These were estimated by regressing each ailment on a
complete set of age, race and survey year indicators, a measure of completed education, and an
indicator that the respondent is female, for 147,996 individuals surveyed between 1997 and 2001.
An asterisk (*) denotes those conditions for which the prevalence rates are significantly different
between women and men at a 5% level. Women have significantly higher rates of pain (headache,
other pain, arthritis), and some respiratory conditions (bronchitis, asthma, lung problems other than
cancer). They are also significantly more likely to suffer from reproductive cancers, hypertension,
vision problems and depression. Men are significantly more likely to suffer from smoking-related
ailments (emphysema, respiratory cancer), some circulatory problems (cardiovascular disease,
diabetes), and hearing loss. Men are significantly more likely to have two-ailment conditions that
involve emphysema, respiratory cancer, diabetes, and cardiovascular disease, while women are
significantly more likely to have two-ailment conditions that involve pain, asthma, bronchitis,
vision, and depression. The prevalence rates for the set of 171 chronic conditions and condition
11

interactions are presented in Figure 4, where it is clear that the difference in prevalence rates
between women and men are larger for conditions that women are more likely to report.
To estimate the severity and prevalence effects of these conditions, we first regress an
indicator for reporting fair or poor health on a vector of chronic conditions, as in equation (2) above,
in separate regressions for men and women. Differences in men’s and women’s chronic condition
coefficients, multiplied by the average prevalence rate of each condition (denoted as

), form the

basis of our severity effect:

Differences in these prevalence rates between men and women, multiplied by the condition’s $
(averaged between the $ estimated for men and women), form the basis of the prevalence effect:

The residual difference in women’s and men’s self-assessed health—that unexplained by the
severity and prevalence effects above—combines differences produced by gender differences in
average values of X (age, education and race), gender differences in the effects of these variables on
health (e.g. in (), and unexplained differences.
Our estimates of these effects are presented in Table 2. The first column presents results
from regressions that include 18 chronic conditions with no interactions between the conditions.
The second column presents results from regressions that included 171 chronic conditions and
chronic condition interactions. On average, 14.3% of women aged 18 to 84 reported fair or poor
health. The likelihood of a woman reporting poor health is 2.5 percentage points greater than is that
for a man. With or without the chronic condition interactions, we find that the difference between
women’s and men’s health is fully explained by differences in the prevalence of conditions they
face. From our analysis that includes condition interactions (column 2), we predict women to be 2.3
percentage points more likely to report poor health based on the conditions they report. There is
little role for the severity effect: we find men are 0.13 percentage points more likely to report poor
health than are women with the same chronic conditions.
12

In tests run on the health status regressions, we found that the condition interaction variables
were jointly significant. However, their absence (column 1) makes little difference to the health
status decomposition.

B. Hospitalizations
A different look at health is provided by the number of hospitalization days and episodes men and
women report having had in the past 12 months. (Hospitalization refers only to in-patient stays.)
Hospitalization may provide a more objective measure of health status than do self-reports. Unlike
doctors visits, which patients can generally schedule themselves, hospital admission is controlled by
health providers, who may fail to admit patients with less serious health problems.
If it were the case that women were less stoical than men, and more likely to factor minor
ailments into their reports of poor health, then we would expect women’s hospitalizations to be less
responsive to their reports of poor health than are men’s. Instead, we find equally large responses
between hospitalization episodes and reports of poor health for men and women. In regressions of
the number of reported hospitalization episodes on an indicator of reporting fair or poor health, with
a complete set of indicators for age, race, survey year and a measure of educational attainment, we
find:

Women:

Number of episodes = 0.341 Fair/Poor Health
(0.006)

Men:

Number of episodes = 0.338 Fair/Poor Health
(0.007)

For both women and men, a subjective report of fair or poor health translates on average into onethird extra hospitalization episode a year.
Women on average have 0.034 more hospitalization episodes per year than do men, and
0.052 extra hospital days. As observed in Figure 1, these differences are largest in young adulthood.

13

Using the same methods presented for health status above, we can decompose hospitalization days
and episodes into severity, prevalence and residual effects. We present these decompositions in
Table 3, where the first three columns present results for hospitalization episodes, and the second
three for hospitalization days. For both episodes and days, we present results for our 18 chronic
conditions without condition interactions (columns 1 and 4), and with interactions (columns 2 and
5). Consistent with our findings for self-reported health status, the difference in the distribution of
chronic conditions goes some way toward explaining women’s greater hospitalization. We find a
prevalence effect for hospitalization episodes of 0.0176, in our analysis containing the 171
conditions and condition interactions. This is half of the total difference we observe in
hospitalization episodes between men and women. We find a prevalence effect for hospital days of
0.0941, which is almost twice as large as the total gap between women and men’s hospitalization
days. Based on the distribution of conditions alone, we would expect women to spend even more
days in the hospital, relative to men, than we observe in the data.
These prevalence effects are offset by differences in the impact of chronic conditions on
hospitalizations for men and women. We find, for both episodes and days, that when men and
women report the same chronic conditions, men have more episodes and more hospital days than do
women. The conditions responsible for this severity effect can be seen in Figure 5, which presents
coefficients from regressions of men and women’s hospitalization episodes on 18 chronic
conditions. Men suffering from respiratory cancer, stomach cancer, bronchitis, and cardiovascular
disease report significantly greater numbers of hospital episodes than do women reporting the same
conditions.

C. Mortality
Methods
The last two sections provided evidence that the worse self-rated health of women can be entirely
explained by gender differences in the distribution of chronic health conditions, but that men are
14

more likely than women with the same health conditions to have hospitalizations. This section turns
to mortality. We study whether men and women who report the same health conditions are equally
likely to die in the two years following the survey, or whether men have excess mortality given
health conditions. We also decompose gender differences in mortality into prevalence and severity
effects, as was done for self-rated health and hospitalizations.
As in the last sections, we start by specifying mortality as a function of health conditions
(

) and other sociodemographic factors (X):
(3)

where D is indicator that the respondent died within 24 months of the survey. These equations are
estimated separately for women and men. Because there are few deaths among younger adults, the
samples include only those aged 45 to 84. Our primary focus is on whether the effects of chronic
conditions on mortality differ for women and men.
Although the framework is identical to that described in the last sections, data issues require
that we use different and somewhat more complex estimation methods. The NHIS mortality
information is available only for those surveyed before the 1997 redesign. As discussed in the data
section, the NHIS followed very different procedures for collecting information on health conditions
before 1997: instead of asking a subset of adults about all health conditions, the survey asked all
adults about a subset of health conditions on the condition list to which they were randomly
assigned. As a result, we have only incomplete information on the variables in C for any one
individual. While this method of collecting information allows for the calculation of accurate
prevalence rates with minimal respondent burden, it complicates analyses that require information
on co-morbidities. Consider, for example, the strategy of estimating equation (3) one “condition
list” at a time, so that we regress the death indicator on the conditions included in Condition List 1
using the sample that was assigned to this list, and repeat this for each of the condition lists. The
estimates of the effects of the conditions on the probability of mortality (i.e. the estimates of

) will

be biased, since they will reflect the effects of conditions that are unmeasured but correlated with
15

the conditions that are measured. For example, if those who have heart disease also have an
elevated risk of emphysema (perhaps because smoking increases the risk for both diseases), the
estimates of the effects of both heart disease and emphysema, which appear in different condition
lists, are likely to be biased upward.
The bias due to incomplete information on chronic conditions can be corrected with
supplementary information on the covariance of each pair of chronic diseases that appear in
different condition lists. Our strategy is to use information on these covariances from the 1997-2001
NHIS surveys to correct for bias due to missing information on co-morbidities.3 To see how these
biases can be corrected, consider a simplified version of (3) in which the controls for the
sociodemographic variables have been suppressed:
(4)
where

represents an

matrix of indicators for whether individuals have chronic conditions

included in condition list j, and there are a total of M condition lists. (In practice, we include
controls for sociodemographic variables. The methods described below are easily extended to the
case in which other control variables are included.) Note that the 1986-1994 data, which we refer to
as the “censored” sample, contain information on D but incomplete information on

. The 1997-

2001 data, which we refer to as the “supplemental” sample, has complete information on C but no
information on D.
The equation for bias correction can be obtained by first defining a matrix

, which is equal

to C but with unobserved values of conditions set to zero, and considering the ordinary least squares
estimates of $ that result when

is used in place of C:
(5)

and
(6)
3

The strategy of using supplemental data in this way has been used to correct for biases in
the estimates of the effects of lead on IQ (Marais and Wecker, 1998).
16

where

is the variance-covariance matrix of the censored data matrix

covariance matrix of

and

. Equation (6) indicates that

suggests the following corrected estimator (denoted

and

is the

is an inconsistent estimator of

, and

):
(7)

where

and

are consistent estimators of the covariance matrices. The former can be

obtained from the censored sample. The matrix

contains cross-products for pairs of conditions

that are from the same condition lists (and so can be estimated from the censored sample alone) and
for pairs of conditions that appear in different condition lists (and so must be estimated from the
supplemental sample.) Details on how these covariance matrices were estimated, and on estimates
of the standard errors for

, are in the Appendix.

Although this estimation method delivers consistent estimates of

for women and men, the

lack of complete information on all conditions is restrictive. We cannot, for example, estimate
models similar to those shown for self-rated health and hospitalizations, in which interactions
between conditions are included. We also cannot use non-linear functional forms for (4)—for
example, logit or probit models—since the bias correction formula are only correct for the linear
model. Finally, we must restrict the list of health conditions to those that are measured in similar
ways in the earlier censored sample and the later supplemental sample. We examine fourteen
chronic conditions, including arthritis and skin cancer (from Condition List 1); digestive cancer
(List 3); diabetes, frequent headaches and reproductive cancer (List 4); CVD, hypertension, and
other circulation problems (List 5); and bronchitis, asthma, emphysema, other (non-cancerous) lung
disorders, and respiratory cancer (List 6).

Results
Table 4 shows results from two sets of estimates of the effects of chronic conditions on the
probability of death within 24 months of the survey. The first two columns show estimates of very
17

simple variants of (3), in which the indicator for death is regressed on only one of the chronic
conditions indicators, plus a set of indicators for age and race, and a control for years of education.
Thus, each cell of each row shows the marginal effects of the condition on the probability of death
for women (row 1) and men (row 2), controlling for no other conditions. The third column provides
the p-value from a test that the coefficients for women and men are identical. These simple results
are shown so that they can be contrasted with those in the last three columns, which contain results
from the complete model that includes the bias correction discussed above.
The results with and without bias correction are generally consistent with those shown above
for self-rated health and hospitalizations. The chronic conditions that lead to the largest increases in
the probability of death—CVD, emphysema, other lung problems, respiratory cancer, digestive and
reproductive cancers and diabetes—also elevate reports of poor health and hospitalizations.
Conditions that have smaller or even no effects on mortality, such as headaches or hypertension,
have smaller (although significant) adverse effects on self-rated health.
Estimates of the marginal effects of conditions on mortality are generally smaller when the
complete set of conditions is included and the bias correction is used. For example, cardiovascular
disease (CVD) is estimated to increase the probability of death by 2.9 percentage points for women
and 4.6 percentage points for men when no conditions other than CVD are included. In the biascorrected model, these effects decline to 2.1 (for women) and 3.6 (for men) percentage points.
These declines reflect the fact that individuals often have multiple conditions, something illustrated
in the results in the last section.
Correcting the bias tends to reduce the men’s coefficient by more than the women’s
coefficients. For example, without adjustment for co-morbidities, the difference in the effects of
CVD on mortality is –1.7 percentage points (2.9 for women minus 4.6 for men). The adjustments
for co-morbidities reduces this difference to –1.5 (2.1 for women minus 3.6 for men). The pattern of
greater reductions in men’s than women’s coefficients is evident for 10 of the 14 conditions. This is
consistent with the evidence on patterns of co-morbidities discussed in Section A, above, which
18

noted that men are more likely than women to have combinations of more life-threatening
conditions (e.g. emphysema, respiratory cancer, diabetes, and cardiovascular disease), whereas
women’s co-morbidities are clustered around conditions that are less likely to be fatal (e.g.
conditions that involve pain, asthma, and bronchitis).
Even after adjusting for co-morbidities, the presence of health conditions is often associated
with larger increases in mortality for men than for women. This can be seen from the last three
columns in Table 4, or in the graphs of these coefficients in Figure 6. (The top panel of Figure 6
shows all fourteen conditions. The bottom panel excludes respiratory and digestive cancer, which
have very large effects of the probability of death.) Of the eight conditions that have marginal
effects on the probability of death in excess of 0.01, five have larger effects on male mortality
(these include stomach cancer, CVD, emphysema, other lung disorders, and respiratory cancer) and
three have larger effects of female mortality (diabetes, reproductive cancer, and bronchitis).
Although the majority of these differences are not statistically significant (see last column of Table
4), the results taken together suggest that serious health conditions pose a greater threat to men than
women.4
This can be seen more formally by decomposing the difference between female and male
rates into prevalence and severity effects, as was done for self-rated health and hospitalizations in
the last two sections. In this sample of 45-84 year olds, 2.6 percent of women and 4.2 percent of
men die within two years of the survey, resulting in a difference between women and men of –1.6
percent. This –1.6 percent difference can be decomposed into a prevalence effect of –0.2 percent, a
severity effect of –0.6 percent, and a remainder unexplained by health conditions of –0.8 percent.
Thus, of the 50% of the gender difference in mortality that can be explained by these 14 chronic
health conditions, 25% (–0.02/–0.08) can be explained by men being more likely to suffer from the

4

Consistent with our finding for respiratory cancer, other research indicates that being
female is associated with longer survival after surgery and chemotherapy treatments for lung
cancer (Patel et al, 2004).
19

chronic conditions that have larger effects of mortality, and 75% (–0.06/–0.08) is explained by men
having a greater probability of dying than women with the same chronic conditions. However, this
decomposition provides a misleading estimate of the size of the severity effect. Fully half of the
severity effect is due to the gender difference in the estimated effect of arthritis on mortality. As
shown in Table 4, arthritis is not associated with male mortality and is negatively associated with
female mortality, so that it contributes to the severity effect for men. In addition, since arthritis is
very prevalent, it is heavily weighted in the calculation of the severity effect. When the effects of
arthritis on mortality are set to zero for both women and men—which seems sensible, given that we
do not think that arthritis really protects women against death—the severity effect drops to –0.2
percent, equal to the prevalence effect.

Is smoking the smoking gun?
Cardiovascular disease is the major contributor to the severity effect (because of its high prevalence
combined with the gender difference in its effect on mortality). Stomach cancer, emphysema, other
lung disorders and respiratory cancer are also contributing factors. All of these conditions are
associated with smoking.5 It is possible that the higher smoking rates of men result in more severe
forms of these conditions when they occur. The 1986-1994 NHIS surveys do not contain
information on the smoking history of respondents, so we cannot examine directly whether the
effects of these conditions on mortality are higher among smokers. We can, however, use the 19972001 NHIS to document that men do have substantially greater life-time exposure to smoking than
women. Figure 7 shows the average number of years of smoking for men and women, by age at the

5

The link between smoking and stomach cancer is not as well known as the association of
smoking with the other four conditions. However, the American Cancer Society reports that
“Smoking increases stomach cancer risk, particularly for cancers of the proximal stomach (the
upper portion of the stomach closest to the esophagus). The rate of stomach cancer is
approximately doubled in smokers.”
http://www.cancer.org/docroot/CRI/content/CRI_2_4_2X_W hat_are_the_risk_factors_for_stomach_cancer_40.asp

20

time of the survey, for sample adults in these surveys.6 Here we see stark differences in lifetime
smoking between men and women. Even including those who never smoked, 75-year-old men
surveyed between 1997 and 2001 report an average of more than 25 years of smoking, in contrast to
fewer than fifteen years of smoking for women. Years of smoking are lower among those in
younger cohorts so that, among 45-year-olds, men have on average only 2 more years of smoking
over their lives than women. If gender differences in life-time tobacco use are generating excess
male mortality, then smaller gender gap in smoking among these younger cohorts may reduce
excess male mortality both through the prevalence effect and the severity effect.
This explanation for the differences in the mortality effects that we find is consistent with
research by Pampel (1997), who concludes that smoking fully explains the recent narrowing in
mortality differentials observed between men and women. Pampel cites Valkonen and van Poppel
(1997) as having concluded that 40% of total sex differences in life expectancy at age 35 could be
explained by smoking. If Valkonen and van Poppel are correct, then combining the smoking results
with differences in the distributions of non-smoking related chronic conditions may bring us most
of the distance needed to explain excess male mortality.

IV. Discussion and Conclusions
The results presented above go partway to resolving the paradox with which we started, but do not
resolve it entirely. The hypothesis that gender differences in self-rated health can be entirely
explained by gender differences in the distribution of conditions is confirmed. The hypothesis that
women and men form assessments of their health in different ways is not consistent with either the
evidence that women and men with the same health conditions are equally likely to report being in

6

For those who never smoked, years of smoking is set to zero. For those who report ever
smoking, years of smoking is calculated as the year the respondent quit (or the current year if she
or he still smokes) minus the year in which he or she began smoking. This, years of smoking
will be overstated for those who do not smoke constantly between the start date and their most
recent quit date (or the date of the interview.)
21

poor health, or with our findings that reports of poor health are equally predictive of hospitalization
episodes for men and women. However, the evidence for hospitalizations and mortality indicate that
men with some health conditions are more likely to be hospitalized and to die than women with the
same conditions. The “severity effects” that disadvantage men are driven mainly by a small number
of smoking-related conditions: CVD (for hospital episodes), and CVD, emphysema, and other lung
disorders (for mortality).7 The remaining question is why, if these conditions are more likely to
result in hospitalizations and death for men, do they not also result in greater reports of poor health
for men?
One partial answer to this question is that some of these conditions do produce both excess
male mortality and higher reports of poor health for men relative to women. The results in Figure 3
indicate that men with emphysema and “other lung” problems are more likely than women to report
poor health. Although gender differences in these coefficients are statistically significant only for
lung problems and not for emphysema, they point to the possibility that men experience more
severe forms of these conditions—something that is consistent with the evidence of greater rates of
smoking among men presented above. However, the finding that men with CVD are equally likely
to report poor health but more likely to experience hospitalizations and die than women with CVD
is more difficult to explain.
Another possible answer is that men tend to report health conditions only when they are at
more severe or advanced stages. For example, a woman with mild angina might report having CVD,
whereas a man might not report CVD until he has experienced a heart attack. This would explain
why reported CVD has a larger effect on male than female mortality. However, to reconcile the
results for self-rated health with those for mortality, it would also have to be the case that women
with milder forms of CVD are as likely to report poor health as men with more severe forms of

7

Stomach and respiratory cancer also have larger effects on mortality and hospitalizations
for men than for women. However, because these conditions have very low prevalence rates, they
contribute little to the overall severity effects for mortality or hospitalizations.
22

CVD. In other words, women would have to be more likely than men to report less severe forms of
conditions and to factor milder forms of conditions into their reports of poor health.
Although logically possible, we do not think this answer is plausible. For many health
conditions we examine, there are no gender differences in the effects on both self-rated health and
mortality. This is true even for conditions such as diabetes and bronchitis, that can display varying
degrees of severity. If women systematically reported milder forms of all conditions, we would
expect to see these conditions having smaller effects on women’s mortality. Additional evidence
comes from looking at samples of individuals who died from specific causes (e.g. acute myocardial
infarction, stroke) within two years of the survey, and examining whether those individuals reported
conditions associated with those causes of death. If men are more likely than women to under-report
conditions, then men who died should be less likely than women to have reported having the
condition that resulted in the death. The results in Table 5 indicate that this is not the case. Women
and men whose causes of death were digestive cancer, diabetes, heart attack, stroke, hypertensive
disease, and respiratory cancer were equally likely to have reported the relevant condition at the
preceding interview. Men who died of respiratory disease (bronchitis, asthma, emphysema or
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease) were more likely than women to have reported one or more
of the conditions leading up to this cause of death. It should be noted that reports of the relevant
conditions are often low for both men and women, indicating that there may be under-reporting of
chronic conditions, due either to unwillingness to disclose health conditions or lack of knowledge
about those conditions.8 However, we find no evidence that men report conditions less than women.
A final explanation is that, for at least some conditions, the symptoms individuals
experience may convey little information about the severity of the disease. This may be especially
relevant for CVD, several components of which can be symptomless. It is possible that women and
men who report having CVD experience similar symptoms and therefore report (on average) the
8

Additional evidence on under-reporting of health conditions in Canada can be found in
Baker, Stabile and Deri (2001).
23

same self-rated health, when in fact the men’s disease is more severe (perhaps due to their greater
levels of smoking). This explanation is consistent with our finding that men and women with CVD
are equally likely to report poor health, that men with CVD are only slightly more likely than
women to experience hospital episodes, and that men with CVD are more than 1.5 times more
likely to die than women who report CVD.
Additional evidence on this point comes from the 1988-1994 National Health Examination
Study (NHANES III), which collected health information using both interviews and medical exams
for a nationally representative sample.9 We use NHANES III data for a sample of men and women
ages 30-74 to compare measures of cardiovascular health for men and women who report having
cardiovascular disease.10 Specifically, we examine whether men who self-report CVD have had
more heart attacks, are more likely to report episodes of severe chest pain, are more likely to smoke,
and have higher blood pressure, triglycerides, and cholesterol than do women who report CVD. The
first three of these measures—heart attacks, chest pain and smoking—are self-reported and are
certainly not “symptomless”. However, measures of blood pressure, triglycerides and cholesterol are
obtained from the examination and laboratory tests. These cannot be subject to gender-specific
reporting bias, and respondents do not know the results of their examinations and blood work when
they report whether they have cardiovascular disease.
We also compare men’s and women’s values of the Framingham risk score, which provides
a useful summary measure of the propensity to develop coronary heart disease (CHD), defined as
defined as angina pectoris, myocardial infarction, coronary insufficiency, and coronary heart disease
death, over a 10-year period. This scoring method was developed by researchers using data from the

9

Additional information on the NHANES III can be found at the NCHS website:
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/products/elec_prods/subject/nhanes3.htm
10

This age range is used since the Framingham risk score, discussed below, was
developed only for individuals aged 30-74.
24

Framingham study, and is described in detail in Wilson et al (1998).11 The ingredients that go into
calculating the score include age, current smoking, diabetes, total cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, and
blood pressure. It is important to note that method of scoring CHD risk varies by gender, and that
men generally receive higher (worse) scores than women with the same profiles of risk factors. For
example, a man with very low HDL (below 35 mg/dl) is assigned more points on the scale than a
women with very low HDL, indicating that men from the Framingham sample with low HDL were
(all else equal) more likely to develop CHD than women. The Framingham result, that men are
more likely to develop CHD than women with the same risk factors, is consistent with our finding
that men who report cardiovascular disease are more likely to die than women with the same
conditions.
Table 6 shows that men who self-report cardiovascular disease at baseline are more likely to
experience some, but not all, risk factors. They are significantly more likely to currently smoke, and
have experienced more heart attacks on average than women who also report cardiovascular
disease. Men are 6 percentage points more likely than women to report severe chest pain, although
this difference is only marginally significant. Men are also significantly more likely to have
diastolic blood pressure and HDL cholesterol in the “high risk” range. Women, however, are
significantly more likely to have high total cholesterol. The Framingham risk score, which
summarizes the combined effects of blood pressure, total cholesterol, and HDL cholesterol, as well
as smoking and diabetes, is nearly twice as high for men as for women who self-report
cardiovascular disease. The Framingham 10-year risk of developing CHD for men is 19.6 percent,

11

The scoring system is based on age-adjusted Cox proportional hazard models, estimated
by gender, that relate the development of coronary heart disease (defined as angina pectoris,
myocardial infarction, coronary insufficiency, and coronary heart disease death) within a 12-year
follow-up period to baseline measures of total cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, diastolic blood
pressure, diabetes and smoking. The raw score in then scaled so that it measures the 10-year risk
of experiencing CHD given the individual’s baseline characteristics.
25

and for women is only 10.7 percent.12 These results indicate that, among men and women who
report cardiovascular disease, men generally have worse risk profiles than do women, which may
account for their higher mortality rates.
In summary, our results indicate that women and men who experience the same health
conditions are equally likely to report being in poor health. And, many health conditions have
effects on hospitalizations and mortality that are similar for men and women. However, men with
some health conditions—notably those associated with smoking—are more likely than women with
these conditions to experience hospitalizations and death. Overall, the results suggest that the
paradox of worse self-rated health for women and higher mortality for men has a fairly
straightforward explanation that does not rest on systematic differences between women and men in
how health is reported.

12

It should be noted that the 10-year risks are likely to be higher for this sample of men
and women who report having CVD. The Framingham method assigns raw scores to risks for
individuals who have not yet been diagnosed with CHD at baseline. In addition, the Framingham
risks are based on samples of white individuals from a New England suburb. However, the risk
scores provide a useful method of aggregating across the different risk factors for heart disease,
ven if they do not assign accurate risks to individuals in the NHANES III sample.
26

References
Arber, S. and Cooper, H. (1999). Gender differences in health in later life: The new paradox? Social
Science and Medicine 48. 61-76.
Baker, M., Stabile, M. and Deri, C. (2001). What do self-reported, objective measures of health
measure? NBER Working Paper 8419, Journal of Human Resources, forthcoming.
Case, A. and Deaton, A. (2003). Broken down by work and sex: How our health declines. NBER
Working Paper 9821.
Hunt, K. and Annandale. E. (1999). Relocating gender and morbidity: Examining men’s and
women’s health in contemporary Western societies. Social Science and Medicine 48. 1-5.
Idler, E. L. (2003). Discussion: Gender differences in self-rated health, in mortality, and in the
relationship between the two. The Gerontologist 43(3). 372-75.
Lawlor, D.H., Ebrahim, S. and Davey Smith G. (2001). Sex matters: Secular and geographical
trends in sex differences in coronary heart disease mortality. British Medical Journal 323. 541-45.
Leinonen, R., Heikkinen, E. and Jylha, M.. (1997). Self-rated health and self-assessed change in
health in elderly men and women — a five-year longitudinal study. Social Science and Medicine
46(4-5). 591-97.
MacIntyre, S., Hunt, K., and Sweeting, H.. (1996). Gender differences in health: Are things really as
simple as they seem? Social Science and Medicine 42(4). 617-24.
Marais, L.M. and Wecker, W.E. (1998). Correcting for omitted-variables and measurement-error
bias in regression with an application to the effect of lead in IQ. Journal of the American Statistical
Association 93(442). 494-505.
Molarius, A. and Janson, S. (2002). Self-rated health, chronic diseases, and symptoms among
middle-aged and elderly men and women. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology 55. 364-70.
Pampel, F. C. (2002). Cigarette use and the narrowing sex differentials in mortality. Population and
Development Review 28(1). 77-104.
Patel, J.D., Bach, P.B. and Kris, M.G. (2004). Lung cancer in women: A contemporary epidemic.
Journal of the American Medical Association 291(14): 1763-1768.
Spiers, N., Jagger, C., Clarke, M. and Arthur, A. (2003). Are gender differences in the relationship
between self-rated health and mortality enduring? Results from three birth cohorts in Melton
Mowbray, United Kingdom. The Gerontologist 43(3). 406-11.
Valkonen, T. and van Poppel, F. (1997). The contribution of smoking to sex differences in life
expectancy: Four Nordic countries and The Netherlands 1970-1989. European Journal of Public
Health 7. 302-10.
Verbrugge, L. M. (1989). The twain meet: Empirical explanations of sex differences in health and
mortality. Journal of Health and Social Behavior 30. 282-304.
Wilson, P. W.F., D’Agostino, R.B., Levy, D., Belanger, A.M., Silbershatz, H., and Kannel, W.B.,
(1998). Prediction of coronary heart disease using risk factor categories. Circulation 97(18). 183747.
27

Table 1. Chronic condition prevalence rates

Condition

Prevalence
Women

Prevalence
Men

Excess prevalence
in women
(percentage points)

Headache

24.0

11.4

13.2*

Other pain

39.5

35.6

3.7*

Arthritis

28.0

19.2

7.2*

Bronchitis

6.7

3.2

3.3*

Emphysema

1.4

2.0

–0.8*

Lung problems

2.0

1.4

0.5*

Asthma

10.8

7.8

3.1*

Diabetes

6.6

6.1

–0.3*

Circulatory problems

0.5

0.4

0.05

Cardiovascular disease

13.3

12.9

–1.1*

Hypertension

26.5

23.3

0.5*

Skin cancer

1.9

2.3

–0.5*

Stomach cancer

0.1

0.1

–0.01

Reproductive cancer

3.3

1.8

1.2*

Respiratory cancer

0.2

0.4

–0.2*

Vision

11.2

8.3

2.2*

Hearing

3.7

6.0

–3.0*

Depression

12.8

9.7

2.9*

Number of observations
81704
66292
147996
Notes: Excess prevalence coefficients reported in column 3 are the coefficients on an indicator that
the respondent is female, in OLS regressions of each condition on a complete set of age, survey year
and race indicators, a variable for completed education, and a sex indicator. An asterisk (*) denotes
that the difference in the rates for men and women are significant at the 5% level.

28

Table 2. The decomposition of health status
The fraction of respondents reporting
Fair/Poor health
Allowing for 18
Conditions

Allowing for
18 Conditions
+ 153 Condition
Interactions

Women

0.1428

0.1428

Men

0.1181

0.1181

Difference (women–men)

0.0247

0.0247

Severity effect

0.0065

–0.0013

Prevalence effect

0.0261

0.0233

Difference (women–men)
for those with no chronic
conditions

–0.0079

0.0028

F-test for the joint significance of 153 condition
interaction terms (p-value) for women’s regressions

29

8.07
(0.0000)

Table 3. The decomposition of hospitalization episodes
Dependent Variable:
Hospitalization Episodes
18
Conditions

18 Conditions
+ 153 Condition
Interactions

Hospitalization Days
18
Conditions

18 Conditions
+ 153 Condition
Interactions

All ages

All ages

Ages
45-84

All ages

All ages

Ages
45-84

Women

0.1502

0.1502

0.1870

0.7286

0.7286

1.019

Men

0.1160

0.1160

0.1853

0.6769

0.6769

1.094

Difference
(women–men)

0.0343

0.0343

0.0016

0.0517

0.0517

–0.0749

Severity effect

–0.0133

–0.0082 –0.0030

–0.1170

–0.0861 –0.0800

Prevalence effect

0.0196

0.0176

0.0089

0.0980

0.0941

0.0268

Difference
(women–men)
for those with no
chronic conditions

0.0252

0.0241

–0.0045

0.0642

0.0362

–0.0281

30

Table 4: Marginal effects of conditions on 2-year mortality
unadjusted for co-morbidities

adjusted for co-morbidities

Condition

women

men

p-value:
women=men

women

men

p-value:
women=men

arthritis

–0.0032
(0.0023)

0.0067
(0.0028)

0.006

–0.0099
(0.0029)

0.0018
(0.0039)

0.016

skin cancer

0.0006
(0.0084)

–0.0055
(0.0069)

0.577

–0.0050
(0.0077)

–0.0083
(0.0079)

0.762

digestive cancer

0.1630
(0.0189)

0.1940
(0.0199)

0.259

0.1571
(0.0169)

0.1973
(0.0219)

0.146

diabetes

0.0401
(0.0042)

0.0415
(0.0047)

0.826

0.0355
(0.0043)

0.0305
(0.0058)

0.489

frequent
headache

–0.0015
(0.0036)

–0.0037
(0.0057)

0.746

–0.0054
(0.0037)

–0.0180
(0.0068)

0.100

reproductive
cancer

0.0463
(0.0082)

0.0537
(0.0131)

0.633

0.0395
(0.0074)

0.0317
(0.0146)

0.632

CVD

0.0289
(0.0029)

0.0459
(0.0031)

0.000

0.0212
(0.0031)

0.0362
(0.0041)

0.004

hypertension

0.0104
(0.0025)

0.0141
(0.0028)

0.316

0.0030
(0.0028)

0.0024
(0.0037)

0.908

circulatory
problems

0.0128
(0.0039)

0.0166
(0.0044)

0.527

0.0081
(0.0035)

0.0094
(0.0050)

0.840

bronchitis

0.0212
(0.0043)

0.0299
(0.0059)

0.234

0.0153
(0.0041)

0.0121
(0.0068)

0.684

asthma

0.0066
(0.0051)

0.0130
(0.0067)

0.449

–0.0026
(0.0048)

–0.0064
(0.0076)

0.666

emphysema

0.0605
(0.0088)

0.0752
(0.0069)

0.189

0.0415
(0.0081)

0.0590
(0.0080)

0.122

other lung
disorder

0.0321
(0.0092)

0.0710
(0.0090)

0.003

0.0171
(0.0084)

0.0502
(0.0102)

0.012

respiratory
cancer

0.3469
(0.0264)

0.3683
(0.0194)

0.513

0.3342
(0.0236)

0.3545
(0.0214)

0.524

Notes: The results shown in the first three columns are from linear regressions of an indicator that
the respondent died within 2 years of the survey on an indicator that the respondent had the
condition listed in the row, plus a set of age indicators, indicators for race (black or other nonwhite), and years of education. Separate regressions were estimated for each condition. Each cell
shows the regression coefficient and standard error for the condition listed in the row. The third
column is the p-value for a t-test of the hypothesis that the effects of each condition on male and
female mortality are identical. The results in the last three columns are from regressions of an
indicator that the respondent dies within 2 years of the survey on a set of indicators for whether the
respondent had each of the conditions, plus a set of age and race indicators and a control for years of
education. These estimates have been corrected to account for the fact that not all conditions are
observed for each individual, using the procedure described in the text and in the Appendix.
31

Table 5: Reports of chronic conditions for those with specific causes of death
Women
Cause of death

Condition

Men

_N_

% with
condition

_N_

% with
condition

P2 (p-value)

Digestive cancer

Digestive cancer

363

3.31%

384

5.21%

1.65 (0.199)

Diabetes

Diabetes

177

51.4%

141

54.6%

0.32 (0.164)

Heart attack

CVD

544

32.4%

669

35.9%

1.65 (0.199)

Stroke

CVD

393

33.8%

304

35.5%

0.21 (0.643)

Hypertensive disease

Hypertension

122

60.7%

93

49.5%

2.68 (0.102)

Respiratory disease

Asthma, bronchitis, or emphysema

267

41.6%

319

54.2%

9.33 (0.002)

Respiratory cancer

Respiratory cancer

15

3.91%

31

5.51%

1.26 (0.261)

Notes: Each row of this table is based on a sample of respondents who died within 2 years of the survey and had the specific cause of
death listed in the first column. The table shows the percentages (of those who died from each cause) who reported the condition listed in
column 2. The P2 test shows whether the percentages of women and men who reported the condition differ. The causes of death are from
the NHIS 72-item ICD-9 recode, and are defined as follows: Digestive cancer= Malignant neoplasms of digestive organs and peritoneum.
Diabetes= Diabetes mellitus. Heart attack= Acute myocardial infarction.Stroke= Intracerebral and other intracranial hemorrhage;
Cerebral thrombosis and unspecified occlusion of cerebral arteries; cerebral embolism; and “all other and late effects of cerebrovascular
diseases.” Hypertensive disease= Hypertensive heart disease; Hypertensive heart and renal disease; and Hypertension with or without
renal disease. Respiratory disease= Bronchitis, chronic and unspecified; Emphysema; Asthma; and “Other chronic obstructive
pulmonary diseases and allied conditions.” Respiratory cancer=Malignant neoplasms of respiratory and intrathoracic organs.

32

Table 6: Averages of risk factors for coronary heart disease
Cardiovascular disease at baseline (by self report)
men

women

men minus
women

t-statistic, men
minus women=0

Indicator: Severe chest pain lasting more than ½ hour

0.396

0.336

0.060

1.68

Indicator: Current smoker

0.321

0.245

0.076

2.27

1.094
(1.000)

0.687
(1.033)

0.407

5.43

Indicator: High systolic blood pressure ($120 mm Hg)

0.740

0.776

–0.036

1.12

Indicator: High diastolic blood pressure ($80 mm Hg)

0.398

0.242

0.156

4.51

Indicator: High total cholesterol ($240 mg/dL)

0.263

0.417

–0.155

4.53

Indicator: High triglycerides ($ 150 mg/dL)

0.574

0.619

–0.046

1.26

Indicator: High risk HDL cholesterol (#40 mg/dL)

0.470

0.243

0.227

6.51

0.196
(0.119)

0.119
(0.078)

0.077

9.96

440

329

Number of heart attacks ever

Framingham 10-year-risk of CHD
observations

Notes: The data consist of all men and women ages 30-74 from the NHANES III, who self-reported having cardiovascular disease (have
had a stroke, heart attack or congestive heart failure.) Averages are computed using sample weights provided in NHANES III. Standard
deviations are in parentheses.

33

Figure 1: Self-rated health, hospital episodes and mortality for men and women. NHIS.
34

Figure 2: Prevalence of selected conditions by age

35

Figure 3: The impact of chronic conditions on the probability of reporting fair or poor health
(Coefficients significantly different between men and women are represented by solid circles.)

36

Figure 4: The prevalence of 171 chronic conditions and condition interactions. Ages 18-64. NHIS 1997-2001.
37

Figure 5: The impact of chronic conditions on hospital episodes in past 12 months.
(Coefficients significantly different between men and women are shown as sold circles.)

38

Figure 6: Marginal effects of health conditions on 2-year mortality, men and women.
39

Figure 7: Average years of life-time smoking for men and women, by age. 1997-2001 NHIS.
40

Appendix
A. Definitions of the variables
All regressions included a complete set of indicators for age and race (black, white or “other”) and a
control for years of education. The chronic health conditions used in the analyses are defined as
follows for each of the two survey periods. In coding the conditions, we attempted to make the
definitions for conditions from the earlier and later periods as close as possible. For the 1986-1994
surveys, we provide the diagnostic codes that were aggregated to create each condition. The
reference periods over which conditions are assessed are noted for the 1997-2001 period :
1986-1994.
12 month reference period unless noted otherwise.
arthritis

arthritis (101); rheumatis, unspecified (102); gout, incl. gouty arthritis (103)

skin cancer

malignant neoplasms of the skin (119)

digestive cancer

malignant neoplasms of the stomach, intestines, colon or rectum (316)

reproductive cancer

malignant neoplasms of breast (421), female genital organs (422), or prostate
(423)

cardiovascular disease

rheumatic fever “ever” (501), ischemic heart disease “ever” (502); tachycardia
or rapid heart (503); heart murmur (504); other unspecified heart rhythm
disorder (505); congenital heart disease “ever” (506); other selected diseases
of the heard excl hypertension (507); cerebrovascular disease “ever” (509);
hardening of the arteries “ever” (510); aneurysm (511)

hypertension

hypertension “ever” (508)

circulation problems

Phlebitis, thrombophelitis (512); hemmorhoids (514); poor circulation (515)

bronchitis

chronic bronchitis (601)

asthma

asthma (602)

emphysema

emphysema (609)

other lung disorders

pleurisy (610); pneumoconiosis and asbestosis (611); tuberculosis (612); other
diseases of the lung (614)

respiratory cancer

malignant neoplasms of the lung or bronchus (613); malignant neoplasms of
other respiratory sites (615)
1997-2001

headache

Severe headache/facial pain in last 3 months

neck/backache

Pain in neck, lower back, or joint injury in last 3 months

arthritis

Joint pain not due to injury in last 12 months.

cardiovascular disease

“Ever been told” has had heart attack, coronary heart disease, angina, other
kind of heart condition/heart disease, stroke.

41

diabetes

“Ever been told” has diabetes.

hypertension

“Ever been told” has hypertension.

circulatory problems

Difficulty with activities due to a “circulatory problem”

chronic vision problems

Trouble seeing “even when wearing glasses”

chronic hearing problems

W ears hearing aid, has “a lot of trouble” hearing, or reports being deaf.

depression

Respondent were asked to report whether they felt sad, nervous, restless,
hopeless, that everything was an effort, or worthless over the past 30 days.
Individuals who reported having at least one of these feelings either “all of the
time” or “most of the time” are coded as depressed.

bronchitis

“Past 12 months” has been told has chronic bronchitis.

emphysema

“Ever been told” has emphysema.

asthma

“Ever been told” has asthma

other lung problems

Difficulty with activities due to a “lung or breathing problem”

skin cancer

“Ever diagnosed” with skin cancer.

stomach cancer

“Ever diagnosed” with stomach cancer

reproductive cancer

“Ever diagnosed” with reproductive cancer.

respiratory cancer

“Ever diagnosed” with respiratory cancer.

B. Bias corrections for mortality estimates
The equation to be estimated is:
(A1)
where it is assumed that , is i.i.d. with E[, | C]=0.

is a matrix of demographic variables (age,

education and race) that are observed for all individuals. For j=1...M,

is an N x kj matrix of 0/1

variables that indicate whether the individual has each of the conditions included in condition list j,
where there are a total of M condition lists. Assume that the number of individuals who are asked
about the conditions in each list is equal to n=N/M, and that the total number of explanatory
variables is
only variables in

. The matrix C is censored, so that for individuals assigned to condition list j,
and

are observed. The outcome D is observed for all individuals.

42

Define a matrix Z which is equal to C but with censored elements set to zero, so that:

and

where

is an n x kj matrix of information for individuals assigned to condition list j.

In what follows, it will be useful to have probability limits of the matrices
. Assume that:

,

, and

(A2)

Then:

(A3)

and:

(A4)

43

Finally, assume that there is an supplemental data set that contains
with the

data matrix denoted

observations on all variables,

. Assume that:

The starting point of the bias correction is the OLS estimator of $ using Z in place of C, i.e.
. The bias-corrected estimate of shown in equation (7) is:
(A5)
The estimate of

is obtained from the censored data as

. Note that, as in (A4), the lower

right portion of this matrix is block diagonal, with estimates of the matrices

for j=1..M along the

diagonal. Note that the elements of these matrices are equal to:

where

is the fraction of individuals assigned to condition list j who have both the ith and kth

condition within that list. When i is equal to k, this is simply equal to the prevalence of the
condition.
The matrix

is estimated using the censored and supplemental samples. Specifically, cross-

products that are based on within-condition-list terms are taken from the censored sample, and are
identical to the corresponding blocks in the estimate of
. The off-block-diagonal terms
that represent cross-products that cross condition lists are estimated as follows:
(A6)

where
and

and

equal the fraction of the censored sample that has condition i and k, respectively,

is the correlation between condition i and k that is estimated from the supplemental sample.

An alternative method of obtaining

would have been to compute the fraction of the

supplemental sample that has both condition i and k. However, for some pairs of rare conditions, we
found that the fraction of the supplemental sample that had both condition i and condition k
exceeded the fraction of the censored sample that had either i or k. The use of (A6), which draws
only the correlation coefficient between i and j from the supplemental sample, prevents this from
occurring.

44

The proof that

is consistent is straightforward. Substituting the formula for

into (A5), we get:

the first term of which has a probability limit of $ and the second term of which has a probability
limit of 0.
The estimate of the variance-covariance matrix for

is:
(A7)

where is the variance of ,. A consistent estimate of ,denoted , is obtained by starting with
the estimate of the error variance using the error-ridden estimate . Specifically, let:

Then:

and:
(A8)
The estimate is obtained by subtracting the first term on the right-hand-side of (A8) from
Substituting in for
, this yields:

where

is constructed from

. Specifically, where

rows divided by M (compare A2 and A3, above).

45

equals

.

with all elements of the first

