                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      MINIMUM WAGE EFFECTS IN THE LONGER RUN

                                             David Neumark
                                             Olena Nizalova

                                          Working Paper 10656
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10656


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2004




We are grateful to seminar participants at the University of Arizona, Columbia University, the University of
Oregon, Michigan State University, and the Public Policy Institute of California, and to Judith Hellerstein,
Jeff Perloff, and Ken Troske for helpful comments. Any opinions expressed in this paper are those of the
authors alone and do not necessarily reflect any position of the Public Policy Institute of California. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2004 by David Neumark and Olena Nizalova. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Minimum Wage Effects in the Longer Run
David Neumark and Olena Nizalova
NBER Working Paper No. 10656
August 2004, Revised March 2006
JEL No. J2, J3
                                     ABSTRACT

Exposure to minimum wages at young ages may lead to longer-run effects. Among the possible
adverse longer-run effects are decreased labor market experience and accumulation of tenure, lower
current labor supply because of lower wages, and diminished training and skill acquisition.
Beneficial longer-run effects could arise if minimum wages increase skill acquisition, or if short-
term wage increases are long-lasting.

We estimate the longer-run effects of minimum wages by using information on the minimum wage

history that workers have faced since potentially entering the labor market. The evidence indicates

that even as individuals reach their late 20's, they work less and earn less the longer they were

exposed to a higher minimum wage, especially as a teenager. The adverse longer-run effects of

facing high minimum wages as a teenager are stronger for blacks. From a policy perspective, these

longer-run effects of minimum wages are likely more significant than the contemporaneous effects

of minimum wages on youths that are the focus of most research and policy debate.

David Neumark
Public Policy Institute of California
500 Washington Street, Suite 800
San Francisco, CA 94111
and NBER
neumark@ppic.org

Olena Nizalova
Michigan State University
nizalova@msu.edu
I. Introduction

           Exposure to a high minimum wage during the years in which teens and young adults enter the

labor market may generate adverse effects that persist in the longer run. If so, then an exclusive focus on

contemporaneous, short-run effects of minimum wages on youths—which is a reasonable characterization

of most research and policy debate on minimum wages—may miss significant components of the

potential effects of minimum wages.

           How might the longer-run effects of minimum wages arise? Most directly, perhaps, the shorter-

run effects of minimum wages on youths that have been studied so extensively can have lasting impacts

that extend into adulthood. Existing research suggests that minimum wages may lower training among

young workers, reduce the accumulation of labor market skills and experience by deterring their

employment, and discourage school enrollment, although these conclusions are not without controversy.1

This paper does not revisit these controversies, although it reports new evidence on some of them. But if,

in fact, minimum wages reduce training, employment, and schooling of young individuals, then we

should expect more lasting adverse effects on both wages, employment, and other labor market outcomes.

Furthermore, these longer-run effects could be exacerbated by factors sometimes interpreted as the

"scarring" effects of non-employment at young ages (e.g., Ellwood, 1982), which amplify the

consequences of reduced early labor market experience. On the other hand, longer-run effects that

counter some of the potential adverse short-run effects are also possible. Minimum wages could lead to

increased skill acquisition if a higher wage floor raises the productivity level necessary for a worker to be

employable.2 And the initial wage increases stemming from minimum wages could have persistent

effects.

1
  The employment effects literature is well known and extensive. See Burkhauser, et al. (2000) for a recent study in
the lengthy literature presenting evidence of disemployment effects for young individuals, but Card and Krueger
(1995) for the contrary view. For evidence on the effects of minimum wages on training see Hashimoto (1982),
Acemoglu and Pischke (2003), Grossberg and Sicilian (1999), Fairris and Pedace (2003), and Neumark and
Wascher (2001). For evidence that minimum wages reduce school enrollment, see Chaplin, et al. (2003) and
Neumark and Wascher (2003); earlier, more ambiguous evidence is presented in Ehrenberg and Marcus (1982),
Mattila (1978), and Ragan (1977).
2
  See, for example, Cunningham's (1981) discussion of the possible positive effects of minimum wages on the
decision of teenagers to stay in school or acquire more schooling. Although increased schooling is possible,


                                                         1
           In this paper we explore the longer-run effects of minimum wages. Of course, research on the

effects of minimum wages on training and schooling implicitly addresses the longer-run effects of

minimum wages, because, for example, teens or young adults who leave school will on average have

lower schooling as adults. What is different and unique in this paper is the direct estimation of these

longer-run effects.3 Instead of simply asking how outcomes such as employment, wages, etc., among 16-

19 year-olds (or 20-24 year-olds) are affected by contemporaneous minimum wages, we estimate the

effects of exposure to higher minimum wages at these younger ages—when minimum wages were most

binding—on outcomes for somewhat older individuals (25-29 year-olds).4

II. Data

           Our data set comes from the Current Population Survey (CPS) Outgoing Rotation Group (ORG)

files for the years 1979-2001. We first extract data on individuals aged 16-29. We then aggregate these

data to the state-year-age cell, giving us measures of averages in these cells (using CPS earnings

weights),5 and we append to these cells information on state and federal minimum wages.

           To be able to study the longer-run effects of exposure to minimum wages, it is necessary to

characterize the minimum wage "history" that each individual has faced. Because state-level variation in

minimum wages is important in obtaining better statistical experiments, this history is characterized in

terms of the higher of the state or federal minimum. The strategy used is to construct the history of

minimum wages in the state in which the individual currently resides. This is a potential limitation,

because with some migration from state to state the minimum wage history based on the current state of

predictions are ambiguous for a number of reasons, including that raising the wage floor for unskilled workers could
reduce the return to education.
3
  The only other paper of which we are aware that attempts to estimate longer-run effects of minimum wages is a
study by Behrman, et al. (1983), who use Social Security earnings records to study the effects of time-series
variation in the minimum wage on various measures of the earnings distribution. They incorporate a distributed lag
of minimum wage effects, but do not distinguish, as we do here, effects of minimum wages at young ages when
minimum wages were most likely to be binding—and their sample includes individuals up to 65 years old. Baker, et
al. (1999) study the effects of minimum wages on teenagers, but focus on the employment effects that arise with
relatively long lags. Although their work does not speak to the effects on adults of minimum wages experienced as
teens, it does emphasize that minimum wage effects may arise over a longer run than is typically assumed in studies
of the effects of minimum wages on employment and other outcomes.
4
  We follow much of the minimum wage literature and define "youth" as ages 16-24.
5
  In our regressions, we always weight by the number of observations used to construct these cell averages,
multiplied by the average CPS earnings weight for the cell to account for over- or under-sampling of states.


                                                         2
residence will measure the true minimum wage history with error.6 Longitudinal data that followed

individuals as they moved from state to state would better capture their minimum wage history, but would

perhaps be more plagued by the endogeneity of migration.7,8

         The specifications estimated below use three different measures of the minimum wage. The first

is simply the current "effective" minimum wage in the state, defined as the log of the higher of the state

minimum wage and the federal minimum wage. This parallels the typical study of contemporaneous,

short-run effects of minimum wages in the existing literature. In the models we estimate we include fixed

year and state effects, so the time-series variation induced by the federal minimum is swept out, and

identification comes from variation in state minimum wages that are set above the federal level. The

second measure captures not just the current effective minimum wage, but also the history of the

minimum wage to which an individual has been exposed, by adding up and averaging the log of the

effective minimum wage to which an individual in any cell defined by state, year, and age has been

exposed in each year, from age 16 to the present age. Because we also condition on single-year age

dummy variables, identification again comes from variation in state minimum wages set above the federal

minimum. Finally, in what we regard as the most informative specifications, we distinguish between

exposure at younger ages when minimum wages should have been more binding and exposure at older
6
  According to the Census Historical Migration Database, in each year over the period 1979-2001, 15-17 percent of
the population changed place of residence. Of this total migration, 95-97 percent is migration within the United
States. On average, 80 percent of domestic migrants change their residence within the same state, and the rest (20
percent) migrate to a different state. Thus, approximately 2.7-3.0 percent of the population moves to a different
state each year. (See http://www.census.gov/population/socdemo/migration/tab-a-1.txt.) Later, we report results
from the 1990 PUMS indicating that about 13 percent of 20-24 year-olds and 16 percent of 25-29 year-olds moved
between states in the previous five years.
7
  Yet another possibility would be to instrument for the measured minimum wage history in the state of residence
with the history in the state of birth (pegged to the same birth cohort), thus isolating the exogenous variation in the
minimum wage history faced by individuals. In the CPS, however, data on state of birth are not available.
Furthermore, while we have little doubt that this instrument would explain a great deal of variation in the minimum
wage history based on state of residence—given relatively low inter-state migration—its exclusion from the
equations we estimate would be questionable, as unmeasured factors associated with the state of birth might affect
the labor market outcomes we study through channels other than the minimum wage history.
8
  This discussion suggests that the NLSY79 might be of some use for this research, by providing longitudinal
information including state of residence for a cohort of teenagers as they age into their 30's. However, most of the
cross-state variation in minimum wages on which our identification relies begins in 1987 (as reported below in
Table 2). Given that the NLSY79 cohort was aged 14-22 in 1979, none are teenagers as of 1987. There is also the
NLSY79 Young Adult file, based on the offspring of the mothers in the NLSY79. This began in the mid-1990s with
teenagers, and at this point there are very few observations on individuals in their 20's (Center for Human Resource
Research, 2002, Chapter 3).


                                                          3
ages. Specifically, we compute the average effective log minimum wage to which an individual in a

state-year-age cell was exposed in each of three periods: ages 16-19, ages 20-24, and ages 25-29.9

        The CPS ORG files start in 1979, but we use information on minimum wages going back to 1973.

To avoid the potential confounding influences of the Vietnam War on youth labor markets we do not go

back earlier than 1973, when the draft and U.S. involvement in the war ended. As a consequence, the

only birth cohorts we can consider for 1979 are the cohorts that were age 16 or younger in 1973, or 22 or

younger in 1979. Table 1 arrays the ages and years that are covered by our analysis. The first cohort—

those aged 16 in 1973—are 22 in 1979, 23 in 1980, etc. The second cohort—those aged 16 in 1974—can

be picked up at an age one year younger. And the seventh cohort—those aged 16 in 1979—can be

covered for the full set of years. 10 Then, toward the end of the sample period, we lose observations on

later cohorts at older ages. For example, the 29th cohort is 16 in 2001, and that is the last year of data for

which they are covered. Of course, we do not have the actual longitudinal observations on members of

these cohorts as they age. But we can infer the effects of minimum wages on these cohorts at different

ages because the CPS repeatedly draws random samples from these cohorts as they age.11

        Table 2 reports federal minimum wages for the sample period, and all state minimum wages that

exceeded the federal minimum wage. The minimum is defined as of May of the calendar year; we chose

this date because the greatest number of state minimum wage increases occurred in April (followed by

January). Table 2 displays considerable variability in the level of state minimum wages, with some states




9
  We compute this only up to the current age. For example, for a 17 year-old we would use the minimum wage
faced at ages 16 and 17.
10
   We explored the sensitivity of the results to using information on minimum wages back to 1966 and hence
covering all cohorts back to age 16. The results were very similar.
11
   In principle we could look at individuals past age 29. However, for older individuals the minimum wage history
that would be used to identify the effects of exposure to minimum wages at young ages comes from the early part of
the sample period, when there was not much state variation in minimum wages. For example, looking at Table 1,
the latest birth cohort of 34 year-olds is cohort 11, which left its teens by 1987, which is when most of the state
variation in minimum wages began. In addition, as Table 1 illustrates, even with 22 years of data we would get
relatively few complete sets of observations on cohorts for these older individuals all the way back to age 16.


                                                         4
in some years having a minimum only a shade higher than the federal minimum,12 and other states and

years with minimums exceeding the federal minimum by well over a dollar.

        Table 3 provides some examples as to how this information is used to construct the average

effective minimum wage to which an individual in a particular state-year-age cell was exposed. Although

we use logs of minimum wages in our empirical analysis, Table 3 presents calculations for levels, to make

the links to Table 2 more clear. The example covers Oregon for 1989, 1990, and 1991; a higher minimum

wage was first enacted in 1990. We first show some representative computations for the minimum wage

exposure measure for all ages (i.e., not distinguishing the age at which the exposure occurred). In 1989,

the federal minimum wage was binding, and had been—at $3.35—since 1981 (see Table 2). So for 16-24

year-olds the minimum wage measure is $3.35.13 For 25 year-olds, the federal minimum was $3.35 for

nine of the 10 years they were in the labor market (beginning at age 17), and $3.10 at age 16 (in 1980), so

that average is shown. And for 29 year-olds, the average is computed over the 14 years beginning at age

16, and includes the earlier federal minimum wage from 1976-1979. In 1990 the higher state minimum

wage of $4.25 takes effect, and each age group is exposed to this higher minimum for one year. For 16

year-olds the average effective state minimum wage is simply $4.25, for 17 year-olds the average of

$4.25 and the federal minimum wage of $3.35 in the previous year, etc. Clearly this case will generate

variation relative to a 16 year-old in a state in which the lower federal minimum wage prevails in 1990.

The computation for 1991 follows the same logic. The last row provides examples of computing the

minimum wage variable that distinguishes exposure by the age at which it occurred. For 20 year-olds in

1991, for example, the average effective minimum wage is the average computed over the federal

minimum wage from 1987-1989 and the higher state minimum wage for 1990.

        Table 4 reports descriptive statistics for the sample, for the three age groups studied. The number

of observations for the whole sample for each age group comes from taking the number of times any


12
   For example, the state minimum wage in Connecticut was only one or two cents above the federal minimum from
1974 through 1987 as a result of legislation mandating a state minimum 0.5 percent above the federal level.
13
   For clarity, examples in table are done for nominal minimum wages. In the empirical analysis, all wage and
earnings measures are converted into 2001 dollars.


                                                      5
single-year age appears in Table 1, multiplied by 51 (for the 50 states and Washington, D.C.). For

example, between 1979 and 2001 ages 16 through 19 appear 92 times, which multiplied by 51 yields

4,692.

         The four outcome variables we study are wages, employment, hours, and earnings. In studying

weekly hours of work and weekly earnings, we do not condition on employment, so that we estimate the

overall effects of minimum wages on hours and earnings. It is important to look at total hours and not

just employment because employment could fall but hours conditional on employment rise, with

ambiguous net effects on the total amount of labor hired.14 Similarly, looking at earnings without

conditioning on employment gives us a summary measure of the overall effects of minimum wages on

workers' earnings.

         The construction of wages, hours, and weekly earnings is sometimes complicated because of

apparently bad data, missing data for those who report that they are working, etc. As a consequence,

there are sometimes fewer valid observations on individuals for these outcomes.15 However, in the full

sample it turns out that in each single-year age group in each state and year there are always individuals

with valid measurements on each outcome, so that the sample size for the data collapsed to state-year-age

cells is always the same. But in analyses disaggregated by race (discussed later) this is not always the

case.

         To provide some information on how the minimum wage variables vary, the descriptive statistics

are broken down by whether or not the current state minimum wage exceeds the federal minimum. Not

surprisingly, the average effective log state minimum wage since age 16 is higher in the group of

observations in which the current state minimum exceeds the federal. For example, for teenagers the

14
   Past research has sometimes looked at outcomes such as hours conditional on employment, part-time status, etc.,
to explore whether employers respond to minimum wages by reducing employment but increasing hours, hence
economizing on fixed costs of employment. Our interest in this paper, though, is in the overall benefits or costs to
workers of minimum wages, so the unconditional estimates are the most pertinent. Some evidence on the effects of
minimum wages on hours of work is reported in Gramlich (1976), Brown, et al. (1983), Cunningham (1981), and
Michl (2000).
15
   In general, those who reported working last week or with a job but not working last week are considered as
employed. Wages are treated as invalid if they are below one half of the federal minimum or above $100 (in 2001
dollars).


                                                         6
average value for this group is 1.75 (corresponding to a minimum wage in 2001 dollars of $5.72),

compared with 1.68 (corresponding to a minimum wage of $5.42) for the other observations. The

difference is a bit smaller for the average effective state minimum wage, because states currently bound

by the federal minimum sometimes had higher state minimums in the past.16

          Looking at the outcomes, for 16-19 year-olds employment is lower in the states with high

minimum wages, and wages are higher, consistent with minimum wages raising wages and lowering

employment contemporaneously. Hours are also lower, but weekly earnings are higher, suggesting that

the wage gains offset the employment and hours reductions. The employment difference is smaller for

the 20-24 year-old group, and for 25-29 year-olds employment is actually a shade higher in the states with

high minimum wages, consistent with minimum wages having a stronger contemporaneous

disemployment effect on younger individuals. Interestingly, though, the wage and earnings differences

increase with age. Given that states with higher minimum wages in any period are more likely to have

had high minimum wages in the past, this finding provides a hint that exposure to high minimum wages

when young may adversely affect wages and earnings of 25-29 year-olds. However, these are only

univariate comparisons that do not account for other factors controlled for in the regression estimates that

follow.

          The final row of the table shows the percentage at or below the minimum wage. Not surprisingly,

of course, this percentage is highest for teenagers, consistent with their lower wages, and falls sharply

with age. Notice, also, that for each age group the percentage at or below the minimum is lower in the

states with high minimum wages than in the other states, indicating that state minimum wages tend to be

implemented in higher wage states. This is why, as explained below, it is important to control for

persistent differences in the levels of wages (and other variables) across states. However, we verified that

for high minimum wage states, relative to other periods for the same states when the minimum wage was

non-existent (or lower), a higher minimum is associated with a higher percentage at or below the


16
  The difference varies slightly across the age groups because of small differences in the years represented in each
age group; see Table 1.


                                                          7
minimum (i.e., the within-state correlation is positive), which is the critical identifying information used

in the empirical analysis.

III. Empirical Methods

        We begin with simple specifications for the effects of the contemporaneous minimum wage on

wages, employment, hours, and earnings, using specifications paralleling existing ones in the literature, of

the form


(1)     Zijt =   + MWit + Si   S   + Yt   Y   + Aj   A   +   ijt   .


        In equation (1), 'i' indexes states, 'j' indexes single-year age groups, and 't' indexes years. Z is

alternatively: the log average wage of workers in the state-year-age cell; the percentage employed in the

cell; the average hours worked of all individuals in the cell; and the log average weekly earnings of all

individuals in the cell. MW is the log of the effective contemporaneous minimum wage (the higher of the

state or federal minimum). S, Y, and A are vectors of state, year, and single-year age dummy variables,

respectively. Controls are not included for productivity-related characteristics that are potentially

endogenous, such as schooling, because we do not want to control for variation in characteristics that may

be influenced by minimum wages; instead, we want to obtain reduced-form estimates that capture both

direct effects on wages (for example), as well as indirect effects via the accumulation of skills.

        The state dummy variables account for persistent state-level differences in the dependent

variables (such as higher-wage states). The year dummy variables sweep out common changes across all

states that could be driven by changes in aggregate economic conditions that are correlated with minimum

wage changes. With the year dummy variables included, no identifying information comes from variation

in the federal minimum wage. Instead, any effects of exposure to higher minimum wages are identified

from variation in state minimum wages above the federal minimum.17



17
  As noted earlier, most of the state-level variation in minimum wages begins in 1987. Earlier, state minimum
wages also acted, in some cases, to extend coverage to workers not covered by federal minimum wages. But given
that federal minimum wage coverage was nearly universal by 1979 (Brown, 1999)—or by 1985 if account is taken


                                                                       8
            Observations within state-year cells for different single-year age groups may be non-independent,

as, for example, state-level economic conditions affect age groups similarly. Furthermore, Bertrand, et al.

(2002) have underscored the potential for understated standard errors in panel data sets when errors are

positively serially correlated and the "treatment" (in this case the minimum wage) is positively serially

correlated. This is not likely to be as severe a problem in our application, as there is less persistent

variation in the minimum wage than in a dummy variable treatment that turns on and stays on for some

states. Nonetheless, to flexibly allow for serial correlation as well as possible non-independence across

age groups, we report standard errors that are robust to arbitrary correlation patterns among all

observations for each state—i.e., across age or time—as well as arbitrary heteroscedasticity across

states.18

            Equation (1) is estimated for three age groups: 16-19 year-olds; 20-24 year-olds; and 25-29 year-

olds. Minimum wage research has usually focused on the first group—teenagers—as those most likely to

be adversely affected by minimum wages, because teenagers have generally accumulated few skills and

therefore are strongly over-represented among minimum wage workers. This conjecture can also be

examined in the framework used here, when we estimate the effects of the current minimum wage. In

contrast, the older group is unlikely to be affected by current minimum wages, but is of greater interest in

looking at the effects of past exposure to high minimum wages, using the specifications explained next.

            The first approach to estimating the longer-run effects of minimum wages is to substitute for the

contemporaneous minimum wage variable in equation (1) a measure of the average effective log

minimum wage to which the individual was exposed, beginning at age 16,


(2)         Zijt =   + MWEXPijt + Si   S   + Yt   Y   + Aj   A   +       ijt   ,


of coverage of state and local government workers—our estimates should be interpreted as largely identifying the
effects of changes in minimum wage levels, rather than the effects of changes in coverage.
18
   Allowing correlation across time also accounts for the non-independence stemming from overlapping samples in
the CPS. We experimented with more restrictive versions, including clustering only on state and year—which
allows for arbitrary correlations across different age groups in the same state and year—and clustering on state and
age—which allows arbitrary correlations across time on the same age group in the same state, but not correlations
across different age groups. For the estimates reported in the tables, standard errors using these alternatives were
always smaller, and often substantially so.


                                                                     9
where MWEXP measures this minimum wage exposure.19 This equation, too, is estimated for the three

different age groups. In this specification identifies the effect of exposure to high minimum wages.20

The inclusion of year effects removes the influence of common movements in the exposure variable

generated by variation in the federal minimum.

         Finally, equation (2) is modified by dropping the restriction that exposure to a higher minimum

wage has equal effects on the dependent variables regardless of the age at which the exposure occurred.

In particular, equation (2) is augmented to include separate measures of exposure during each age range.

For example, for the 25-29 year-olds the specification is

                            1619                 2024                  2529
(3)      Zijt =   +   1MWEXP     ijt   +   2MWEXP     ijt   +    3MWEXP     ijt   + Si   S   + Yt   Y   + Aj   A   +   ijt   .


         The three variables MWEXP1619, MWEXP2024, and MWEXP2529 measure exposure to a higher

minimum during the specified age ranges. When this specification is estimated for 20-24 year-olds,

EXP2529 is of course dropped. For 16-19 year-olds we would also drop EXP2024, in which case this

specification would be equivalent to equation (2), reflecting the fact that the question of the effects of

exposure at earlier ages for the youngest age group is nonsensical; consequently this specification is not

estimated for 16-19 year-olds.

         The motivation for specification (3) is straightforward. Whatever the consequences of minimum

wages—reducing employment directly, lowering training, etc.—they are likely to be more severe when

the minimum wage is more binding. Suppose, for example, that a negative effect on wages of exposure to

a higher minimum wage stems from reduced labor market experience (which we cannot measure directly
19
   Note that because equation (2) includes state dummy variables and is estimated for separate age groups, it allows
for differences across states in the age profiles of the dependent variables. Thus, the findings we obtain cannot be
attributable to fixed differences in these age profiles between states that are correlated with the minimum wage
variable. Similarly, the inclusion of the year dummy variables allows for shifts in the age profiles of the dependent
variables over time.
20
   We also estimated specifications with a contemporaneous minimum wage variable and the exposure variable. The
conclusions were very similar but more complicated to present and interpret, in part because there are always two
cases for the same level of exposure—with and without a current high minimum—and in part because the
contemporaneous minimum wage variable, conditional on a given level of exposure, also captures information about
the time pattern of exposure to a higher minimum.


                                                            10
in the CPS). Any such reduction is likely to have been stronger if the exposure occurred when an

individual was younger, rather than older, because the disemployment effects of minimum wages are

likely to be strongest for the youngest and therefore least-skilled individuals (which turns out to be the

case based on estimates of equation (1)). Equation (3) therefore tests whether exposure to higher

minimum wages when an individual was young indeed generates stronger longer-run effects.

        Finally, we report estimates disaggregating the observations by race (looking at whites and

blacks). It has often been conjectured that the effects of minimum wages on minorities will be stronger

because their wage levels are lower—whether because of lower productivity or discrimination—and

hence a minimum wage is more binding, although the existing literature on minimum wage employment

effects (mainly older time-series studies) does little to establish stronger disemployment effects for

minorities (Brown, 1999).21 Here, though, we are asking a quite different question about minimum wages

and we are using more recent data and state-level variation in minimum wages, so the race difference

merits revisiting.

IV. Results

Contemporaneous Minimum Wage Effects

        Estimated effects of contemporaneous minimum wages, based on equation (1), are reported in

Table 5. The estimates in the first column are consistent with a positive and significant effect of

minimum wages on wages of teenagers. Given that the log minimum wage gap between states with and

without a higher minimum is 0.07, multiplying the estimated minimum wage coefficient by 0.07 yields

the effect of an "average" higher state minimum wage. The estimated coefficient of 0.2216 therefore

implies that imposing the average state minimum wage results in wages for teenagers that are higher by

about 1.6 percent (0.222 0.07). Of course for this double-log specification the estimated elasticity is the

coefficient estimate. Existing research has reported elasticities of wages near the minimum with respect




21
  Linneman (1982) uses a different approach, and finds similar contemporaneous effects of minimum wages on
earnings of blacks and whites.


                                                      11
to minimum wages and found higher values,22 but the 0.22 figure is an average across all teens—many of

whom earn above the minimum wage. No doubt reflecting in part the considerably lower share of 20-24

and 25-29 year-olds at the minimum, the estimated wage effects for these older age groups are smaller,

near zero, and statistically insignificant.

        Column (2) reports estimates for employment. There is evidence of a significant negative

employment effect for teenagers. With an estimated coefficient of −9.40, the implied elasticity is −0.20.23

This elasticity is within the range of existing estimates of the elasticity of teen employment with respect

to minimum wages. The estimates for the older groups are not statistically significant, and only for 20-24

year-olds is the estimate negative. Column (3) looks at hours worked. The hours effects parallel the

employment effects, with the estimates indicating a significant negative effect only for teenagers (and an

elasticity of −0.19).

        Finally, column (4) looks at weekly earnings. Here, for teenagers especially, there are anticipated

offsetting effects as higher wages compete with lower employment or hours. In fact this is borne out in

the estimates, which suggest that a higher contemporaneous minimum wage has little or no effect on

average earnings, either for teenagers or for the other age groups.

        The estimates in Table 5 point to contemporaneous effects of minimum wages only on

employment and hours of teenagers. This does not imply that there are not other adverse effects from

minimum wages experienced by those aged 20-24. For example, Neumark and Wascher (2001) report

stronger adverse effects of minimum wages on training of 20-24 year-olds than teenagers, and evidence

presented later in this paper suggests that facing higher minimum wages in the older age range reduces

completed schooling. These effects on training and schooling of those in their early 20's are not

surprising, as these are ages at which jobs are more likely to entail training in the first place (as shown in

Neumark and Wascher, 2001) and at which many individuals are still on the margin between staying in or

22
   Neumark, et al. (2004) find a contemporaneous wage elasticity for minimum wage workers of around 0.8, falling
to 0.4 or less for workers more than 10 percent above the minimum but still near the minimum.
23
   The estimate of −9.40, multiplied by the average log minimum wage gap of 0.07, coupled with an average
employment rate of 46.5 percent for teenagers, implies a 1.4 percent decline in employment, which dividing by the
approximately 7 percent higher minimum yields the −0.20 elasticity.


                                                       12
leaving school. Thus, despite the evidence in Table 4, longer-run adverse effects of minimum wages

could stem from exposure in the teens or the early 20's.

Cumulative Minimum Wage Exposure Estimates

         The estimates discussed thus far do not address the issue of the effects of cumulative exposure to

a higher minimum, and hence the longer-run effects of the minimum wage. This issue is first taken up in

Table 6, which reports estimates of equation (2) using the cumulative minimum wage exposure measure.

To interpret the estimates, we calculate their implications for the effects of exposure since age 16 to a

minimum wage that is on average higher by 0.06 log points. This is the difference between states with

and without higher contemporaneous minimum wages faced by teens and young adults—as shown in the

first row of estimates in Table 4—and it is exposure at these ages on which we focus most of our

attention. Based on the estimates in Table 6, for 16-19 and 20-24 year-olds the implied effect of this

exposure to a higher minimum wage is a 1.1-1.2 percent higher contemporaneous wage. But for 25-29

year-olds the estimated longer-run effect of exposure to a higher minimum is negative and larger,

potentially reflecting longer-run cumulative effects of exposure to a higher minimum wage in the past; we

return to this question below.

         Turning to the employment and hours results, in columns (2) and (3), the estimated exposure

effects are negative and statistically significant for all three age groups for both employment and hours (in

some cases at the ten-percent level). For 20-24 year-olds, for example, the cumulative effect of exposure

to a higher minimum wage since age 16 is to reduce hours by 0.36, or 1.4 percent.

         Finally, column (4) reports the earnings effects. For teenagers there is a negative and

insignificant effect. For 20-24 year-olds the estimated effect is small and insignificant. And for 25-29

year-olds the effect is negative, quite large, and statistically significant. For this oldest group, the

estimates imply that an individual exposed to same average current difference in minimum wages we

have used throughout earns 3.6 percent less because of exposure to a higher minimum wage.24 Those


24
  Table 2 indicates that Alaska, Connecticut, and the District of Columbia have had higher state minimum wages
for the entire sample period, and for considerably longer than any other state. This raises the possibility that the


                                                          13
older individuals exposed to a higher minimum wage also have lower employment and hours. These

latter estimates suggest that by the time they reach the age when almost everyone has left school,

detrimental effects of longer-term exposure to a high minimum wage become evident.

Exposure at Different Ages

         Given that minimum wages are more binding at younger ages, their contemporaneous effects

should be greatest when individuals are young, and therefore their longer-run effects should be strongest

for exposure at young ages. Estimates of equation (3), examining this issue, are reported in Table 7. To

summarize briefly, although there is not much evidence of effects of past exposure to higher minimum

wages on 20-24 year-olds, for 25-29 year-olds the evidence points quite clearly to adverse effects of

exposure to higher minimum wages at younger ages. It makes sense that it is only for the older group that

these effects become apparent, as 20-24 year-olds are often still enrolled in school (which may itself be

influenced by the minimum wage), and if working are more likely to be observed well before the

overtaking age. Both of these influences imply that for this younger group it will be more difficult to

infer the effects of minimum wages. For example, if minimum wages deter training, then at very young

ages during which workers receiving training are paid lower wages, adverse effects of minimum wages on

wages would be obscured. And if minimum wages cause young adults to leave school earlier and to seek

employment, then at ages when many are still in school an adverse employment effect of minimum wages

would be masked. Consequently, we view the estimates for 25-29 year-olds as most informative.

         Looking first at wages, the estimates for exposure at younger ages (16-19 and 20-24) are negative

and statistically significant in both cases. The estimates imply, for example, that exposure to the average

higher minimum wage during ages 16-19 reduces "adult" wages by about 1.3 percent (0.06 0.215). The

effects for exposure of 20-24 year-olds is a shade weaker. This evidence points to adverse longer-run

effects on wages of exposure to high minimum wages during one's early years in the labor market. The



effects of longer-run exposure to a higher minimum wage are disproportionately identified from these three states,
which have to generate all of the variation at the high end of the distribution of years of exposure. However,
dropping observations from the two states and the District of Columbia had little impact on the estimates, if anything
strengthening the conclusions somewhat.


                                                         14
evidence on employment and hours similarly points to adverse longer-run effects of exposure to a high

minimum wage when young, with the estimates higher in absolute terms for exposure at ages 20-24. For

25-29 year-olds, exposure to the average higher minimum wage during ages 20-24 reduces hours by about

0.4 hour, or 1.3 percent.

         The final column of Table 7 reports results for earnings. Here, again, there is strong evidence of

negative longer-run effects of exposure to minimum wages as a teenager or young adult, as the estimated

longer-run effects for exposure both as a teenager and a young adult are negative and statistically

significant for 25-29 year-olds. For example, exposure to the average higher minimum wage, as a

teenager, is estimated to reduce weekly earnings as an adult by 1.8 percent, and similar exposure as a 20-

24 year-old to reduce weekly earnings by 2.3 percent. All told, the general pattern in these estimates is

that exposure to higher minimum wages at younger ages has adverse longer-run effects on labor market

outcomes. Later, we consider more carefully how these effects might arise.

Effects of Exposure by Race

         Next, we turn to results estimated separately for whites and blacks.25 As a preliminary, Table 8

reports descriptive statistics for whites and blacks. These reveal lower average wages for blacks,

especially at the older ages, as well as lower employment, hours, and earnings for blacks. Interestingly,

for teenagers the share of blacks at or below the minimum is lower than for whites. As indicated by the

descriptive statistics at the top of the table for the state minimum wage gap, this is not because blacks and

whites are exposed to very different minimum wages. Rather, the answer lies in the much lower

employment rates for blacks, suggesting that far fewer blacks whose wages would be bound by the

minimum remain in the workforce. Thus, the lower employment rate coupled with the lower wages of

those blacks who do work is consistent with minimum wages being more binding for blacks because of

their lower potential wages, despite the lower share black at the minimum; the regression results

described below confirm this.


25
  In all of our analyses using the CPS that do not distinguish by race, we include all observations. Here we include
only whites and blacks.


                                                         15
        Panel A of Table 9 reports the contemporaneous specification (equation (1)) for teenagers, simply

to shed some light on race differences in minimum wage effects in these data using a specification

paralleling much of the existing literature. The estimates are consistent with minimum wages being more

binding for black teenagers, with a larger positive point estimate on wages of blacks, and larger negative

point estimates on employment and hours of blacks, although the differences are not statistically

significant. Stronger contemporaneous effects for black teenagers make it more likely that exposure to a

higher minimum wage in the early years in the labor market will have more adverse longer-run effects for

blacks, although these stronger adverse longer-run effects could arise regardless of differences in

contemporaneous effects for teenagers, as discussed earlier.

        The next specifications, in Panel B of Table 9, explore whether blacks are more adversely

affected in the longer run by exposure to minimum wages, especially during the earliest years in the labor

market. The evidence points quite clearly to more adverse longer-run effects of minimum wages for

blacks. Focusing again on the estimates for 25-29 year-olds, we find that, for blacks, exposure to a higher

minimum wage during ages 16-19 or 20-24 is associated with significant negative reductions in wages,

employment, hours, and earnings. The estimates for whites are often about one-quarter to one-third as

large, although still generally statistically significant.

        A natural question is why there are such sharp differences between blacks and whites in the

longer-run effects of exposure to a high minimum at young ages. The explanation presented thus far is

simply that because minimum wages are more binding for blacks, their consequences should be more

severe.26 However, the racial differences in the longer-run effects, in Panel B, seem much more

pronounced than the racial differences in the contemporaneous effects in Panel A, although the estimates

for 20-24 year-olds in Panel B suggest that at these ages the contemporaneous adverse effects of

minimum wages are more severe for blacks. A potential additional factor that may amplify the race

differences is that minimum wages and the ensuing disemployment effects may lead to increased criminal

26
  Given stronger disemployment effects of minimum wages for blacks, the longer-run impact of minimum wages
would be amplified if returns to experience were higher for blacks than for whites. However, the evidence suggests
that the opposite is probably the case (e.g., Oettinger, 1996).


                                                        16
activity.27 Previous researchers have considered whether a higher minimum wage increases or reduces

crime—especially property crimes or other crimes that provide illicit income—by teenagers and young

adults. Theoretical predictions are ambiguous, as higher wages paid to some may deter crime, while

reduced employment probabilities may increase it. Empirical evidence is also ambiguous.28 But if

minimum wages do lead to increased criminal activity among youths, and even more so if the criminal

justice system generates harsher consequences of criminal behavior for blacks, then this may help to

explain the sharper effects for blacks of exposure to high minimum wages as teenagers and young adults,

as incarceration can result in the destruction of human capital and criminal records can lead to subsequent

labor market difficulties (e.g., Kling, et al., 2001). At this point, though, this explanation of the race

differences in longer-run effects of minimum wages is speculative.

         The results by race are inherently interesting given the focus on race differences in the effects of

minimum wages in the earlier contemporaneous effects literature, and given worse labor market outcomes

for blacks. But the race differences are also of interest for a more general reason. Specifically, by

identifying two groups that should be differentially affected by longer-run exposure to high minimum

wages, and finding evidence of stronger effects on the group for whom this would be expected (in this

case, blacks), the race results provide additional evidence that the longer-run effects of minimum wages

identified by our approach are causal. Essentially, the race differences provide a third level of

differencing, relative to the difference-in-differences identification strategy that relies solely on the

variation in exposure across time and states.




27
  See Grogger (1998) for a discussion of research on race differences in participation in crime.
28
  Research on the economics of crime that tries to isolate the effect of exogenous variation in wages concludes that
higher wages deter crime (e.g., Grogger, 1998). Research on the effects of the minimum wage, per se, is mixed.
Time-series evidence in Hashimoto (1987) indicates that minimum wages increase property crimes but not violent
crimes, while Chressanthis and Grimes (1990) suggest that the evidence is quite fragile. The specifications used by
Chressanthis and Grimes are perhaps more suspect. For example, they include the school enrollment rate as a
control variable despite the fact that it is an endogenous outcome when we are thinking about youth time allocation
decisions in response to minimum wages. Nonetheless, the point remains that the conclusions are quite sensitive to
model specification (see also Kallem, 2004).


                                                         17
Exposure to Differing Economic Conditions

         Our estimates thus far have focused on the effects of a history of exposure to high minimum

wages on wages, earnings, and work. However, the only history that we have included in our equations

estimated thus far is the minimum wage history. The history of economic conditions to which one was

exposed as a youth may also affect subsequent labor market outcomes,29 and if this history is correlated

with the minimum wages to which one was exposed when younger, then the preceding estimates may be

biased. We therefore augment the specifications from Table 7, for 25-29 year-olds, with controls for

exposure to unemployment rates.

         There is a potential endogeneity problem because the dependent variables may be determined

jointly with at least the more recent unemployment rates. But these unemployment rates are calculated

for all ages to pick up general economic conditions, and therefore should not be much influenced by

changes in employment, hours, etc., for a narrow age group. Moreover, we omitted the contemporaneous

unemployment rate to avoid this problem. Nonetheless, if the higher minimum wage in earlier years

contributed to the higher unemployment rate at the same time, then this specification may over-control for

the minimum wage and hence understate its effect.

         The estimates in Table 10 indicate that the history of unemployment rates to which individuals

were exposed does in fact impact contemporaneous outcomes, with numerous cases (six out of eight)

where higher past unemployment rates have negative effects on current wages, employment, hours, and

earnings.30 Moreover, the estimated minimum wage effects moderate as a result of the inclusion of the

unemployment history. In particular, the wage and earnings effects of exposure to a higher minimum

wage as a teenager fall by a third or more, while remaining significant (at the ten-percent level or better).

The effects of exposure to a higher minimum wage at ages 20-24 do not fall nearly as much, declining by

about one-quarter to one-third, with all of the estimates remaining statistically significant. We read the


29
   Mroz and Savage (2003) study the longer-term effects of earlier spells of unemployment. See also Beaudry and
DiNardo (1991).
30
   Note that the sample is a bit smaller here because prior to 1979 smaller states were not separately identified in the
CPS and therefore unemployment rates by state are not always available for the earlier cohorts at young ages.


                                                           18
results as indicating that the evidence of adverse longer-run effects of exposure to a higher minimum

wage in the early 20's is quite strong and robust, while that for exposure as a teen is a bit weaker. Finally,

these findings also suggest that the longer-run adverse effects of minimum wages may be more

attributable to the lasting impact of effects of minimum wages on training and schooling than on

employment or hours, since—as shown in Table 5—there is little evidence of the latter effects for 20-24

year-olds.

        Another relevant set of influences on young individuals' labor market experiences is changes in

welfare and taxes. For example, as documented in Meyer and Rosenbaum (2001), the 1990s—and

especially the late 1990s after welfare reform—witnessed sharp changes in welfare and tax policy that

strongly affected work incentives among single mothers. It is unlikely that these drive our results. For

25-29 year-olds, in particular, very little identifying information comes from the late 1990s, as the sample

ends in 2001 and we are estimating the effects of minimum wages many years earlier.31

The Minimum Wage "History" and Migration

        Next, we return to the potential mismeasurement of the minimum wage history faced by workers,

given that this history is based on state of residence at the time they are observed. The implication of

such measurement error is that as we look further back in time from the CPS observation on each

individual, the minimum wage history is likely to be more error-ridden, and the estimated effects of

exposure more biased toward zero. Thus, the evidence of negative effects of past exposure to higher

minimum wages seems unlikely to be attributable to this measurement error.

        Another possible source of bias pertaining to the minimum wage history is the endogenous choice

of the current state of residence. Insofar as this choice is related to minimum wages, we would expect

that individuals move so as to offset adverse effects of minimum wages or to take advantage of beneficial


31
  We also computed estimates separately for males and females. If the minimum wage effects we have found thus
far represent effects of omitted changes in these types of policies, we might expect quite different results for men
and women, with the effects more apparent for women. As it turns out, though, the evidence of longer run effects of
minimum wages is relatively similar for males and females, and if anything somewhat stronger for males. While
indirect, this is suggestive evidence that the minimum wage effects we detect do not primarily reflect these other
changes in work incentives.


                                                        19
effects; that is, migration should arbitrage away some of the costs or benefits of higher minimum wages.

Thus, for example, less-skilled teenagers or young adults in states with high minimum wages might be

more likely to move to lower minimum wage states to try to offset whatever adverse effects on skill

formation, etc., would be generated by exposure to a high minimum wage. A migration pattern like this

would tend to understate negative effects of exposure to a higher minimum wage, given how we measure

this exposure; another way to think about this is simply that endogenous migration generates a positive

correlation between skill and minimum wages. Again, then, this source of bias seems unlikely to account

for our findings.32

        To address this issue more directly, we turned to data from the 1990 and 2000 Census of

Population PUMS files, which include information on some measures related to skill or wages, age, and

mobility between states. We looked at those aged 20-24 and 25-29 in 1990 or 2000, who were therefore

teenagers or young adults five years earlier (age ranges for which the earlier estimates indicated adverse

effects from exposure to high minimum wages), and identified those who had changed states of residence

since five years ago; the share of such movers is about 13 percent for 20-24 year-olds and 16 percent for

25-29 year-olds.33 We then matched these records to the effective minimum wage by state and year, and

estimated a regression model for the change in the minimum wage associated with inter-state migration as

a function of race, sex, ethnicity, and an indicator for education less than a high school degree. This tells

us whether, among those who move between states, those with less skills or lower wages (whether




32
   Another type of migration that may be relevant is illegal immigration into a state. This may be somewhat more
likely to occur when minimum wages are high, because the high minimum makes such employees—for whom
minimum wage laws may be more likely to be violated—more attractive to employers. If so, then the increased
supply of unskilled workers in response to a high minimum wage may lead to worse labor market outcomes for legal
workers, who may be more likely to be surveyed. However, this does not undermine the results reported thus far. It
simply points to one of the responses to a higher minimum wage that may exacerbate the contemporaneous, and
hence also the longer-run, effects of the minimum wage. Illegal immigrants are simply another input toward which
employers may substitute in response to a higher minimum wage.
33
   In-state moves are also identified, although these are not relevant to our inquiry. We excluded those who lived
abroad five years earlier. The non-movers are also potentially of interest, since that in itself may be viewed as a
migration decision. However, we suspect that for many individuals staying in the same state is largely exogenous,
and therefore want to avoid the relationship between wage- or skill-related measures and changes in the minimum
wage that arise simply because of changes in the minimum wage in the state in which one resides.


                                                        20
because of skill or discrimination) exhibit a tendency to move to states with higher or lower minimum

wages.

         The estimates are reported in Table 11. With respect to education, sex (in the 1990 data), and

race (in the 2000 data), characteristics associated with lower wages and skills are also associated with

moves to states with lower minimum wage gaps. For these three cases, then, the evidence is consistent

with the conjecture that lower-wage or lower-skill workers, when they move, migrate to states with lower

rather than higher minimum wages; such a migration pattern would if anything bias our earlier estimates

against finding adverse effects of exposure to a high minimum wage as a teenager. Some of the result go

the other way, however, in particular for Hispanics in both years, and for race in the 1990 data.34 On

balance, there is no reason to infer from these estimates that endogenous migration leads to overly strong

adverse impacts of exposure to high minimum wages at young ages; across the different skill- or wage-

related measures, the positive and negative effects on changes in the minimum wage gap associated with

migration are roughly offsetting.

Accounting for the Longer-Run Effects of Minimum Wages

         The key evidence points to longer-run negative effects on earnings of exposure to higher

minimum wages at earlier ages when minimum wages were more likely to have been binding. It is

instructive to think about the magnitudes of the estimated earnings effects reported in Tables 7 and 10 to

try to understand what might underlie the adverse longer-run effects of minimum wages that we find.

Given the stronger results for exposure in the early 20's, we focus on the effects of exposure at these ages

on 25-29 year-olds. We use the same type of calculation we have been using throughout. More

specifically, in this section we consider the effects of exposure of 20-24 year-olds to an average minimum

wage higher by 0.06 log points. Averaging the earnings estimates in Tables 7 and 10, the resulting

coefficient (0.336) implies that exposure to this higher minimum wage through the 20-24 period reduces

average earnings of 25-29 year-olds by 2.0 percent. This seems like a large effect, and it is therefore


34
 Of course the underlying story for Hispanics is potentially more complex because of the possible continuation of
migration patterns beginning with migration into the United States.


                                                        21
important to ask how much of it can be potentially explained by the different types of minimum wage

effects suggested by the estimates reported in this paper or elsewhere in the existing literature; these are

limited to effects of minimum wages on current labor supply, experience, training, and schooling.35

        The most direct effect would arise through lower current (i.e., adult) employment and hours

stemming from exposure to a higher minimum wage earlier, of which there is evidence in columns (2)

and (3) of Tables 7 and 10. For example, these effects may arise because the lower wage reduces labor

supply. Using the average of the unconditional hours estimates in the two tables (yielding −5.734), which

account for both employment and hours variation for the employed, the estimated effect on hours implies

a 1.09 percent reduction in unconditional hours and hence a similar reduction in earnings.36 Thus, the

contemporaneous labor supply effect accounts for just over half of the earnings decline. Of course the

source of the contemporaneous employment and hours decline cannot be determined by these data. It

may in part reflect lower labor supply in the face of lower adult wages stemming from earlier exposure to

a higher minimum wage, as well as other factors the accumulation of which makes those who were

exposed to high minimum wages less likely to be employed or to have hours as high as other workers.

        In addition to lower current employment and earnings, the estimates point to foregone labor

market experience stemming from disemployment effects in earlier periods. The estimated

contemporaneous effect of minimum wages on 20-24 year-olds from Table 7 implies that exposure to a

higher minimum lowers unconditional hours of work for 20-24 year-olds by 0.65 percent. If each year of

full-time experience is worth, say, four percent higher wages, then this implies 0.1 percent

(0.04 0.0065 4) lower earnings, on average, for employed individuals, or 0.08 percentage point lower

earnings unconditionally, which would account for another 4.0 percent of the earnings decline for 25-29

year-olds (0.08/2.0). Accounting for tenure effects would be expected to increase this effect, although it

is difficult to say by how much since we do not know how this disemployment would have affected later

tenure; arguably the effect would be relatively small because young workers change jobs frequently.

35
   We do not look at the implied effect of exposure to a higher minimum on wages as an "explanation" of the effect
on earnings, but instead seek to understand the factors that can reduce both wages and employment or hours.
36
   Lower current hours could also help account for lower wages conditional on working.


                                                        22
Thus, foregone experience contributes a little bit, as well, to the overall earnings cost adults bear as a

result of exposure to a high minimum wage as young adults.

        The negative longer-run effects of minimum wages could also occur through decreased skill

accumulation. There is evidence from CPS data that minimum wages reduces formal training for 20-24

year-olds (Neumark and Wascher, 2001, Table 3), with the evidence implying that a representative higher

minimum (using the 7.3 percent figure from above) reduces the incidence of training by about 1.0

percentage points, or about 10 percent. With an estimated return to this training of about 18 percent, this

implies an additional 0.18 percent (0.18 0.01) reduction in the average wage; 37 because this estimate

comes from a sample that conditions on employment, given the employment rate for this age group this

would translate into 0.14 percent reduction in average earnings, accounting for an additional 7.0 percent

of the earnings decline.

        Another avenue for skill reduction stemming from higher minimum wages comes through school

enrollment. Here, rather than relying on past findings, we can simply adopt our regression framework to

directly assess the longer-run effects of exposure to a higher minimum on schooling. As reported in

Table 12, looking at both the percentage with a high school degree or higher level of educational

attainment, and years of schooling,38 the estimated effects of exposure as a 20-24 year-old (as well as a

teen) on schooling of 25-29 year-olds were negative and statistically significant. Using the years of

schooling estimate, the coefficient implies that the exposure we are considering reduces schooling by

0.072 years, which multiplied by a return to schooling of 0.07 implies an average 0.5 percent reduction in

earnings conditional on employment or 0.4 percent unconditionally, accounting for another 20 percent of

the earnings reduction.

        The estimates discussed in this subsection are only intended to be suggestive. Adding them up,

though, suggests that standard labor supply and human capital channels—such as lower current

employment and hours, reduced training and schooling, and foregone work experience as a teenager—

37
   The training estimates used in this calculation are from Table 3 (average for column (2')), Table 2 (column (2)),
and Table A1 (column (2')) of Neumark and Wascher (2001).
38
   It is less appropriate to estimate these models for younger individuals, for whom schooling may not be completed.


                                                        23
may be able to explain about 86 percent ({1.09 + 0.08 + 0.14 + 0.4}/2.0) of the longer-run effects of

minimum wages that we find. In that sense, our estimates appear reasonable. Of course there may be

additional influences generating the longer-run effects of minimum wages, such as the scarring effects of

early non-employment that deter the formation of good work habits, a reputation as a good worker, labor

market networks, etc. These types of influences can account for adverse effects on earnings that are not

captured in the costs of foregone experience. Also, the returns to experience are identified largely from

voluntary variation in experience, such as from when one leaves school. It is plausible, though, that spells

of involuntary non-employment are more costly.39

V. Conclusions

        We study whether exposure to minimum wages at young ages leads to longer-run effects on labor

market outcomes. Adverse longer-run effects could arise because of decreased labor market experience

and accumulation of tenure, lower current labor supply, diminished training and skill formation (including

schooling), and other influences, although there are also possible channels of positive longer-run effects.

If minimum wages have longer-run negative effects, then an exclusive focus on short-run effects of

minimum wages on youths—which characterizes nearly all of the existing research and policy debate on

minimum wages—fails to capture a potentially harmful effect of minimum wages and one that may be

more important from a policy perspective, both because the effects are persistent and because they fall on

older individuals who are more likely to be primary breadwinners in their families.

        We estimate the longer-run effects of minimum wages by using information on the minimum

wage history that workers have faced since potentially entering the labor market at age 16. The evidence

indicates that as individuals reach their late 20's, they earn less and may also work less the longer they

were exposed to a higher minimum wage as a teen and young adult. Furthermore, the adverse longer-run

39
  These findings and this conjecture are qualitatively consistent with work by Mroz and Savage (2003) indicating
that—after accounting for heterogeneity that may generate a correlation between individuals' employment
experiences at different ages—early spells of unemployment experienced by youths result in earnings losses that
taper off only slowly over time, lowering earnings as much as 10 years later. However, they do not focus on
minimum wage effects per se, and do not distinguish between voluntary and involuntary spells of unemployment.
Ruhm (1991) reports evidence of long-term negative earnings effects associated with job displacement, which better
captures involuntary spells of non-employment.


                                                       24
effects of exposure to higher minimum wages when young are stronger for blacks, presumably reflecting

in part, at least, the greater extent to which minimum wages are binding for these groups. In our view,

this evidence indicates that it is important to focus on more than simply the contemporaneous effects of

minimum wages on the youngest individuals, as this narrow and short-run focus may lead us to miss

adverse minimum wage effects that are manifested in the longer run.




                                                    25
                                              References

Acemoglu, Daron, and Jorn-Steffen Pischke. 2003. "Minimum Wages and On-the-Job Training."
         Research in Labor Economics, Vol. 20, pp. 159-202.
Baker, Michael, Dwayne Benjamin, and Shuchita Stanger. 1999. "The Highs and Lows of the Minimum
         Wage Effect: A Time-Series Cross-Section Study of the Canadian Law." Journal of Labor
         Economics, Vol. 17, No. 2, April, pp. 318-50.
Beaudry, Paul, and John DiNardo. 1991. "The Effect of Implicit Contracts on the Movement of Wages
         over the Business Cycle: Evidence from Micro Data." Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 99, No.
         4, August, pp. 665-88.
Behrman, Jere R., Robin C. Sickles, and Paul Taubman. 1983. "The Impact of Minimum Wages on the
         Distributions of Earnings for Major Race-Sex-Groups: A Dynamic Analysis." American
         Economic Review, Vol. 73, No. 4, September, pp. 766-78.
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2002. "How Much Should We Trust
         Differences-in-Differences Estimates?" NBER Working Paper No. 8841.
Brown, Charles. 1999. "Minimum Wages, Employment, and the Distribution of Income." In Handbook of
         Labor Economics, Vol. 3B, Orley C. Ashenfelter and David Card, eds. (Amsterdam: Elsevier),
         pp. 2101-63.
Brown, Charles, Curtis Gilroy, and Andrew Kohen. 1983. "The Effect of the Minimum Wage on
         Employment and Unemployment." Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 18, No. 1, pp. 3-31.
Burkhauser, Richard V., Kenneth A. Couch, and David C. Wittenburg. 2000. "A Reassessment of the
         New Economics of the Minimum Wage Literature with Monthly Data from the Current
         Population Survey." Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 18, No. 4, pp. 653-80.
Card, David, and Alan Krueger. 1995. Myth and Measurement: The New Economics of the Minimum
         Wage (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press).
Center for Human Resource Research. 2002. NLSY79 Child & Young Adult Data Users Guide,
         December.
Chaplin, Duncan D., Mark D. Turner, and Andreas D. Pape. 2003. "Minimum Wages and School
         Enrollment of Teenagers: A Look at the 1990's." Economics of Education Review, Vol. 22, No.
         1, pp. 11-22.
Chressanthis, George A., and Paul W. Grimes. 1990. "Criminal Behavior and Youth in the Labour
         Market: The Case of the Pernicious Minimum Wage." Applied Economics, Vol. 22, No. 11,
         November, pp. 1495-1508.
Clark, Melissa A., and David A. Jaeger. 2002. "Natives, the Foreign-Born and High School Equivalents:
         New Evidence on the Returns to the GED." IZA Discussion Paper No. 477.
Cunningham, James. 1981. "The Impact of Minimum Wages on Youth Employment, Hours of Work, and
         School Attendance: Cross-Sectional Evidence from the 1960 and 1970 Censuses." In The
         Economics of Legal Minimum Wages, Simon Rottenberg, ed. (Washington, DC: American
         Enterprise Institute), pp. 88-123.
Ehrenberg, Ronald G., and Alan J. Marcus. 1982. "Minimum Wages and Teenagers' Enrollment-
         Employment Outcomes." Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 17, No. 1, Winter, pp. 39-58.
Ellwood, David T. 1982. "Teenage Unemployment: Permanent Scars or Temporary Blemishes?" In The
         Youth Labor Market Problem: Its Nature, Causes, and Consequences, Richard B. Freeman and
         David A. Wise, eds. (Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press), pp. 349-85.
Fairris, David, and Roberto Pedace. 2003. "The Impact of Minimum Wages on Job Training: An
         Empirical Exploration with Establishment Data." Southern Economic Journal, Vol. 70, No. 3,
         January, pp. 566-83.
Gramlich, Edward M. 1976. "Impact of Minimum Wages on Other Wages, Employment, and Family
         Incomes." Brookings Paper on Economic Activity, No. 1, pp. 409-51.
Grogger, Jeff. 1998. "Market Wages and Youth Crime." Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 16, No. 4,
         October, pp. 756-91.
Grossberg, Adam J., and Paul Sicilian. 1999. "Minimum Wages, On-the-Job Training, and Wage
        Growth." Southern Economic Journal, Vol. 65, No. 3, January, pp. 539-56.
Hashimoto, Masanori. 1987. "The Minimum Wage and Youth Crimes: Time-Series Evidence." Journal of
         Law & Economics, Vol. 30, No. 2, October, pp. 443-64.
Hashimoto, Masanori. 1982. "Minimum Wage Effects on Training on the Job." American Economic
         Review, Vol. 72, No. 5, December, pp. 1070-87.
Jaeger, David. 1997. "Reconciling the Old and New Census Bureau Education Questions:
        Recommendations for Researchers." Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, Vol. 15, No. 3,
        July, pp. 300-9.
Kallem, Andrew J. 2004. "Youth Crime and the Minimum Wage." Senior Thesis, Harvard University.
Kling, Jeffrey, David Weiman, and Bruce Western. 2001. "The Labor Market Consequences of
        Incarceration." Crime and Delinquency, Vol. 46, No. 2, July, pp. 410-27.
Linneman, Peter. 1982. "The Economic Impacts of Minimum Wage Laws: A New Look at an Old
        Question." Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 90, No. 3, June, pp. 443-69.
Mattila, J. Peter. 1978. "Youth Labor Markets, Enrollments, and Minimum Wages." Proceedings of the
         31st Annual Meeting, Industrial Relations Research Association Series, pp. 134-40.
Meyer, Bruce D., and Daniel T. Rosenbaum. 2001. "Making Single Mothers Work: Recent Changes in
        Tax and Welfare Policy and Their Effects." National Tax Journal, Vol. 53, No. 4, Pt. 2,
        December, pp. 1027-62.
Michl, Thomas R. 2000. "Can Rescheduling Explain the New Jersey Minimum Wage Studies?" Eastern
         Economic Journal, Vol. 26, No. 3, Summer, pp. 265-76.
Mroz, Thomas A., and Timothy H. Savage. 2003. "The Long-Term Effects of Youth Unemployment."
        Unpublished paper, University of North Carolina.
Neumark, David, Mark Schweitzer, and William Wascher. 2004. "Minimum Wage Effects Throughout
        the Wage Distribution." Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 39, No. 2, Spring, pp. 425-50.
Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 2003. "Minimum Wages and Skill Acquisition: Another Look at
        Schooling Effects." Economics of Education Review, Vol. 22, No. 1, pp. 1-10.
Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 2001. "Minimum Wages and Training Revisited." Journal of
         Labor Economics, Vol. 19, No. 2, pp. 563-95.
Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 1996. "The Effects of Minimum Wages on Teenage Employment
        and Enrollment: Evidence from Matched CPS Surveys." Research in Labor Economics, Vol. 15,
        pp. 25-63.
Oettinger, Gerald S. 1996. "Statistical Discrimination and the Early Career Evolution of the Black-White
        Wage Gap." Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 14, No. 1, January, pp. 52-78.
Ragan, James. 1977. "Minimum Wages and the Youth Labor Market." Review of Economics and
         Statistics, Vol. 59, No. 2, May, pp. 129-36.
Ruhm, Christopher J. 1991. "Are Workers Permanently Scarred by Job Displacements?" American
         Economic Review, Vol. 81, No. 1, May, pp. 319-24.
Table 1: Ages, Years, and Cohorts Used in Analysis
                                                                                  Cohort:
                            1    2    3   4    5     6    7   8    9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
   Year:         1979      22   21   20   19   18   17   16
                 1980      23   22   21   20   19   18   17   16
                 1981      24   23   22   21   20   19   18   17   16
                 1982      25   24   23   22   21   20   19   18   17   16
                 1983      26   25   24   23   22   21   20   19   18   17   16
                 1984      27   26   25   24   23   22   21   20   19   18   17   16
                 1985      28   27   26   25   24   23   22   21   20   19   18   17   16
                 1986      29   28   27   26   25   24   23   22   21   20   19   18   17   16
                 1987           29   28   27   26   25   24   23   22   21   20   19   18   17   16
                 1988                29   28   27   26   25   24   23   22   21   20   19   18   17   16
                 1989                     29   28   27   26   25   24   23   22   21   20   19   18   17   16
                 1990                          29   28   27   26   25   24   23   22   21   20   19   18   17   16
                 1991                               29   28   27   26   25   24   23   22   21   20   19   18   17   16
                 1992                                    29   28   27   26   25   24   23   22   21   20   19   18   17   16
                 1993                                         29   28   27   26   25   24   23   22   21   20   19   18   17   16
                 1994                                              29   28   27   26   25   24   23   22   21   20   19   18   17   16
                 1995                                                   29   28   27   26   25   24   23   22   21   20   19   18   17   16
                 1996                                                        29   28   27   26   25   24   23   22   21   20   19   18   17   16
                 1997                                                             29   28   27   26   25   24   23   22   21   20   19   18   17   16
                 1998                                                                  29   28   27   26   25   24   23   22   21   20   19   18   17   16
                 1999                                                                       29   28   27   26   25   24   23   22   21   20   19   18   17 16
                 2000                                                                            29   28   27   26   25   24   23   22   21   20   19   18 17 16
                 2001                                                                                 29   28   27   26   25   24   23   22   21   20   19 18 17 16
Minimum wage data are used beginning as 1973, but monthly CPS ORG files are available beginning only in 1979. The analysis focuses on minimum wages from
age 16 up to the present age (through age 29). Consequently, the youngest cohort we can study for 1979 is the cohort that was age 16 in 1973.
Table 2: Minimum Wages in Analysis Period
                                                                                      Year:
                  73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01
Federal          1.60 2.00 2.10 2.30 2.30 2.65 2.90 3.10 3.35 3.35 3.35 3.35 3.35 3.35 3.35 3.35 3.35 3.80 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.75 5.15 5.15 5.15 5.15

Alaska           2.10 2.50 2.60 2.80 2.80 3.15 3.40 3.60 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 4.30 4.75 4.75 4.75 4.75 4.75 4.75 5.25 5.65            5.65   5.65 5.65
California                           2.50                                                        4.25 4.25                               5.00 5.75            5.75   5.75 6.25
Connecticut      1.85 2.01 2.11 2.31 2.31 2.66 2.91 3.12 3.37 3.37 3.37 3.37 3.37 3.37 3.37 3.75 4.25 4.25 4.27 4.27 4.27 4.27 4.27 4.27 4.77 5.18            5.65   6.15 6.40
Delaware                                                                                                                            4.65 5.00                 5.65   5.65 6.15
DC               2.16 2.19 2.45 2.55 2.76 2.79 2.95 3.14 3.48 3.62 3.82 3.82 3.85 3.86 4.16 4.33 4.33 4.38 4.51 4.55 4.55 5.25 5.25 5.25 5.75 6.15            6.15   6.15 6.15
Hawaii                          2.40 2.40                                                   3.85 3.85 3.85      4.75 5.25 5.25 5.25 5.25 5.25 5.25            5.25   5.25 5.25
Idaho
Iowa                                                                                                       3.85         4.65 4.65 4.65 4.65 4.65
Maine            1.80                                                             3.45 3.55 3.65 3.65 3.75 3.85
Massachusetts    1.85                                                                       3.55 3.65 3.75                                    4.75 5.25 5.25 5.25 6.00 6.75
Minnesota                                                                                        3.55 3.85 3.95
New
Hampshire                                                                                    3.45 3.55 3.65
New Jersey       1.75       2.20       2.50                                                                             5.05 5.05 5.05 5.05 5.05 5.05
New York         1.85
Oregon                                                                                                      4.25 4.75 4.75 4.75 4.75 4.75 4.75 5.50 6.00 6.50 6.50 6.50
Pennsylvania                                                                                           3.70
Rhode Island                                                                                 3.55 3.65 4.00 4.25 4.45 4.45 4.45 4.45 4.45 4.45 5.15           5.65 6.15
Vermont                                                                                      3.45 3.55 3.65 3.85                     4.50 4.75 5.00 5.25 5.25 5.75 5.75
Washington                                                                                             3.85 4.25                4.90 4.90 4.90 4.90      5.70 6.50 6.72
Table only displays states that ever have a minimum wage higher than the federal minimum in the 1973-2001 period. We do not consider a state as having a higher than
federal minimum wage if coverage does not apply to men; in 1973 California had a minimum wage above the federal level ($1.65) for women only. Federal and state
minimum wages for the year are reported as of May of that year. The DC minimum wage is a weighted average of occupation-specific minimum wages, for the earlier part of
the sample.
Table 3: Examples of Construction of Average Effective State Minimum Wage, Oregon
                                           89                                             90                                        91
State minimum
wage                                   --                                                4.25                                      4.75
Federal minimum
wage                                  3.35                                               3.80                                      4.25
Average effective 16-24: 3.35                                       16: 4.25                                   16: 4.75
state minimum     25: (1/10) 3.10 + (9/10) 3.35                     17: (1/2) 3.35 + (1/2) 4.25                17: (1/2) 4.25 + (1/2) 4.75
wage, all ages    …                                                 18: (2/3) 3.35 + (1/3) 4.25                18: (1/3) 3.35 + (1/3) 4.25
                  29: (2/14) 2.30 + (1/14) 2.65                     …                                              + (1/3) 4.75
                      + (1/14) 2.90 + (1/14) 3.10                   29: (1/14) 2.30 + (1/14) 2.65              …
                      + (9/14) 3.35                                     + (1/14) 2.90 + (1/14) 3.10            29: (1/14) 2.65 + (1/14) 2.90
                                                                        + (8/14) 3.35 + (1/14) 4.25                + (1/14) 3.10 + (7/14) 3.35 +
                                                                                                               (1/14) 4.25 + (1/14) 4.75
Average effective    20: 3.35                                       20: 3.35                                   20: (1/4) 3.80 + (3/4) 3.35
state minimum        …                                              …                                          …
wage exposed to      29: (1/2) 2.30 + (1/4) 2.65 + (1/4) 2.90       29: (1/4) 2.30 + (1/4) 2.65 + (1/4) 2.90   29: (1/4) 2.65 + (1/4) 2.90 + (1/4) 3.10
age ages 16-19                                                          + (1/4) 3.10                               + (1/4) 3.35
See Table 2 for the federal minimum wage series extending back to 1973.
Table 4: Summary Statistics
                                                   16-19 year-olds                             20-24 year-olds                             25-29 year-olds
                                                                      Federal                                     Federal                                     Federal
                                                    Current state    min. wage                  Current state    min. wage                  Current state    min. wage
                                         Whole      min. wage >       prevails      Whole       min. wage >       prevails      Whole       min. wage >       prevails
                                         sample       federal        currently      sample        federal        currently      sample        federal        currently
 Observations                             4692          692            4000          5712           856            4856          4590           789            3801
 Log of effective state minimum           1.688        1.746           1.678         1.683         1.744           1.673         1.655         1.734           1.639
 wage, current ($2001)                   (0.092)      (0.087)         (0.089)       (0.088)       (0.085)         (0.084)       (0.068)       (0.077)         (0.052)
 Average effective log of state
                                          1.694         1.740           1.685        1.704          1.733           1.699        1.697          1.732           1.689
 minimum wage since age 16
                                         (0.092)       (0.087)         (0.091)      (0.087)        (0.083)         (0.088)      (0.068)        (0.068)         (0.066)
 ($2001)
 Employment (%)                           46.45         44.96           46.70        70.43          69.68           70.56        78.84          79.04           78.80
                                         (14.59)       (15.52)         (14.41)       (8.91)        (10.42)          (8.62)       (6.50)         (6.82)          (6.43)
 Wage ($2001)                              6.54          7.10            6.44         9.15           9.96            9.00        12.34          13.72           12.06
                                          (0.96)        (1.16)          (0.88)       (1.49)         (1.74)          (1.40)       (1.79)         (1.91)          (1.62)
 Weekly hours of work,                    11.88         11.20           11.99        25.72          25.31           25.80        31.68          31.61           31.69
 unconditional                            (5.78)        (5.69)          (5.78        (4.47)         (5.05)          (4.36)       (3.14)         (3.27)          (3.11)
 Weekly earnings ($2001),                 85.43         86.87           85.18       247.63         265.22          244.53       404.65         448.62          395.53
 unconditional                           (49.34)       (52.47)         (48.79)      (70.02)        (80.37)         (67.57)      (74.09)        (79.91)         (69.43)
 Percentage at or below minimum           12.71         10.57           13.08         7.14           6.46            7.26         3.32           3.23            3.34
 wage                                     (6.79)        (6.41)          (6.78)       (4.47)         (4.34)          (4.49)       (2.58)         (2.72)          (2.55)
Each observation is the mean for the cells defined by state, year, and age (by single year), using the monthly CPS ORG files from 1979-2001. Means of these observations
are reported, with standard errors of these means reported in parentheses. “Average effective state minimum wage since age 16” is calculated inclusive of age 16. In
computing mean weekly earnings, observations on individuals employed but not reporting a wage were weighted by P(employed)/P(employed and wage reported). Without
this weighting, mean earnings would be biased toward zero because data on wages are missing for the employed but not the non-employed. Minimum wages, wages, and
earnings are converted to 2001 dollars based on the Consumer Price Index research series using current methods (CPI-U-RS); see http://www.bls.gov/cpi/cpiurstx.htm.
Individual observations are weighted using CPS earnings weights.
Table 5: Estimated Effects of Current Log of State Minimum
                                     (1)          (2)        (3)                               (4)
                                                Percent                                    Log (weekly
                                Log(wage) employed         Hours                            earnings)
 16-19
 Effective log state minimum 0.2216**         -9.4008+    -2.2123                             -0.0607
 wage, current                   (0.0693)      (5.1854)   (1.4551)                            (0.2390)
 R2                                 0.78         0.86       0.91                                0.91
 20-24
 Effective log state minimum      0.0102       -2.4059    -0.4954                              0.0128
 wage, current                   (0.0590)      (2.9786)   (1.4671)                            (0.1004)
 R2                                 0.80         0.64       0.74                                0.82
 25-29
 Effective log state minimum      -0.0048       2.2494     1.0103                              0.0258
 wage, current                   (0.0554)      (2.8554)   (1.4064)                            (0.0910)
 R2                                 0.77         0.48       0.52                                0.71
All estimates are from linear regressions with standard errors reported in parentheses. More details on
the variables are given in Table 4. Standard errors are “clustered” by state, and hence are robust to
arbitrary heteroscedasticity across states and arbitrary correlations across observations (distinguished by
year or age) within states. A plus sign (+) indicates that estimate is statistically significant at the 10-
percent level, a single asterisk (*) indicates that estimate is statistically significant at the five-percent
level, and a double asterisk (**) indicates significance at the one-percent level. All regressions contain
controls for age (single-year age dummy variables), year, and state. State-age-year observations are
weighted by the number of observations in the cell, multiplied by the average CPS earnings weight of
individuals in the state-year-age cell to correct for oversampling of individuals in small states.
Table 6: Estimated Effects of Average Effective Log State Minimum Wage Since Age 16
                                     (1)            (2)         (3)          (4)
                                                  Percent              Log (weekly
                                Log(wage)       employed      Hours      earnings)
 16-19
 Average effective log state     0.1914**       -11.8109*    -2.4776*     -0.2783
 minimum wage since age 16       (0.0602)        (4.7417)    (1.2525)    (0.2364)
 R2                                 0.78           0.86        0.91         0.91
 20-24
 Average effective log state     0.1944**      -11.3323** -5.9440**       -0.0828
 minimum wage since age 16       (0.0666)        (4.3730)    (1.9027)    (0.1121)
   2
 R                                  0.81           0.64        0.74         0.82
 25-29
 Average effective log state    -0.3192**      -19.2979** -9.8015**     -0.5928**
 minimum wage since age 16       (0.1021)        (5.0667)    (2.5440)    (0.1440)
   2
 R                                  0.77           0.48        0.53         0.71
See notes to Table 5.
Table 7: Estimated Effects of Average Effective Log State Minimum Wage by Age of
Exposure
                                     (1)             (2)         (3)         (4)
                                                  Percent              Log (weekly
                                Log(wage)       employed       Hours     earnings)
 20-24
 Average effective state         0.1067**         -3.6759    -2.1364+     -0.0170
 minimum wage, 16-19             (0.0331)        (2.5398)    (1.1383)    (0.0680)
 Average effective state          0.1033*         -3.6115    -2.7972+      0.0131
 minimum wage, 20-24             (0.0519)        (3.1615)    (1.5123)    (0.0933)
 R2                                 0.81            0.64        0.74        0.82
 Observations                       5712           5712        5712         5712
 25-29
 Average effective state        -0.2150**       -5.7487*     -2.7991*   -0.3024**
 minimum wage, 16-19             (0.0485)        (2.7085)    (1.3059)    (0.0682)
 Average effective state        -0.1894**      -11.0518** -6.6298**     -0.3807**
 minimum wage, 20-24             (0.0456)        (2.6619)    (1.3428)    (0.0726)
 Average effective state           0.0351         -1.6490     -1.0418      0.0010
 minimum wage, 25-29             (0.0450)        (2.2380)    (1.1492)    (0.0692)
 R2                                 0.77            0.48        0.53        0.71
 Observations                       4590           4590        4590         4590
See notes to Table 5.
Table 8: Summary Statistics for Whites and Blacks
                                   16-19 year-olds                  20-24 year-olds            25-29 year-olds
                                 Whites     Blacks                Whites     Blacks          Whites     Blacks
 Observations                      4691       3897                  5712       4788            4590       3845
 Log of effective state           1.688      1.689                 1.683      1.684           1.655      1.655
 minimum wage, current           (0.092)    (0.093)               (0.088)    (0.089)         (0.068)    (0.068)
 Average effective log of state   1.694      1.694                 1.703      1.705           1.697      1.698
 minimum wage since age 16       (0.092)    (0.093)               (0.087)    (0.088)         (0.068)    (0.069)
 Employment %                     49.85      29.05                 73.02      56.43           80.58      68.87
                                 (14.63)    (25.38)                (8.85)    (26.93)          (6.81)    (24.51)
 Wage                              6.56       6.48                  9.26       8.50           12.62      10.76
                                  (0.99)     (1.99)                (1.57)     (2.75)          (1.96)     (3.08)
 Observations, wages               4677       3211                  5712       4374            4590       3620
 Weekly hours of work,            12.81       8.91                 26.80      21.84           32.58      28.36
 unconditional                    (6.04)     (7.79)                (4.56)     (9.51)          (3.39)     (8.89)
 Observations, hours               4677       3208                  5712       4370            4590       3612
 Weekly earnings,                 92.17      62.92                260.90     194.26          425.72     314.31
 unconditional                   (52.11)    (69.01)               (74.18) (112.73)           (86.45) (142.31)
 Observations, earnings            4677       3208                  5712       4370            4590       3612
 Percentage at or below           13.44        8.88                 7.12        7.29           3.18        3.84
 minimum wage                     (7.69)    (14.86)                (4.82)    (14.34)          (2.65)    (10.59)
See notes to Table 4 for details. Samples are sometimes smaller because of absence of white or black respondents in a
cell.
Table 9: Estimated Effects of Current State Minimum and Average State Minimum Wage by Age of Exposure, by Race
                                                                  White                                                               Black
                                           (1)            (2)               (3)            (4)        (1)                    (2)               (3)         (4)
                                                        Percent                        Log (weekly                         Percent                     Log (weekly
                                      Log(wage)        employed           Hours         earnings)  Log(wage)              employed           Hours      earnings)
 A. Contemporaneous
    specification:
 16-19
 Effective log state minimum           0.2066**         -9.6879*        -1.7986           -0.0104         0.2954*         -11.1330          -2.8317      0.0215
 wage, current                         (0.0762)         (4.7510)        (1.3699)         (0.2168)         (0.1367)        (7.0460)         (2.0275)     (0.6204)
 R2                                       0.77             0.83            0.91             0.90             0.40            0.51             0.61        0.62
 B. Exposure
    specifications:
 20-24
 Average effective log state           0.1171**          -2.7625        -1.4824           0.0175          0.1542+         -10.7862         -4.4699+      -0.0474
 minimum wage, 16-19                   (0.0373)         (2.5750)        (1.2198)         (0.0717)         (0.0795)        (6.5654)         (2.5999)     (0.1841)
 Average effective log state            0.1115*          -0.6500        -1.4948           0.0797          -0.0566          -9.8050         -6.2448*      -0.1655
 minimum wage, 20-24                   (0.0553)         (3.3735)        (1.6421)         (0.0923)         (0.0950)        (6.7012)         (2.6323)     (0.1903)
 R2                                       0.79             0.56            0.70             0.80             0.46            0.39             0.48        0.51
 25-29
 Average effective log state          -0.2178**          -0.3870        -0.3206         -0.2376**        -0.5349**       -32.1744**       -16.4728**    -1.0828**
 minimum wage, 16-19                   (0.0508)         (2.7329)        (1.3556)         (0.0700)         (0.1228)         (8.9942)         (3.7619)     (0.2037)
 Average effective log state          -0.1872**         -7.0702*       -4.8671**        -0.3267**        -0.4864**       -26.8465**       -15.1759**    -0.9812**
 minimum wage, 20-24                   (0.0493)         (2.7535)        (1.4209)         (0.0758)         (0.1108)         (7.7896)         (3.3653)     (0.1788)
 Average effective log state            -0.0010          -0.9717        -0.5264           -0.0190          0.0046           -4.1159          -1.5088      -0.0437
 minimum wage, 25-29                   (0.0524)         (2.3156)        (1.1771)         (0.0749)         (0.0978)         (7.1327)         (2.9712)     (0.1537)
 R2                                       0.74             0.46            0.50             0.68             0.46            0.29             0.34        0.36
Specification in Panel A corresponds to columns (1)-(4) of Table 5. Specifications in Panel B correspond to Table 7. See notes to Table 5 and 8.
Table 10: Estimated Effects of Years of Exposure to Higher State Minimum Weighted by
State Minimum Wage Gap, by Age of Exposure, Including Unemployment Rate Exposure
Controls
                              (1)              (2)             (3)            (4)
                                            Percent                     Log (weekly
                        Log(wage)         employed           Hours        earnings)
 25-29
 Weighted exposure,       -0.0829+          -1.0426         -0.4219       -0.1012*
 16-19                    (0.0463)         (2.8212)        (1.3118)       (0.0617)
 Weighted exposure,      -0.1468**        -7.6701**       -4.8380**      -0.2908**
 20-24                    (0.0459)         (2.7586)        (1.3528)       (0.0720)
 Weighted exposure,        -0.0340         -4.2832+        -2.3793*        -0.1072
 25-29                    (0.0428)         (2.2731)        (1.1284)       (0.0660)
 Average UR, 16-19       -0.0061**           0.0904        0.0590+       -0.0049**
                          (0.0012)         (0.0734)        (0.0348)       (0.0017)
 Average UR, 20-24       -0.0161**        -0.4409**       -0.2170**      -0.0226**
                          (0.0015)         (0.0760)        (0.0354)       (0.0019)
   2
 R                           0.79             0.49            0.54           0.73
 Observations               4590              4590           4590           4590
See notes to Table 5.
Table 11: Relationship Between Wage- and Skill-Related Variables and Change in
Minimum Wage for Movers, 25-29 Year-Olds
                                   Change in log of effective minimum wage
                                   1990 PUMS                     2000 PUMS
                                 (1)          (2)            (3)             (4)
                               20-24        25-29          20-24           25-29
 Education less than high   -0.0024** -0.0023**         -0.0024**       -0.0043**
 school                      (0.0004)     (0.0004)       (0.0008)        (0.0008)
 Female                     -0.0009** -0.0011**            0.0004         -0.0003
                             (0.0003)     (0.0002)       (0.0005)        (0.0004)
 Non-white                  0.0013**      0.0016**      -0.0027**       -0.0020**
                             (0.0004)     (0.0004)       (0.0006)        (0.0005)
 Hispanic                   0.0096**      0.0080**       0.0048**        0.0020**
                             (0.0006)     (0.0005)       (0.0008)        (0.0008)
 Observations                100,454       149,668         98,560        134,483
 R2                           0.0003        0.0019         0.0005          0.0004
 Share of movers in age       0.1283        0.1572         0.1303          0.1613
 group
 Change in log effective      -0.0336      -0.0341         0.0900          0.0913
 minimum wage, mean          (0.0448)     (0.0448)       (0.0751)        (0.0754)
Sample used in estimation excludes individuals who lived abroad 5 years ago. A single asterisk (*)
indicates that estimate is statistically significant at the five-percent level, and a double asterisk (**)
indicates significance at the one-percent level. The five-percent PUMS samples are used.
Table 12: Estimated Effects on Schooling of Average State Minimum
Wage by Age of Exposure
                                    (1)                 (2)
                             Percentage with
                           high school degree        Years of
                           or higher education      schooling
 25-29
 Average effective state        -7.0313**           -0.8145**
 minimum wage, 16-19             (2.2168)            (0.2093)
 Average effective state        -7.4778**           -1.1940**
 minimum wage, 20-24             (2.4633)            (0.2385)
 Average effective state          0.7907             -0.0359
 minimum wage, 25-29             (2.3264)            (0.2185)
   2
 R                                 0.61                0.79
 Observations                   -7.0313**           -0.8145**
For 1979-1991 high school degree is based on years of schooling, and for 1992-
2001 on whether a high school diploma (or equivalent) was earned (Jaeger, 1997).
(Before 1997, it was not possible in the CPS to distinguish high school graduates
from those with a GED; see Clark and Jaeger, 2002.)
