                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       ECONOMIC AND POLITICAL LIBERALIZATIONS

                                            Francesco Giavazzi
                                              Guido Tabellini

                                          Working Paper 10657
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10657


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       August 2004




Some of the results in this paper first appeared in a paper with the same title presented at the IMF conference
on the Middle East and Northern Africa (MENA) region: Washington DC, April 7,8, 2004,. We are grateful
to Torsten Persson for many very helpful discussions and for sharing with us his data set on democratic
institutions and economic development, to Roman Wacziarg for making his data on trade liberalizations
available, to Tito Boeri, Andrew Feltenstein, Eliana La Ferrara and Ross Levine and seminar participants at
Bocconi University, CIAR, the IMF, the World Bank and the Beijing conference on Chinese Economy and
Security for helpful comments; to Federico De Francesco and Gaia Narciso for outstanding research
assistance. Guido Tabellini is grateful to Bocconi University and the Canadian Institute for Advanced
Research for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Francesco Giavazzi and Guido Tabellini. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Economic and Political Liberalizations
Francesco Giavazzi and Guido Tabellini
NBER Working Paper No. 10657
August 2004
JEL No. P0, O1, E0
                                           ABSTRACT

This paper studies empirically the effects of and the interactions amongst economic and political
liberalizations. Economic liberalizations are measured by a widely used indicator that captures the
scope of the market in the economy, and in particular of policies towards freer international trade
(cf. Sachs and Werner 1995, Wacziarg and Welch 2003). Political liberalizations correspond to the
event of becoming a democracy. Using a difference-in-difference estimation, we ask what are the

effects of liberalizations on economic performance, on macroeconomic policy and on structural

policies. The main results concern the quantitative relevance of the feedback and interaction effects

between the two kinds of reforms. First, we find positive feedback effects between economic and

political reforms. The timing of events indicates that causality is more likely to run from political

to economic liberalizations, rather than viceversa, but we cannot rule out feedback effects in both

directions. Second, the sequence of reforms matters. Countries that first liberalize and then become

democracies do much better than countries that pursue the opposite sequence, in almost all

dimensions.

Francesco Giavazzi
IGIER
Universita' L.Bocconi
5, via Salasco
20136 - Milano ITALY
and NBER
giavazzi@mit.edu


Guido Tabellini
Bocconi University
guido.tabellini@uni-bocconi.it
       1.      Introduction
In an assessment of the recent research on the effects of institutions on growth, the IMF concludes:
“While the association between institutional quality and economic performance appears strong and
robust, much more unsettled is the question of what lies behind these findings. (WEO, April 2003,
chapter 3)”. Contrasting the view that institutions are mainly determined by a country’s geography,
that is by its location on the earth, or by its history, for instance by the origin of the Europeans who
first settled in the country, the IMF further observes: “The evidence that greater openness to trade
and stronger competition are conducive to institutional improvement, and thus to growth, suggests
that countries are not ‘predestined’, say by geography or history: the ‘right’ policies may shape
institutions and through this cannel affect growth.”
      But if economic liberalization affects growth and institutions, what determines a country’s
decision to liberalize its economy? Economic liberalization, moreover, is just one dimension along
which a country may open up, the other, and perhaps the most important one, being political
liberalization, that is becoming a democracy. What are the relationships between these two forms of
liberalization? Does one appear to “cause” the other? Do both affect growth and other economic
policies? Are there positive interaction effects—that is, do the benefits from adopting economic and
political liberalization exceed the individual effect that each of them would produce if adopted in
isolation? These are the questions motivating this paper.
      More precisely, the paper addresses four separate questions: (i) How do economic and
political liberalizations affect economic outcomes such as growth and investment, macroeconomic
policies, such as inflation and the budget surplus, and structural policies, such as indicators of
protection of property rights and control of corruption ? (ii) Does economic liberalization “induce”
political liberalization, is the causality running the other way, or are the two forms of liberalization
unrelated? (iii) How do economic and political liberalizations interact, that is are the effects of
adopting both forms of liberalization greater than the sum of the individual effects of the two, when
adopted in isolation? (iv) Does the ‘sequencing’ matter ? That is: if a country that was originally
closed and non democratic decides to open up in both areas, does where it starts from make a
difference?
      It is obviously not the first time these issues are addressed. Parts of the first question--the
effects of economic and political liberalizations on growth and investment--have been addressed in
the literature. Sachs and Werner (1995), and more recently Wacziarg and Welch (2003), have
studied the effects of economic liberalization. A large literature, that includes Barro (1995),
Prezworsky and Limongi (1993) and (2000), Roll and Talbott (2003) and Persson (2004) among
others, has studied the economic effects of political liberalizations. However, with the exception of


                                                                                                      2
Persson (2004), who focuses on the policy effects of different types of democratizations, economic
and political liberalizations have been studied separately, thus missing the possibility that the two
might interact. The main contribution of this paper is to study the interaction between the two types
of liberalizations, focusing not only on the economic outcomes (growth and investment), but also on
the effects on the quality of institutions that accompany or are induced by liberalizations.
      We address these questions using data from a sample of about 140 countries, over the period
1960-2000. The variables we look at are the traditional ones considered in the literature on
economic and political liberalizations, and are described in section 2. Our empirical methodology is
adapted from the microeconometric literature on the effects of various treatments. Specifically,
following Persson (2004), we estimate the effect of reforms using a difference-in-difference
technique: this exploits both the cross country and the time series variation in the data, but with
arguably weaker identifying assumptions than the typical exclusion restrictions employed by most
of the macroeconomic literature on this topic. In this respect, our results provide new information
even when we consider issues that have been studied before in the literature. The empirical
methodology is illustrated in section 3.
      Our empirical results are described in section 4. We start by studying the effects of each
liberalization separately. Here we confirm the finding that economic liberalization is good for
growth and investment; but this effect cannot be entirely attributed to international trade: economic
liberalizations tend to be accompanied or followed by a host of other policy improvements,
including an improvement in the budget surplus, better protection of property rights and lower
corruption. The main effect of a transition to democracy, on the other hand, is to improve the
quality of institutions (protection of property rights and control of corruption), but to deteriorate the
macroeconomic environment, with only small positive effects on economic growth.
      Studying the effects of each reform separately can be misleading, however, because it
conceals possible feedback and interaction effects between the two kinds of reforms. The main
results of this paper concern the quantitative relevance of these feedback and interaction effects.
First, the data strongly suggest that indeed there are positive feedback effects between economic
and political reforms. The timing of events indicates that causality is more likely to run from
political to economic liberalizations, rather than viceversa: many economic liberalizations are
preceded by political liberalizations, while the converse is observed less frequently--although we
cannot rule out feedback effects in both directions. Second, the data also suggest that there are
interaction effects between the two kinds of reforms: countries that enact both reforms have better
economic performance compared to countries that enact only one kind of reform, and the effects are
not additive. More importantly, the sequencing of reforms matters. Countries that first liberalize and


                                                                                                       3
then become democracies do much better than countries that pursue the opposite sequence. Section
5 briefly discusses our interpretation of this finding.
        Thus, the main practical but tentative lesson of this paper can be summarized as follows.
Consider a country that is closed both economically and politically, like China or Russia in the late
1980s. This country can follow two paths to economic and political liberalism. The “easy path” is to
do what Russia did: first become a democracy and then try open up the economy. This route is
“easy” in the sense that democratic governments are more likely to pursue economic liberalizations
compared to dictatorships. But the economic payoffs are much higher for countries that do it the
“hard way”, namely who open up the economy while still being autocracies, and only then become
democracies. In some sense, this is what China is trying to do. This route is harder in the sense that
very few autocracies have pursued economic liberalizations; but those who did performed much
better than the rest. The comparison between China and Russia, of course, fits this lesson very well.


   2. The data
The sample consists of yearly data for about 140 advanced and developing countries included in the
analysis of Persson (2004) and selected on the basis of data availability during the period 1960-
2000.


        2.1 Economic and political liberalizations
Our indicator of economic liberalizations is taken from Wacziarg and Welch (2003), who in turn
have updated the earlier indicators compiled by Sachs and Werner (1995). A country is considered
as closed to international trade if one of the following conditions is satisfied: (i) average tariffs
exceed 40%; (ii) non-tariff barriers cover more than 40% of its imports; (iii) it has a socialist
economic system; (iv) the black market premium on the exchange rate exceeds 20%; (v) much of its
exports are controlled by a state monopoly. A country is open if none of these conditions applies.
Throughout the paper we refer to an economic liberalization as the event of becoming open, given
that a country was closed in the previous year. Thus, this measure of economic liberalization seeks
to capture discrete and comprehensive policy changes that increase the scope of the market in
allocating goods and services. Freer international trade is an important component, though not the
only one, of economic liberalizations as defined here. Since we are less interested in the specific
problems raised by transitions away from a socialist economic system, throughout the analysis we
control for formerly socialist countries, as described below.
        Sachs and Werner (1995) find that this indicator of openness is positively correlated with
economic growth in the period 1970-89. The effect is very large and robust: economic liberalization


                                                                                                    4
increases average growth by as much as 2%. Following Rodriguez and Rodrik (2000) 1, Wacziarg
and Welch (2003) update the Sachs and Werner index of economic liberalizations for the 1990s.
The cross-sectional correlations are weaker in the 1990s: they find that an updated dummy for the
1990s is conditionally uncorrelated with economic growth across countries, so that the results in
SW appear to be specific to their chosen time period. However, using the country-specific dates of
liberalization—the same we use in this paper--and studying the within-country effects of
liberalization, Wacziarg and Welch (2003) confirm that episodes of ecnomic liberalizations are
followed by an increased trade volume, faster growth and an acceleration of investment. The effects
on trade are significant over the entire sample (1950-1998), though weaker in the most recent period
(1990-1998). This last finding suggests that announced trade reforms are not always associated with
increases in trade: this will happen if, for instance, tariffs are replaced by other trade barriers, as was
the case in India in 2000-01. Why “liberalizations” as defined by the Wacziarg and Welch (2003)
dummy may not be accompanied by increases in trade volumes is one of the facts addressed in this
paper.
      Following Persson and Tabellini (2003), Persson (2004) and a large literature on the topic, we
define a country as a democracy if it has strictly positive values of the indicator POLITY2 in the
POLITY IV database2. Throughout this paper, we refer to a democratization as the event of
becoming a democracy, given that a country was not a democracy the previous year. The choice of
0 as the dividing line between democratic and non democratic regimes is suggested by the
observation that POLITY2 tends to jump discretely around zero. The standard deviation of this
variable is 0.2 over the entire range (-10, +10 where the mean is 7.6) and 0.5 in the range (-3, +3
where the mean is 1.7). A cursory look at the time series data indicates that indeed crossing 0 is
often associated with large and discrete improvements in institutions that take place over one or two
years, while subsequent improvements in this indicator tend to be much more gradual. The same
definition of democracy was used in previous studies, such as Persson and Tabellini (2003) and in
Persson (2004).




1
  Rodriguez and Rodrik (2000) point out that the Sachs and Werner (1995) definition of being closed is dominated by
the last two conditions (state monopoly in exports and black market premia). But see the reply in Werner (2003).
2
  POLITY2 codes transition years by interpolating the variable POLITY from the years before to the years at the end of
the transition. The variable POLITY in turn seeks to measure the quality of democratic institutions, on the basis of
freedom of active and passive participation in elections, checks and balances on the executive, freedom of political
association and respect of other basic political rights. It has been coded in the POLITY project
(http://www.cidcm.umd.edu/inscr/polity/index.htm) precisely with the purpose of detecting changes in political
institutions over time.

                                                                                                                    5
      2.2 Performance measures
We consider three types of indicators of performance: (i) general economic outcomes; (ii)
macroeconomic policies; (iii) governance indicators.
      Our first and main question is whether economic and political liberalizations have an effect on
general economic outcomes. Perhaps the ultimate indicator of economic performance is real per
capita income, but for reasons that we discuss below, it is difficult to draw inferences about the
causal effect of reforms on the level of income. Moreover, the time period we consider only lasts 40
years, and many reforms take place in the second half of this period. Hence, rather than studying the
effect of reforms on the level of per capita income, we focus on its growth rate, defined as the first
difference of the log of GDP per capita (growth). In addition, we also consider the investment rate,
defined as the ratio of total investment to GDP (investment), and in some cases we also look at a
measure of the relative size of international trade, defined as import plus exports over GDP (trade).
The source for these three variables are the Penn World tables. For most countries, these variables
are available for the whole period 1960-2000.
      Our second question is whether economic and political liberalizations induce governments to
choose (or are accompanied by) better macroeconomic policies. As indicators of macroeconomic
policy, we consider the yearly rate of inflation, expressed in logs (inflation), and the central
government surplus as a fraction of GDP (surplus). The source of these variables is the IMF.
Inflation is available for the whole period for many countries, although for quite a few countries the
series contains some non-contiguous years of missing observations. The variable surplus              is
available from the early 1970s onwards only, and for a few countries for a shorter period.
      Finally, we ask whether economic and political liberalizations also induce governments to
introduce new institutions or improve existing institutions, with the results of enhancing the
protection of property rights or the protection from abuse by government. For this purpose, we
include among our measures of performance two widely studied indicators of perception of good
governance. The first, called gadp, summarizes perceptions of structural policies and institutional
environments encouraging the production of output rather than its diversion (through theft,
corruption, litigation or expropriation). This variable has been compiled by Knack and Keefer
(1995) using ICRG data. It is available over the period 1982-97 and consists of a simple average of
five indicators: two relate to the role of the government in protecting property rights against private
diversion (law and order, and bureaucratic quality); the other three to the role of the government
itself as a source of diversion (corruption, risk of expropriation and government repudiation of
contracts). The variable gadp varies from 0 to 10, with higher values indicating better policies
(more protection of property rights). As we are particularly interested in the role of regime changes


                                                                                                     6
in preventing abuse of power by government officials, we also consider one specific component of
gadp, namely, perceptions of the control of corruption (corruption). This indicator (unlike gadp)
varies from 0 to 6, again with higher values denoting better policies – i.e. less corruption. This
variable too is only available from 1982 -1997, and its source is the same as for gadp.


       3. Methodology
       3.1 General econometric strategy
How can we estimate the causal effect of economic and political reforms on economic
performance? Most existing macroeconomic literature has focused on one of two approaches. The
simplest one is to estimate cross country regressions. Economic performance, or economic policies,
are regressed on indicators of the political or trade regime.3 The obvious problem here is that the
estimated correlation could reflect an omitted variable or reverse causation. The typical solution is
to find an instrument for the political or trade regime, as in Hall and Jones (1999). But good
instruments are not easily available, particularly when it comes to democracy. Moreover, as
discussed in Wacziarg and Welch (2003), cross-sectional regressions mask useful information from
                                                                                                             4
the time variation in the data. The second approach is to estimate panel regressions.                            While
exploiting also the time variation in the data, this approach too relies on restrictive and untestable
identifying assumptions taking the form of exclusion restrictions.
        In this paper, we follow the microeconometric approach. We define reforms as a “treatment”
administered to some countries but not others, and estimate the causal effect of the treatment
through a difference-in-difference estimation. This methodology, used in this context also by
Persson (2004), allows us to exploit both the time series and the cross sectional variation in the
data.5 Specifically, we include in the analysis as many countries as possible: some experienced a
reform during the period of observation, and are called “treated”; others had no reform during this
period, and are called “controls”. For instance, when studying the effect of economic liberalizations,
the control countries are those that were always open or always closed during the relevant time
period. We then compare economic performance in the treated countries, before and after the
treatment, with the economic performance of the control group over the same time period. The
estimation method thus exploits both the within-country variation as well as the comparison
between countries. This has clear advantages relative to the simpler comparisons in isolation:

3
  Examples of this approach are Mulligan, Gil and Sala-i-Martin (2004) on the effects of democracy, Alesina, Spolaore
and Wacziarg (2003) on the effect on trade volumes.
4
  Examples of this approach are Sachs and Werner (1995) on economic liberalizations, Barro (1996) or Prezworski and
Limongi (1993) on democracy.
5
  In this respect, our methodology differs from both Wacziarg and Welch (2003) and Roll and Talbott (2003), who
estimate the effect of economic and political liberalizations, respectively, only from within-country (i.e. before-after)
comparisons.

                                                                                                                       7
exploiting the within-country variation only, risks confounding the effect of a treatment with that of
unobserved variables that move all countries at the same time--a relevant possibility in our context
because many economic and political liberalizations are clustered in the 1990s. Exploiting the
cross-sectional comparisons only, can be even more misleading, because the omitted variable
problem is daunting in this context.
        Since reforms do not take place in all countries at the same time, to implement the
difference-in-difference approach we estimate the following regressions in the whole sample of
treated and control countries, where i subscripts refer to countries and t subscripts refer to years:

       (1)                        yit = ai + bt + γ xit + δ reformit + eit

where yit     denotes the measure of performance, a and b are country and year fixed effects
respectively, xit is a set of other control variables, reformit is a dummy variable taking a value of 1
in the years after the reform in the treated countries and 0 otherwise (i.e , in the treated countries
before the reform and in the control countries) and e is an unobserved error term. The coefficient δ
measures the effect of the reform on the variable of interest y.


       3.2 Identification
As explained for instance in Besley and Case (2000) or in Blundell and McCurdy (2000), the
crucial identifying assumption in this difference-in-difference estimation is that there is no
unobserved variable affecting performance that moves systematically over time in a different way
between the treated and control groups. A violation of this assumption is more likely if the treated
and control countries are very different from each other, because in this case any omitted time-
varying variable, such as technological progress or increased globalization, could affect treated and
control countries in very different ways. The identifying assumption could also be violated if
reforms are not random and whatever triggers the reform also has a causal effect on performance;
for instance, economic liberalizations might be systematically enacted by far sighted political
leaders, who also promote sound economic performance in many other ways.
        Both identifying assumptions are clearly restrictive, as is always the case in
macroeconomics. Nevertheless, there are a number of steps we can take to reduce the likelihood of
violation and to check their validity. First, by including in the control groups countries that are
always open or always closed economically, or always democratic or non-democratic, we insure
that the average control country is not very different from the average treated country. 6 Second, we

6
 To check this, we have estimated the probability of treatment (i.e. of undergoing economic or political liberalizations)
as a function of some time invariant country features, namely continental location (being in Africa, Asia and Latin
America) and socialist legal origin. Figure A1 in the appendix displays the histograms of the estimated probability of

                                                                                                                       8
always include in the vector x of additional controls a dummy variable for socialist legal origin
interacted with the economic or political reform that we are studying. This makes sure that the
estimated effects of reforms do not reflect the very special circumstances of the transition in
formerly socialist countries. Moreover, we also always check that the results are robust to including
in the vector x of additional controls the interaction between year fixed effects and time invariant
variables that classify countries according to their continent (Africa, Latin America and Asia) and to
socialist legal origin. Conditioning on this time varying variable makes countries more similar and
thus reduces the likelihood of a violation of our identifying assumption – see also footnote 6 and
Figure A1. Third, we check the estimated residuals of the control group (over the whole period) and
of the treated group before the reform; a violation of the assumption that reforms are random is
likely to result in systematically different time patterns of the estimated residuals between these two
groups of countries. If we do not find clearly different patterns over time, we are reassured about
the validity of our identifying assumption.


        3.3 Implementation
Implementing this estimation strategy in our context requires addressing a few other problems.
First, some reforms take place very close to the end of the sample for which we have available
measures of performance. Since we expect that it takes some time for reforms to influence
performance, we discard the reforms that took place in the last three years of the available sample.
Specifically, we set to missing the observations of the dependent variables after a reform, if the
reform is not followed by at least three additional years of data on performance. For instance,
Burkina Faso liberalized its economy in 1998 and growth is only available until 2000. We have thus
set growth to missing for Burkina Faso from 1998 onwards, and this country is thus considered a
control (since it did not experience any liberalization before 1998). Since the pattern of available
data differs depending on the measures of performance, this also implies that the groups of control
and treated countries vary with our definition of performance. With regard to the beginning of the
sample, we only require one available observation of performance before the reform took place, for
a country to be classified as treated (since here delayed effects are not a problem).
         Second, in a few countries we observe episodes of reversals in economic and political
liberalizations. Reversals are more frequent for democratizations, particularly in a few African


treatment (i.e. of having at least one reform) for different groups of countries: those who had no reforms, those who had
only one reform, and those who had both. We find controls and treated countries close to both extremes of the estimated
probabilities of treatment (the so called “propensity score”); that is we find a few control countries that were likely to
experience some reforms but did not, such as Haiti, as well as several treated countries that were not very likely to
receive treatment, such as Ireland with regard to economic liberalization, or Iran towards the end of the sample with
regard to political liberalization. This reassures us that the two groups of countries are not too different from each other.

                                                                                                                           9
countries that start out as democracies upon becoming independent and then, after a few years,
collapse into dictatorships. Some of these episodes of reversals or of democratization are very brief
and last only a few years. To cope with this problem, we define treatment in two different ways.
First, we only consider permanent reforms, that is uninterrupted reforms that are not reversed in the
sample up to the year 2000.              In this case we ignore temporary reforms that are subsequently
reversed. The reason for doing this is that reversed liberalizations are in some sense incomplete
reforms that failed in some important yet unobserved dimension. Here we are interested in the
effects of the reforms that lasted. Of course, this might create a selection problem for the reforms
that happen towards the end of the sample, for which a reversal might take place in the future but
cannot be observed. Next, we define the treatment to include all reform episodes that last at least
four years, irrespective of whether they are temporary or permanent. The restriction to at least four
years of reform is imposed in light of the observation that the effects of the reform on performance
do not occur suddenly.7
       Last, some of our measures of performance, such as the rate of investment or corruption,
move slowly over time. Despite the inclusion of year dummy variables, the residuals of our
regressions for these measures of performance are likely to be serially correlated. Although this
does not bias the estimated treatment effect, it could lead us to underestimate the true standard
errors (see Bertrand, Duflo and Mullainathan, 2004). To cope with this problem, we always report
also standard errors estimated with clustered regressions, that allow residuals to be correlated within
each country block. In some specifications we also control for lagged per capita income or the
lagged dependent variable, or we estimate by averaging the data over longer periods. We discuss
these specification and estimation issues more in detail in the next section.
       Finally, Table 1 lists the sample of countries for which we have data on growth and on at least
one of the reform indicators (democracy, and being economically open or closed). The table is split
in three panels: panel A lists the control countries (those that were always open or always closed
during the period in which data on growth are available); panel B lists the treated countries that had
only one reform during the period in which data on growth are available--either political or
economic liberalization; panel C lists all treated countries that experienced both reforms during the
relevant time period. In each panel, the second and third columns report the date of their last


7
  In a few countries, reforms are enacted, then are interrupted for just a few years, and then are enacted again. If the
reversal lasts three years or less, we neglect it and when coding all reform years (permanent and temporary) we code the
reversal period as if it did not occur. Again, this is suggested by the logic that reforms (and reversals) need to last some
time to show their effects. For instance, Albania became a democracy with available data on growth in 1992, and
remained a democracy until the end, except for a one-year, 1996, during which democracy was interrupted. When we
define treatment as a permanent reform, we code the treatment as having started in 1997 (the year of permanent
democratization). When we consider all instances of democratization, we neglect the reversal of 1996 that lasted only
one year, and we classify Albania as a democracy throughout this period (and hence we consider it a control country).

                                                                                                                        10
liberalization and of their last democratization (i.e. a permanent liberalization or democratization as
defined above). A missing date means that no change in the relevant dimension was observed
during this period.8 About 85 countries had at least one episode of trade liberalization during 1960-
2000 that was not subsequently reversed, while there are about 50 countries that have become
democratic and had not reverted to autocracy by the year 2000. 32 countries experienced both
reforms.


      4. Results
First we study the effects of liberalizations and of democratizations in isolation. Then we study the
feedbacks and the interactions between the two types of reform.
      4.1        The effects of economic liberalizations
Table 2 reports the effects of economic liberalization on growth an investment. The control group
consists of all the countries that, in our sample, did not go through a regime change as far as
economic liberalization is concerned: that is, as explained in the previous section, the controls are
the countries that remained either always closed or always open throughout the sample--or, more
precisely, in the portion of our sample for which the dependent variable exists, here growth and
investment.
      Table 2 should be read as follows (the same holds for Tables 3 through 7). The variable lib is
a dummy variable equal to 1 in the post-liberalization years for the treated countries only. Its
estimated coefficient captures the average effect of the reform. The first columns, labelled
“permanent” in the fourth-but-last row, only consider permanent liberalizations, that is
liberalizations that last until the end of our sample. The columns labelled “all” consider instead all
liberalization episodes, including those that were eventually reversed, provided they last longer than
3 years. For each regression we report two standard errors, those from the OLS regression (above)
and those for the clustered regressions (below). As explained in the previous section, all regressions
include country fixed effects and year dummy variables, as well as the dummy variable for socialist
legal origin interacted with the reform dummy variable. In columns 2 and 5, as well as columns 7
and 10, we also control for year dummy variables interacted with dummy variables for continental
location (Africa, Asia and Latina America) and for socialist legal origin.
      Table 2 shows that economic liberalizations speed up growth by about 1% and raise the share
of investment by almost 2% of GDP. The effects of permanent and temporary liberalizations are not
very different—if anything, temporary liberalizations seem to have a larger effect on growth and
investment than those that are not reversed. These estimates are similar to those obtained by
8
 For a few countries only, a missing observation means that the economic or political regime could not be classified
based on available data.

                                                                                                                 11
Wacziarg and Welch (2003), who only consider treated countries and compare the periods before
and after the reform.
      Columns 3 and 8 investigate the timing of these effects, by replacing the variable lib with a
dummy variable equal to 1 in the three years preceding the reform (3y_pre_lib), a dummy variable
equal to 1 in the year of the reform and in the three following years (3y_post_lib), and a dummy
variable equal to 1 from year 4 after the reform and onwards (4yon_post_lib). Liberalizations seem
to be triggered by crisis: they occur at the end of a period during which the economy grows less
than usual (about 1 percent below trend growth), and investment is unusually low. Moreover, the
positive effects of liberalization take at least 4 years to show up. Note that the estimated coefficient
of the variable (4yon_post_lib) captures the difference between average economic performance four
years after the reform and the default years (i.e. the control countries and the treated countries in the
years that precede the reform by more than three years). Thus, after four years or more, not only is
the crisis overcome, but economic performance is significantly better than before the crisis.
      If reforms are preceded by a crisis, is our identification assumption at risk? Not necessarily,
unless one believes that something else happened during or after the crisis (other than the economic
reform itself), which in turn is responsible for the observed improvement in economic performance
four years or more down the line. On the contrary, this time pattern suggests that the improvement
in economic performance certainly did not start before the reform was implemented, and thus if
anything it reinforces a causal interpretation of the estimates. We return to a discussion of the
identifying assumptions in subsection 4.3 below.
      The finding that reforms are preceded by crisis raises yet another concern: could the growth
and investment acceleration after the reform simply reflect economic convergence once the crisis is
overcome? To answer this question we re-estimated the equation including lagged per-capita
income among the regressors. If the growth or investment acceleration four years after the reform
was just due to the income loss suffered during the crisis years, it would be captured by this new
variable. To avoid the bias due to the inclusion of lagged per-capita income in a panel regression
with country fixed effects, we discarded all countries for which less than 21 years of data are
available – this left us with 100 countries and an average panel length of about 30 years per country.
The estimated effect of liberalization on growth and investment was very similar to that reported in
Table 2, for all specifications.
      As a final check against spurious dynamic effects, we also re-estimated the model with a two-
step procedure suggested by Bertrand, Duflo and Mullainathan (2004) to cope with serially
correlated residuals. First, we estimated the residuals of a panel regression of economic
performance (growth or investment) against country and year fixed effects (in some specifications


                                                                                                      12
we also included year dummy variables interacted with continental location and socialist legal
origin), for the whole sample of countries (treated and controls). Then we retained only the treated
countries and computed the average of the residuals before and after the last unreversed reform. To
have a long enough time average, we discarded the spells (before or after the reform) that lasted less
than 10 years. Under the null hypothesis that economic liberalizations have no effect on economic
performance, the averaged residuals should be the same before and after the reform. We could
always reject this null hypothesis, finding that economic liberalizations improve economic
performance.
       Table 3 documents the effect of economic liberalization on gadp and corruption. Remember
that gadp is an index ranging between 0 and 10, while corruption ranges between 0 and 6.
Liberalizations appear to be associated with improvements in the quality of these structural policies.
The estimated effect is generally significant, particularly for gadp, but it is relatively small, never
exceeding 0.6. Again, we find that the effects are delayed by at least 3 years. But since the
dependent variables measure perceptions of good policies, these delayed effects cannot be
interpreted as causal. Rather, a more natural interpretation is that economic liberalizations are
simultaneously accompanied by improvement in structural policies, and the perceptions improve a
few years after new and better structural policies are in place. These episodes of economic reforms
probably correspond to the implementation of a cluster of good policies, of which opening up to
international trade is but one aspect.
       This general interpretation is also suggested by the estimates in Table 4, that look at the
effects of economic liberalizations on macro policies. Following an economic liberalization the
budget surplus improves by some 1.5 per cent of GDP - - here too the effects seem somewhat
delayed. Inflation however, does not appear to be affected by economic liberalizations, although
these tend to happen at the end of a period during which inflation was unusually high.9
       We further discuss our identifying assumptions in section 4.3 below. But before doing that,
we study the effects of political reforms.


       4.2       The effects of democratizations
Tables 5-7 repeat the analysis for the same dependent variables and with exactly the same structure,
but defining the reform as the event of becoming a democracy. Here the control group includes all
the countries that were either always democratic or always non-democratic.

9
  In Tables 3 and 4 we generally do not have a long enough time period to estimate dynamic equations with lagged
dependent variables or with the two-step procedure suggested by Bertrand, Duflo and Mullainathan (2004). The only
exception is inflation, for which we have 91 countries with 21 years of data or more. Including a lagged dependent
variable and estimating the effect of liberalization on inflation yields a negative and significant estimated coefficient,
suggesting that inflation goes down after economic liberalization.

                                                                                                                      13
      In Tables 5 the dependent variables are growth and the investment rate. Democratic
transitions are associated with small improvements in economic performance. The effects are
generally too small to be statistically significant, however, except when we consider all political
reforms (rather than permanent reforms only) – cf. columns 4, 5 and 9. Columns 3 and 8 study the
timing of these effects. As for economic liberalization, the event of becoming a democracy is
preceded by a slowdown in growth and investment--though the estimated coefficients are not
statistically significant. The results are very similar if we include lagged per-capita income among
the regressors (disregarding the countries for which less than 21 years of data are available): the
estimated effect of becoming a democracy is positive and about the same order of magnitude as in
Table 5, but it is statistically significant only when considering all democratizations. The two step
procedure described above and suggested by Bertrand, Duflo and Mullainathan (2004) yields
statistically insignificant estimates.
      Overall, these estimates tend to confirm previous results in the literature, that found no robust
effect of becoming a democracy on economic performance, although they point to small positive
effects of democratizations, leaving some room for an optimistic assessment about the effects of
becoming a democracy.
      Tables 6 shows that political liberalizations, improve gadp and corruption with a lag, though
again by relatively small amounts. The effects on corruption are typically stronger than those for
gadp. The order of magnitude is about the same as for economic liberalizations.
      Finally, Table 7 shows that democratizations are associated with ambiguous effects on
macroeconomic policy: inflation rises but so does the budget surplus. The timing of these effects,
illustrated in columns 3 and 8, is puzzling however: both inflation and the budget surplus are
already higher up to three years before democratization, relative to the default observations. This
suggests that the identifying assumption might be violated, since the policy changes might precede
the political reform.10


      4.3 Discussion
The results up to this point can be summarized as follows. Economic liberalization is good along all
dimensions: it is accompanied by better structural policies and better macroeconomic policies, and
it is followed by improved economic performance. This timing suggests a causal interpretation, at
least with regard to economic outcomes. Political liberalization, on the contrary, do not have strong
and robust effects on growth and investment, though they appear to improve structural policies and

10
  Adding a lagged dependent variable to the inflation regressions, or estimating with the two step procedure discussed
above, yields small positive coefficients of democratization on inflation, which are significant in some but not all
specifications.

                                                                                                                   14
they yield mixed results on macroeconomic policies.                       These findings confirm with a new
methodology previous results in the literature about the effects of economic and political
liberalizations on growth and investment, and add some new insights on other policy variables.
       As anticipated in section 3, the identifying assumption behind these estimates is that there is
no unobserved time varying variable that affects performance in the treated and control groups
differently. To check that this assumption is not clearly inconsistent with the data, Figures 1 and 2
plot the average estimated residuals in each year, for the control group and for the treated group
before the corresponding reform (permanent liberalization in Figure 1, permanent democratization
in Figure 2).11 The specification is the more comprehensive one, inclusive also of year fixed effects
interacted with continental location and socialist legal origin. Under the identifying assumption, the
residuals for these two groups of countries ought to be similar, up until the time of the reform. But
this is not what we find. Only in one case (the growth regression when the treatment is economic
liberalization) the two groups of countries exhibit very similar time patterns. In all other cases the
dependent variable for the group of treated countries before the ‘treatment’ appears to behave
somewhat differently from that for the control group. The difference is particularly pronounced
towards the end of the sample, when the number of treated countries becomes very small because
more and more countries have taken the treatment.
       These figures suggest two possible sources of bias in these ‘single treatment’ regressions. The
‘treatment’, that is economic or political liberalization, did not happen randomly, but at the end of a
period during which a country that eventually opened up, along one or the other dimension,
behaved in a systematically different way from the control group—for instance was investing more,
or less, than the controls. If the reform does not happen randomly, then our results could be affected
by a selection bias—for instance we could find larger investment after economic liberalizations
simply because the countries that opened up were already investing more than the group of control
countries. Alternatively, the bias could be the result of having omitted one or more variables
correlated with both performance and treatment. This second problem is particularly relevant if both
reforms tend to be undertaken simultaneously, or if one type of reform induces the other. If so,
omitting one of the two treatment variables biases the estimated effect of the included one—for
instance we may attribute an improvement in gadp to economic liberalization, while it is really the
effect of the transition to a democratic regime which accompanies economic liberalization.


11
   In interpreting these figures, one should bear in mind that the treated and control groups vary in each diagram, and
that the treatment date is different for different countries. Moreover, as time progresses, the group of treated countries
becomes smaller (because more and more countries have taken the treatment), while the size of the control group in
each diagram remains constant over time. For each dependent variable, the residuals in Figure 1 are estimated from the
second column in each of the panels in Tables 2-4, while the residuals in Figure 2 are estimated from the second column
in each of the panels in Tables 5-7.

                                                                                                                      15
      Motivated by these concerns, we now consider the feedback effects between economic and
political liberalizations, as well as possible interactions in their effects on the performance
indicators.


      4.4       Effects of economic liberalizations on democracy, and viceversa
We start by studying the feedback effects between economic and political liberalizations. That is,
we first ask whether one reform appears to ‘cause’ the other.
      A priori, the feedback effects could go in both directions and are likely to reinforce each
other. Trade tends to benefit many, and hurt a few: it thus seems more likely that a democratic
regime shifts the balance in favour of freer trade. It is also possible, however, that a liberalized
economic regime fosters a transition towards democracy, for instance because it increases the
economic well being and the economic power of the middle classes (see for instance Acemoglou
and Robinson, 2004 and Rajan and Zingales, 2003).
      The results are displayed in Table 8. Here the dependent variables are, respectively, the
continuous variable POLITY2, that varies from -10 to +10 and measures the democratic quality of
the political regime (higher values being better democracies), and the 0-1 index of economic
liberalization. In the regression in which the dependent variable is the quality of democracy, the
treatment is defined as the economic reform and the control group includes all the countries that
never changed their economic regime. Viceversa, when the dependent variable is being
economically open, the treatment is democratization and the control groups consists of all countries
that never changed their political regime.12
      The first lesson from Table 8 is that feedback effects are generally important. The estimated
coefficients are often positive and significant both when we ask whether economic liberalization
affects political liberalization, or the other way around. Investigating the effects of these two
reforms in isolation, as commonly done in the literature, may thus result in biased estimates of their
effects.
      The timing of these feedback effects is very different for the two reforms, however, and
suggests that causality is more likely to run from political to economic liberalizations rather than
viceversa. Economic liberalizations (the left-hand-side panel of Table 8) do not appear to lead the
transition to a democracy: as shown in columns 3 and 5, the quality of democracy is higher both
before and after the date of economic liberalization. In particular, there is no evidence that
POLITY2 is higher in the years following economic liberalization, compared to the 5 preceding

12
  In columns 6-8, where we consider the effects of permanent democratizations, the dependent variable is defined as
being permanently open ; in columns 9 and 10, where we consider the effect all democratizations (permanent and
temporary), the dependent variable is being open (irrespective of whether or not there has been a reversal).

                                                                                                                16
years. Note that this result is obtained both for permanent democratizations (column 3) as well as
for temporary ones (column 5).
       Democratizations, on the contrary, appear to lead economic liberalization (see the right-hand-
side panel of Table 8). The index of economic liberalization rises over time in the years following
the transition to a democratic regime, thus suggesting that political liberalization ‘induces’
economic liberalizations much more than the other way around. Since the dependent variable here
is either 0 or 1, the coefficients in the right hand panel of Table 8 can be interpreted as effects on
probabilities—that is, for instance, the coefficient 0.32 in column 8 means that over 4 years after the
transition to a democracy the probability that a country will open up has increased by 32 per cent –
a large effect indeed.
       A cursory look at the data in Table 1 also suggests that the direction of causality is more
likely to go from political to economic liberalizations rather than viceversa. As shown in panel C of
Table 1, among the countries that undertook both reforms in the period 1960-2000, as many as 23
countries first became democracies and then opened up the economy, while the opposite sequence
is observed in only 9 countries. Moreover, countries that first became democracies opened up the
economy after about 4 years on average, while for the opposite sequence the average distance
between the two reforms exceeds 9 years, suggesting that these two reforms are less closely related
in this second group of countries.
       Despite these remarks, other features of the data suggest that the feedback effects could go in
both directions. Figure 3 displays the estimated residuals for the control countries and for the treated
countries before the reform. In the top panel, the dependent variable is economic liberalization, and
the treatment is becoming a (permanent) democracy; in the bottom panel, the dependent variable is
the quality of democracy as measured by POLITY2, and the treatment is (permanent) economic
liberalization.13 If the direction of causality ran exclusively from democracy to economic
liberalization, in the top panel the residuals for the control countries and the treated countries before
the political reform should display similar patterns. But this is not what we find. In particular, with
reference to the upper panel of Figure 3, where the dependent variable is economic liberalization,
the residuals from the treated group before political reform display a positive trend towards the end
of the 1990s. This suggests that this group of countries was more likely to open up in the 1990s,
quite independently of the prior transition to a democracy. Indeed, most cases of economic
liberalization that are preceded by political liberalization happen in the 1990’s; when we exclude
this decade from the sample the estimated coefficients in Table 8 drop and become negative or

13
  Here too, as in the previous figures, the specification includes also year fixed effects interacted with dummy variables
for continental location and for socialist legal origin. For each dependent variable the residuals are thus estimated from
the second column in each of the panels in Table 8.

                                                                                                                      17
statistically insignificant, and the evidence of a ‘causal’ link between the two forms of
liberalizations disappears.
      Overall, we are thus led to conclude that the positive feedback between economic and
political liberalizations could run in both directions, and that it is difficult to ascertain a precise
direction of causality between economic and political reforms. This suggests that we ought to study
the effects of the two liberalizations jointly; this is what we do in the next section.


      4.5 Interactions between political and economic liberalizations
The control group now consists of all countries that have never changed either political or economic
regime, and we allow for multiple treatments: only economic liberalization, only democratization,
or both.
      The question of whether there are complementarities or other interactions between different
types of reforms is of independent interest, beyond addressing the identification problem discussed
in the previous section. We would like to know if the joint adoption of both reforms enhances the
sum of the individual effects, and if the sequence of reforms matters. But there is also a more
technical reason for allowing the estimated coefficients to differ depending on the number and
sequence of reforms. If we imposed a priori the same coefficients on the reform dummy variables
for all countries irrespective of the number and sequence of reforms--while the true effects are
heterogeneous--the error term would pick up part of the heterogeneous treatment effect; with
multiple treatments (and hence multiple dummy variables for economic reform in the same
country), this would create a correlation between the error term and the reform dummy variables in
the countries that experienced both treatments, leading to biased estimates.
      For these reasons, in this subsection we partition the countries in mutually exclusive groups
and we estimate a specification that includes the following dummy variables for reforms:
      -    two dummy variables equal to one after political (economic) liberalization in the
countries that only changed their political (economic) regime, leaving the other unchanged
throughout the sample. These variable are labelled dem_1t, for democratization-1-treatment-only,
(lib_1t, for liberalization -1-treatment-only).
      -    two dummy variables equal to one after political (economic) liberalization in the
countries that enacted both reforms, that is liberalized the economy and also introduced democratic
institutions. These variable are labelled dem_2t, for democratization-2-treatments, (lib_2t, for
liberalization -2-treatments).
      -    two dummy variables equal to one after the second reform only, depending on the
sequence of the reform. The variable lib_after_dem is equal to one after the second reform only,


                                                                                                    18
and only for countries that first became a democracy and then liberalized the economy; it is zero in
all other cases. Likewise, the variable dem_after_lib, is equal to one after the second reform for
countries that first liberalized the economy and then became a democracy, otherwise it is zero. If the
estimated coefficients of both variables are zero, then it means that there are no interaction effects
(i.e. the effect of reforms as captured by the dummy variables dem_2t and lib_2t are additive), and
sequencing does not matter.14
       Thus, the effect of reforms in countries that undertook both reforms should be read as follows.
Consider a country like Mexico, that first opened up the economy and then became a democracy.
When it liberalizes the economy, the effect on economic performance is given by the estimated
coefficient of the variable lib_2t. When it then becomes a democracy, the effect is captured by the
algebraic sum of the coefficients of dem_2t and dem_after_lib. Conversely, consider a country like
Argentina, that followed the opposite sequence: first it became a democracy and then it opened up
the economy. The effect of the first (political) reform is captured by the estimated coefficient of the
variable dem_2t. The effect of the second (economic) reform, instead, is captured by the algebraic
sum of the coefficients of lib_2t and lib_after_dem.
       As in the previous subsections, we always include a dummy variable for socialist legal origin
interacted with a dummy variable for political liberalization and with a dummy variable for
economic liberalization, to isolate the effects that are due to the special case of transition
economies. Given that here we seek to extract more information from the data, we pay more
attention to the other conditioning variables; in particular, we always include year dummy variables
interacted with dummy variables for continental location and socialist legal origin. We also report
the estimates for a variety of alternative specifications and estimation methods.
       Figure 4 illustrates the estimated residuals in the usual way, for the control countries and for
the treated countries before the first (permanent) reform.15 With this richer specification and this
definition of multiple treatments, the control and the treated groups now display a very similar
behaviour, confirming that here the identifying assumption seems consistent with the data.
       Consider Table 9 first, where the dependent variables are growth and the investment rate. The
first two columns of each panel (columns 1-2 and 6-7) report our basic estimates for permanent and
all reforms respectively. Columns 3-4 and 8-9 add lagged income (also for permanent and all
reforms respectively), to control for possible convergence dynamics; to reduce the impact of the
lagged dependent variable bias in fixed effects estimation, here we discard all countries with less



14
   One country, Paraguay, undertook both reforms in the same year; we thus set both variables, lib_after_dem and
dem_after_lib, equal to 1 after both reforms for Paraguay.
15
   For each dependent variable, the residuals are estimated from the first column in each of the panels in Tables 9-11.

                                                                                                                    19
than 21 years of data. Since serial correlation in the residuals is less likely to be a problem in these
regressions, we only report standard errors estimated by OLS.
      In the first two rows we report the estimated coefficients of the variables dem_1t and lib_1t,
referring to the countries that opened up in only one dimension. Here we see that becoming a
democracy either has no effect on economic performance, or if anything it has a negative effect.
Economic liberalization instead has a positive effect on economic performance, except in columns 1
and 3 where we confine attention to growth and to permanent reforms and where the effect is
insignificant. These estimates thus roughly confirm the findings already discussed in the previous
subsections, when considering each reform in isolation, although the effects here are generally
weaker.
      In rows three and four we report the estimated coefficients of the variables dem_2t and lib_2t,
referring to the countries that undertook both reforms. As explained above, these coefficients
capture the effect of the reform that came first (democracy or economic liberalization, depending on
the sequence). Once more, economic liberalization has strong positive effects on growth and (when
all reforms are included) on investment. Becoming a democracy has no effects on investment, but
leads to growth accelerations. Compared to the countries that opened up in only one dimension, the
effects here are generally stronger and more likely to be positive, particularly for democracy.
Compared to the results described in the previous section where we considered each reform in
isolation, we confirm that economic liberalizations induce economic improvements, but we now
find stronger positive effects from becoming a democracy.
      Finally, rows six and seven report the estimated coefficients of the variables lib_after_dem
and dem_after_lib. As explained above, these variables capture possible interaction effects between
the two reforms and discriminate among countries on the basis of the sequencing. These estimated
coefficients are generally different from zero, suggesting the presence of interaction effects,
although with opposite signs on growth and investment.
      The overall effect of the last reform (democracy or economic liberalization, depending on the
sequence) can be obtained by the algebraic sum of the estimated coefficient of dem_2t and
dem_after_lib (if the sequence was first economic liberalization and then democracy), or by the sum
of lib_2t and lib_after_dem (under the reverse sequence). These algebraic sums indicate that, when
the second reform is enacted, investment accelerates further while growth is not affected or might
even fall. But here the effects are stronger for democracy than for economic liberalization. When
the second reform is democracy, growth is not affected but investment accelerates by 2-3% of GDP,
depending on the specification. When instead the second reform is liberalization, growth either falls
or remains unaffected and investment rises but by less (about 1.5% of GDP).


                                                                                                     20
       Thus, the central new lesson from Table 9 is that the sequence of reforms matters a lot.
Opening up the economy first and then becoming a democracy gives better results than the opposite
sequence. This can be seen directly by comparing the estimated coefficients of lib_after_dem and
dem_after_lib. In the growth regressions, the estimated coefficient of lib_after_dem is always
negative and significant, while the estimated coefficient of dem_after_lib, is not significantly
different from zero (and sometimes it is even positive). In the investment regressions, the estimated
coefficient of dem_after_lib is always positive and statistically significant, while the estimated
coefficient of lib_after_dem is generally not significant and sometimes it is even negative. Thus,
although the sign of the interaction effects is different on growth vs investment, both regressions
imply that countries that open up the economy first perform better compared to countries that enact
the opposite sequence. Opening up the economy first gives two boosts to economic performance:
the first one at the time of economic liberalization; and then a second one, on investment, when the
country becomes a democracy. Becoming a democracy first, instead, gives more disappointing
results: there is some acceleration of growth (but not of investment) at the time of democratization;
but later on, when the economy is liberalized, the positive effects of liberalizations tend to vanish or
are smaller compared to the countries that enacted the two reforms in reverse order.
       As a final robustness check, columns 5 and 10 of Table 9 report the two step estimates
obtained with the procedure suggested by Bertrand, Duflo and Mullainathan (2004) and described
above. First we estimate the residuals of a panel regression of economic performance (growth or
investment) against country and years fixed effects and the year dummy variables interacted with
continental location and socialist legal origin, for the whole sample of countries (treated and
controls). Then we retained only the treated countries and computed the country average of the
residuals under three sub-periods: before any reform, after the first reform and before the second
reform, and after the second reform (whenever it took place).16 To have a long enough time
average, we discarded the sub-periods lasting less than 10 years; we were left with 110 observations
corresponding to an unbalanced panel of at most three periods for the treated countries. We then
regressed theses remaining averaged estimated residuals on the same set of dummy variables used
on yearly data and described above.17 As shown in columns 5 and 10, the resulting estimates
confirm the importance of the sequence of reforms.
       Table 10 reports the same set of estimates for two other dependent variables: international
trade (defined as the volume of trade in percent of GDP) and the rate of inflation. The structure of
Table 10 and the estimation procedures are identical to those of Table 9, except that in columns 3-4

16
  Here we always refer to permanent (i.e. unreversed) reforms.
17
  As for the yearly data, in this second step we also controlled for socialist legal origin interacted with the political and
economic reforms.

                                                                                                                         21
and 8-9 we now include the lagged dependent variable (rather than lagged per-capita income); thus,
the estimated coefficients in these columns capture the short run effects of the reforms.
      The left hand panel of Table 10, on international trade, helps to understand why the sequence
might be important. Under the “good” sequence, economic liberalization gives a big boost to trade
(the estimated coefficient of lib_2t is always positive and generally highly significant), with a
second smaller boost once the country becomes a democracy (the algebraic sum of dem_2t and
dem_after_lib is positive and significant in the first two columns). Under the “bad” sequence,
becoming a democracy reduces, if anything, trade volumes (the estimated coefficient of dem_2t is
often negative and generally insignificant), and economic liberalization has negligible effects on
trade (the algebraic sum of lib_2t and lib_after_dem is close to zero). The right hand panel of Table
10, on inflation, suggests a second way in which the sequence seems to matter. Repeating the same
steps, we see that economic liberalizations induce a fall in inflation in the countries that open up the
economy first, but this does not happen if economic liberalizations follow democratizations. Table
10 thus suggest that there are two types of economic liberalizations: those that are associated with
improvements in trade and better macroeconomic policy, and those that are not. Economic
liberalizations that are enacted after a country has become a democracy are less effective at
boosting trade volume and are accompanied by worse macroeconomic policies. This might be one
channel through which the sequence of reforms matters.
      Table 11 repeats the analysis for the budget surplus and structural policies (gadp and
corruption). Since a shorter time series is available for these dependent variables, here we do not
attempt to also control for a lagged dependent variable or to estimate via the two-step procedure.
Thus, we only report the usual set of estimates on yearly data. The estimates on the budget surplus
provide yet more evidence that the sequence matters: economic liberalizations enacted after
becoming a democracy are associated with smaller improvements in the budget surplus, compared
to economic liberalizations that come first. The results on gadp and corruption instead suggest that
economic and political reforms seem to have additive effects, confirming the results obtained when
considering each reform in isolation. Here the sequence seems unimportant, although the countries
that enact both reforms do better than the countries that enact only one of them.
       Finally, we address one last question. Consider countries that had only one reform in our
sample period, 1960-2000. Some of them were closed in the other (non-reformed) dimension, others
were open. If the sequence of reforms matters, could the effect of the observed reform differ
depending on whether the country was open or closed in the other dimension? To answer this
question, we split the dummy variables lib_1t and dem_1t into a finer partition, allowing the effect
of lib_1t to differ between democracies and non-democracies, and the effect of dem_1t to differ


                                                                                                     22
between countries that were economically open or closed. Here the comparison did not yield
conclusive results. One reason could simply be lack of data: among the countries experiencing only
one reform, only three countries (Central African Republic, Iran and Malawi) became democracies
in closed economic environments, and relatively few opened up the economy while remaining
dictatorships throughout. In most other cases, the reform took place in countries that were already
open in the other dimension. A second possibility is that the distance between the two reforms in
this group of countries was so large to make them incomparable to the countries undertaking both
reforms in a closer sequence. Whatever the reason, the inference that the sequence of reforms
matters is only supported by the sample of countries that undertook both reforms during the
observed sample period.


      5. Why sequencing might matter?
The main lesson we learn from the joint study of economic and political liberalizations is that the
sequence matters. Countries that first liberalize the economy, and then make the transition to a
democracy, do better, in terms of growth, investment, trade volume and macro policies, than those
that adopt the two reforms in the reverse order. This finding can be interpreted in two alternative
and non-mutually exclusive ways.
      One possibility is that economic liberalizations enacted first are more effective. This
interpretation is suggested by the findings on trade volume and inflation: economic liberalization
first is associated with a sharp increase in trade volumes, both at the time of economic
liberalizations and then again later on, when the country becomes a democracy; instead, economic
liberalizations that are preceded by transitions to democracy have much smaller effects on trade.
Similarly, the reduction in inflation is only observed after an economic liberalization, if this comes
first. The type of economic liberalization a country adopts thus seems different depending on
whether it is, or it is not, a democracy. Democracies do tend to liberalize the economy, but trade
does not expand, suggesting that although the economy is formally open, protection remains
pervasive, or new non-tariff barriers are introduced to replace formal tariffs. This is not the case
when the liberalization takes place in a dictatorship. “Dictators” are less likely to open up the
economy, as suggested by the fewer cases of economic liberalizations under dictatorships. But those
who do--for instance Chile in 1976, or Guyana in 1988, or Mexico in 1986--if they decide to open
up, it is because they are able to crush the interest groups that oppose free trade and a market
system.   Hence liberalization is more pervasive and effective, and less bogged down by
compromises.



                                                                                                   23
      The other possibility is that democratizations, when enacted in an open economic
environment, produce “better” democracies. There are several reasons why this might be the case.
One reason is that liberalization speeds up growth and introduces a more competitive environment.
Eventually, when the country gets rid of the dictator and becomes a democracy, it is in some sense,
a better democracy. First, because it is now open to trade and competition; second because, having
grown faster for some time, it now has the resources for the redistribution that a democracy
requires. A young democracy in a closed economic environment, instead, is more likely to bogged
down in redistributive conflicts and be more unrestrained in the pursuit of populist and inefficient
policies. A second reason might be that the sequence economic liberalization followed by political
liberalization might indicate the presence of a controlled and pre-planned liberalization enacted by a
far sighted leader. When democratization comes first, instead, it is more likely to be unexpected and
result from violent struggles or collapses of state authority. As such, it is more likely to be
associated with economic disruptions and redistributive struggles. The data lend some support to
this interpretation as well. Democratizations that follow liberalizations seem to give an additional
boost to investment and trade volumes, perhaps because they give more confidence that the open
economic environment will last over time. This does not happen when democratization comes first.
Moreover, when democratization comes second, we tend to observe a more gradual improvement in
the quality of democracy (as measured by the variable POLITY) in between the two liberalization
episodes – a sign of a more controlled reform process.
       What does all of this imply for a country that is closed economically and politically and that
is contemplating economic and political reforms, or for a new-born country e.g. like Iraq? If
reforms could be administered like medical treatments, then the answer would be clear cut.
Economic liberalization should come first and receive the strongest priority; only afterwards should
the country worry about political reform. But reforms are not ordered by a doctor and the data do
indicate that autocrats are unlikely to open up the economy. Indeed, most economic liberalizations
tend to be preceded by political reforms, perhaps imposed by a struggling population on an
unwilling leader. In this case, the sequence of reforms cannot be chosen ex-ante and the path to
reform might be less effective from an economic point of view.




                                                                                                   24
                                                  References
Acemoglou, D. and J. Robinson (2004), work in progress


Alesina, A., E. Spolaore and R. Wacziarg (2003), “Trade, growth and the size of countries”, mimeo, Harvard
University.

Barro, R, (1996), "Democracy and Growth", Journal of Economic Growth, (March ).

Bertrand, M., E. Duflo and S. Mullainathan (2004), “How Much Should We Trust Differences- in-
Differences Estimates?”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 119, 249-275.

Besley, T. J. and Anne C. Case (2000), "Unnatural Experiments? Estimating the Incidence of Endogenous
Policies”, Economic Journal, (November).

Blundell, R. and T. McCurdy (2000), “Labor Supply: a Review of Alternative Approaches”, in O.
Ashenfelter and D. Card (eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics ,vol. 3a. Amsterdam, North Holland.

Hall, R. E. and C. Jones (1999), “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much more Output per Worker than
Others?”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 114, 83-116.

Knack, S. and P. Keefer (1995), “Institutions and Economic Performance: Cross-Country Tests Using
Alternative Measures”, Economics and Politics, 7: 207-227.

IMF, (2003), World Economic Outlook, April. IMF, Washington DC.

Mulligan C. B., R. Gil and X. Sala-i-Martin (2004), “Do Democracies Have Different Public Policies than
Non-democracies?”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, (March.).

Persson, T. (2004), “Consequences of Constitutions”, 2003 Presidential Address at the Annual EEA
Congress, Journal of the European Economic Association (forthcoming).

Persson, T. and G. Tabellini (2003) The Economic Effects of Constitutions, Cambridge, MIT Press.

Przeworski, A., and Limongi, F. (1993), "Political Regimes and Economic Growth." Journal of Economic
Perspectives 7: 51-70.

Przeworski, A., and Limongi, F. (2000), Democracy and Development: Political Regimes and Well-Being in
the World, 1950-1990. Cambridge (UK), Cambridge University Press.

Rajan, Raghuram G. and Luigi Zingales (2003), Saving Capitalism from Capitalists. London: Random
House.

Rodriguez, F. and D. Rodrik (2000), “Trade Policy and Economic Growth: A Skeptic’s Guide to the Cross-
National Evidence”, NBER Macroeconomic Annual 2000, vol. 15: 261-325.

Roll, R. and J. Talbott (2003), “Political and Economic Freedoms and Prosperity”, mimeo.

Sachs, J. and A. Werner (1995), “Economic Reform and the Process of Global Integration”, Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, 1: 1-95.

Wacziarg, R. and K. H. Welch (2003), “Trade Liberalization and Growth: New Evidence”, NBER Working
Paper No. 10152.

Werner, A. (2003), “Once More into the Breach: Economic Growth and Global Integration”, mimeo.


                                                                                                       25
Table 1: Countries and years of permanent democratizations and liberalizations
          (Treatment refers to growth regressions)

A. Countries that received no treatments (controls).
       In this table some countries are defined as controls even if a liberalization or democratization year appears: it
      means that the dependent variable was not available in the year of permanent liberalization or democratization,
      or that the reform took place so late in the sample that the last few observations of the dependent variable were
      discarded.




Country              year of perm.      year of perm.     Country         year of perm.        year of perm.
                       liberalization   democratization                     liberalization     democratization
Algeria              .                  .                 Lesotho         .                    .
Angola               .                  .                 Lithuania                    1993    .
Austria                         1960    .                 Luxembourg      .                    .
Azerbaijan                      1995    .                 Malta           .                    .
Belarus              .                  .                 Moldova                      1994    .
Belgium              .                  .                 Namibia         .                    .
Bulgaria                        1991               1990   Netherlands     .                    .
Burkina Faso                    1998    .                 Nigeria         .                               1999
Burundi                         1999    .                 Norway          .                    .
Canada               .                  .                 Pakistan        .                    .
Chad                 .                  .                 Papua New G.    .                    .
China                .                  .                 Russia          .                    .
Comoros              .                  .                 Rwanda          .                    .
Congo                .                  .                 Senegal         .                               2000
Croatia              .                             1999   Sierra Leone    .                    .
Cuba                 .                  .                 Slovak Rep.                  1991    .
Czech Republic                  1991    .                 Slovenia                      1991   .
Denmark              .                  .                 Swaziland       .                    .
Eq. Guinea           .                  .                 Sweden                       1960    .
Estonia              .                  .                 Switzerland     .                    .
Finland                         1960    .                 Syria           .                    .
France               .                  .                 Tajikistan                   1996    .
Gabon                .                  .                 Togo            .                    .
Georgia                         1996    .                 Ukraine         .                    .
Germany              .                  .                 United Kingd.   .                    .
Haiti                .                  .                 United States   .                    .
Hong Kong            .                  .                 Uzbekistan      .                    .
Iceland              .                  .                 Vietnam         .                    .
India                .                  .                 Yemen           .                    .
Italy                .                  .                 Zaire           .                    .
Kazakhstan           .                  .                 Zimbabwe        .                    .
Kyrgyzstan                      1994    .




                                                                                                                      1
B.      Countries that received one treatment only: democratization

                 In this table, as in the previous one, some countries are defined as having received only one treatment
                 even if a year appears for both liberalization and democratization: it means that the dependent
                 variable was not available in one of those years, or that the reform took place so late in the sample that
                 the last few observations of the dependent variable were discarded.. The same applies for the
                 following table.

Country                year of perm. l iberalization   year of perm .democratization
Albania                                         1992                              1997
Cambodia               .                                                          1998
Central African Rep.   .                                                          1993
Cyprus                                          1960                              1968
Fiji                   .                                                          1990
Greece                 .                                                          1974
Iran                   .                                                          1997
Malawi                 .                                                          1994
Portugal               .                                                          1975
Spain                  .                                                          1976
Thailand               .                                                          1992

                 Countries that received one treatment only: liberalization

Country            year of perm. liberalization        year of perm. democratization
Armenia                                        1995                               1998
Australia                                      1964    .
Barbados                                       1966    .
Botswana                                       1979    .
Cameroon                                       1993    .
Cape Verde                                     1991    .
Colombia                                       1986    .
Costa Rica                                     1986    .
Egypt                                          1995    .
Gambia                                         1985    .
Guinea                                         1986    .
Guinea-Bissau                                  1987                               1999
Indonesia                                      1970                               1999
Ireland                                        1966    .
Israel                                         1985    .
Ivory Coast                                    1994                               2000
Jamaica                                        1989    .
Japan                                          1964    .
Jordan                                         1965    .
Kenya                                          1993    .
Latvia                                         1993    .
Macedonia                                      1994    .
Malaysia                                       1963    .
Mauritania                                     1995    .
Mauritius                                      1968    .
Morocco                                        1984    .
New Zealand                                    1986    .
Niger                                          1994                               1999
Singapore                                      1965    .
South Africa                                   1991    .
Sri Lanka                                      1991    .
Tanzania                                       1995    .
Trin. & Tobago                                 1992    .
Tunisia                                        1989    .
Uganda                                         1988    .
Venezuela                                      1996    .


                                                                                                                         2
C. Countries that received 2 treatments

                 Democratization first

Country            year of perm. liberalization       year of perm. democratization

Argentina                                     1991                               1983
Panama                                        1996                               1989
Paraguay                                      1989                               1989
Uruguay                                       1990                               1985
Bolivia                                       1985                               1982
Brazil                                        1991                               1985
Dominican Rep.                                1992                               1978
Ecuador                                       1991                               1979
El Salvador                                   1989                               1982
Nicaragua                                     1991                               1990
Guatemala                                     1988                               1986
Honduras                                      1991                               1980
Poland                                        1990                               1989
Romania                                       1992                               1990
Hungary                                       1990                               1989
Turkey                                        1989                               1983
Nepal                                         1991                               1990
Bangladesh                                    1996                               1991
Philippines                                   1988                               1986
Zambia                                        1993                               1991
Ethiopia                                      1996                               1993
Mozambique                                    1995                               1994
Madagascar                                    1996                               1991




                 Liberalization first

Country            year of perm. liberalization       year of perm. democratization
Chile                                          1976                              1989
Guyana                                         1988                              1992
Peru                                           1991                              1993
Mexico                                         1986                              1994
Ghana                                          1985                              1996
Benin                                          1990                              1991
Mali                                           1988                              1992
South Korea                                    1968                              1987
Taiwan                                         1963                              1992




                                                                                        3
Table 2: Effects of liberalizations on growth and investment

                    (1)          (2)           (3)             (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)          (9)         (10)
Dep. Var                                         growth                                                        investment

lib                 1.01         0.93                          1.42        1.32        1.59        1.98                     2.08        2.32
                    (0.36)***    (0.41)**                      (0.34)***   (0.38)***   (0.31)***   (0.34)***                (0.29)***   (0.31)***
                    (0.38)**     (0.47)*                       (0.36)***   (0.43)***   (0.86)*     (1.11)*                  (0.81)**    (0.98)**

3y_pre_lib                                     -0.95                                                           -2.36
                                               (0.49)*                                                         (0.42)***
                                               (0.60)                                                          (0.88)***

3y_post_lib                                    0.48                                                            -0.55
                                               (0.46)                                                          (0.39)
                                               (0.44)                                                          (1.00)

4yon_post_lib                                  0.95                                                            2.12
                                               (0.44)**                                                        (0.38)***
                                               (0.42)**                                                        (1.14)*

Treatment           permanent    permanent     permanent       all         all         permanent   permanent   permanent    all         all
Y*conts             No           Yes           No              No          Yes         No          yes         No           No          Yes
Obs.(countries)     4492(134)    4492(134)     4492(134)       4492(134)   4492(134)   4640(135)   4640(135)   4640(135)    4640(135)   4640(135)
Adj.R2(within)      0.01         0.03          0.01            0.01        0.03        0.02        0.08        0.04         0.03        0.08
Standard errors in parentheses (above: OLS; below: clustered); * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%;
 *** significant at 1%.
lib = 1 after liberalization
3y_pre_lib = 1 in the 3 years preceding liberalizations
3y_post_lib = 1 in the year of liberalization and in the 3 following years
4yon_post_lib = 1 from the 4th year and onwards after liberalization
Y*conts: Y are dummy variables for years; conts are dummy variables for Asia, Africa, Latin America and for socialist legal origin
Regressions always include country and year fixed effects, as well as a dummy variable for socialist legal origin interacted with lib




                                                                                                                                                1
Table 3: Effects of liberalizations on gadp and corruption

                   (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)          (9)           (10)
Dep. Var                                             gadp                                                    corruption

lib                0.33          0.16                        0.33        0.15        0.21        0.15                     0.21          0.15
                   (0.07)***     (0.08)*                     (0.07)***   (0.08)*     (0.06)***   (0.07)**                 (0.06)***     (0.07)**
                   (0.16)**      (0.14)                      (0.15)**    (0.14)      (0.13)      (0.16)                   (0.13)        (0.16)

3y_pre_lib                                     -0.24                                                         0.03
                                               (0.09)***                                                     (0.08)
                                               (0.14)                                                        (0.14)

3y_post_lib                                    -0.03                                                         0.10
                                               (0.09)                                                        (0.08)
                                               (0.21)                                                        (0.18)

4yon_post_lib                                  0.59                                                          0.45
                                               (0.10)***                                                     (0.09)***
                                               (0.26)**                                                      (0.22)**

treatment          permanent     permanent     permanent     all         all         permanent   permanent   permanent    all           all
Y*conts            No            Yes           No            No          Yes         No          yes         No           No            Yes
Obs.(countries)    1559(106)     1559(106)     1559(106)     1561(106)   1561(106)   1593(106)   1593(106)   1593(106)    1595(106)     1595(106)
Adj.R2(within)     0.45          0.47          0.47          0.45        0.47        -0.01       0.02        0.00         -0.01         0.02
Standard errors in parentheses (above: OLS; below: clustered); * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%;
 *** significant at 1%.
lib = 1 after liberalization
3y_pre_lib = 1 in the 3 years preceding liberalizations
3y_post_lib = 1 in the year of liberalization and in the 3 following years
4yon_post_lib = 1 from the 4th year and onwards after liberalization
Y*conts: Y are dummy variables for years; conts are dummy variables for Asia, Africa, Latin America and for socialist legal origin
Regressions always include country and year fixed effects, as well as a dummy variable for socialist legal origin interacted with lib




                                                                                                                                                   2
Table 4: Effects of liberalizations on inflation and surplus

                    (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)          (10)
Dep. Var                                          inflation                                                      surplus

lib                 0.12           -0.15                       0.00        -0.17       1.82        2.01                    1.47         1.53
                    (0.07)*        (0.07)**                    (0.06)      (0.06)***   (0.40)***   (0.48)***               (0.40)***    (0.48)***
                    (0.18)         (0.19)                      (0.18)      (0.16)      (1.01)*     (1.57)                  (1.02)       (1.65)

3y_pre_lib                                       1.16                                                          -0.79
                                                 (0.08)***                                                     (0.50)
                                                 (0.18)***                                                     (0.77)

3y_post_lib                                      0.71                                                          1.34
                                                 (0.08)***                                                     (0.49)***
                                                 (0.17)***                                                     (1.07)

4yon_post_lib                                    0.22                                                          1.90
                                                 (0.08)***                                                     (0.53)***
                                                 (0.23)                                                        (1.22)

treatment           permanent      permanent     permanent     all         all         permanent   permanent   permanent   all          all
Y*conts             No             Yes           No            No          Yes         No          yes         No          No           Yes
Obs.(countries)     3594(131)      3594(131)     3594(131)     3594(131)   3594(131)   1907(103)   1907(103)   1907(103)   1907(103)    1907(103)
Adj.R2(within)      0.21           0.33          0.26          0.21        0.33        0.04        0.06        0.04        0.04         0.06
Standard errors in parentheses (above: OLS; below: clustered); * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%;
 *** significant at 1%.
lib = 1 after liberalization
3y_pre_lib = 1 in the 3 years preceding liberalizations
3y_post_lib = 1 in the year of liberalization and in the 3 following years
4yon_post_lib = 1 from the 4th year and onwards after liberalization
Y*conts: Y are dummy variables for years; conts are dummy variables for Asia, Africa, Latin America and for socialist legal origin
Regressions always include country and year fixed effects, as well as a dummy variable for socialist legal origin interacted with lib




                                                                                                                                                3
Table 5: Effects of democratizations on growth and investment

                   (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)          (9)         (10)
Dep. Var                                      growth                                                     investment

dem                0.34        0.44                      0.64        0.78        0.29        -0.07                    0.58        0.48
                   (0.41)      (0.45)                    (0.35)*     (0.37)**    (0.35)      (0.37)                   (0.29)**    (0.30)
                   (0.45)      (0.52)                    (0.40)      (0.38)**    (0.99)      (0.98)                   (0.78)      (0.79)

3y_pre_dem                                  -0.67                                                        -0.37
                                            (0.61)                                                       (0.51)
                                            (0.68)                                                       (1.00)

3y_post_dem                                 0.39                                                         0.02
                                            (0.56)                                                       (0.47)
                                            (0.55)                                                       (1.02)

4yon_post_dem                               0.10                                                         0.34
                                            (0.49)                                                       (0.41)
                                            (0.51)                                                       (1.30)

treatment          permanent   permanent    permanent    all         all         permanent   permanent   permanent    all         all
Y*conts            No          Yes          No           No          Yes         No          Yes         No           No          Yes
Obs.(countries)    4397(138)   4397(138)    4397(138)    4388(138)   4388(138)   4530(150)   4530(150)   4530(150)    4518(150)   4518(150)
Adj.R2(within)     0.01        0.03         0.01         0.01        0.03        0.01        0.07        0.01         0.01        0.06
Standard errors in parentheses (above: OLS; below: clustered); * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%;
 *** significant at 1%
dem = 1 after democratizations
3y_pre_dem = 1 in the 3 years preceding democratizations
3y_post_dem = 1 in the year of democratizations and in the 3 following years
4yon_post_dem = 1 from the 4th year and onwards after democratizations
Y*conts: Y are dummy variables for years; conts are dummy variables for Asia, Africa, Latin America and socialist legal origin
Regressions always include country and year fixed effects, as well as a dummy variable for socialist legal origin interacted with dem




                                                                                                                                              4
Table 6: Effects of democratizations on gadp and corruption

                   (1)          (2)           (3)             (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)          (9)         (10)
Dep. Var                                            gadp                                                      Corruption

dem                0.29         0.20                          0.03        -0.03       0.33        0.30                     0.19        0.19
                   (0.09)***    (0.09)**                      (0.08)      (0.08)      (0.07)***   (0.08)***                (0.07)***   (0.07)***
                   (0.20)       (0.20)                        (0.19)      (0.18)      (0.19)*     (0.21)                   (0.18)      (0.20)

3y_pre_dem                                    -0.19                                                           -0.09
                                              (0.11)*                                                         (0.08)
                                              (0.17)                                                          (0.16)

3y_post_dem                                   0.04                                                            0.17
                                              (0.11)                                                          (0.09)*
                                              (0.23)                                                          (0.22)

4yon_post_dem                                 0.49                                                            0.50
                                              (0.12)***                                                       (0.10)***
                                              (0.30)                                                          (0.27)*

treatment          permanent    permanent     permanent       all         all         permanent   permanent   permanent    all         all
Y*conts            No           Yes           No              No          Yes         No          Yes         No           No          Yes
Obs.(countries)    1790(122)    1790(122)     1790(122)       1791(122)   1791(122)   1828(122)   1828(122)   1828(122)    1825(122)   1825(122)
Adj.R2(within)     0.45         0.47          0.45            0.44        0.46        -0.02       0.00        -0.01        -0.03       -0.00
Standard errors in parentheses (above: OLS; below: clustered); * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%;
 *** significant at 1%.
dem = 1 after democratizations
3y_pre_dem = 1 in the 3 years preceding democratizations
3y_post_dem = 1 in the year of democratizations and in the 3 following years
4yon_post_dem = 1 from the 4th year and onwards after democratizations
Y*conts: Y are dummy variables for years; conts are dummy variables for Asia, Africa, Latin America and socialist legal origin
Regressions always include country and year fixed effects, as well as a dummy variable for socialist legal origin interacted with dem




                                                                                                                                               5
Table 7: Effects of democratizations on inflation and surplus

                   (1)           (2)           (3)              (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)         (10)
Dep. Var                                        inflation                                                         surplus

dem                0.40          0.17                           0.35        0.18        0.89        0.04                    1.51        0.99
                   (0.07)***     (0.07)**                       (0.06)***   (0.06)***   (0.53)*     (0.62)                  (0.46)***   (0.52)*
                   (0.17)**      (0.21)                         (0.13)***   (0.13)      (1.02)      (1.00)                  (1.16)      (1.28)

3y_pre_dem                                     0.31                                                             2.06
                                               (0.11)***                                                        (0.69)***
                                               (0.21)                                                           (0.94)**

3y_post_dem                                    0.53                                                             1.97
                                               (0.10)***                                                        (0.66)***
                                               (0.23)**                                                         (1.15)*

4yon_post_dem                                  0.43                                                             1.21
                                               (0.09)***                                                        (0.67)*
                                               (0.22)*                                                          (1.24)

treatment          permanent     permanent     permanent        all         all         permanent   permanent   permanent   all         all
Y*conts            No            Yes           No               No          Yes         No          Yes         No          No          Yes
Obs.(countries)    3739(141)     3739(141)     3739(141)        3740(141)   3740(141)   1996(110)   1996(110)   1996(110)   1995(110)   1995(110)
Adj.R2(within)     0.21          0.32          0.21             0.21        0.32        -0.00       -0.01       -0.00       -0.00       -0.01
Standard errors in parentheses (above: OLS; below: clustered); * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%;
 *** significant at 1%.
dem = 1 after democratizations
3y_pre_dem = 1 in the 3 years preceding democratizations
3y_post_dem = 1 in the year of democratizations and in the 3 following years
4yon_post_dem = 1 from the 4th year and onwards after democratizations
Y*conts: Y are dummy variables for years; conts are dummy variables for Asia, Africa, Latin America and socialist legal origin
Regressions always include country and year fixed effects, as well as a dummy variable for socialist legal origin interacted with dem




                                                                                                                                                  6
Table 8: Effects of liberalizations on democracy and viceversa

                   (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)         (5)         (6)           (7)           (8)           (9)         (10)
Dep. Var                                       Polity2                              permanently   permanently   permanently      open        open
                                                                                        open          open          open

Lib                1.14          -0.15                      0.79
                   (0.22)***     (0.24)                     (0.21)***
                   (0.75)        (0.81)                     (0.67)

Dem                                                                                 0.25          0.12                        0.12        0.02
                                                                                    (0.02)***     (0.02)***                   (0.01)***   (0.01)
                                                                                    (0.06)***     (0.07)*                     (0.05)**    (0.05)

5y_pre_treat                                  2.15                      1.86
                                              (0.35)***                 (0.33)***
                                              (0.60)***                 (0.61)***

3y_pre_treat                                  3.08                      2.78                                    0.05
                                              (0.30)***                 (0.27)***                               (0.02)**
                                              (0.75)***                 (0.55)***                               (0.05)

3y_post_treat                                 2.38                      2.00                                    0.15
                                              (0.28)***                 (0.27)***                               (0.02)***
                                              (0.89)***                 (0.75)***                               (0.06)**

4yon_post_treat                               2.21                      1.32                                    0.32
                                              (0.27)***                 (0.23)***                               (0.02)***
                                              (1.01)**                  (0.79)*                                 (0.07)***

treatment          permanent     permanent    permanent     all         all         permanent     permanent     permanent     all         all
Y*conts            No            Yes          No            No          No          No            yes           No            No          Yes
Obs.(countries)    4603(132)     4603(132)    4603(132)     4603(132)   4603(132)   4593(132)     4593(132)     4593(132)     4581(132)   4581(132)
Adj.R2(within)     0.23          0.29         0.25          0.23        0.25        0.40          0.50          0.41          0.38        0.50
Standard errors in parentheses (above: OLS; below: clustered); * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%;
 *** significant at 1%.
lib (dem)= 1 after liberalization (democratization)
ny_pre_treat = 1 in the n years preceding treatment (liberalizations or democratizations)
3y_post_treat = 1 in the 3 years following treatment (liberalizations or democratizations)
4yon_post_treat = 1 from the 4th year and onwards after treatment (liberalizations or democratizations)
Y*conts: Y are dummy variables for years; conts are dummy variables for Asia, Africa, Latin America and for socialist legal origin
Regressions always include country and year fixed effects, as well as a dummy variable for socialist legal origin interacted with lib (columns
1-5) and with dem (columns 6-10)

                                                                                                                                                    7
Table 9 – Effects of democratizations and liberalizations on growth and investment
                   (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)            (6)         (7)         (8)        (9)           (10)
                                               growth                                                        Investment
dem_1t             -1.72        0.47         -1.22       0.86         -0.78          -1.88       0.70        -2.03      0.55          -0.56
                   (0.82)**     (0.61)       (0.81)      (0.60)       (0.52)         (0.68)***   (0.50)       (0.69)*** (0.53)        (1.02)
                   (0.69)**     (1.06)                                               (1.62)      (1.45)

lib_1t             0.04         0.86         0.34        1.05         -0.00          1.55        1.42        1.51        1.45         0.49
                   (0.50)       (0.49)*      (0.49)      (0.47)**     (0.25)         (0.41)***   (0.40)***   (0.42)***   (0.40)***    (0.49)
                   (0.56)       (0.46)*                                              (1.19)      (1.05)

dem_2t             1.66         1.53         1.07        1.00         0.59           0.42        0.31        0.46        0.49         1.16
                   (0.71)**     (0.52)***    (0.70)      (0.51)**     (0.54)         (0.59)      (0.42)      (0.60)      (0.43)       (1.06)
                   (0.58)***    (0.39)***                                            (1.05)      (1.11)

lib_2t             2.29         2.20         1.44        1.71         1.00           -0.47       2.64        -0.43       2.79         -1.11
                   (0.90)**     (0.66)***    (0.88)      (0.64)***    (0.48)**       (0.73)      (0.54)***   (0.75)      (0.55)***    (0.95)
                   (0.71)***    (0.71)***                                            (1.54)      (1.63)

dem_after_lib      -1.23        -1.02        0.84        0.99         -0.46          3.61        1.49        3.47        1.41         3.67
                   (1.09)       (0.93)       (1.08)      (0.92)       (0.71)         (0.89)***   (0.76)*     (0.91)***   (0.78)*      (1.40)***
                   (0.75)       (0.87)                                               (1.45)**    (2.22)

lib_after_dem      -3.01        -1.88        -2.51       -2.07        -1.89          1.80        -0.35       1.81        -0.40        -0.14
                   (1.13)***    (0.86)**     (1.11)**    (0.85)**     (0.67)***      (0.92)*     (0.71)      (0.94)*     (0.72)       (1.33)
                   (0.94)***    (0.91)**                                             (1.53)      (1.95)

Lagged income      No           No           Yes         Yes          No             No          No          Yes         Yes          No
Estimation         OLS, FE      OLS, FE      OLS, FE     OLS, FE      2 step         OLS, FE     OLS, FE     OLS, FE     OLS, FE      2 step
Treatment          Permanent    All          Permanent   All          Permanent      Permanent   All         Permanent   All          Permanent
Obs.(countries)    4243(130)    4229(130)    4079(107)   4065(107)    110            4361(131)   4230(130)   4044(106)   4030(106)    113
Adj.R2 within      0.04         0.04         0.07        0.07         0.05           0.11        0.10        0.11        0.11         0.08
Standard errors in parentheses (above: OLS; below: clustered); * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%;
 *** significant at 1%.
dem_1t (dem_2t) = 1 after democratizations for countries that did not (did) liberalize
lib_1t (lib_2t) = 1 after liberalizations for countries that did not (did) democratize
dem_after_lib (lib_after_dem) = 1 after the second treatment for countries that liberalized first (became dem. first)
Controls always included: country and year fixed effects, dummy variables for years interacted with dummy variables for Asia, Africa, Latin
America and socialist legal origin; dummy variable for socialist legal origin interacted with lib and dem (as defined in the previous tables).




                                                                                                                                               8
Table 10 – Effects of democratizations and liberalizations on inflation and international trade
                  (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)            (7)         (8)         (9)         (10)
                                              Trade                                                           inflation

dem_1t            -1.56        -5.22        0.80         -1.09        0.16         0.66           0.16        0.05        -0.03       0.22
                  (1.97)       (1.45)***    (1.14)       (0.81)       (3.17)       (0.14)***      (0.10)      (0.12)      (0.09)      (0.19)
                  (4.38)       (3.53)                                              (0.31)**       (0.22)

lib_1t            0.38         0.23         0.93         0.01         0.04         -0.19          -0.01       -0.08       0.01        -0.03
                  (1.20)       (1.15)       (0.69)       (0.64)       (1.53)       (0.08)**       (0.08)      (0.07)      (0.06)      (0.10)
                  (3.11)       (2.88)                                              (0.19)         (0.21)

dem_2t            -2.81        -1.56        -0.24        0.32         -4.31        0.08           0.11        0.07        0.11        -0.32
                  (1.71)*      (1.22)       (0.97)       (0.67)       (3.30)       (0.11)         (0.09)      (0.09)      (0.07)      (0.20)
                  (3.70)       (2.28)                                              (0.32)         (0.20)

lib_2t            10.76        8.45         2.61         2.28         1.14         -0.59          -0.84       -0.39       -0.43       -0.11
                  (2.16)***    (1.56)***    (1.23)**     (0.86)***    (2.95)       (0.16)***      (0.12)***   (0.13)***   (0.10)***   (0.18)
                  (5.98)*      (4.42)*                                             (0.42)         (0.36)**

dem_after_lib     8.98         10.52        1.16         1.23         4.72         -0.43          -0.16       -0.17       -0.07       -0.24
                  (2.61)***    (2.21)***    (1.47)       (1.21)       (4.35)       (0.18)**       (0.16)      (0.14)      (0.13)      (0.27)
                  (9.16)       (9.21)                                              (0.35)         (0.40)

lib_after_dem     -7.55        -7.22        -2.18        -2.45        2.94         0.57           0.64        0.21        0.16        0.78
                  (2.72)***    (2.05)***    (1.55)       (1.13)**     (4.13)       (0.19)***      (0.14)***   (0.16)      (0.12)      (0.26)***
                  (8.74)       (6.14)                                              (0.50)         (0.52)

Lagged dep var    No           No           Yes          Yes          No           No             No          Yes         Yes         No
Estimation        OLS, FE      OLS, FE      OLS, FE      OLS, FE      2 step       OLS, FE        OLS, FE     OLS, FE     OLS, FE     2 step
Treatment         Permanent    All          Permanent    All          Permanent    Permanent      All         Permanent   All         Permanent
Obs.(countries)   4243(130)    4229(130)    3961(106)    3946(106)    110          3466(127)      3371(126)   2928(88)    2876(88)    81
Adj.R2 within     0.29         0.30         0.78         0.80         -0.04        0.35           0.34        0.57        0.58        0.11
Standard errors in parentheses (above: OLS; below: clustered); * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%;
 *** significant at 1%.
dem_1t (dem_2t) = 1 after democratizations for countries that did not (did) liberalize
lib_1t (lib_2t) = 1 after liberalizations for countries that did not (did) democratize
dem_after_lib (lib_after_dem) = 1 after the second treatment for countries that liberalized first (became dem. first)
Controls always included: country and year fixed effects, dummy variables for years interacted with dummy variables for Asia, Africa, Latin
America and socialist legal origin; dummy variable for socialist legal origin interacted with lib and dem (as defined in the previous tables).




                                                                                                                                               9
Table 11 – Effects of democratizations and liberalizations on surplus, gadp and corruption
                       (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)              (6)
                                  surplus                       gadp                         corruption

lib_1t                 -1.92          2.55          -0.03          -0.11          -0.06           0.06
                       (0.85)**       (0.61)***     (0.12)         (0.11)         (0.11)          (0.10)
                       (0.92)**       (2.06)        (0.32)         (0.22)         (0.35)          (0.25)

dem_1t                 2.04           1.24          0.02           0.06           0.10            0.14
                       (0.58)***      (0.57)**      (0.09)         (0.10)         (0.08)          (0.08)*
                       (1.92)         (2.05)        (0.16)         (0.17)         (0.15)          (0.13)

dem_2t                 1.40           -0.73         0.35           -0.06          0.60            0.30
                       (0.86)         (0.81)        (0.18)*        (0.14)         (0.14)***       (0.12)**
                       (2.29)         (1.99)        (0.17)**       (0.29)         (0.34)*         (0.36)

lib_2t                 3.58           4.04          0.34           0.14           0.28            0.27
                       (1.13)***      (1.10)***     (0.22)         (0.14)         (0.19)          (0.12)**
                       (2.45)         (2.40)*       (0.16)**       (0.21)         (0.20)          (0.28)

dem_after_lib          -0.29          -0.42         -0.13          0.06           -0.21           0.06
                       (1.23)         (1.01)        (0.25)         (0.15)         (0.21)          (0.13)
                       (2.38)         (1.98)        (0.30)         (0.35)         (0.43)          (0.33)

lib_after_dem          -2.95          -1.83         -0.10          0.12           -0.31           -0.16
                       (1.30)**       (1.12)        (0.24)         (0.12)         (0.21)          (0.10)
                       (2.15)         (1.65)        (0.24)         (0.19)         (0.21)          (0.15)

Treatment              Permanent      All           Permanent      All            Permanent       All
Obs.(countries)        1861(101)      1802(100)     1535(104)      1500(103)      1569(104)       1534(103)
Adj.R2 within          0.07           0.07          0.49           0.51           0.04            0.05
Standard errors in parentheses (above: OLS; below: clustered); * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%;
 *** significant at 1%.
dem_1t (dem_2t) = 1 after democratizations for countries that did not (did) liberalize
lib_1t (lib_2t) = 1 after liberalizations for countries that did not (did) democratize
dem_after_lib (lib_after_dem) = 1 after the second treatment for countries that liberalized first (became dem. first)
Controls always included: country and year fixed effects, dummy variables for years interacted with dummy variables for Asia, Africa, Latin
America and socialist legal origin; dummy variable for socialist legal origin interacted with lib and dem (as defined in the previous tables).
No lagged dependent variable included; estimation by OLS, FE




                                                                                                                                            10
Figure 1                       Estimated residuals for controls (always) and treated (before liberalization)


                                           Liberalization                                                                        Liberalization                                                                   Liberalization
                                                  Growth                                                                                  Gadp                                                                          Inflation




                                                                                              .2




                                                                                                                                                                                   .6
           4




                                                                                                   -5.55e-17




                                                                                                                                                                                   .4
                    2
  t_resids/c_resids




                                                                                  t_resids/c_resids




                                                                                                                                                                           t_resids/c_resids
                                                                                           -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                   .2
    0




                                                                                              -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                   0
           -2




                                                                                              -.6




                                                                                                                                                                                   -.2
                        1960     1970              1980     1990           2000                                1960    1970               1980       1990           2000                       1960    1970              1980            1990           2000
                                                   year                                                                                   year                                                                           year
                                (mean) c_resids              (mean) t_resids                                          (mean) c_resids                 (mean) t_resids                                 (mean) c_resids                     (mean) t_resids



                                           Liberalization                                                                        Liberalization                                                                   Liberalization
                                              Investment                                                                                Corruption                                                             Overall_deficit_surplus
                                                                                              .6




                                                                                                                                                                                   3
           2




                                                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                              .4
                    1
  t_resids/c_resids




                                                                                  t_resids/c_resids




                                                                                                                                                                           t_resids/c_resids
                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                          .2
        0




                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                              0
           -1




                                                                                                                                                                                   -1
                                                                                              -.2
           -2




                        1960     1970              1980     1990           2000                                1960    1970               1980       1990           2000                       1960    1970              1980            1990           2000
                                                   year                                                                                   year                                                                           year
                                (mean) c_resids              (mean) t_resids                                          (mean) c_resids                 (mean) t_resids                                 (mean) c_resids                     (mean) t_resids




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            11
Figure 2                     Estimated residuals for controls (always) and treated (before democracy)


                                        Democratization                                                                      Democratization                                                                  Democratization
                                                Growth                                                                                 Gadp                                                                           Inflation




                                                                                                                                                                                .5
          6




                                                                                           .1
                                                                                            -.1 -2.78e-17
          4




                                                                                                                                                                                         0
  t_resids/c_resids




                                                                                t_resids/c_resids




                                                                                                                                                                         t_resids/c_resids
           2




                                                                                    -.2




                                                                                                                                                                        -.5
          0




                                                                                           -.3
                                                                                           -.4
          -2




                                                                                                                                                                                -1
                      1960     1970              1980     1990           2000                               1960    1970               1980       1990           2000                        1960    1970              1980            1990           2000
                                                 year                                                                                  year                                                                            year
                              (mean) c_resids              (mean) t_resids                                         (mean) c_resids                 (mean) t_resids                                  (mean) c_resids                     (mean) t_resids



                                        Democratization                                                                      Democratization                                                                  Democratization
                                            Investment                                                                               Corruption                                                              Overall_deficit_surplus
                                                                                           .6
          1




                                                                                                                                                                                6
                                                                                           .4
          0




                                                                                                                                                                                4
  t_resids/c_resids




                                                                                        t_resids/c_resids




                                                                                                                                                                        t_resids/c_resids
                                                                                                .2
          -1




                                                                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                -8.33e-17
          -2




                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                           -.2
          -3




                                                                                                                                                                                -2
                      1960     1970              1980     1990           2000                               1960    1970               1980       1990           2000                        1960    1970              1980            1990           2000
                                                 year                                                                                  year                                                                            year
                              (mean) c_resids              (mean) t_resids                                         (mean) c_resids                 (mean) t_resids                                  (mean) c_resids                     (mean) t_resids




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          12
Figure 3 Estimated residuals for controls (always) and treated (top panel: before democracy; bottom
panel: before liberalization))




                                                       Democratization
                                                           Liberalization




                           .3       .2
                   t_resids/c_resids
                           .1
                           0
                           -.1




                                     1960   1970               1980                           1990   2000
                                                               year
                                                   (mean) c_resids          (mean) t_resids



                                                         Liberalization
                                                              Polity2
                           3         2
                   t_resids/c_resids
                           1
                           0
                           -1




                                     1960   1970               1980                           1990   2000
                                                               year
                                                   (mean) c_resids          (mean) t_resids

                                                                                                            13
Figure 4                     Estimated residuals with multiple treatments - controls (always) and treated (before first
reform)

                             Democratization and Liberalization                                                       Democratization and Liberalization                                                  Democratization and Liberalization
                                                 Growth                                                                                   Gadp                                                                              Inflation




                                                                                                                                                                                       .2
          3




                                                                                                 .1
          2




                                                                                                                                                                                       .1
                                                                                                         .05
  t_resids/c_resids




                                                                                       t_resids/c_resids




                                                                                                                                                                               t_resids/c_resids
               1




                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                               0
      0




                                                                                                                                                                                       -.1
                                                                                                 -.05
          -1




                                                                                                                                                                                       -.2
          -2




                                                                                                 -.1
                      1960     1970               1980       1990               2000                           1960     1970              1980       1990               2000                       1960     1970             1980            1990           2000
                                                  year                                                                                    year                                                                               year
                              (mean) c_resids                 (mean) t_resids                                         (mean) c_resids                 (mean) t_resids                                     (mean) c_resids                     (mean) t_resids



                             Democratization and Liberalization                                                       Democratization and Liberalization                                                  Democratization and Liberalization
                                                Investment                                       .1
                                                                                                                                        Corruption                                                                 Overall_deficit_surplus
          3




                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                 .05
          2




                                                                                                                                                                                       .5
  t_resids/c_resids




                                                                                       t_resids/c_resids




                                                                                                                                                                               t_resids/c_resids
            1




                                                                                               0




                                                                                                                                                                                       0
          0




                                                                                                 -.05




                                                                                                                                                                                       -.5
          -1




                                                                                                 -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                       -1
                      1960     1970               1980       1990               2000                           1960     1970              1980       1990               2000                       1960     1970             1980            1990           2000
                                                  year                                                                                    year                                                                               year
                              (mean) c_resids                 (mean) t_resids                                         (mean) c_resids                 (mean) t_resids                                     (mean) c_resids                     (mean) t_resids




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                14
                                                                       APPENDIX

Figure A1. Probability of having at least one reform (either political or economic liberalization)



                                      1                         2
            10
            5
            0
  Density




                                      3                         4
            10
            5
            0




                 .2        .4         .6   .8   1    .2   .4   .6       .8       1
                                                pt
            Graphs by (mean) mtreat




The horizontal axis measures the estimated probability of treatment – i.e. of having at least one reform (either economic or political liberalization) -
conditional upon being in Africa, Asia, Latin America and on having a socialist legal origin. The vertical axis measures the number of countries
having this estimated probability., by group of countries:
 - Group 1 are the countries that had no reform at all (ie they are the control countries)
 - Group 2 are the countries that had political liberalization only
 - Group 3 are the countries that had economic liberalization only
 - Group 4 are the countries that had both economic and political liberalization

                                                                                                                                                           15
