                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  ON THE IMPORTANCE OF MEASURING PAYOUT YIELD:
                     IMPLICATIONS FOR EMPIRICAL ASSET PRICING

                                           Jacob Boudoukh
                                            Roni Michaely
                                          Matthew Richardson
                                           Michael Roberts

                                          Working Paper 10651
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10651


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2004




The authors thank Simon Benninga, Alon Brav, Eugene Fama, Ken French, Eli Ofek, Michael Weisbach,
Robert Whitelaw and seminar participants at Goldman Sachs Asset Management and the December 2003
Finance and Accounting in Tel-Aviv Conference. We are responsible for all remaining errors. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2004 by Jacob Boudoukh, Roni Michaely, Matthew Richardson, and Michael Roberts. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
On the Importance of Measuring Payout Yield: Implications for Empirical Asset Pricing
Jacob Boudoukh, Roni Michaely, Matthew Richardson, and Michael Roberts
NBER Working Paper No. 10651
August 2004, Revised February 2006
JEL No. G1
                                       ABSTRACT

Previous research showed that the dividend price ratio process changed remarkably during the
1980's and 1990's, but that the total payout ratio (dividends plus repurchases over price) changed
very little. We investigate implications of this difference for asset pricing models. In particular, the
widely documented decline in the predictive power of dividends for excess stock returns in time
series regressions in recent data is vastly overstated. Statistically and economically significant
predictability is found at both short and long horizons when total payout yield is used instead of
dividend yield. We also provide evidence that total payout yield has information in the cross-section
for expected stock returns exceeding that of dividend yield and that the high minus low payout yield
portfolio is a priced factor. The evidence throughout is shown to be robust to the method of
measuring total payouts.

Jacob L Boudoukh
Leonard N. Stern School of Business
New York University
40 West 4th Street, 9-190
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
jboudoukh@stern.nyu.edu

Roni Michaely
Cornell University
rm34@cornell.edu

Matthew Richardson
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
mrichar0@stern.nyu.edu

Michael Roberts
Duke University
mroberts@duke.edu
While the irrelevance theorem of Miller and Modigliani (1961) implies that there is no

reason to suspect that dividends play a role in determining equity price levels or equity

returns, the theorem is silent on the usefulness of dividends in explaining these variables.

It is then, perhaps, not surprising that there is a considerable literature exploiting the

properties of dividends and dividend yields to better understand the fundamentals of asset

pricing both in the time series and cross-section. Motivation for the former comes from

variations of the Gordon growth model in which dividend yields can be written as the

return minus the dividend’s growth rate (see, for example, Fama and French (1988)), from

consumption-based asset pricing models in which the firm’s dividends covary with

aggregate consumption (e.g., Lucas (1978) and Shiller (1981)), and so forth. Additional

motivation comes from cross-sectional heterogeneity in tax, agency, and asymmetric

information considerations (e.g., Litzenberger and Ramaswamy (1979), Jensen (1986),

John and Williams (1985), Allen Bernardo and Welch (2000), and Grullon, Michaely and

Swaminathan (2002)).

   We propose that this underlying motivation really refers to distributed cash flow going

to equity holders, be it dividends, or anything that substitutes for dividends such as

repurchases. To the extent researchers find dividends to be a useful variable for

empirically characterizing asset pricing models (e.g., Fama and French (1988), Campbell

and Shiller (1988b), Hodrick (1992), Cochrane (1998), Charest (1979), and Benartzi,

Michaely, and Thaler (1997)), two potentially important questions are how well do

dividends proxy for total payout, and what are the implications of any mismeasurement?

This issue is not vacuous as there is recent substantive evidence that repurchases have

substituted for dividend payments over the last 15 to 20 years (see, for example, Fama and



                                             2
French (2001), Grullon and Michaely (2002), Dittmar and Dittmar (2002), and Brav,

Graham, Harvey and Michaely (2005)). Thus, there is reason to believe that dividend and

repurchase policies are not independent.

   It then remains an empirical question whether these changes in payout policy are

relevant to both time-series and cross sectional tests of asset pricing. Anecdotally, there is

an emerging literature arguing that dividend yield has lost some of its allure as a key

empirical variable in asset pricing (e.g., Stambaugh (1999), Valkanov (2001), Lettau and

Ludvigson (2001), Cochrane (2001), and Goyal and Welch (2003)). This paper provides a

comprehensive analysis of the impact of measuring dividends versus payouts on existing

empirical asset pricing model results. We show that the loss of the predictive power of

dividends is related to the definition of payouts in asset pricing tests.

   Though the definition of total payout is conceptually straightforward, measuring this

variable is a challenge. For example, identifying the fraction of repurchases meant to

substitute for dividends is difficult, if not impossible, to discern. Since our focus here is on

the asset pricing implications, we examine several measures of total payout, leaving the

debate over which measure may be “more appropriate” to future research. Furthermore,

we also consider a measure of total net payout yield, which accounts for cash flows from

investors to the firm (e.g., seasoned equity offerings). We examine cash inflows since ex-

ante there is the possibility that cash is raised to maintain dividends, in which case a

correction to account for true economic dividends, the net inflows and outflows, needs to

be examined (e.g., Allen and Michaely (2003)). As such, our analysis may be viewed

more broadly as an examination of payout based measures in general.




                                                3
   Figure 1 graphs aggregate series for common dividends, repurchases of common

stocks, and sales of common stock by nonfinancial corporations in the merged

CRSP/Compustat database from 1971 to 2003.1 Consistent with the literature, Figure 1

shows that payout yields are systematically underestimated if repurchases are ignored.

The figure also shows that equity issuances represent a significant negative cash transfer

to shareholders. While dividends comprised the majority of cash flows during the first part

of the sample period, its relative share declined through the mid- to late-1980s. For

example, the ratio of repurchases to total payouts (dividends plus repurchases) hovers

between 5% and 15% through the early 1980’s, after which the ratio rises to near 50% by

the end of the sample.2

   We show that using dividends alone to describe payout is not just a bias per se (as

illustrated in Figure 1), but it also has potential cross-sectional effects as the rank

correlation between firms’ dividend yield and firms’ payout yield generally decreases over

the sample. Moreover, the time series process for dividend yields is different than payout

(and net payout) yield, carrying important implications for asset pricing in the context of

the existing literature. Interestingly, the time series processes for dividend yields prior to

the emergence of repurchases as a significant form of distributing cash and that of payout

yields after repurchases became dominant look remarkably similar. This supports the

paper’s thesis that repurchases should be taken into account when relating yields to

expected returns.3

   The omission of alternatives to dividends as a means of payout introduces a

measurement error problem both in the time series and cross-section. While this

measurement error is potentially an important issue from a theoretical perspective, the



                                              4
focus of the paper is on documenting the empirical importance of measuring total payouts

(dividends plus repurchases) and total net payouts (dividends plus repurchases less equity

issuances), or more succinctly payouts and net payouts, on asset pricing tests. In

particular, this paper looks at time-series and cross-sectional regressions of asset returns

on various measures of payout yields. The basic strategy is to first document the results

using dividend yields, then show how the results change as we incorporate repurchases

and, ultimately, issuances. We report several findings.

   First, the evidence of stock return predictability in the time series is much stronger

using payout (net payout) yield. For example, for our full sample period (1926-2003) the

regression of returns on dividend yield at an annual frequency and horizon generates an R2

of 5.5% and a coefficient of 0.116 with a t-statistic of 2.240. The total payout yield

regressions, depending on the measurement of repurchases, exhibit R-squares of 8.0% and

9.1%, an increase of 45% and 65% respectively. The net payout yield regression exhibits

an R-square of 26%, an almost five-fold increase. Moreover, while the bias-adjusted

(Stambaugh 1999) dividend yield coefficient is insignificant, those of the payout and net

payout yields are strongly significant. In a horse race between dividend yield and (net)

payout yield we see that any association between dividends and returns disappears,

captured entirely by the other payout variable. Finally, using the out-of-sample

predictability framework of Goyal and Welch (2004), we show that our payout measures

exhibit positive and robust predictability in spite of model uncertainty due to repeated

rolling estimation.

   Insight into this improved predictability is found in the dynamic properties of the

individual yield series. Structural break tests reveal instability in the dividend yield series



                                               5
around the time of the enactment of SEC rule 10b-18, which provides a legal safe harbor

for firms repurchasing their shares in accordance with the rule’s provisions. In contrast, no

such instability is detected in the payout measures. Furthermore, regression results over

the period 1926-1985 show that our payout yield coefficient is very similar to those found

in the full sample regressions. Thus, this evidence in total suggest that explanations of

dividend yield’s apparent decline as a predictive variable based on arguments such as

spurious statistics, learning, et cetera, may not be the dominant force behind the reduced

predictive power of dividend yield. Rather, the result may simply be an outcome of using

dividend yield instead of payout yield.

   Second, we find that the payout yield measures have a stronger correlation with

returns than dividend yield measures in the cross section. For example, the average

monthly returns on low, medium, and high payout (net payout) yield portfolios are 1.28%

(1.24%), 1.40% (1.36%), and 1.56% (1.57%), respectively. In contrast, similar dividend

yield portfolios exhibit average monthly returns of 1.15%, 1.28% and 1.33%, respectively.

Thus, the cross-sectional relation between total payout yield and returns is more distinct

than the relation between dividend yield and returns. This conclusion is reinforced by

Fama-MacBeth regressions of returns on beta, size, book-to-market, and our yield

variables. In these cross sectional–time series regressions, dividend yields show an

insignificant association with returns, whereas our payout measures exhibit highly

significant associations with returns. Interestingly, book to market is subsumed within

payouts when we confine our attention to those firms that actually pay out cash via

dividends.




                                              6
   Moreover, while there is a consistent relation between average returns and payout

yields in the context of Fama-French 3-factor model regressions, this is not the case for

dividend yields. Most important, asset pricing restrictions of the Fama-French 3-factor

model can be rejected for a cross-section of portfolios sorted by these factors and payout

yield. However, when a payout yield factor is added to the mix we cannot reject the

restrictions of the model but for one of the three sets of portfolios.

   Finally, based on these previous results, we devise a simple, self-financed, trading

strategy that goes long a portfolio of high yield stocks and short a portfolio of low yield

stocks; rebalancing these holdings on an annual basis (Figure 3). The strategy based on net

payout yield exhibits an average annual return of 4.44% compared with 3.36% for the

payout portfolio, and 2.16% for the strategy based on dividend yield. These strategies

result in portfolios with negative market betas and negative loading on the size factor,

suggesting that these returns are not likely to be explained by standard risk measures.

   This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we describe the data, including

definitions, sources, and statistical properties. In Section III, we investigate the time-series

and cross-sectional implications of the measurement problem form an empirical

viewpoint. Section IV concludes.




                                               7
                      I. Payout Yields: Data and Implications


A. Data Description

   For the cross sectional analysis, we follow closely the sample selection and variable

construction methods of Fama and French (1992, 1993). Nonfinancial firms in the

intersection of the CRSP monthly return file and COMPUSTAT annual files form the core

of our sample. We also require that each firm have a strictly positive value for book equity

from COMPUSTAT for its fiscal year ending in calendar year t-1. All fiscal year-end

accounting variables in year t-1 are merged with the monthly returns for July of year t to

June of year t+1, ensuring that the accounting information is known prior to the returns

that they are used to explain.

   The book-to-market ratio is defined as the sum of fiscal year-end book equity

(Compustat item #60) and balance sheet deferred taxes (Compustat item #74), divided by

the CRSP market capitalization in December of the corresponding year. Firm size is

defined as the CRSP market capitalization as of June in year t. Thus, the book-to-market

for the end of fiscal year t-1 and the firm size in June of year t are merged with the returns

from July of year t to June of year t+1.

   We compute “pre-ranking” beta estimates for each stock by first regressing monthly

returns on the contemporaneous and lagged market return, measured by the CRSP value-

weighted index, using 24-60 months of historical data (as available). The pre-ranking beta

estimate is the sum of the regression coefficients on the two market returns and is meant

to adjust for nonsynchronous trading (Dimson (1979)). These estimates are updated

annually each July by re-estimating the regressions after incorporating the most recent



                                              8
return data. We note that the estimation of pre-ranking betas imposes the additional

requirement of at least 24 months of historical returns data for inclusion in our tests of

monthly returns.

   To compute post-ranking betas, we begin by sorting stocks into size deciles each

month using the Fama and French size breakpoints.4 Within each size decile we then sort

stocks into ten portfolios based on their pre-ranking beta estimates. This procedure

generates 100 size/pre-ranking beta portfolios for which we compute monthly equal-

weighted returns. We then regress each portfolio’s time series of returns on the

contemporaneous and lagged CRSP value-weighted return and sum the resulting

parameter estimates to obtain the post-ranking beta estimates. The post-ranking betas are

then assigned to each stock in the corresponding portfolio.

   For the construction of our yield variables, we begin by defining the relevant cash

flow measures. Dividends are defined as the total dollar amount of dividends declared on

the common stock of the firm during the year (Compustat item #21).

   Repurchases are defined in two ways, highlighting the difficulty in measuring

repurchases that substitute for dividends. The first measure captures all cash flows

generated from any repurchase activity, and is defined as the total expenditure on the

purchase of common and preferred stocks (Compustat item #115) plus any reduction in

the value of the net number of preferred stocks outstanding (Compustat item #56).5 This

data is available from the statement of cash flows for the period 1971-2003. The second

measure of repurchases attempts to exclude those repurchases that may be earmarked for

compensation or payment-in-kind (Fama and French (2001)). Such a situation can occur

when firms repurchase shares in anticipation of employee stock option exercise activity.



                                             9
As such, our second measure of repurchases is defined by the change in treasury stock,

adjusted for potential asynchronicity between the repurchase and option exercise.6

   From a theoretical perspective, the distinction between these two alternatives is

important, though not the focus of this paper. Rather, for our purposes, the relevant issue

is which measure better captures the relation between payout and expected returns, and

the extent to which repurchases substituted for dividends. There are several theoretical

reasons why dividends and repurchases may be substitutes. First, from a tax perspective,

firms may prefer to switch from dividend payments to repurchases, which are more tax

effective. Second, in most agency (e.g. Jensen (1986)) and signaling models (e.g., Miller

and Rock (1985)) dividends and repurchases play a similar role. Indeed empirically,

Grullon and Michaely (2002) provide two important pieces of evidence that support the

idea of a substitution effect between repurchases and dividends. First, they show that,

conditional on Lintner’s (1956) dividend model, the difference between actual and

expected dividend payments is negatively correlated with a firm’s repurchase activity.

Second, the market reaction upon an announcement of a dividend decrease is much less

negative for firms that are repurchasing shares. Though these results support the

substitution hypothesis, they provide a noisy measure of the exact portion of repurchases

that substitute for dividends, which we attempt to address by using more than one

repurchase measure.

       There are also several reasons why repurchases may be independent of a firm’s

dividend policy and, therefore, inappropriate as a substitute for dividends. For example, a

firm might do one-off repurchases as a way of reducing agency conflicts within the firm

(Jensen (1986)) or as a signal of the firm’s being undervalued (Vermaelen (1984)). If



                                            10
dividend policy is not affected by such activities, then it is not clear that these repurchases

will be helpful for our understanding of the risk-return relation that is the focus of this

paper.

   Our final cash flow measure is motivated by corporate finance theories, such as Miller

and Modigliani (1961) and Miller and Rock (1985), in which there is no distinction

between outflows (i.e., dividends and repurchases) and inflows (i.e., issuances). As such,

we examine a measure of equity issuances defined as the sale of common and preferred

stock (Compustat data item #108) minus any increase in the value of the net number of

preferred stocks outstanding (Compustat item #56). This data is available from the

statement of cash flows for the period 1971-2003.

   With our cash flow measures, we construct five primary yield variables: dividend

yield, payout yield (two measures), and net payout yield (two measures), each of which is

normalized by the contemporaneous year-end market capitalization. Payout is defined as

the sum of dividends and repurchases. Net payout is defined as the sum of dividends and

repurchases minus issuances. Since we have two measures of repurchases, we have two

corresponding measures of payout yield and net payout yield: a cash flow based measure

and a treasury stock based measure. To ease the presentation and discussion that follows,

we focus our attention on only the dividend yield, both payout yields, and the cash flow

based net payout yield. Results using the treasury-stock based net payout yield generate

qualitatively similar findings.

   As with the book-to-market variable, all year-end t-1 yield variables are merged with

monthly returns from July of year t to June of year t+1. Additionally, to ensure

consistency across analyses, we trim the upper and lower 0.5 percent of the book-to-



                                              11
market distribution, the upper 5 percent of the dividend yield and payout yield

distributions, and upper and lower 2.5 percent of the net payout yield distribution, to

mitigate the effect of outliers.7

    Time series analysis combines the standard data from CRSP with repurchase data from

COMPUSTAT. In particular, the dependent variable, excess return on the market, is the

log difference in the total return on the CRSP value-weighted index minus a proxy for the

riskless interest rate for the period 1926-2003.8 The dividend yield, total dividends over

the past year divided by current price, is imputed directly from CRSP’s return series by

taking the log difference in cum- and ex-dividend returns.           The repurchase yield is

calculated separately by taking the total dollar repurchases during each year from

Compustat and dividing by the corresponding year-end market capitalization. Our payout

yield is the sum of dividend- and repurchase-yields. Our repurchase yield is only available

beginning in 1971 (1984 for repurchase yield calculated from treasury stocks) and, as

such, we assume that repurchases were zero prior to this date so that our dividend and

payout yields match exactly prior to 1971 (1983). As Figure 1 shows, repurchases were of

negligible size until the mid-1980s, so this lack of data is likely to have little effect on our

results.

    To calculate net payout yield we subtract the equity issuance yield, defined as the ratio

of equity issuances to market capitalization, from the payout yield.9 While the assumption

of a zero repurchase yield prior to 1971 may be reasonable, assuming a zero issuance

yield is less so because equity issuances represent a significant fraction of cash flows even

before this date. Thus, we examine an alternative definition of net payout. Motivated by

Goyal and Welch (2005) and an early working paper version of Fama and French (2004)



                                               12
we compute the value of net (of repurchases) equity issuances as the monthly change in

shares outstanding times the average share price.10 Annual numbers are obtained by

summing over firms each year. The ratio of the annual aggregate net issuances to the

corresponding year-end market capitalization is then subtracted from our dividend yield to

obtain the net payout yield prior to 1971. The drawback of this measure is that it captures

issuances not generating cash flows (e.g., acquisitions and stock grants). However, this

definition enables us to measure net payout yield beginning as early as 1926.11

   It is important to note that, for the results to follow, the tendency of the measurement

error in either cash-flow-based repurchases or treasury-stock-based repurchases will be

to dilute their impact. As a preview, we find strong support for the use of payout yield and

net payout yield (as opposed to dividend yield alone) as a payout measure for

understanding the risk-return relation.




B. Preliminary Data Analysis and Observations

       As described earlier, Figure 1 presents the time series pattern of aggregate

dividends, repurchases and issuances. Two observations are of particular interest. First,

there is a gradual increase in repurchases over the latter half of the sample. This increase

in repurchases is due primarily to the institution of SEC rule 10b-18 in 1982, which

provides a safe harbor for firms conducting repurchases from stock price manipulation

charges.12 The introduction of this rule provides a natural breakpoint for our analysis since

the institutional change was, arguably, an exogenous event. Second, though the increase in

repurchase activity is gradual, there is significant variation in the level of repurchases.




                                             13
This variation introduces noise in the comparison of dividend to payout yields, which may

affect the relation, or lack thereof, between returns and yields.

                                        [Insert Figure 1 here]

       Thus, the question of whether Figure 1 has meaningful implications concerning

asset pricing models depends on two conditions. The first condition is that the difference

between dividend yield and payout yield - apparent from Figure 1 - should be associated

with meaningful variation cross-sectionally and/or with shifts in the time-series process

for the yield measures during the period in which repurchases substitute for dividends.

Assuming that the above condition holds, the second condition is that the shift from

dividend yield to payout yield has a significant economic affect on empirical asset pricing.

We deal with the former condition in this section and the latter condition in the next

section.

       In terms of the impact of the mismeasurement of payout yields, it is natural to ask

whether the cross-section of firms varies across dividend, repurchase and payout yields.

This matters because it is standard practice to evaluate factors and returns via the sorting

of stocks into portfolios. Panel A (B) of Figure 2 graphs the rank correlation between

dividend yield and (net) payout yield and repurchase yield and (net) payout yield year by

year. For brevity, we present only the results corresponding to the cash flow based

measures, as the rank correlations using the treasury stock measure of repurchases

produces similar results. Throughout the 1970’s, the correlation of dividend yield with

payout yield was close to one. This is not surprising, as the primary cash payout method

was dividends. However, by the mid 1980’s the correlation had dropped below 0.8 and, in

1997, it had dropped to under 0.7. In contrast, the correlation between repurchase yield



                                              14
and payout yield increased dramatically over the sample horizon. Remarkably, by the end

of the sample period, ranking firms by repurchases was a more accurate assessment of

payout yield ranks than using dividend yields. Panel B of Figure 2 presents similar

evidence for net payout yield.

                                       [Insert Figure 2 here]

       The implication of these results is that asset pricing tests employing measures of

cash distributions to shareholders are less likely to accurately capture economic effects if

these studies ignore repurchases (and issuances). Thus, for those tests that are derived

from theory (such as the consumption-based asset pricing models described earlier), it is

clear that one needs to include the total cash paid to shareholders. However, one caveat is

in order. From a statistical perspective, if our objective is to explain the change in the

explanatory power of dividend yield since the beginning of the 1980s one could argue that

only those cash flows that substitute for dividends should be included. It is not clear that

the information content of share repurchase announcements is identical to that of dividend

change announcements (e.g. Grullon and Michaely (2004)). Indeed, there is some

evidence that repurchases have more explanatory power for expected returns than

dividends (e.g., Lakonishok, Ikenberry and Vermaelen (1995) and Benartzi, Michaely and

Thaler (1997)). Thus, if one takes the view that the variable of interest is the one that best

explains variation in future returns (e.g., Fama and French (1992, 1993)); it may be the

portion of repurchases not substituting for dividends that has the explanatory power. A

similar caveat holds when extending dividends to total net payout via the inclusion of

equity issuance. In particular, we must bear in mind the evidence in Baker and Wurgler

(2000) on the predictive power of the equity share of total debt and equity issuance. Our



                                              15
evidence differs significantly in that we examine equity issuance deflated by price (i.e.,

the net yield).

        As important as the cross-sectional characteristics of dividend versus payout yields

are the time-series features. By far the strongest evidence and greatest use in asset pricing

models is the treatment of dividend yield as the primary source of fundamental

movements in asset prices, either directly through cash flow distributions or via its impact

on time-varying expected returns. This literature covers the excess volatility studies (e.g.,

Shiller (1981), Grossman and Shiller (1981), Marsh and Merton (1986), Kleidon (1986),

Campbell and Shiller (1988a), Campbell (1991) and Cochrane (1991), among others), the

predictability of stock returns (e.g., Hansen and Singleton (1983), Fama and French (1988,

1989), Ferson and Harvey (1991) and Hodrick (1992)), and the process for dividend yields

and its implications for returns (e.g., Campbell and Shiller (1988b), Cochrane (1998), Ang

and Bekaert (2001), Lettau and Ludvigson (2001), Fama and French (2002) and Lewellen

(2003)).

        Panel A of Table I provides a summary of the properties of the dividend, payout,

and net payout yield time-series processes over the sample periods commonly examined

in previous empirical studies. As documented by others, the time-series process for

dividend yields is dramatically different in comparing the 1926-1985 to the 1926-2003

sample periods. In particular, the process is much more persistent over the longer period

(see, e.g., Goyal and Welch (2003)). For example, the AR(1) parameter increases from

0.805 to 0.944. This is a dramatic shift towards interpreting the dividend yield process as

being nonstationary. This, in turn, casts doubt on the underlying economic intuition of

stock return predictability. Table I presents Dickey-Fuller tests for nonstationarity using



                                             16
the autocorrelation coefficient (set up as an AR(1) regression with an intercept), i.e., the

test statistic ( ρˆ − 1) / σˆ ρˆ . Using the Student-t distribution is inappropriate under the null of

a unit root, so we use the critical values provided by Fuller (1996). For example, the 10%

critical value is -2.57. The shift in autocorrelation from 0.805 for the subsample to 0.944

in the full sample translates into a shift from a test statistic of -2.311 to -1.159, a shift from

borderline-rejection of the unit root null to being well within the confines of a unit root.

                                           [Insert Table I here]

        Panel A of Table I provides additional evidence that questions the above

interpretation. If one treats the payout yield as the appropriate process to study, the shift in

the process from the 1926-1985 sample to the 1926-2003 sample is much more marginal.

In this case, the AR(1) coefficient increases from 0.809 to just 0.863 using cash-flow-

based repurchases. Since treasury stock data is only available beginning in 1984, the

dividend yield and payout yield using treasury-stock-based repurchases are identical from

1926-1984. Thus, we compare the total payout yield computed using treasury-stock-based

repurchases for the full sample (1926-2003) with the dividend yield for the partial sample

(1926-1984). When we do, we see the AR(1) coefficient rise from 0.802 to 0.906.13 The

unit root test statistics are of much higher magnitude in the full sample, namely -2.309 and

-1.724 using the two measures.

        An alternative way to look at the time-series process for dividend yields and

payout yields in the predictive regressions is to perform tests for a structural break. While

in reality the shift (if any) is most likely gradual, we nevertheless choose 1985 because of

its proximity to the enactment of SEC rule 10b-18, discussed above.14 We perform the test

for the driving processes underlying the dividend and total payout processes, as well as the



                                                  17
predictive regressions. Panel B of Table I shows the dividend process seems to experience

a structural break. The F-statistic is 3.725, with a corresponding p-value of 0.029. The

dividend yield predictive regression’s F-statistic is 3.270, with a p-value of 0.044. For

both repurchase measures similar calculations for the total payout process and related

predictive regression do not show any evidence of a structural break. These results

provide an interpretation for our earlier analysis of Dickey-Fuller tests statistics for a unit

root. In particular, to the extent there is a break in the dividend price ratio time series, its

stationarity is, not surprisingly, jeopardized in the full sample, a result of the structural

break. We may now interpret the test as a result of a structural break rather than the

additional data providing true evidence against stationarity of the underlying series. The

results for net payouts are mixed, in that the autoregression shows a structural break,

however, the predictive regressions do not. When we discuss in the next section in detail

the results of these predictive regressions, we find, perhaps surprisingly, that this has no

adverse effect on the net payout measure to predict market returns.

       While the actual impact of this result for asset returns will be studied empirically

in the next section, this finding tends to support the existing literature that relies on

stationarity of dividend yields. Consider models that include dividend price ratios in VAR

frameworks and exploit their implications for long-horizon expected returns (e.g.,

Campbell and Shiller (1988) and Cochrane (1998)). If one uses total payout as aggregate

distributions to shareholders, one will reach similar conclusions to this earlier literature

with respect to volatility of returns and its decomposition into time-varying risk premiums

versus cash flow risk.




                                               18
       Aside from making stationarity assumptions about dividend yields in theoretical

finance models, some economists argue that stationary systems are a natural outcome of

the equilibrium process. In this context, the above results lend support to the idea that

payout yields are a more appropriate measure of cash flow distributions (and the

underlying economic fundamentals) than dividend yields, confirming previously

mentioned evidence in Grullon and Michaely (2002) and Dittmar and Dittmar (2002),

albeit from a different perspective. Although we do not investigate the implications of the

changed process for dividend growth versus payout growth rates in this paper, the results

in Table I should prove useful for current research that focuses on the properties of

dividend growth rates (e.g., Ang and Bekaert (2001), Lettau and Ludvigson (2001), and

Menzly, Santos and Veronesi (2003)) or for reevaluations of excess volatility studies

(Shiller (1981), Kleidon (1986), and Larrain and Yogo (2005)).



                                II. Empirical Results


       The thesis of this paper is that most theories underlying dividend yield’s

usefulness in predicting stock returns do not distinguish how cash is transferred between

the firms and its shareholders. Therefore, from a theoretical perspective, since all cash

flow distributions to shareholders may have fundamental information about asset pricing,

researchers should be careful in using dividend yields alone. From an empirical

perspective we showed in Section I that the estimated process is more “consistent” if we

include repurchases and cash flow from equity issuance, rather than using dividends

alone. Still the extent to which this mismeasurement affects the empirical results reported




                                            19
in the literature remains an open question, which we now address following the strategy of

Section I. Specifically, we investigate the properties of the stock return/dividend yield

relation and then extend the analysis to include payout and net payout yields. The analysis

is performed both in the time-series and the cross-section.




A. Time-Series Predictability Analysis

   By far the most important result in the literature on estimating time-varying expected

returns is the predictive power of dividend yields. For example, Campbell, Lo and

MacKinlay (1997) as well as Cochrane (2001), in their book chapters discussing

predictability, give center stage to empirical results involving the dividend price ratio.

This evidence has been looked at across asset classes, across industries, and across

countries. While there is significant debate about dividend yields as predictors, especially

at long horizons, part of its extra scrutiny is due to it being the most single-pointed

variable.15 Goyal and Welch (2003), for example, provide a detailed and thorough analysis

of various measures of dividend yields and argue that the predictive power has been

overstated both in- and out-of-sample. In particular, they document predictability prior to

1990 but show that this disappears when including the last decade. After considering

various explanations, they argue that the most likely one is that the relation was spurious.

   As argued in the literature, the last 15 years have exhibited a dramatic shift in the

breakdown between payout yields and dividend yields (see, e.g., Cochrane (2001, P.391)

and Allen and Michaely (2003)). Panel A of Table II presents the results of aggregate time

series regressions of the market excess return on the dividend, payout, and net payout

yield. From 1926-1984 (i.e., the “Early Sample”) the coefficient on dividend yield is


                                             20
0.296 with t-statistic and R2 of 3.666 and 13%, respectively. However, when the recent

history is included, the coefficient and explained variation drop dramatically, to 0.116

with a corresponding t-statistic of 2.24 and R2 of 5.5%. While statistical significance is

still present, its temporary disappearance in the late 90’s brought researchers to conclude

that predictability based on dividend yields disappears. A series of high returns coupled

with low dividend yields early in the new millennium brought back statistical significance

(see our t-statistic of 2.240), but the breakdown in explanatory power and coefficient are

still a resounding puzzle to early predictability stories. Moreover, this significance, when

appropriately adjusted for the well known estimation bias inherent in this setting (See

Stambaugh (1999)), disappears in the full sample, but not in the early subsample.

                                       [Insert Table II here]

   In contrast to the results for dividend yields, when we use the payout yield as a

predictor for the entire sample period the regression coefficients, t-statistics and R2s

change only mildly, and statistical significance is not lost. This is consistent with our

explanation that measurement error and omitted variables are the culprit to the decline in

dividend yield predictability. Interestingly, this is true irrespective of whether we use

cash-flow-based repurchases or treasury-stock-based repurchases to correct dividend

yield. For the cash-flow (and treasury-stock) –based payoff yield measures the regression

coefficient drops from 0.280 (0.300) to 0.209 (0.172), the t-statistic remains highly

significant at any reasonable level, dropping from 3.688 (3.396) to 3.741 (2.854), and the

R2 drops from 12.1% (13.5%) to 9.1% (8.0%).

   Before we turn to the results for net payout yield, it is useful to note that the regressor

we use is constructed somewhat differently. In particular, the net payout yield is not



                                             21
necessarily positive anymore due to the netting out of equity issuances (see Section II.A

above), hence, we cannot use log(yield) as our regressor anymore. Since we want to

deviate as little as possible from the literature in this respect we simply bound the net

yield away from negativitiy by defining the regressor as log( net yield + 0.1 ). The results

are qualitatively robust to the precise size of the adjustment factor (0.1 in our case) but

larger adjustments further remove the comparability of our estimates with that of the

existing literature.16

    The results for net payout yield are quite striking. While the regression coefficient we

obtain is not comparable to the ones computed above for total payout and dividend yield,

the t-statistic and R2 are comparable. The t-statistic is 5.311, significant at any standard

level. The R2 is 26.2%. This result is striking in light of the baseline level of predictability

using dividends alone of 5.5%, or even in light of the payout measures’ explanatory power

of 8.0% or 9.1%.17

    There are two potential statistical objections to the evidence of predictability at short

horizons, namely the small sample bias of the predictive estimator (e.g., Stambaugh

(1986)) and the breakdown of typical asymptotics in small samples due to the presence of

highly persistent regressors (e.g., Elliott and Stock (1994)). Because these statistical issues

arise as a result of the properties of the predictive variable, it is possible that the different

results for the dividend versus the payout measures may be due to these issues rather than

fundamentals. It is important therefore to document the differential evidence with the

appropriate corrections.

    With respect to small sample bias, Stambaugh (1986, 1999) notes that the typically

high persistence in regressors used in predictive regressions, coupled with the strong



                                               22
negative correlation between innovations to these regressors and asset returns themselves,

create a bias in the predictive regression coefficient.         When the bias is adjusted

appropriately (e.g., downward), the regression coefficients typically are found to be

insignificant. Lewellen (2004), more recently, pointed out that the autocorrelation of the

regressor, when appropriately bounded below unity, would affect the Stambaugh bias by

reducing the standard errors relative to those calculated while ignoring the constraint on

the AR(1) coefficient of the regressor. In some cases (e.g., some periods and/or some

regressors) this may have the effect of salvaging predictability.

   Amihud and Hurvich (2004) suggest a simple method to implement the Stambaugh-

Lewellen adjustment via OLS regressions18. Using their approach we compute bias-

adjusted beta coefficients and standard errors, which appear in Panel A of Table II. Since

at an annual frequency the persistence in the regressor is lower and the correlation

between returns and the innovations to the regressor is lower, the effect of the adjustment

is smaller. Interestingly, due to the relatively high persistence in the dividend yield series

(namely, 0.94) and the relatively high cross correlation between the regressor’s AR(1)

errors and returns (namely, -0.709) relative to the other regressors discussed next, the bias

adjustment has sufficient bite to diminish the statistical significance of the dividend yield

predictability obtained in standard OLS regression. In particular, while the OLS beta is

0.116, the bias-adjusted beta is 0.072, and while, as noted above, the OLS t-statistic is

2.240, it is 1.281 for the bias-adjusted beta. This lost significance is not the case, however,

for all other regressors under consideration. In particular, the adjusted beta of the cash-

flow-based (treasury-stock-based) payout yield regressor is 0.167 (0.126) with a t-statistic

of 2.192 (1.872). The statistical significance is not lost here because the adjustment



                                              23
necessary for the payout series is small. This is a result of the relatively low persistence of

these regressors, coupled with the relatively weak correlation between the innovations to

the regressors and returns.

   With respect to possible size distortions of t-statistics due to near unit root properties

of the regressor, Elliot and Stock (1994) derive an alternative asymptotic theory in which

they explicitly model the regressor as a having a local-to-unit root. A number of finance

papers have recently applied this theory to the question of stock return predictability (see,

for example, Torous, Valkanov and Yan (2001), Jannson and Moreira (2003), Campbell

and Yogo (2005), and Polk, Thompson, and Vuolteenaho (2003)). Under this alternative

methodology, the researcher can construct Bonferroni-based tests that are robust to the

persistence problem by directly incorporating Dickey-Fuller confidence intervals around

the autoregressive parameter. In panel A of Table II, we present the 5% confidence

interval for the one sided Bonferroni Q-test using the test methodology and critical value

in Campbell and Yogo (2005).19 For this relatively more conservative test we find that

beta is bound away from zero for all three total payout variables, but not for dividend

yield. The Bonferroni Q-test cannot reject that beta is zero for the dividend price ratio,

with a lower confidence interval below zero, namely -0.007. The gross payout measures

are bound away from zero, with the lower point of the confidence interval being 0.035 for

the cash flow based variable and 0.014 for the treasury stock one. The 5% lower tail of the

total net payout variable is, as one would expect given its low persistence and high R-

square, bound well away from zero, at 0.313.

   In conclusion, neither of the above statistical issues can explain the different

predictability results using dividend yields versus the various payout measures. As an



                                              24
alternative comparison of the measures, we investigate their true predictive content from

an economic perspective by turning to benchmarks recently set out in a series of papers by

Goyal and Welch (2003, 2005). Goyal and Welch suggest an economically-motivated,

intuitive benchmark for predictability, namely, out of sample performance. They compute

the root-mean-squared-error differential (dRMSE) between two competing models (i) a

myopic model, where expected returns are just the historical mean risk premium, and (ii) a

predictability-based MSE, where expected returns are based on a rolling regression of

available past data at any point in time. A reasonable economic benchmark for

predictability to be interesting from an economic standpoint, they argue, is dRMSE>0.

   In Table II we compute this measure with a rolling look-back window of 60 years and

a forecast period starting in 1985. Consistent with Goyal and Welch, the dividend yield

series does not provide sufficient predictive information to overcome statistical or

modeling errors, hence, not only is its statistical validity questionable, but its economic

relevance is doubtful.   Interestingly, two out of the three alternative series that we

examine do manage to beat the Goyal-Welch benchmark. The dRMSE is positive for all

but the treasury-stock-based total payout variable. The cash-flow-based payout forecasts

exhibit a dRMSE of 2.4%, while that of the net payout is a remarkable 4.8% on a per

annum basis.

   The statistical significance of the dRMSE measure is examined in Goyal and Welch

(2003) using asymptotic statistical theory developed by Diebold and Mariano. In some

recent work, e.g., Clark and West (2005), authors have pointed out that statistical noise in

the repeated estimation of predictive coefficients in the rolling regression framework can

introduce a bias into the dRMSE measure. This is because in finite samples the RMSE



                                             25
under the null of no predictability is not expected to be zero, but, instead, negative.

Motivated by small sample concerns, Goyal and Welch (2005) provide a bootstrapping

analysis of the Diebold-Mariano dRMSE statistic and provide corresponding cutoff

values. Similarly, we conduct a Monte Carlo simulation under the null of no predictability

and obtain a simulation-based p-value for the dRMSE’s given the relevant parameters.20

The dRMSEs of the cash flow based total payout series and that of the net payout series

are not only positive, but also have impressive p-values of 8.2% and 2.2% respectively.

That is, in simulations under the null of no predictability only 8.2% (2.2%) of the times

the dRMSE was greater than 2.4% (or 4.8%).

   Panel B of Table II provides a “horse race” between dividend yield and the various

payout yield measures. Consistent with our main thesis, all three payout measures are

highly significant, while dividend yield is insignificant in each case. For example, for the

dividend yield and cash-flow-based total payout bivariate regression the p-value (not

shown) on dividends is 0.790 while that of total payout is 0.007. Comparing the R2s

across univariate and bivariate regressions, we conclude that dividend yield’s contribution

to the regression is negligible in the presence of any of the other payout regressors. For

example, the univariate R2 for the cash-flows-based payout yield regressor is 9.2% while

in the bivariate case it is 9.8% -- not a remarkable difference. This result, that dividends

disappear when pitted against payout series, carries through to the other two regressions.



B. Cross-Sectional Analysis

       The idea that dividends can be a useful measure for expected stock returns has

early roots in finance (e.g., Dow (1920)). More recent research into the cross-sectional



                                             26
relation between dividend yields and returns is motivated not only by Dow’s findings or

the implication of the Gordon growth model, but by the presence of market imperfections.

For example, Litzenberger and Ramaswamy (1979), among others, use tax motives to find

a positive relation between expected returns and dividend yields in the context of a tax-

based CAPM. Others studies (e.g., John and Williams, (1985), Allen Bernardo and Welch

(2000), Grullon, Michaely and Swaminathan (2002)) turn to agency problems and

information asymmetries in motivating a cross-sectional relation between equity returns

and dividend yields. In this section, we explore (i) whether yields are useful measures for

describing cross-sectional variation in expected returns, and (ii) whether the different

yield measures (i.e., dividend versus (net) payout) lead to different conclusions. We close

the section by comparing the performance of simple trading strategies based on our three

yield measures.

       Our first set of analysis examines the characteristics of stocks as a function of our

different yield measures. Each year at the end of June, we form ten portfolios based on the

ranked values of dividend yield, payout yield, and net payout yield from December of the

previous year. Breakpoints for the decile portfolios are determined using only NYSE

stocks with a non-zero yield. Stocks with zero yields comprise their own portfolio.

       Table III presents the average monthly return, post-ranking beta, log firm size, log

book-to-market, yield, and number of firms for each of ten positive yield portfolios, as

well as for a portfolio of zero-yield stocks, for the period July 1984 to December 2003.

With the exception of the first decile portfolio, there seems to be little cross-sectional

return variation based on these portfolios, e.g., the lowest three deciles’ mean monthly

return is 1.15% monthly, the middle four deciles monthly return is 1.28%, and the highest



                                            27
three is 1.33%. This contrasts to the July 1963 to June 1984 period (not reported in the

tables), in which these same portfolios increase sharply from the low deciles (1.23%) to

the high deciles (1.63%). In both periods, the average beta decreases with the dividend

yield while the average book-to-market ratio increases with dividend yields.

                                      [Insert Table III here]

       As far as the average return is concerned, the portfolios formed on (net) payout

yield measures (Panels B through D) tell a different story. Most important, there is

measurable cross-sectional variation in expected returns, the result being an almost

monotonic relation between returns and payout yield. For the cash flow (treasury stock)

based measure of payout yield, the lowest three deciles’ mean is 1.28% (1.27%), the

middle four is 1.40% (1.34%) and the highest three is 1.56% (1.51%). Note that finding

higher payout yield portfolios having higher realized returns is consistent with the time-

series results documented in Section III.A. In that section, we documented higher returns

during periods of high payout yields for the aggregate market. Like the dividend yield

portfolios, the payout yield portfolios are negatively correlated with beta and positively

correlated with book-to-market: High payout yield portfolios have lower betas and higher

book-to-market ratios than low payout yield portfolios. Similarly, these inferences carry

over to net payout yields, whose portfolio (low, medium, high) returns are 1.24%, 1.36%,

1.57% and, are negatively correlated with beta and positively correlated with the book-to-

market ratio.

       As is now standard in the literature, Table IV performs Fama-MacBeth monthly

return regressions on post-ranking betas, book-to-market, size, and either dividend,

payout, or net payout yield, over the period July 1984 to December 2003. Again, we focus



                                            28
on this later period corresponding to the period in which share repurchase activity is

largely protected from legal action. Specifically, we run cross-sectional regressions every

month in order to generate a time series of parameter estimates. As mentioned above, each

year we trim the smallest and largest 0.5% of the observations for book-to-market, the

largest 5% of the observations for dividend yield and payout yield, and the largest and

smallest 2.5% of the observations for net payout yield. This trimming avoids giving

extreme observations excessive weight in the regressions, although we also address this

issue further by using a robust regression technique discussed below. Table IV presents

the average value of each estimated parameter’s time series, along with a corresponding

standard deviation and t-statistic. Panel A presents the results for the entire sample and

panel B presents the results when only the non-zero yield firms are included.

                                       [Insert Table IV here]

       For the OLS regressions on the entire sample, the standard results appear in the

significantly negative coefficient on size and significantly positive coefficient on book-to-

market. The market beta coefficient is insignificant across all four specifications. More to

the point of this paper, however, are the differences across our yield measures. Both the

(cash-flow based) payout yield and net payout yield coefficients are positive and highly

significant, whereas the dividend yield coefficient is insignificant. The coefficient on the

log payout yield is 0.15 with a t-statistic of 2.24, and the coefficient on net payout yield is

0.03 with a t-stat of 4.14. The difference in coefficient magnitude is due to the inability to

use the log transformation on the net payout yield because of negative values, thus

preventing a direct comparison of the coefficients.21 The treasury stock based payout yield

is also positive (0.08) and more than twice the magnitude of the dividend yield, but



                                              29
statistically insignificant. However, the important point is that relative to the dividend

yield (coefficient of 0.03 with a t-stat of 0.38), payout yield and net payout yield show

significantly stronger associations with stock returns.

         One of the commonly cited problems in measuring the cross-section of returns is

the extent to which the results are robust. In particular, Knez and Ready (1997) argue that

robust estimation should be applied due to outliers and, indeed, find that the size effect

reverses (becomes positive) when such a technique is applied. As such, we apply a similar

method here by re-estimating the model using least absolute deviation (LAD) regression.

Similar to Knez and Ready (1997), the standard size effect reverses sign. The book-to-

market effect remains positive and significant. Interestingly, the coefficient on log

dividend yield is now significantly positive, though relatively less so than (net) payout

yield.

         Finally, in panel B we report OLS and LAD regression results for when the sample

is restricted to only positive yield stocks. Interestingly, in the dividend yield specification

of the OLS regression, the standard result no longer applies. That is, size and book-to-

market are not significantly related to returns. In the payout and net payout yield

specifications, the size coefficient is still insignificant but the book-to-market coefficient

is now significant. This change is due in large part to a larger sample of firms that pay

dividends or repurchase shares compared to firms that only pay dividends. More to the

point of this paper though, where the dividend yield is insignificant, the payout and net

payout yields are significantly related to returns, but for the OLS estimate of the treasury

stock based payout yield. The LAD estimates for the positive yield sub-sample show a

similar pattern: the payout coefficients are positive and highly significant while the



                                              30
dividend yield appears relatively less important. This is consistent with the declining rank

correlation between payout yields and dividend yields during the 1984-2003 period

described above and in Figure 2.

       Thus far, our results suggest that payout and net payout yields have explanatory

power for cross-sectional variation of returns over and above the standard firm

characteristics, and that the payouts’ coefficients are robust to sample specification, as

well as outliers. On the other hand, for most cases, during the period 1984-2003, the

dividend yield coefficient is not able to explain cross-sectional variation in returns and is

more sensitive to sample specifications.22

       Given the evidence of cross-sectional covariation between stock returns and

payout yield, we develop measures of dividend, payout, and net payout yields as potential

factors. We begin by sorting firms into three dividend yield groups and three payout yield

groups each year, based on their deciles discussed earlier. These low, medium, and high

groups correspond to the bottom three, middle four, and top three deciles. We then

construct nine portfolios from the intersection of the dividend and payout yield groups and

compute value-weighted average returns for each portfolio. Our dividend yield factor is

computed as the average return across the three high dividend yield groups minus the

average return across the three low dividend groups. The (net) payout yield factor is

constructed in a similar manner. This approach mirrors Fama and French’s (1993) method

for forming the size and book-to-market factors and, as such, aids in purging the

correlation between our yield factors. The result of this procedure is four monthly time-

series including: DYHML (corresponding to the dividend yield factor), PYCFHML

(corresponding to the cash flow based payout yield factor), PYTSHML (corresponding to



                                             31
the treasury stock based payout yield factor), and NPYHML (corresponding to the net

payout yield factor).

       The analysis that we perform is standard and based on the original portfolio

regressions performed by Fama and French (1993). We begin by merging monthly data

for the risk-free return, excess market return, SMB factor return, and HML factor return

(all of which are obtained from Ken French’s website) with our yield factors discussed

above. These three time series, in addition to one of our yield factors, form the design

matrix in our factor regressions. The dependent variables consist of monthly excess stock

returns for three sets of 25 portfolios: beta/payout yield, size/payout yield, and book-to-

market/payout yield.23 To coincide with the existing evidence, these portfolios include

zero yield stocks, though the construction of our factor returns do not. For the beta/payout

yield portfolios, we sort NYSE stocks in June of each year t into beta and (independently)

payout yield quintiles.24 The 25 portfolios are then constructed from the intersection of the

quintiles and a value-weighted monthly return is computed. We then regress monthly

excess portfolio returns on an intercept, the excess market return, SMB, HML and either

DYHML, PYCFHML, PYTSHML, or NPYHML. Panel A of Table V presents the estimated

intercepts and yield coefficients, as well as the corresponding t-statistics, for the book-to-

market/yield portfolios. 25

                                       [Insert Table V here]

       Before commenting on the results containing the yield factors, it is worthwhile

documenting the findings for a conventional 3-factor model estimated on the three sets of

portfolios described above: beta/payout yield, size/payout yield, and book-to-

market/payout yield. Panel B of Table V summarizes the test results. In terms of the



                                              32
number of significant alphas, we find 7, 4 and 8 out of 25, respectively. Of course, these

alphas may be correlated, which calls for a joint test. We look at the standard Wald test

that the alphas are all equal to zero. The Wald tests produce test statistics of 44.77, 82.93,

and 46.54, respectively, all of which are asymptotically distributed χ2(25) and highly

statistically significant. That these tests reject the joint hypothesis that all of the intercepts

are zero is potentially important. While it is not the first rejection of the Fama-French

model (see Davis, Fama and French (2000) and Cremers (2003), among others), it does

suggest that portfolio returns sorted in some way on payout yield cannot be solely

explained cross-sectionally by the Fama-French factors.

        To this point there is some evidence that payout yield may be a factor in describing

expected returns. Across all three cross-sections of portfolios sorted on payout yield and

the other factors (i.e. beta, size, book-to-market), the alphas tend to be statistically

indistinguishable from zero (see Panel A for the book-to-market/yield portfolios in Table

V as a representative sample). For example, Panel B shows that relative to the three-factor

model, for portfolios sorted on beta, size and book-to-market, the number of significant

alphas substantially declines. For the dividend yield factor there are 2, 5 and 4,

respectively, significant alphas compared to that for the cash flow based payout yield

factor (2, 4 and 2), treasury stock based payout yield (1, 5, and 4), and net payout yield

factor (0, 6 and 0). While the alphas are probably correlated, suggesting a joint hypothesis,

the evidence presented here is suggestive of the importance of a yield factor albeit

distinguishing somewhat less between dividend yield and payout yield relative to previous

evidence.




                                                33
       To complete the analysis, we perform a Wald test analogous to the one described

above, the results of which are presented in panel B of Table V. We find a negligible

difference when we include the dividend yield factor into the specification. However,

when we replace the dividend yield with payout yield, the test-statistics fall uniformly

across the portfolios for the treasury stock based payout measure and in all but the beta

portfolio for the cash flow based payout measure. A further decline in test statistics is

found when we include the net payout yield factor. In sum, excess returns are driven to

zero, or generally closer in the case of size portfolios, as we progress from the Fama-

French 3-factor model to including the dividend yield, then payout yield, and, finally, net

payout yield.

       In terms of the coefficients on the payout yield, between one third and half of them

are significant in the regressions, which suggests that they have useful information for

describing cross-sectional variation above and beyond the usual factors. Moreover, the

coefficients follow sensible patterns, such as a positive correlation between the yield

factor coefficient and payout sorted portfolios. For each (net) payout measures, the

estimated slope coefficients in the low yield portfolio are all negative while those in the

highest yield portfolio are all positive. Thus, independent of the book-to-market portfolio,

the coefficients tend to increase across the yield portfolios. This finding is consistent with

the results of Table III on the relation between average returns and payout yields, and

shows that it carries through even in the presence of the well-documented 3-factor model

of Fama and French. Also consistent with our previous results, the strength of the

association between the estimated yield coefficients and the yield portfolios appears to

strengthen as we progress from dividend yield to payout yield to net payout yield.



                                              34
       In concert, this cross-sectional evidence suggests that including repurchases have

additional explanatory power for expected returns, and that these yields generally

outperform dividend yields, which supports the measurement issue. The results of Tables

4 and 5 also suggest that investing in high yield stocks, especially when the yield measure

includes repurchases, results in higher returns than investing in yield-neutral portfolios.

These findings ultimately beg the question: How does the strategy of investing in high

yield portfolios perform over time?

       To illustrate the applicability of this analysis, we analyze the performance of

various yield portfolios. We consider the popular trading strategy, Dogs of the Dow, and

variations of that strategy based on our discussion. In its simplest form, this strategy

amounts to buying high yield Dow-Jones-Index stocks (say a third). In Burton Malkiel’s

(2003) well-known book, A Random Walk Down Wall Street, he describes how this

strategy historically outperformed the Dow Jones by 2-3% per annum. Malkiel goes on to

say, however, that once this strategy became popular, the returns disappeared – in his

language “the dogs no longer hunt” (pp. 246). Our analysis, however, suggests an

alternative explanation.

                                      [Insert Table VI here]

       Panel A of Table VI describes the monthly returns to buying portfolios of stocks

formed on various yield measures during the period July 1984 to December 2003.

Specifically, in June of each year, stocks are sorted into deciles based on their yield from

the previous year. The High (Low) Yield portfolio consists of those stocks falling in the

upper (lower) 30% of the non-zero yield distribution. While the average monthly return of

holding the market over this period is 1.12%, the return corresponding to the top dividend



                                             35
yield portfolio is 1.35%, a 20 basis point difference. However, when we consider the high

(net) payout yield portfolios, we see average returns of 1.57%, 1.53%, and 1.59% to the

cash flow based payout yield, treasury stock based payout yield, and net payout yield,

respectively. These returns effectively double the spread over the market return exhibited

by the dividend yield portfolio. Turning to the risk characteristics of these portfolios,

Panel A also presents their factor loadings, which reveal positive loadings on each of the

factors, but statistically significant intercepts that range from 59 basis points per month for

the dividend yield portfolio to 80 basis points per month for the net payout yield portfolio.

       Panel B of Table VI presents a similar analysis for portfolios that simultaneously

go long in the high yield portfolio and short in the low yield portfolio. Several

observations are worth mentioning. First, the payout and the net payout yield have

significantly higher returns than the dividend yield strategy. Second, this zero-finance

strategy has a positive alpha which is the highest for the payout and net payout yield.

Third, regardless of how the yield is being measured, this strategy has negative loadings

on the market and size factors, and positive loading on the book-to-market factor. Finally,

the payout yield and net payout yield portfolios exhibit substantial improvements in

performance relative to the dividend yield portfolio. Figure 3 presents a graphical view of

these portfolios performance over time and illustrates both the evolution of the yield factor

and the viability of our findings as a trading strategy. We note that in most years the

dividend, payout (cash-flow and treasury stock measures) and the net payout strategies

were profitable (in 13 out of 19, 14 out of 19, 13 out of 18, and 12 out of 19 years,

respectively).

                                        [Insert Figure 3 here]



                                              36
       Perhaps the most glaring result is the large negative return to the net payout yield

portfolio in 2000, which stands in stark contrast to the other two portfolio returns. Closer

examination of this result reveals that it is due primarily to a subset of firms that issued

equity during 1998 (i.e., at just the right time) and garnered significantly large subsequent

returns from July of 1999 to June of 2000. These firms fall predominantly in high-tech

and bio-tech industries (SIC codes 7372, 7373, 7370, 2834, 2835, and 2836).

       Overall, the results indicate that even after controlling for alternative risk-factors,

these strategies appear to earn abnormal returns, as measured by the significantly positive

intercepts. These returns are higher when repurchases and issuances are accounted for. At

the same time, the analysis illustrates that while following this strategy is profitable, it is

not an arbitrage, as evidenced by significant losses in a few years.



                III. Concluding Remarks and Future Research


       A reliable predictor of equity returns for much of the 20th century, dividend yields

recently lost some of their allure. In this paper, we argue that a more appropriate measure

is total payout. We show that the apparent demise of dividend yields as a predictor is due

more to mismeasurement than alternative explanations such as spurious correlation,

learning, etc. The enactment of SEC rule 10b-18 in 1982 spawned an explosion in

repurchase activity that had a profound affect on the manner in which firms distribute

earnings to their shareholders. This shift in payout policy resulted in a magnification of an

existing problem in measures of payout yields, namely, the exclusion of share

repurchases. We show that once repurchases are accounted for, our measures of total




                                              37
payout yield show significant predictive ability in both the time series and cross-section of

equity returns.

       In particular, we present several key findings. First, the dividend yield process

exhibits a structural break around the time of the SEC rule change, and a subsequent

decline in its predictive ability once post-1984 data is included in the analysis. In contrast,

payout yields show no significant change in their dynamic properties and, consequently,

their predictive ability remains intact across various time periods. Additionally, the

significant relation between returns and payout yield are robust to small sample

considerations (e.g., Stambaugh (1999) and Lewellen (2003)). Finally, we show that

payout yields exhibit significant out-of-sample predictability, using the framework of

Goyal and Welch (2005), whereas dividend yields do not.

       Second, much like the time series analysis, we provide evidence that payout yields

contain information about the cross-section of future returns above and beyond that

provided by dividend yields. Fama-MacBeth regressions reveal a statistically and

economically significant relation between returns and payout yield, as opposed to the

insignificant relation between returns and dividend yield. Further, factor regressions

reveal that a payout yield factor constructed from a portfolio long stocks in the upper 30%

of the yield distribution and short those in the bottom 30% of the yield distributions

appears to be priced in the sense that asset pricing restrictions cannot be rejected in the

presence of this payout factor, whereas they can be when only the traditional three-factors

(Fama and French (1993)) are examined.

       Since corporate theory does not distinguish between inflows and outflows (Miller

and Modigliani (1961), Miller and Rock (1985), and Allen and Michaely (2003)) our



                                              38
analysis also enables us to address the more general issue of how cash flows between the

firm and investors impact asset prices. We construct a measure of net payout yield

incorporating both share repurchases and issuances. The results show an even stronger

association between returns and net payout yields, in both the cross-section and time

series, than that found with either dividend or payout yield.

       The implications of this study, while straightforward, are broad. At a fundamental

level, our results suggest that asset pricing frameworks disillusioned with the use of

dividends as a fundamental variable can now consider total payouts as a more accurate

measure. Further, new research that exploits the complex properties of dividend growth

rates both at the aggregate and individual firm level should take care in their

interpretation. Our results suggest a better approach would be to look at the growth rate

for total payouts and proceed along those lines.




                                             39
References

Allen, Franklin, Antonio E. Bernardo, and Ivo Welch, 2000, A theory of dividends based

on tax clienteles, Journal of Finance 55, 2499-2536.



Allen, Franklin, and Roni Michaely, 2003, Payout policy, in George Constantinides,

Milton Harris, and Rene Stulz, eds.: Handbooks of Economics, North-Holland.



Amihud, Yakov, and C. Hurvich, 2004, Predictive regressions: A reduced-bias estimation

method, Journal of financial and Quantitative Analysis 39, 813-841.



Amihud, Yakov, Clifford Hurvich, and Yi Wang, 2004, Hypothesis testing in predictive

regressions, NYU Finance Department Working Paper 04-030.



Ang, Andrew and Geert Bekaert, 2001, Stock return predictability: Is it there?, Working

Paper Columbia University.



Baker, Malcolm, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2000, The equity share in new issues and aggregate

stock returns, Journal of Finance 55, 2219-2257.



Benartzi, Shlomo, Roni Michaely, and Richard Thaler, 1997, Do changes in dividends

signal the future or the past?, Journal of Finance 52, 1007-1043.




                                            40
Bens, Daniel A., Venky Nagar, and Douglas J. Skinner, 2002, Employee Stock Options,

EPS Dilution, and Stock Repurchases, Working paper University of Michigan.



Black, Fischer, and Myron Scholes, 1974, The effects of dividend yield and dividend

policy on common stock prices and returns, Journal of Financial Economics 1, 1-22.



Bossearts, Peter, and Pierre Hillion, 1999, Implementing statistical criteria to select return

forecasting models: What do we learn?, Review of Financial Studies 12, 405-428.



Brav, Alon, John R. Graham, Campbell Harvey, and Roni Michaely, 2003, Payout policy

in the 21st century, forthcoming Journal of financial Economics.



Brennan, Michael, 1971, A note on dividend irrelevance and the Gordon valuation model,

Journal of Finance 26, 1115-1122.



Campbell, John, 2000, Asset pricing at the millenium, Journal of Finance 55, 1515-1567.



Campbell, John, Andrew Lo, and A. Craig MacKinlay, 1997, The Econometrics of

Financial Markets, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.



Campbell, John, and Robert Shiller, 1988a, The dividend–price ratio and expectations of

future dividends and discount factors, Review of Financial Studies 1, 195–228.




                                              41
Campbell, John, and Robert Shiller, 1988b, Stock prices, earnings and expected dividends,

Journal of Finance 43, 661-676.



Campbell, John, and Motohiro Yogo, 2005, Efficient tests of stock return predictability,

Working Paper Harvard University.



Charest, Guy, 1978, Dividend information, stock returns and market efficiency – II,

Journal of Financial Economics 6, 297-330.



Clark, Todd E., and Kenneth D. West, 2005, Using out-of-sample mean squared

prediction errors to test the martingale difference hypothesis, NBER Technical Working

Paper 305.



Cochrane, John, 1991, Explaining the variance of price-dividend Ratios, Review of

Financial Studies 5, 243-280.



Cochrane, John, 1998, “A frictionless model of U.S. inflation,” in Ben S. Bernanke and

Julio J. Rotemberg, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual, Cambridge MA: MIT press, p.

323-384.



Cochrane, John, 2001, Asset Pricing, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.




                                             42
Cremers, Martijn K., 2003, Multifactor efficiency and bayesian inference, Working Paper

Yale University.



Daniel, Kent, and Sheridan Titman, 1997, Evidence on the characteristics of cross-

sectional variation in stock returns, Journal of Finance 52, 1-33.



Davis James, Fama Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2000, Characteristics, covariances,

and average returns: 1929 to 1997, Journal of Finance 55, 389-406.



Diebold, Francis X., and Roberto Mariano, 1995, Comparing predictive accuracy, Journal

of Business and Economic Statistics 13, 253-263.



Dittmar, Amy, and Robert Dittmar, 2002, Stock repurchase waves: An explanation of the

trends in aggregate corporate payout policy, Working Paper University of Michigan.



Dow, Charles H., 1920, Scientific stock speculation, The Magazine of Wall Street.



Elliott, Graham, and James H. Stock, 1994, Inference in time series regression when the

order of integration of a regressor is unknown, Econometric Theory 10, 672-700.



Fama Eugene F., 1988, Market efficiency, long-term returns, and behavioral finance,

Journal of Financial Economics 49, 283-306.




                                             43
Fama Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1988, Dividend yields and expected stock

returns, Journal of Financial Economics 22, 3-25.



Fama Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1989, Business conditions and expected returns

on stocks and bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 25, 23-49.




Fama Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1992, The cross-section of expected stock

returns, Journal of Finance 47, 427-465.



Fama Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on

stocks and bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3-56.



Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2001, Disappearing dividends: Changing firm

characteristics or lower propensity to pay?, Journal of Financial Economics 60, 3-43.



Fuller, Wayne, 1996, Introduction to Statistical Time Series, Wiley.



Goetzmann, William, and Philippe Jorion, 1993, Testing the predictive power of dividend

yields, Journal of Finance 48, 1083-1100.



Goyal, Amit, and Ivo Welch, 2003, Predicting the equity premium with dividend ratios,

Management Science 49, 639-654.




                                            44
Goyal, Amit, and Ivo Welch, 2005, A comprehensive look at the empirical performance of

equity premium prediction, Working Paper Emory University.



Grossman, Sanford, and Robert Shiller, 1981, The determinants of the variability of stock

market prices, American Economic Review 71, 222-227.



Grinstein, Yanniv, and Roni Michaely, 2005, Institutional holdings and payout policy,

Journal of Finance 60, 1389-1426.



Grullon, Gustavo, and Roni Michaely, 2002, Dividends, share repurchases and the

substitution hypothesis, Journal of Finance 57, 1649-84.



Grullon, Gustavo, and Roni Michaely, 2004, The information content of share

repurchases, Journal of Finance 59, 651-680.



Grullon, Gustavo, Roni Michaely, and Bhaskaran Swaminathan, 2002, Are dividend

changes a sign of firm maturity?, The Journal of Business 75, 387-424.



Hansen, Lars, and Kenneth Singleton, 1983, Stochastic consumption, risk aversion, and

the temporal behavior of asset returns, Journal of Political Economy 91, 249-265.



Harvey, Campbell, and Wayne Ferson, 1991, The variation of economic risk premiums,

Journal of Political Economy 99, 285-315.



                                            45
Hodrick, Robert, 1992, Dividend yields and expected stock returns: Alternative

procedures for inference and measurement, Review of Financial Studies 5, 357-386.



Jagannathan, Murali, Clifford P. Stephens, and Michael S. Weisbach, 2000, Financial

flexibility and the choice between dividends and stock repurchases, Journal of Financial

Economics 57, 355-384.



Jansson, Michael, and Marcelo J. Moreira, 2003, Optimal inference in regression models

with nearly integrated regressors, Working Paper Harvard University.



Jensen, Michael. C., 1986, Agency costs of free cash flow, corporate finance, and

takeovers, American Economic Review 76, 323-329.



John, Kose and John Williams, 1985, Dividends, dilution, and taxes: A signaling

equilibrium, Journal of Finance 40, 1053-1070.



Kleidon, Allan W., 1986, “Variance bounds test and stock price valuation models, Journal

of Political Economy 94, 953-1001.



Knez, Peter, and Mark Ready, 1997, On the robustness of size and book-to-market in

cross-sectional regressions, Journal of Finance 52, 1355-1382.




                                           46
Lakonishok, Joseph, Ikenberry David and Theo Vermaelen, 1995, Market underreaction

to open market repurchases, Journal of Financial Economics 39, 181-208.



Larrain, Borja, and Motohio Yogo, 2005, Does firm value move too much to be justified

by subsequent changes in cash flow?, Working Paper University of Pennsylvania.



Lewellen, Jonathan, 2004, Predicting returns with financial ratios, Journal of Financial

Economics 74, 209-235.



Lettau, Martin, and Sydney Ludvigson, 2002, Expected returns and expected dividend

growth, Working Paper New York University.



Lintner, John, 1956, Distribution of incomes of corporations among dividends, retained

earnings, and taxes, American Economic Review 46, 97-113.



Litzenberger, Robert, and Krishna Ramaswamy, 1979, The effects of personal taxes and

dividends on capital asset prices: Theory and empirical evidence, Journal of Financial

Economics 7, 163-195.



Lucas, Robert, 1978, Asset prices in an exchange economy, Econometrica 46, 1429-1445.



Malkiel, Burton, 2003, A Random Walk Down Wall Street, Norton.




                                           47
Marsh, Terry, and Robert Merton, 1986, Dividend variability and variance bounds test for

the rationality of stock market prices, American Economic Review 76, 483-448.



Menzly, Lior, Tanos Santos, and Pietro Veronesi, 2004, Understanding predictability,

Journal of Political Economy 112, 1-47.



Miller, Merton, and Franco Modigliani, 1961, Dividend policy, growth, and the valuation

of shares, Journal of Business 34, 235-264.



Miller, Merton, and Kevin Rock, 1985, Dividend policy under asymmetric information,

Journal of Finance 40, 1031-1051.



Miller, Merton, and Myron Scholes, 1982, Dividends and taxes: Empirical evidence,

Journal of Political Economy 90, 1118-1141.



Nelson, Charles, and Myung J. Kim, 1993, “Predictable stock returns: The role of small

sample bias”, Journal of Finance 48, 641-661.



Newey, Whitney, and Kenneth West, 1987, A simple positive semi-definite,

heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix, Econometrica 55,

703-708.




                                              48
Polk, Christopher, Samuel Thompson, and Tuomo Vuolteenaho, 2003, New forecasts of

the equity premium, Working Paper Harvard University.



Robertson, Donald, and Stephen Wright, 2003, Dividends, total cashflows to shareholders

and predictive return regressions, Working Paper University of Cambridge.



Shiller, Robert, 1981, The use of volatility measures in assessing market efficiency,

Journal of Finance 36, 291-304.



Stambaugh, Robert F., 1986, Bias in regressions with lagged stochastic regressors,

Working Paper University of Chicago.



Stambaugh, Robert F., 1999, Predictive regressions, Journal of Financial Economics 54,

375-421.



Torous, Walter, Rossen Valkanov, and Shu Yan, 2001, On predicting stock returns with

nearly integrated explanatory variables, Working Paper UCLA.



Vermaelen, Theo, 1984, Repurchase tender offers, signalling and managerial incentives,

Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 19, 163-181.




                                           49
1
    Using different measures of repurchases such as the change in treasury stocks (which

account for stock options) restricts the sample to start in 1983. The results, however,

exhibit a similar pattern.
2
    Using our measure of repurchases based on the change in treasury stock, this figure is

around 30% towards the end of the sample period.
3
    Independent of this work, Robertson and Wright (2003) make a similar point about

mismeasurement of dividend yields vis a vis repurchases and equity issuance. They find

that by accounting for this mismeasurement stronger evidence of time series predictability

is present, which is one of our findings as well.
4
    We thank Ken French for providing these data.
5
    This measure of repurchase activity is similar to the one used by Jagannathan, Stephens

and Weisbach (2000). While we measure the repurchase activity only for common stocks,

their measure uses the entire repurchase activity, which also includes preferred stocks.

The difference, however, is minimal (see Grullon and Michaely (2002)).
6
    Specifically, our definition is motivated by that provided in the Appendix A.4 of Fama

and French (2001), which defines repurchases as the change in the firm’s Treasury Stock

(Compustat item #226) or as the difference between repurchases and issuances from the

statement of cash flows when the retirement method is used (see Fama and French (2001)

for further details). We only include positive changes in the treasury stock (i.e.,

repurchases). We modify their measure by then adding to the year t measure, any negative

change that occurs in the subsequent year, t+1. Treasury stock data is available from 1982

to 2003, so that our change measure is available beginning in 1983.




                                              50
7
    Specifically, we trim the yield distributions based solely on positive yields in the case of

dividend and payout yields, and non-zero yields in the case of net payout yields since

many yields are zero.
8
    Due to data availability for our sample period we follow Goyal and Welch (2003) in

using the three month rate instead of the one year rate. This should have no material

effect on the results.
9
    The denominators of these ratios (dividend, repurchase, issuance) differ because of slight

variations in data availability across the various yield measures. However, when we

restrict attention to the subset of firms for which all yield variables have non-missing data

(i.e., the denominator is the same), our results are unaffected.
10
     Specifically, we define net equity issued for firm i in month t from the CRSP monthly

tapes as:

          (shroutt × cfacshrt − shroutt −1cfacshrt −1 )× ( prct / cfacprt + prct −1 / cfacprt −1 )/ 2 ,
where shrout is the number of shares outstanding, cfacshr is the cumulative factor to

adjust shares, cfacpr is the cumulative factor to adjust price, and prc is the month-end

share price. Net repurchases are obtained by negating this measure.
11
     We also examine two alternative measures of net equity issuance motivated by Goyal

and Welch (2005), based on the net expansion in market capitalization. The first measure

uses monthly, firm-level data to compute:

                                       Mcapit − Mcapit −1 (1 + RETX it ) ,

where Mcap is the end-of-period market capitalization and RETX is the price appreciation

from t-1 to t for firm i. The primary difference between this measure and the one based on




                                                          51
the change in shares outstanding relates to the assumed price at which the net issuing

activity occurs (e.g., average price versus month-end price, rights offerings, exchanges

and reorganizations). The second measure uses aggregate market data, and replaces RETX

with VWRETX, the value weighted price appreciation of the market. This aggregate

measure captures net issuances due to firm entry (e.g., IPOs) and firm exit (e.g.,

bankruptcies and buyouts). However, all measures produce qualitatively similar results

and as such these alternatives are not presented.
12
     See Grullon and Michaely (2002) for a detailed analysis on the impact of Rule 10b-18

on firms’ open market repurchase activity.
13
     Note that, due to very few aggregate repurchases relative to aggregate dividends prior to

1985, the processes are quite similar.
14
     The Chow test for structural break calls for the estimation of the model over the entire

sample and the two subsamples. We obtain a sum of squared residuals for the full sample

(RSS), for the early, pre-1985 subsample (RSSE), and for the late, post 1985, subsample

(RSSL). Intuitively, a large difference between RSS and the sum RSSE+ RSSL signifies a

structural break. Specifically, the test statistic is

                              [RSS-(RSS E + RSS L )]/k
                         F=                            ~F(k,n-2k),
                               (RSS E + RSS L )/(n-2k)

where n is the number of observations and k is the number of regressors.
15
     For skeptical views, see Goetzmann and Jorion (1993), Nelson and Kim (1993),

Stambaugh (1999), Bossaerts and Hillion (1999), Valkanov (2001) and Goyal and Welch

(2003).




                                                 52
16
     We have rerun both the time series and cross-sectional analysis (Fama-MacBeth

regressions) defining the regressor as log( net yield + 1.01). The statistical significance is

unaffected.
17
     Robertson and Wright (2003) reach similar conclusions with respect to the

measurement of dividend yields versus payout yields. Their results are reassuring since

they use a different econometric specification (cointegrating VAR framework rather than

predictive regressions), different data sources (e.g., Federal Reserve/Bureau of Economic

Analysis) and alternative definition for payouts. They do find, though, that the payout

process is less persistent and that the cointegration restrictions implied by predictive

regressions are not rejected with payouts but is rejected with dividend yields.
18
     For a summary of their method and related literature see also Amihud, Hurvich and

Wang (2004).
19
     We would like to thank Motohiro Yogo for the use of his Gauss code.
20
     In particular, we simulate 78 observations of the dependent and independent variables.

We simulate the independent variable based on its estimated AR(1) coefficients, drawing

the first observation from the unconditional distribution. We simulate returns based on

their sample mean and standard deviation. We also preserve the AR(1) innovations and

returns’ cross correlation. We repeat the simulation 10,000 times, using random normals.
21
     We choose not to offset the net payout yield, as done in the time series analysis, because

many firms have substantially (greater than 10%) negative net payout yields.
22
     We rerun the analysis reported in Table IV for January and non-January months

separately. For the non-January months, our results are largely unaffected. Specifically,




                                               53
dividend yields are positive and either insignificant or marginally significant (depending

on whether we examine the positive subsample or the entire sample). The (net) payout

yields are all positive and highly significant. For January months, all of the yields are

largely insignificant, though most estimates are negative.
23
     We use the cash flow based payout yield measure to form the portfolios.
24
     Size and book-to-market quintiles are formed using the breakpoints downloaded from

Ken French’s website and the corresponding sets of portfolios are formed in the same

manner as the beta/total payout yield portfolios.
25
     For expositional purposes related to Table length, Panel A of Table V does not report

the results related to beta and size portfolios.




                                               54
                                                                          Figure 1
                              Aggregate Cash Flows Received by Corporate Shareholders
The sample consists of all nonfinancial firms in the intersection of CRSP and Compustat with data
for dividends paid to common shareholders, repurchase of common stock, and sale of common stock.
The figure presents the aggregate cash flows to shareholders. The height of the white bars represent a
negative flow of funds from shareholders to corporations in the form of issuances of common stock. The
height of the grey bars represent a positive flow of funds to shareholders from corporations in the form of
common dividends. The height of the black bars represent a positive flow of funds to shareholders from
corporations in the form of common share repurchases. All dollar figures are in billions and inflation
adjusted to 2000 dollars using the all-urban CPI.



                              450

                              400                      Common Share
                                                       Issuances
                              350
                                                       Common Share
                              300                      Repurchases
                              250                      Common
                                                       Dividends
        $Bil. (Year = 2000)




                              200

                              150

                              100

                               50

                                0

                               -50
                                 71

                                       73

                                             75

                                                   77

                                                         79

                                                               81

                                                                     83

                                                                           85

                                                                                 87

                                                                                        89

                                                                                              91

                                                                                                    93

                                                                                                          95

                                                                                                                97

                                                                                                                      99

                                                                                                                            01

                                                                                                                                  03
                               19

                                      19

                                            19

                                                  19

                                                        19

                                                              19

                                                                    19

                                                                          19

                                                                                19

                                                                                       19

                                                                                             19

                                                                                                   19

                                                                                                         19

                                                                                                               19

                                                                                                                     19

                                                                                                                           20

                                                                                                                                 20
                              -100

                              -150

                              -200

                              -250
                                                                                     Year
                                                                          Figure 2
                                                               Rank Correlations
The sample consists of all nonfinancial firms in the intersection of CRSP and Compustat with data
for market capitalization, dividends paid to common shareholders, repurchase of common stock, and
sale of common stock. We also require that firms have at least two years worth of historical return
data available on CRSP. Payout is the sum of dividends and repurchases. Net Payout is the sum of
dividends and repurchases less issuances. All yields are computed by dividing the relevant variable by
contemporaneous year-end market capitalization. Panel A presents two series of annual rank correlations
for dividend yield and repurchase yield with payout yield. Panel B presents two series of annual rank
correlations for dividend yield and repurchase yield with net payout yield.


      Panel A: Annual Rank Correlation Between Dividend/Repurchase Yield and Payout Yield



                                  1

                                 0.9

                                 0.8
              Rank Correlation




                                 0.7

                                 0.6

                                 0.5
                                                                                                    Dividend Yield &
                                 0.4                                                                Payout Yield (CF)

                                 0.3                                                                Repurchase Yield &
                                                                                                    Payout Yield (CF)
                                 0.2
                                  71

                                        73

                                              75

                                                    77

                                                          79

                                                                81

                                                                      83

                                                                            85

                                                                                  87

                                                                                        89

                                                                                              91

                                                                                                    93

                                                                                                          95

                                                                                                                97

                                                                                                                      99

                                                                                                                            01
                                 19

                                       19

                                             19

                                                   19

                                                         19

                                                               19

                                                                     19

                                                                           19

                                                                                 19

                                                                                       19

                                                                                             19

                                                                                                   19

                                                                                                         19

                                                                                                               19

                                                                                                                     19

                                                                                                                           20




                                                                                  Year
Panel B: Annual Rank Correlation Between Dividend/Repurchase Yield and Net Payout Yield



                              1
                                                                              Dividend Yield &
                             0.9                                              Net Payout Yield (CF)
                             0.8                                              Repurchase Yield &
         Rank Correlations




                                                                              Net Payout Yield (CF)
                             0.7

                             0.6

                             0.5

                             0.4

                             0.3

                             0.2
                              71

                                    73

                                          75

                                                77

                                                      79

                                                            81

                                                                  83

                                                                        85

                                                                              87

                                                                                    89

                                                                                          91

                                                                                                93

                                                                                                      95

                                                                                                            97

                                                                                                                  99

                                                                                                                        01
                             19

                                   19

                                         19

                                               19

                                                     19

                                                           19

                                                                 19

                                                                       19

                                                                             19

                                                                                   19

                                                                                         19

                                                                                               19

                                                                                                     19

                                                                                                           19

                                                                                                                 19

                                                                                                                       20




                                                                              Year
                                                             Figure 3
                                             Annual Returns for Yield Factors
At the end of June of each year t, ten portfolios are formed on the basis of ranked values of dividend
yield, payout yield and net payout yield. The dividend (payout) [net payout] yield is the ratio of common
dividends (dividends plus common share repurchases) [dividends plus repurchases minus common share
issuances] in year t to year-end market capitalization. All stocks containing nonmissing data for the ratio
of book-to-market equity, common share dividends, common share repurchases, and common equity sales,
and at least two years worth of historical return data are then allocated to the yield portfolios using
NYSE breakpoints based on positive yields (non-zero yields in the case of net payout). Each portfolio’s
monthly equal-weighted return for July of year t to June of year t + 1 is calculated, after which the
portfolios are reformed. The figure shows annual returns to three portfolios, each of which represents
a long position in stocks falling in the top 30% of the yield distribution and a short position in stocks
falling in the bottom 30% of the yield distribution. Returns are computed by compounding monthly
returns from July of year t − 1 to June of year t. The dividend yield portfolio is denoted DYHML. The
cash flow based payout yield portfolio is denoted PYCFHML. The treasury stock based payout yield
portfolio is denoted PYTSHML (this series begins in 1986). The net payout yield portfolio is denoted
NPYHML.



                           40

                           30

                           20
       Annual Return (%)




                           10

                             0

                                85     87       89      91     93       95     97     99     01     03
                           -1019     19       19      19     19       19     19     19     20     20
                                            DYHML
                           -20              PYCFHML
                                            NPYHML
                           -30
                                            PYTSHML

                           -40
                                                                    Year
                                                   Table I
                        Aggregate Time Series Summary Statistics
The sample consists of all nonfinancial firms in the intersection of CRSP and Compustat with data for
dividends paid to common shareholders, repurchase of common stock, and sale of common stock. Excess
market return is the difference in the CRSP value-weighted total return (including dividends) and the
return on a three-month Treasury bill. The Dividend yield is computed as the difference in the cum- and
ex-dividend returns to the CRSP value-weighted index. The Payout Yield is the sum of dividend yield
and repurchase yield, defined as the ratio of common share repurchases to year-end market capitalization.
We measure repurchases in two ways using the statement of cash flows (data from 1971) and the change
in the treasury stock (data from 1983). Because repurchases were negligible prior to and just after the
passing of SEC Rule 10b-18 in 1982, we assume that repurchases are zero before the availability of each
measure. The Net Payout Yield is the sum of dividend yield and repurchase yield (using the statement
of cash flows measure) less the issuance yield, defined as the ratio of common share issuances to year-end
market capitalization. Since repurchase and issuance data from the statement of cash flows begin in
1971, we use the monthly change in shares outstanding from the CRSP monthly stock file to capture
net equity issuances prior to 1971. In particular, net equity issuance for month t is the product of the
split-adjusted growth in shares and the average of the split adjusted stock-price at the beginning and end
of the month. All variables are in logs (0.1 is added to net payout yield to adjust negative yields). Panel
A presents summary statistics on the aggregate time series. SD is the standard deviation. SE is the
standard error. ρ is the first-order autocorrelation coefficient. Statistic presents test-statistic values for
hypothesis tests of the autocorrelation coefficients. For the excess market return, the null hypothesis is
that ρ = 0 and the test statistic, (N − 2)1/2 [ρ̂/(1 − ρ̂2 )1/2 ], is asymptotically standard normal under the
null. For the yields, the null hypothesis is that ρ = 1 and the test-statistic, (ρ̂ − 1)/σˆρ , has a distribution
under the null that is tabulated in Fuller (1996). Panel B presents results of Chow tests for a structural
break in the dividend (payout and net payout) yield process and predictive regression. The test-statistic
is:
                                           [RSS − (RSSE + RSSL )]/k
                                     F =
                                            (RSSE + RSSL )/(n − 2k)
where RSS is the residual sum of squares for the full sample, RSSE is the residual sum of squares for
the pre-1984 sample, RSSL is the residual sum of squares for the post-1983 period, n is the number of
observations, and k is the number of regressors. F is distributed F (k, 2n − k).
                                        Panel A: Summary Statistics

               Log(Excess         Log(Dividend      Log(Payout       Log(Payout    Log(0.1 + Net Payout
              Market Return)         Yield)         (CF) Yield)      (TS) Yield)           Yield)
Mean                  0.058            -3.272           -3.149           -3.210            -2.042
SD                    0.200            0.411            0.292            0.334              0.135
                                       Full Sample (1926-2003) Autocorrelations
ρ                     0.089            0.944            0.863            0.906              0.659
SE                    0.143            0.048            0.059             0.055             0.157
Statistic             0.621            -1.159           -2.309           -1.724            -2.167
                                      Partial Sample (1926-1984) Autocorrelations
ρ                     0.104            0.805            0.809            0.802              0.637
SE                    0.158            0.084            0.079             0.083             0.177
Statistic             0.655            -2.311           -2.413           -2.377            -2.047




                                      Panel B: Structural Break Tests

                          Log(Dividend     Log(Payout      Log(Payout       Log(0.1 + Net Payout
            AR(1)            Yield)        (CF) Yield)     (TS) Yield)              Yield
            Statistic         3.725             1.862            3.034             0.474
            P-Value           0.029             0.163            0.054             0.625
            Predictive
            Statistic         3.270             0.982            2.113             0.488
            P-Value           0.044             0.380            0.128             0.616
                                               Table II
                                     Return Predictability
The sample consists of all nonfinancial firms in the intersection of CRSP and Compustat with data for
dividends paid to common shareholders, repurchase of common stock, and sale of common stock. Excess
market return is the difference in the CRSP value-weighted total return (including dividends) and the
return on a three-month Treasury bill. The Dividend yield is computed as the difference in the cum- and
ex-dividend returns to the CRSP value-weighted index. The Payout Yield is the sum of dividend yield
and repurchase yield, defined as the ratio of common share repurchases to year-end market capitalization.
We measure repurchases in two ways using the statement of cash flows (data from 1971) and the change
in the treasury stock (data from 1983). Because repurchases were negligible prior to and just after the
passing of SEC Rule 10b-18 in 1982, we assume that repurchases are zero before the availability of each
measure. The Net Payout Yield is the sum of dividend yield and repurchase yield (using the statement
of cash flows measure) less the issuance yield, defined as the ratio of common share issuances to year-end
market capitalization. Since repurchase and issuance data from the statement of cash flows goes back
only to 1971, we use the monthly change in shares outstanding from the CRSP monthly stock file to
capture net equity issuances prior to 1971. In particular, net equity issuance for month t is the product
of the split-adjusted growth in shares and the average of the split adjusted stock-price at the beginning
and end of the month. All variables are in logs (0.1 is added to net payout yield to avoid negative
yields). Panel A presents results from univariate regressions of log excess market return on dividend
yield, payout yield(s), and net payout yield. Panel B presents the results from multivariate regressions
of log excess market returns on dividend yield and either payout or net payout yield. All standard errors
(SE) are heteroscedasticity-consistent. The t-statistics are the ratio of the coefficient to the standard
error. The adjusted coefficient (Adj Coefficient) is computed using the method of Amihud and Hurvich
(2004). Simulated P-values (Sim P-Value) are computed via 10,000 simulations under the null of zero
predictability, but accounting for the regressor’s autocorrelation and the cross correlation of the errors.
The R2 Sim P-Value is the corresponding R2 from simulations under the null. The rho is the cross
correlation between the errors of the AR(1) and the errors of the predictive regression. Adjusted beta
and confidence interval are calculated following Amihud and Hurvich (2004). The Bonnferoni Q-test
confidence interval is calculated following Campbell and Yogo (2005b). The Goyal Welch (2003,2004)
root-mean-squared error differential (dRMSE) uses 60 periods as the look back window and an out of
sample period of 1985-2003. The Sim P-Value of the dRMSE measure is calculated within the simulations
under the null described above. SE is the standard error.
                           Panel A: Univariate Predictive Regressions

                       Log(Dividend         Log(Payout      Log(Payout    Log(0.1 + Net Payout
                          Yield)            (CF) Yield)     (TS) Yield)           Yield
                                      Full Sample: 1926 - 2003
     Coefficient             0.116             0.209            0.172             0.759
         SE                  0.052             0.062            0.060             0.143
     t-statistic             2.240             3.396            2.854             5.311
       P-Value               0.014             0.001            0.003             0.000
      Sim Pval               0.170             0.045            0.080             0.000
         R2                  0.055             0.091            0.080             0.262
     R2 Sim Pval             0.083             0.011            0.020             0.000
        ρ                    -0.709            -0.671           -0.691            -0.301
 Adj. Coefficient             0.072            0.167             0.126             0.736
       SE                    0.056              0.076           0.067              0.146
   t-statistic                1.281            2.192            1.872              5.058
    P-Value                  0.102              0.016           0.032              0.000
Bonferroni Q-Low             -0.007            0.035            0.014              0.313
 Bonferroni Q-Hi              0.151            0.267            0.209              0.641
  dRMSE (GW)                 -0.068            0.024            -0.017            0.048
Sim Pval dRMSE               0.932             0.082            0.703             0.022
                                      Early Sample: 1926 - 1984
     Coefficient             0.296             0.280            0.300             0.794
        SE                   0.081             0.076            0.080             0.149
    t-statistic              3.666             3.688            3.741             5.342
Bonferonni Q-Low             0.070             0.065            0.077             0.347
 Bonferonni Q-Hi             0.389             0.387            0.390             0.735
     P-Value                 0.000             0.000            0.000             0.000
  Sim P-Value                0.044             0.054            0.043             0.001
        R2                   0.130             0.121            0.135             0.300



                       Panel B: Multivariate Predictive Regressions

              Log(Dividend       Log(Payout       Log(Payout       Log(0.1 + Net Payout
                 Yield)          (CF) Yield)      (TS) Yield)              Yield            R2
Coefficient        -0.088              0.318                                               0.098
SE                 0.111               0.129
Coefficient        -0.394                               0.641                              0.112
SE                 0.216                                0.251
Coefficient        -0.042                                                 0.830            0.267
SE                  0.064                                                 0.108
                                                                     Table III
                                             Yield Portfolio Returns and Characteristics
At the end of June of each year t, ten portfolios are formed on the basis of ranked values of dividend yield, payout yield and net payout yield. The
dividend (payout) [net payout] yield is the ratio of common dividends (dividends plus common share repurchases) [dividends plus repurchases minus
common share issuances] in year t to year-end market capitalization. There are two measures of payout yield corresponding to two measures of
repurchases: one based on the statement of cash flows, the other based on the change in treasury stock. For net payout yield, we use the cash flow
based measure of repurchases. To mitigate the effect of outliers, we trim the upper and lower 0.5% of the log(book-to-market) distribution, the upper
5% of the dividend and payout yield distributions, and upper and lower 2.5% of the net payout yield distribution. All stocks containing nonmissing
data for the ratio of book-to-market equity, common share dividends, common share repurchases, and common equity sales, and at least two years
worth of historical return data are then allocated to the yield portfolios using NYSE breakpoints based on positive yields (non-zero yields in the case
of net payout). Each portfolio’s monthly equal-weighted return for July of year t to June of year t + 1 is calculated, after which the portfolios are
reformed. ME is the market capitalization, in millions of dollars, as of June in year t. BE/ME is the ratio of book equity in December of year t − 1
to market capitalization in December of year t − 1. β is the post-ranking beta for one of 100 size x book-to-market portfolios and is computed as the
sum of the coefficients from a time series regression of portfolio returns on contemporaneous and lagged excess market return. Firms is the average
number of stocks in the portfolio in each month. A portfolio consisting of zero-yield stocks is presented as well.

                                          Panel A: Portfolios Formed on Dividend Yield During 7/84-12/03

                                                                                   Dividend Yield Deciles
                                     Zero Yield      1      2       3       4         5      6       7       8       9      10     All
                  Average Return        1.43       1.04    1.27    1.13    1.26      1.26   1.29    1.32    1.36    1.37    1.25   1.26
                  β                     1.48       1.29    1.25    1.21    1.20      1.18   1.17    1.14    1.13    1.03    1.08   1.17
                  ln(ME)                3.75        6.17   5.92     6.04    6.08    6.10     6.06    6.04    5.77    5.82   5.53    5.95
                  ln(BE/ME)             -0.56      -0.92   -0.70   -0.61   -0.53    -0.46   -0.38   -0.29   -0.18   -0.05   0.56   -0.36
                  Dividend Yield         0.00      0.00    0.01    0.01    0.02      0.02   0.03    0.03    0.04    0.06    0.18   0.04
                  Firms                 2,357      153     148     132     128       122    122     121     132     123     118    130
                 Panel B: Portfolios Formed on Cash Flow Based Payout Yield During 7/84-12/03

                                                          Cash Flow Based Payout Yield Deciles
                     Zero Yield    1       2       3         4       5       6       7       8       9      10     All
Average Return          1.37      1.22    1.33    1.28      1.33    1.38    1.41    1.46    1.52    1.41    1.74   1.41
β                       1.49      1.42    1.33    1.29      1.26    1.23    1.21    1.19    1.13    1.11    1.21   1.24
ln(ME)                  3.61       4.79   5.21    5.39       5.54   5.67    5.73     5.60    5.70   5.64    5.15    5.44
ln(BE/ME)              -0.57      -0.73   -0.60   -0.49     -0.43   -0.40   -0.37   -0.31   -0.25   -0.18   0.04   -0.37
Total Payout Yield      0.00      0.00    0.01    0.02      0.02    0.03    0.04    0.05    0.06    0.08    0.15   0.05
Firms                  1,611      292     213     180       166     158     153     157     148     148     167    178


              Panel C: Portfolios Formed on Treasury Stock Based Payout Yield During 7/84-12/03

                                                        Treasury Stock Based Payout Yield Deciles
                     Zero Yield     1       2       3         4       5       6       7       8       9      10     All
Average Return          1.42       1.16    1.35    1.29      1.35    1.30    1.34    1.36    1.46    1.47   1.60    1.37
β                       1.49       1.40    1.31    1.27      1.25    1.21    1.19    1.17    1.12    1.08   1.17    1.22
ln(ME)                  3.71       5.03    5.45    5.57      5.65    5.81    5.85    5.76    5.75    5.70   5.26    5.58
ln(BE/ME)               -0.59     -0.76   -0.63   -0.54     -0.43   -0.41   -0.36   -0.31   -0.23   -0.12   0.18   -0.36
Total Payout Yield       0.00      0.00   0.01    0.02       0.02   0.03    0.03     0.04   0.05    0.07    0.15    0.04
Firms                   1,986      251     191     168       158     149     144     153     145     142     151    165
                         Panel D: Portfolios Formed on Net Payout Yield During 7/84-12/03

                                                                     Net Payout Yield Deciles
                         Zero Yield    1       2       3       4         5      6       7        8       9      10     All
Average Return              1.77      0.95    1.41    1.36    1.42      1.28   1.36    1.37     1.48    1.56    1.68   1.38
β                           1.45      1.49    1.48    1.42    1.32      1.26   1.23    1.20     1.16    1.13    1.22   1.29
ln(ME)                      2.81      4.22    4.42    4.54    5.16      5.45   5.61    5.70     5.65    5.62    5.12   5.15
ln(BE/ME)                   -0.09     -0.82   -0.78   -0.68   -0.57    -0.46   -0.41   -0.35    -0.28   -0.20   0.03   -0.45
Total Net Payout Yield       0.00     -0.10   -0.01   0.00     0.01    0.02    0.03     0.04    0.05    0.06    0.14    0.02
Firms                       505       551     481     383     246       198    185     173      173     174     195    276
                                               Table IV
                     Fama-MacBeth Monthly Return Regressions

The sample consists of all nonfinancial firms in the intersection of CRSP and Compustat with data for
dividends paid to common shareholders, repurchase of common stock, and sale of common stock. The
dividend (payout) [net payout] yield is the ratio of common dividends (dividends plus common share
repurchases) [dividends plus repurchases minus common share issuances] in year t to year-end market
capitalization. There are two measures of payout yield corresponding to two measures of repurchases:
one based on the statement of cash flows, the other based on the change in treasury stock. For net payout
yield, we use the cash flow based measure of repurchases. To mitigate the effect of outliers, we trim the
upper and lower 0.5% of the log(book-to-market) distribution, the upper 5% of the dividend and payout
yield distributions, and upper and lower 2.5% of the net payout yield distribution. We also require that
firms have at least two years worth of historical return data available on CRSP. Cross-sectional regressions
are estimated each month. Mean is the time series mean of the estimated coefficients, Std is its time series
standard deviation, and t(Mn) is Mean divided by its time series standard error. Market capitalization
is denoted by ME, book equity is denoted by BE, common dividends is denoted by D, cash flow based
(treasury stock based) common share repurchases is denoted by RCF (RTS), and stock issuances is
denoted by S. β is the post-ranking beta for one of 100 size x book-to-market portfolios and is computed
as the sum of the coefficients from a time series regression of portfolio returns on contemporaneous and
lagged excess market return. The table provides estimates based on ordinary least squares (OLS) and
least absolute deviation (LAD) regressions. Panel A presents results for all nonmissing yield values,
including zero yields. Zero dividend and repurchase yields are adjusted by adding 0.01 before converting
to percentages and taking logs. Net payout yield is measured in percentages but not converted into
logarithmic scale because of negative values. Panel B presents results for all positive yield values for
dividend and payout, and all nonzero yields for net payout.
                                   Panel A: Entire Sample

                           OLS Estimates                                     LAD Estimates
                        7/84-12/03 (234 Mos.)                             7/84-12/03 (234 Mos.)
    Coefficient         Mean      Std     t(Mn)                           Mean     Std        t(Mn)
      Rit = a + b1t βit + b2t ln(M Eit ) + b3t ln(BEit /M Eit ) + b4t ln(Dit /M Eit ) + eit
     Intercept            2.33   7.27     4.90                            -0.81    6.47       -1.91
         β               -0.03   6.06     -0.07                           -0.46    5.52       -1.26
      ln(M E)            -0.16   1.08     -2.34                            0.30    0.81        5.72
   ln(BE/M E)             0.26   1.28      3.10                           0.39     0.90        6.57
    ln(D/M E)            0.03    1.17     0.38                             0.23    0.98        3.52
 Rit = a + b1t βit + b2t ln(M Eit ) + b3t ln(BEit /M Eit ) + b4t ln((D + RCF )it /M Eit ) + eit
     Intercept            2.11   7.07     4.56                            -1.01    6.23       -2.49
         β                0.05   5.92     0.12                            -0.35    5.43       -0.98
      ln(M E)            -0.16   1.04     -2.37                            0.29    0.78        5.77
   ln(BE/M E)             0.26   1.22      3.25                           0.37     0.86        6.58
ln((D + RCF )/M E)       0.15    0.99      2.24                           0.32     0.85       5.73
 Rit = a + b1t βit + b2t ln(M Eit ) + b3t ln(BEit /M Eit ) + b4t ln((D + RT S)it /M Eit ) + eit
     Intercept           2.24    7.18      4.77                           -0.91    6.37       -2.20
         β                0.02   5.99     0.06                            -0.41    5.50       -1.14
      ln(M E)            -0.17   1.07     -2.43                            0.30    0.80        5.74
    ln(BE/M E)            0.24   1.28      2.92                           0.38     0.92        6.36
ln((D + RT S)/M E)        0.11   1.11     1.50                            0.27     0.94        4.43
 Rit = a + b1t βit + b2t ln(M Eit ) + b3t ln(BEit /M Eit ) + b4t (D + RCF − S)it /M Eit + eit
      Intercept           2.11   7.10     4.55                            -0.73    6.45       -1.74
          β               0.10   6.12     0.26                            -0.40    5.59       -1.10
       ln(M E)           -0.15   1.03     -2.22                            0.31    0.76        6.17
    ln(BE/M E)            0.27   1.25      3.29                           0.39     0.92        6.52
(D + RCF − S)/M E         0.03   0.10     4.14                             0.04    0.08        8.09
                             Panel B: Positive Yield Subsample

                           OLS Estimates                                     LAD Estimates
                        7/84-12/03 (234 Mos.)                             7/84-12/03 (234 Mos.)
    Coefficient         Mean      Std     t(Mn)                           Mean     Std        t(Mn)
      Rit = a + b1t βit + b2t ln(M Eit ) + b3t ln(BEit /M Eit ) + b4t ln(Dit /M Eit ) + eit
     Intercept            1.47   6.60     3.41                             0.25    6.41        0.59
         β               -0.08   5.29     -0.23                           -0.30    5.02       -0.92
      ln(M E)            -0.02   0.72     -0.33                            0.13    0.69        2.88
   ln(BE/M E)             0.08   0.91      1.31                           -0.00    0.86       -0.01
    ln(D/M E)            0.02    0.63     0.43                             0.07    0.63        1.58
 Rit = a + b1t βit + b2t ln(M Eit ) + b3t ln(BEit /M Eit ) + b4t ln((D + RCF )it /M Eit ) + eit
     Intercept            1.73   6.39     4.15                            -0.26    6.26       -0.63
         β                0.08   5.81     0.21                            -0.26    5.35       -0.76
      ln(M E)            -0.08   0.85     -1.40                            0.20    0.71        4.22
   ln(BE/M E)             0.18   1.10      2.49                           0.14     0.83        2.63
ln((D + RCF )/M E)       0.06    0.48      1.94                           0.12     0.46       3.99
 Rit = a + b1t βit + b2t ln(M Eit ) + b3t ln(BEit /M Eit ) + b4t ln((D + RT S)it /M Eit ) + eit
     Intercept           1.78    6.23      4.37                           -0.11    6.07       -0.29
         β                0.04   5.51     0.11                            -0.29    5.09       -0.88
      ln(M E)            -0.08   0.84     -1.38                            0.18    0.71        3.89
    ln(BE/M E)            0.15   1.03      2.18                           0.10     0.82        1.86
ln((D + RT S)/M E)        0.05   0.51     1.45                            0.11     0.45        3.56
 Rit = a + b1t βit + b2t ln(M Eit ) + b3t ln(BEit /M Eit ) + b4t (D + RCF − S)it /M Eit + eit
      Intercept           1.77   7.20     3.76                            -0.77    6.68       -1.76
          β               0.21   6.27     0.50                            -0.27    5.71       -0.73
       ln(M E)           -0.11   1.00     -1.62                            0.29    0.76        5.85
    ln(BE/M E)            0.28   1.32      3.21                           0.39     0.99        6.02
(D + RCF − S)/M E         0.03   0.10     4.03                             0.04    0.08        8.64
                                                Table V
                                        Factor Regressions

The sample consists of all nonfinancial firms in the intersection of CRSP and Compustat with data for
dividends paid to common shareholders, repurchase of common stock, and sale of common stock. The
dividend (payout) [net payout] yield is the ratio of common dividends (dividends plus common share
repurchases) [dividends plus repurchases minus common share issuances] in year t to year-end market
capitalization. To mitigate the effect of outliers, we trim the upper 5% of the dividend and payout yield
distributions, and upper and lower 2.5% of the net payout yield distribution. We also require that firms
have at least two years worth of historical return data available on CRSP. The regression equation is:

            Rt − Rft = α + β1 [RMt − Rft ] + β2 SM Bt + β3 HM Lt + β4 Y IELDHM Lt + εt .

The regressand is monthly excess portfolio returns, Rt − Rft , from 7/1984 to 12/2003, and the regressors
are the market excess return (RMt − Rft ), the small minus big factor return (SM Bt ),the high minus low
factor return (HM Lt ), and the high minus low yield factor return for the dividend yields, payout yields,
and net payout yields. The first three regressors are obtained from Ken French’s website. YIELDHML
corresponds to one of four yield factors: dividend (DYHML), cash flow based payout (PYCFHML),
treasury stock based payout (PYTSHML), or net payout (NPYHML). The table presents intercept
and yield factor slope coefficient estimates (and corresponding t-statistics) for 25 portfolios formed on
book-to-market and payout yield (panel A). Panel B presents a summary of statistical tests of intercept
significance for five different model specifications and the three aforementioned sets of portfolios. χ2 is
the test-statistics corresponding to a Wald test of the joint hypothesis that all of the intercepts are equal
to 0. One asterisk (two asterisk) correspond to statistical significance at the 5% (1%) level.
                 Panel A: Book-to-Market Equity/Payout Yield Portfolios

                                           Payout Yield Quintiles
                Low                           High      Low                              High
                         2       3       4                        2       3       4
                Yield                         Yield     Yield                            Yield
B/M Quintiles                           YIELDHML = Dividend Yield
                                 α                                      t(α)
    Small       0.04    -0.02   0.30    0.55    0.53     0.33   -0.16   2.11     3.04    2.45
     2          -0.15   -0.12   0.09     0.05   0.16    -1.12   -0.75    0.51     0.26   0.77
     3          -0.32   -0.33   -0.15   0.11    0.16    -1.82   -1.78   -0.79    0.61    0.82
     4          -0.36   -0.09   0.03    -0.28   0.02    -2.07   -0.43    0.16    -1.81   0.13
    Big         -0.37   -0.41   -0.36   -0.26   0.11    -1.94   -1.69   -1.37    -1.42   0.69
                                 β4                                     t(β4 )
    Small       -0.24   -0.16   -0.15   0.01    -0.30   -5.07   -2.81   -2.71    0.15    -3.62
      2         -0.14   -0.20   -0.06   0.06    -0.09   -2.71   -3.11   -0.86    0.91    -1.05
      3         -0.24   -0.10   0.14    0.31     0.11   -3.49   -1.34    1.97    4.44     1.48
      4         -0.10   -0.18   -0.01   0.36     0.23   -1.57   -2.24   -0.16    5.92     3.41
     Big        -0.02   -0.17   0.00    0.21     0.30   -0.30   -1.82    0.03    2.91     5.19
                                YIELDHML = Cash Flow Based Payout Yield
                                  α                                     t(α)
    Small        0.17   0.06    0.33     0.43   0.33     1.34    0.38    2.25    2.37     1.53
      2         -0.15   -0.12   0.17     0.01   -0.03   -1.04   -0.67    0.94    0.05    -0.17
      3         -0.24   -0.28   -0.14   0.04    0.05    -1.28   -1.45   -0.75    0.21    0.27
      4         -0.31   0.00     0.04   -0.31   -0.13   -1.78    0.01    0.17    -1.82   -0.73
     Big        -0.28   -0.26   -0.27   -0.32   0.01    -1.45   -1.06   -1.03    -1.66    0.05
                                  β4                                    t(β4 )
    Small       -0.26   -0.17   -0.06   0.26    0.42    -5.18   -2.77   -1.02    3.64    4.95
     2          -0.01   -0.01   -0.16   0.07    0.41    -0.13   -0.18   -2.25    1.03    5.09
     3          -0.18   -0.12   -0.01   0.14    0.22    -2.44   -1.56   -0.15    1.81    2.79
     4          -0.09   -0.18   -0.01   0.05    0.31    -1.27   -2.21   -0.11    0.71    4.42
    Big         -0.19   -0.32   -0.18   0.11    0.19    -2.54   -3.26   -1.67    1.40    3.03
            Panel A: (Cont.) Book-to-Market Equity/Payout Yield Portfolios

                                              Payout Yield Quintiles
                Low                              High      Low                              High
                         2         3        4                        2       3       4
                Yield                            Yield     Yield                            Yield
B/M Quintiles                   YIELDHML = Treasury Stock Based Payout Yield
                                    α                                      t(α)
    Small        0.11   0.02      0.32     0.51    0.49     0.86    0.13    2.23     2.83    2.24
     2          -0.13   -0.11     0.12     0.04    0.13    -0.93   -0.65    0.68     0.21    0.61
     3          -0.28   -0.33     -0.16   0.05     0.13    -1.52   -1.77   -0.85     0.27    0.66
     4          -0.35   -0.08     0.05    -0.30   -0.04    -2.03   -0.37    0.22    -1.81   -0.25
    Big         -0.33   -0.37     -0.37   -0.29   0.02     -1.74   -1.50   -1.39    -1.51   0.13
                                    β4                                     t(β4 )
    Small       -0.19   -0.12     -0.06    0.12   0.10     -4.68   -2.60   -1.32    2.05    1.43
      2         -0.07   -0.03     -0.09    0.02   0.10     -1.49   -0.62   -1.55    0.41    1.50
      3         -0.13   0.01       0.03    0.16   0.08     -2.22    0.10    0.55    2.71    1.26
      4         -0.01   -0.02     -0.04    0.05   0.19     -0.13   -0.36   -0.64    0.96    3.34
     Big        -0.11   -0.13     0.02     0.06   0.24     -1.84   -1.60    0.24    0.93    4.87
                                          YIELDHML = Net Payout Yield
                                    α                                      t(α)
    Small        0.20   -0.11     0.24    0.24     0.32     1.54   -0.74    1.63     1.45    1.45
      2         -0.08   -0.19     0.02    -0.07   -0.08    -0.55   -1.08    0.09    -0.40   -0.38
      3         -0.25   -0.28     -0.06   -0.04    0.02    -1.33   -1.44   -0.31    -0.22    0.08
      4         -0.28   -0.16     0.04    -0.33   -0.14    -1.59   -0.75    0.17    -1.94   -0.76
     Big        -0.25   -0.36     -0.25   -0.26   0.03     -1.28   -1.41   -0.94    -1.32    0.16
                                    β4                                     t(β4 )
    Small       -0.26   0.16      0.10     0.55   0.37     -5.22    2.58    1.81    8.46    4.24
     2          -0.13   0.11       0.13    0.20   0.42     -2.28    1.61    1.81    2.86    5.16
     3          -0.13   -0.10     -0.15    0.26   0.25     -1.71   -1.25   -2.05    3.42    3.13
     4          -0.13   0.13      -0.01   0.08    0.27     -1.82   1.51    -0.09     1.16   3.80
    Big         -0.21   -0.10     -0.18   -0.02   0.13     -2.82   -0.96   -1.73    -0.24   2.00
                                                   Panel B: Tests of Intercept Significance



                                     FF 3-Factor                FF 3-Factor               FF 3-Factor              FF 3-Factor              FF 3-Factor
                                                                + DYHML                 + PYCFHML                + PYTSHML                 + NPYHML
Portfolio Set                   Significant α      χ2     Significant α     χ2      Significant α     χ2     Significant α     χ2     Significant α     χ2
Beta / Payout Yield                  7          44.77∗∗         2         46.26∗∗         2         36.59         1         41.94∗         0         42.03∗
Size / Payout Yield                  4          82.93∗∗         5         82.59∗∗         4        80.53∗∗        5         83.85∗∗        6         81.84∗∗
Book-to-Market / Payout Yield        8          46.54∗∗         4         48.36∗∗         2        38.25∗         4         43.98∗         0          33.97
                                                                     Table VI
                                    Monthly Return Summary Statistics for Yield Portfolios
The sample consists of all nonfinancial firms in the intersection of CRSP and Compustat with data for dividends paid to common shareholders,
repurchase of common stock, and sale of common stock. The dividend (payout) [net payout] yield is the ratio of common dividends (dividends plus
common share repurchases) [dividends plus repurchases minus common share issuances] in year t to year-end market capitalization. To mitigate the
effect of outliers, we trim the upper 5% of the dividend and payout yield distributions, and upper and lower 2.5% of the net payout yield distribution.
We also require that firms have at least two years worth of historical return data available on CRSP. All stocks with nonmissing yield values are then
allocated to ten yield portfolios using NYSE breakpoints based on positive yields (non-zero yields in the case of net payout). Each portfolio’s monthly
equal-weighted return for July of year t to June of year t + 1 is calculated, and then the portfolios are reformed in July of year t + 1. Both panel
present results over the period July 1984 to December 2003. Panel A presents high yield portfolios formed from the top 30% of the yield distribution.
Panel B presents high minus low yield portfolios formed by subtracting the returns to the bottom 30% of the yield distribution (excluding zero yield
stocks) from the top 30% of the yield distribution. Both panels present average monthly returns during the period July 1984 to December 2003.
Additionally, factor loadings and t-statistics are presented from time series regressions of portfolio returns on the market excess return (RMt − Rft ),
the small minus big factor return (SM Bt ), and the high minus low factor return (HM Lt ), all obtained from Ken French’s website. t-statistics are
presented in parentheses.


                                                            Panel A: High Yield Portfolios

                                                     High Dividend         High Total            High Total         High Total Net
                                           Market         Yield        Payout (CF) Yield      Payout (TS) Yield    Payout (CF) Yield
                 Mean Monthly Return         1.12          1.35               1.57                  1.53                  1.59
                                                           Factor Loadings and t-statistics
                 Intercept                                 0.59               0.79                  0.77                  0.80
                                                         ( 8.07)             ( 9.85)              ( 10.10)              ( 10.87)
                 RMt − Rft                                0.79                 0.84                 0.80                  0.84
                                                         ( 43.83)            ( 41.70)             ( 42.15)              ( 45.41)
                 SM Bt                                     0.32                0.53                 0.46                  0.52
                                                         ( 14.13)            ( 21.20)             ( 19.53)              ( 22.68)
                 HM Lt                                     0.53                0.47                 0.49                  0.47
                                                         ( 19.60)            ( 15.66)             ( 16.97)              ( 17.14)
                        Panel B: Long High Yield Stocks and Short Low Yield Stocks

                               Dividend Yield   Payout Yield (CF)     Payout Yield (TS)   Net Payout Yield (CF)
                      Market    (High - Low)      (High - Low)          (High - Low)          (High - Low)
Mean Monthly Return    1.12         0.18               0.28                 0.25                  0.37
                                       Factor Loadings and t-statistics
Intercept                           0.31               0.38                 0.37                  0.43
                                   ( 3.15)            ( 3.92)             ( 10.10)               ( 2.83)
RMt − Rft                           -0.25              -0.24                -0.26                 -0.27
                                  ( -10.18)           ( -9.98)            ( 42.15)               ( -7.28)
SM Bt                               -0.15               -0.19               -0.23                 -0.49
                                  ( -4.81)            ( -6.51)            ( 19.53)              ( -10.64)
HM Lt                               0.14                0.23                0.20                   0.44
                                   ( 3.68)            ( 6.27)             ( 16.97)               ( 7.74)
