                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        GOOD PRINCIPALS OR GOOD PEERS?
                PARENTAL VALUATION OF SCHOOL CHARACTERISTICS,
                 TIEBOUT EQUILIBRIUM, AND THE INCENTIVE EFFECTS
                      OF COMPETITION AMONG JURISDICTIONS

                                             Jesse Rothstein

                                         Working Paper 10666
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10666


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2004




I am grateful to Alan Auerbach, David Lee, John Quigley, Emmanuel Saez, and especially David Card for
their advice. Tom Davidoff, Caroline Hoxby, Justin McCrary, Rob McMillan, Cecilia Rouse, Till von
Wachter, three anonymous referees, and participants in seminars at several institutions provided helpful
comments and suggestions. I thank David Card, Cecilia Rouse, the College Board, the Mellon Foundation,
and the National Center for Education Statistics for access to data. This research was supported by a
National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship and a fellowship from the Fisher Center for Real
Estate and Urban Economics at the University of California, Berkeley. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Jesse Rothstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Good Principals or Good Peers? Parental Valuation of School Characteristics, Tiebout
Equilibrium, and the Incentive Effects of Competition Among Jurisdictions
Jesse Rothstein
NBER Working Paper No. 10666
August 2004
JEL No. H7, I2, L1
                                          ABSTRACT

School choice policies may improve productivity if parents choose well-run schools, but not if

parents primarily choose schools for their peer groups. Theoretically, high income families cluster

near preferred schools in housing market equilibrium; these need only be effective schools if

effectiveness is highly valued. If it is, equilibrium "effectiveness sorting" will be more complete in

markets offering more residential choice. Although effectiveness is unobserved to the

econometrician, I discuss observable implications of effectiveness sorting. I find no evidence of a

choice effect on sorting, indicating a small role for effectiveness in preferences and suggesting

caution about choice's productivity implications.

Jesse Rothstein
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
jrothst@princeton.edu
I. Introduction

         Monopoly public education providers may operate inefficiently (Hanushek, 1981). One

policy that may create incentives toward efficient production is to allow parents to choose among

several schools, with compensation of school administrators and staff linked to parental demand

(Chubb and Moe, 1990; Friedman, 1962; Hoxby, 1994).

         Hanushek cautions: “If the efficiency of our school systems is due to poor incentives for

teachers and administrators coupled with poor decision-making by consumers, it would be unwise to expect

much from programs that seek to strengthen ‘market forces’ in the selection of schools” (Hanushek,

1981, emphasis added). Poor decision making is not required; parents may rationally choose schools

with “pleasant surroundings, athletic facilities, cultural advantages,” (ibid., p. 34) or easy access to

resources over those that most efficiently pursue academic performance. Perceived or actual peer-

group externalities can also limit parents’ choice of effective schools, as parents may prefer a poorly

run school with a good peer group (Willms and Echols, 1992; 1993). Finally, parents may fail to

choose effective schools because they are unable to identify them, as many commonly used

indicators of school quality are arguably uninformative about school effectiveness (Kane and Staiger,

2002).1 Anything that limits parents’ choice of effective schools will tend to dilute the incentives

that choice might otherwise create for more efficient management.

         Economists have long argued that housing markets represent an established, potentially

informative form of school choice, as parents influence their children’s school assignments via their

residential location decisions (Borland and Howsen, 1992; Brennan and Buchanan, 1980; Hoxby,




1 Real estate agents typically report the average outcomes of students at a local school to prospective buyers; as noted
below, these are at best very noisy measures of effectiveness. Another source of information is state school
accountability programs; in California, schools’ rankings correlate 0.93 with the average education of students’ parents
(see also Rothstein, 2004a; Technical Design Group, 2000).

                                                            1
2000; Tiebout, 1956). 2 Existing research on so-called Tiebout choice focuses on differences in average

student performance across housing markets that differ in the control over school assignment

afforded by the location decision.3 The interpretation of these differences is not straightforward,

particularly when—as is frequently the case—outcomes are averaged only across students in public

schools, as choice likely has important effects on the allocation of students across schools and

sectors (Hsieh and Urquiola, 2003).

         Tiebout choice markets are nevertheless informative. In this paper, I study the distribution

of student outcomes within metropolitan housing markets for evidence on parental demand.

Looking at the cross-sectional allocation of effective schools, I ask whether school effectiveness

plays a sufficiently important role in the residential location decision to create meaningful incentives

for more productive school management.

         The primary hurdle to be overcome in assessing the relative importance of school

effectiveness and peer group in parental choices is that effectiveness is difficult to measure and easy

to confound with peer-group effects. Prominent research (Hanushek, 1986) casts doubt on the

educational importance of many of the observable characteristics of schools—class size, teacher

qualifications, etc.—that might be thought to indicate effective administration. A common fallback

approach is to measure effectiveness as the residual in a regression of student outcomes on

individual and peer-group characteristics.4 This is not a solution. The logic of Tiebout-style models

suggests that the peer group is badly endogenous in this regression. School characteristics are

capitalized into housing prices, and any unobserved characteristic of a school that makes it




2 See Rouse (1998); Cullen et al. (forthcoming); Mayer et al. (2002); and Krueger and Zhu (2003) for analyses of several
existing non-residential choice programs.
3 Belfield and Levin (2002) review studies of this sort. There is some dispute, however, about the sign of the relationship

between choice measures and average scores. See, e.g., Hoxby (2000) and Rothstein (2004b) for contrasting estimates.
4 Most school accountability programs, of course, do not even reach this level of sophistication. Typically, they rely

upon average performance without adjusting for school composition.

                                                            2
desirable—including, potentially, its effectiveness—will raise the price of local housing, attracting a

better peer group.

         Although the possibility of a peer group-effectiveness correlation, and the resulting omitted

variables bias in peer-effect estimates, presents a problem for hedonic and other traditional

approaches to assessing parental valuations, it also provides information. I demonstrate below, in a

simple multicommunity-style model, that this correlation is likely to be stronger when parents place

more priority on school effectiveness in their location decisions. 5 Importantly, the model predicts

that for plausible parental preferences the expected correlation between peer group and

effectiveness is also increasing in the amount of Tiebout choice afforded by the local governmental

structure, as high choice markets more readily permit a family with the available means to purchase

access to its desired school. Under somewhat strong assumptions, necessitated by the

unobservability of several key components of the Tiebout marketplace, preferences for effective

schools imply larger estimated peer effects in high-choice markets.

         I test this prediction on two data sets. First, I use the National Educational Longitudinal

Survey (NELS), a random sample of 8th grade students from roughly 750 metropolitan schools.

Second, I turn to a sample of more than 300,000 SAT-takers, matched to the high schools that they

attended. This sample has the advantage of being considerably larger than the NELS—with

observations from nearly every metropolitan high school—but the disadvantage that endogenous

selection into SAT-taking may introduce bias.

         I find no evidence in either data set that the school-level association between student

characteristics and outcomes is stronger in high-choice than in low-choice markets. This result is



5 Ross and Yinger (1999) review the multicommunity literature. Epple and Sieg (1999) and Epple, Romer, and Sieg
(2001) estimate more sophisticated multicommunity models than are considered here, focusing in the first case on their
stratification predictions, which I explore in Section V, and in the second case on their implications for the
determination of public good provision levels.

                                                           3
robust to nonlinearity in the causal peer effect; to several measures of choice and of peer-group

quality; to a variety of alternative specifications; to instrumental variables methods that address the

potential endogeneity of market structure; and to multiple strategies for dealing with sample

selection in the SAT data.

        Several strong assumptions are required to interpret this result as informative about parental

preferences. First, I must assume that any geographic variation in causal peer effects is unrelated to

market structure. Second, I assume that observable characteristics that predict variation in

individual scores within schools also index willingness-to-pay for a desirable school. Finally, I

assume that the within-market variance of school effectiveness does not covary with choice, so that

if choice increases effectiveness sorting it must also increase apparent peer effects.

        I argue that the most likely sources of violations of the first assumption would bias the

estimates toward a positive choice effect. To investigate the second assumption, I estimate several

specifications that allow certain student characteristics to have different effects on within-school

variation in scores and on across-school sorting; although results are not always conclusive, they

suggest that my single-index assumption is at least a reasonable approximation.

        The final assumption is the most uncomfortable, as competition may lead to more

homogeneity in school administration (Hoxby, 1999b). I cannot verify the assumption without a

direct measure of school effectiveness, but I discuss two indirect tests. The first uses the residual

variance from my primary models, along with assumptions about the causal peer effect, to extract

the variance of effectiveness. I find that choice is associated with a significant but small variance

reduction. Second, I note that if competition “levels up” the effectiveness of the worst schools, as

in the Hoxby model, average effectiveness—and average scores—should be higher in high-choice

markets. In contrast to some earlier estimates, I find that average performance is no higher in high-




                                                    4
choice markets once student characteristics are controlled. I tentatively conclude that the

assumption, while imperfect, does not do great violence to the data.

        If this conclusion is accepted, there are two plausible explanations for the pattern of results.

First, it may be that school policies are not responsible for a large share of the extant variation in

student performance.6 We would not then expect to observe any sorting on school effectiveness in

the distribution of student outcomes. A second explanation is that effectiveness does matter for

student performance, but that it does not matter greatly to parental residential choices.7 This could

be because peer groups and other characteristics swamp effectiveness in parental preferences or

because the latter is difficult for parents to observe.

        Under either explanation, the Tiebout marketplace does not seem to reliably sanction

administrators who pursue unproductive policies and, as a result, Tiebout choice appears unlikely to

create meaningful incentives toward greater school effectiveness. It is worth noting, however, that if

the failure derives from parents’ inability to observe school effectiveness, improved reporting of

school achievement under recent accountability policies has the potential to alter the relationships

estimated here.


II. Allocation of effective schools in Tiebout equilibrium

        I develop here a simple multicommunity model of residential choice, in the spirit of similar

models explored in greater depth by earlier authors (Epple et al., 2001; Epple and Sieg, 1999;

Fernandez and Rogerson, 1996; 1997). My goal in modeling is to develop a “best case” for Tiebout

choice, and I thus ignore such complications as private schools; families without children who are

unconcerned about the quality of schools; and non-school amenities, such as beaches, parks, views,


6This would be consistent with the results of Kane and Staiger’s (2002) study of school accountability measures.
7My data describe only academic outcomes (test scores and school completion), and I cannot speak to the important
possibility that parents look for schools that are effective along other, nonacademic, dimensions.

                                                         5
home size, and air quality.8 I focus primarily on the static allocation of a collection of schools in a

metropolitan area with exogenously determined school effectiveness, but also provide an informal

discussion of potential dynamic effects of the pattern of demand on the production of effectiveness.

A. A simple multicommunity model with exogenous effectiveness

         A metropolitan area of population N contains J jurisdictions (J<<N). Each jurisdiction,

indexed by j, is endowed with n identical houses (with n ( J − 1) < N ≤ nJ ) and an effectiveness

parameter, µj, that is fixed and known to all market participants. I assume that there are no ties in

effectiveness: µ j ≠ µ k for j ≠ k . All homes are owned by absentee landlords, perhaps a previous

generation of parents, who have no current use for them. There is no possibility for collusion

among landlords, and houses rent for the lowest non-negative market-clearing price.

         Family i’s exogenous income is x i ∈ X ⊂ R + . No two families have the same income, and

the metropolitan distribution function is F (with F (0 ) = 0 and F (l ) = 1 for some finite l ).

Families purchase a house in one of the local districts, for rental price hj, and derive utility from the

perceived quality of the local schools and from numeraire consumption. Perceived quality is a linear

combination of the peer-group average income and effectiveness: q j = x j δ + µ j , where x j is

average income in community j and δ is the weight attached to peer groups relative to effectiveness

                                                                          (           )
in preferences. The utility that family i gets in jurisdiction j is U x i − h j , q j . I make the usual

assumptions that U is twice differentiable everywhere, with U1 and U 2 both positive, and that the

marginal utility of quality relative to that of consumption is increasing in consumption:

                                      ∂ ⎛ U 2 ( c , q ) ⎞ U 12U 1 − U 11U 2
                                          ⎜               ⎟=                >0.                                 (1)
                                      ∂c ⎜⎝ U 1( c , q ) ⎟⎠    (U 1 )2


8The importance of schools to location decisions is supported by, among many others, Black (1999); Bogart and
Cromwell (2000); Figlio and Lucas (2004); and Reback (2002).

                                                         6
The last is known as “single crossing,” and drives the results.

         Families take community composition and housing prices as given in choosing a community.

Market equilibrium consists of a set of housing prices and an allocation of families (or, equivalently,

family incomes) to communities such that all community housing markets clear and each family is

satisfied with its community assignment, taking other families’ assignments as fixed:

                                                                                   {               }
         Definition: An equilibrium for a market defined by δ; J; µ 1 , K , µ J ; and F consists of non-


                                       {            }
         negative housing prices h1 , K , h J and an allocation rule G : X a Z J that satisfy the

         following conditions (where x j ≡ E[x|G (x ) = j ] ):

              EQ1      Approximate market clearing: No district is overfull (for each j,

                        ∫ 1(G(x ) = j )dF ( x ) ≤   n
                                                        N   ), and less-than-full districts have housing prices of

                       zero ( ∫ 1(G (x ) = j )dF ( x ) < n N ⇒ h j = 0 ).

              EQ2      Nash equilibrium: Given housing prices and the existing allocation rule, no family

                       would prefer a district other than the one to which it is assigned:

                          (                     )
                       U x i − hG( x i ) , qG ( x i ) ≥ U (x i − hk , q k ) for all i and all k.

              EQ3      No ties in realized quality: For any j ≠ k, q j ≠ q k .9

The following results are proved in an appendix:

         Proposition 1. Any equilibrium is perfectly stratified by income: The n highest-income

         families live in the highest-quality community, which has the highest rents; the next n

         families live in the second-highest-quality, second-highest-rent community; and so on. Thus,

         rankings of communities by rent, quality, or the incomes of their residents are all identical.


9Condition EQ3 corresponds to Fernandez and Rogerson’s (1996; 1997) “local stability” notion. Allocations that satisfy
EQ1 and EQ2, but not EQ3, are unstable, and a perturbation in one of the tied communities’ effectiveness or peer
group leads to non-negligible differences between the communities as families adjust.

                                                                7
         Proposition 2. Equilibrium always exists.

         Proposition 3. If δ = 0 —if families are unconcerned with the peer group—there is a unique

         equilibrium allocation rule G.10 This rule perfectly sorts families by school effectiveness: The

         ranking of communities by rent or by income is identical to that by effectiveness.

         Proposition 4. When δ > 0 , there may be multiple equilibrium allocation rules. For any

         perfectly stratified (in the sense of Proposition 1) rule G such that qG ( y ) > qG (w ) whenever

          y > w and G ( y ) ≠ G (w ) , there exist housing prices with which G is an equilibrium.


B. Graphical description of equilibrium allocation

         The relationships between J, δ, and the equilibrium allocation of peer groups and

effectiveness are key to the empirical analysis.11 Figure 1 illustrates several sample markets. I

assume that family income, x, is normally distributed with unit mean and variance. Panels A and B

consider the simple case of J=3, n = N 3 , and µ j =            j
                                                                    3   . First, suppose that δ=0, so that desirability is

identical to effectiveness. In this case, district 3 is necessarily the most desirable and district 1 the

least; by Proposition 3 the unique equilibrium assigns the wealthiest third of families to district 3 and

the poorest third to district 1. The thin solid line in Panel A of Figure 1 graphs the allocation of

effectiveness by family income in this market, while the dashed line graphs the allocation of peers.

         Now consider the impact of changing parental valuations to incorporate moderate concern

for the peer group, δ=1.5. The perfectly effectiveness-sorted allocation remains an equilibrium, this

time with larger rent premia associated with homes in districts 3 and 2. The allocation of district


10 With a discrete income distribution, there are infinitely many price vectors that support G as an equilibrium, but all
generate the same ordinal ranking of communities by housing prices. With a continuous, connected income distribution,
the housing price vector would be unique (up to specification of the minimum housing price if nJ = N ). My empirical
analysis neglects prices entirely, and focuses solely on the allocation of schools and peers in equilibrium.
11 The model also has important implications for housing prices. As my data do not describe prices, I neglect these

implications. Bayer et al. (2003) use price data along with a parameterization of the utility function to estimate a model
much like this one within a single housing market.

                                                            8
desirability in this equilibrium is graphed as the bold line in Panel A. This equilibrium is not unique,

however, as any permutation of the three income terciles across the three districts meets the criteria

for Proposition 4 and might arise in market equilibrium.12 Panel B depicts the allocation of peers,

effectiveness, and district desirability in one “reverse sorted” equilibrium, in which high-income

students attend schools that are uniformly less effective than those enrolling poorer students.

         The remaining panels consider an economy with more Tiebout choice, J=10 and µ j =                        j
                                                                                                                      10   .

Again, when δ = 0 , equilibrium is unique and perfectly sorted on effectiveness. The resulting

effectiveness allocation is depicted as the thin line in Panel C, with the allocation of peers again

depicted as a dashed line.

         Differences in average income between adjacent deciles are much smaller than those

between adjacent terciles. As a result, when we allow for concern for the peer group with δ = 1.5 ,

not all allocations of deciles to communities are equilibria. The bold line in panel C displays the

“quality” allocation in the perfectly effectiveness-sorted equilibrium, while panel D displays an

imperfectly sorted equilibrium allocation, and panel E offers an allocation that cannot arise in

equilibrium even with δ = 1.5 . In this allocation, the fourth decile of the income distribution is

assigned to a community that, because its schools are so ineffective while its students are only

slightly better, is considered inferior to that where the fifth decile resides, violating Proposition 1.

C. Simulations of comparative statics in J and δ

         The contrast between the three-district and the ten-district cases in Figure 1 indicates a

general tendency: Imperfectly sorted equilibria—low or negative rank-order correlations between h

or x and µ—are relatively easy to maintain when jurisdictions are few and large, but become less



12Average income in the three terciles are -0.1, 1, and 2.1; differences among any pair of communities in perceived peer
quality are therefore never less than 1.65 and swamp differences in effectiveness.

                                                           9
prevalent as J grows. Imperfect effectiveness sorting arises because individual families who care

about both peers and effectiveness are unwilling to leave an underperforming school/jurisdiction in

favor of a better performer with worse peers. Increased parental choice reduces the need for

coordination by offering closer competitors in peer-group space, limiting the amount of

underperformance that high-income families will accept before moving. This exit limits the

possibility of low (or negative) effectiveness sorting in equilibrium.

         Because equilibrium is not generally unique, formal comparative statics results are difficult to

formulate: The primary effect of changes in J and δ is to alter the set of equilibria, not to

substantively change any particular one. I thus use simulations of toy economies similar to those

illustrated above to study the relationship between the parameters and the central tendency of

equilibrium allocations.

         Where districts’ effectiveness parameters were fixed and evenly spaced in Figure 1, my

simulations draw effectiveness parameters independently from a standard normal distribution. For

specified (δ, J ) , then, the simulation begins with a draw of J independent effectiveness parameters,

one for each community. The J quantiles of the income distribution are randomly permuted among

the J communities, and the perceived quality ( q = xδ + µ ) of each community is computed. If each

quantile is assigned to a higher-perceived-quality community than are lower-income quantiles, then

the permutation is an equilibrium allocation. If quality is not increasing in income, then the

allocation is not an equilibrium, and quantiles are re-permuted among the communities until an

equilibrium allocation is found.13




13 This strategy treats all equilibria as equally likely. This might be refined with a theory of equilibrium selection, perhaps
attaching higher probability to equilibria that are attracting points for larger ranges of initial assignments, or with a
dynamic approach in which effectiveness parameters evolve slowly and a fraction of families move in each period.
These are left for future work.

                                                              10
         For each of several (J, δ) combinations, I simulated 5,000 economies. Figure 2 reports the

average effectiveness experienced by families at each income quantile for two market structures

( J = 3 and J = 10 ) and four values of the parental valuations parameter ( δ = 0, 1.5, 3, and 6 ). Panel

A depicts the case where parents are unconcerned about the peer group and care only for school

effectiveness ( δ = 0 ). As equilibrium must be perfectly effectiveness-sorted in this case, this panel

merely graphs estimated order statistics for 3 or 10 draws from the µ distribution.

         As δ grows in the remaining panels, equilibria arise with progressively less complete sorting

on effectiveness. As a result, the distribution of effectiveness parameters that might be experienced

by a family at any particular point in the income distribution approaches the unconditional

effectiveness distribution, and averages collapse toward the overall mean of 0. Importantly—see

Panels B and C—this collapse is faster in the 3-district case than in the 10-district case. As δ grows

further in Panel D, however, the differences between the two sorts of market disappear, along with

any semblance of sorting on effectiveness.14

         Figure 2 indicates that effectiveness sorting tends to increase with δ and, for moderate values

like that in Panel C, with J. The relevant parameter for the empirical work below is the coefficient

of a market fixed effect, community-level regression of effectiveness on average income. For each

(δ, J ) combination I regressed µ on      x , using as data the 5,000*J communities from the 5,000

simulation draws and including a fixed effect for each draw. The resulting estimates of

               (       )     ( )
θ (δ , J ) = cov x j , µ j var x j are displayed in Figure 3. When δ is small, θ is well above zero

regardless of J. Conversely, when δ is large, θ is close to zero for all J. For moderate δ, we observe




14Non-monotonicities in Panels C and D derive from the tails of the normal income distribution, which produce larger
differences in average income between adjacent quantiles at the extremes than near the middle.

                                                         11
larger slope parameters, θ—more perfect sorting on effectiveness—when there are many districts

than when there are few. That is, ∂θ ∂J > 0 for moderate δ.15


D. Supply-side responses to competition

         The simulations incorporate the assumption that the across-school variance of effectiveness

is constant across markets. This may not hold, particularly if parents use a low δ and school

administrators faced with competition seek to attract parental demand by becoming more effective.

If, as in Hoxby’s (1999b) model, this happens in such a way as to level up the least-effective schools

rather than to cause the most effective to pull away from the pack, the variance of effectiveness will

be declining in J. Reduced variation of effectiveness has exactly the same effect in the model as does

reduced parental concern for effectiveness, so might lead to a small ∂corr (x , µ ) ∂J for any δ (with

even larger reductions in ∂θ ∂J ). I discuss observable implications of a choice effect on

effectiveness production below.


III.     Estimation

A. Educational production

         I work with a simple, reduced-form educational production function. Let

                                         t ijm = α m + x ijm β + x jm γ + µ jm + ε ijm ,                                (2)

where tijm is the test score (or other outcome measure) of student i when he or she attends school j in

market m; αm is a market-specific intercept capturing unobserved differences between regions’

populations or educational systems; xijm is an index of the student’s background characteristics; x jm



15Figure 3 reveals a small effect of Tiebout choice on the effectiveness gradient θ even when δ=0 and equilibrium is
unique, but this is sensitive to the simulation assumptions about the distribution of effectiveness as J grows. Simulations
for positive δ are less sensitive.

                                                              12
is the average background index of students at school j; and µ jm —which is unobserved by the

researcher but need not be orthogonal to x jm —measures the effectiveness of school j, its policies

and practices that contribute to student performance.16

         Some care must be taken in the conceptual separation of inputs into peer effects, γ, and

effectiveness, µ. For analysis of residential choice, the peer effect should include any inputs that are

causally dependent upon the composition of enrollment. To the extent that schools with

advantaged students have more actively involved parents or attract better teachers (Antos and

Rosen, 1975), more resources, or—if parental “voice” is effectual—greater effort from

administrators, these inputs are part of the peer effect. By contrast, effectiveness encompasses only

those characteristics of a school or its staff that do not depend upon the characteristics of enrolled

students. These might include differences in administrative quality or effort beyond those forced by

parental voice, as well as any idiosyncratic differences in costs, resources, or productive efficiency.

         Test-score maximizing parents will not care whether scores are generated by peer groups or

by effectiveness, and (if they have perfect information) will rank schools according to δ = γ . This

requires partialling out the portion of the school average,

                                          t jm = α m + x jm (β + γ ) + µ jm + ε jm ,                                   (3)

that is due to β, the effect of individual characteristics on students’ own scores. Parents may use

δ ≠ γ if they either have preferences beyond their children’s scores or lack sufficient information to

perform this partialling out.17




 This paper considers only peer effects that depend upon students’ observable characteristics. I need not determine
16

whether these occur because t ij depends on x j or on t j , a distinction that Manski (1993) points out is not identified
if errors are non-independent within schools. Equation (2) appears to allow for only the former—Manski’s “exogenous”
effects—but in reduced form the latter—“endogenous” effects—appear as the former plus a term that appears as
residual variance in my school-level analysis.

                                                             13
B. Observable implications of effectiveness sorting

            Researchers do not observe µjm directly. In a regression for average scores using school-level

data from market m, the coefficient on the peer group is biased upward by

               (            )      ( )
θ m = cov m µ jm , x jm varm x jm relative to the causal effect β + γ.

            The model in Section II (and particularly the simulations in Figure 3) suggests that the

equilibrium value of θ m may vary systematically with both parental preferences and the availability of

choice. If choice is measured by cm—the index used in the empirical analysis below amounts to

c m = 1 − 1 J when districts are equally sized—the key prediction is that ∂E m [θ m |c m , δ ] ∂c > 0 (where

E m [ X ] is the expectation of X within market m) when δ is neither very small nor very large.

            Let

                                µ jm = λ m + x jmθ m + ν jm , with θ m = φ 0 + c m φ1 + Z m φ 2 + ω m .                          (4)

Here, Zm is a vector of metropolitan control variables; λm is an unspecified metropolitan-specific

intercept, and the φ parameters are all functions of δ. I look for evidence that φ1>0. Equations (3)

and (4) can be combined as

                                                               (
                   t jm = (α m + λ m ) + x jm (β + γ + θ m ) + ν jm + ε jm   )                                                 (5A)

                                                                                              (
                       = (α m + λ m ) + x jm (β + γ + φ 0 ) + x jm c m φ1 + x jm Z m φ 2 + x jm ω m + ν jm + ε jm .  )         (5B)

One approach to estimation, then, would be a two-step procedure, in which equation (5A) is

estimated separately for each market in the first step, and then the resulting coefficients



17   Researchers vary in their assessments of the relative importance of         x jm (β + γ ) and µ jm in explaining cross-sectional
variation in performance. Chubb and Moe (1990) and Hoxby (1999a) argue that many of the problems in American
education derive from parents’ inability to enforce administrative effort through either voice or exit, implying a large role
for effectiveness. On the other hand, Kane and Staiger’s (2002) analysis suggests that sampling error and demographic
composition swamp effectiveness in the across-school distribution of scores. Productivity arguments for choice policies,
of course, rely crucially on the former view that productivity has large effects on student outcomes, can vary substantially
across schools, and can be observed by parents.

                                                                   14
corresponding to β + γ + θ m regressed on the choice index in the second. I instead estimate (5B) in

one step. I regress school average test scores on market fixed effects, the school-level peer-group

average, and its interactions with choice and with Zm. 18 In all specifications, I estimate standard

errors that allow for the heteroskedasticity and within-market autocorrelation implied by (5B)

(Kézdi, 2002).

           This strategy can be made robust to nonlinearities in the causal peer effect. Replace (3) by

                                                            ( )
                                          t jm = α m + f x jm + µ jm + ε jm .                                       (6)


                [   ]           ( )                ( ) ( )                        [        ]
Then E m t jm |x jm = α m + g m x jm , where g m x jm = f x jm + E m µ jm |x jm . A positive choice effect


                        [       ]
on the slope of E m µ jm |x jm corresponds to         ∂
                                                     ∂c m   ( g ′m (x )) > 0 .   Because there are a fairly small

number of metropolitan markets in the United States and a limited number of schools in each

market, I cannot be fully nonparametric in estimating this relationship. Instead, I segment markets

into quartiles defined by their choice indices, and estimate nonparametric peer group-test score

relationships separately for each group. The hypothesis is that the estimated functions will be

steeper in the high-choice groups.

C. Likely biases

           Several identifiable factors may bias the coefficient on the peer group-Tiebout choice

interaction in specifications like (5B). I discuss two here; I argue that each has the potential to

produce an upward bias in φ̂1 .

           The first relates to measurement error in x jm : There may not be enough observations at any

particular high school to accurately estimate the school-level average, the data may omit important


18                                                                                                (       )
           x jm ω m as a component of the error appears to require an assumption about cov θ m , x jm . This can be
     Treating
shown to equal cov (θ m , x m ) , which does not vary within markets and is therefore absorbed by the fixed effect.

                                                             15
background variables, or the included variables may be imperfectly measured. Any of these would

attenuate the gradient of school average student outcomes with respect to peer-group characteristics.

         x jm should be more reliable in markets where schools are more stratified, for several

reasons. First, stratification implies a higher true variance of the peer group, and therefore a larger

signal component of the signal-to-noise ratio. In the denominator, schools in more stratified

markets are more internally homogeneous; as the sampling variance of the school average depends

linearly upon the within-school variance of individual characteristics, more homogeneous schools

imply less noise in school averages. Finally, unobserved student characteristics are likely to be more

strongly associated with observed characteristics at the school level, making the observed variables

better indicators of the true peer-group quality, in markets that are more heavily stratified.

         The above arguments imply that the peer-group coefficient in a regression using data from a

single market should be attenuated to a lesser degree when the market has more stratified schools.

As choice is positively correlated with stratification—a clear implication of the model above, and

demonstrated empirically in Section V, below—this would produce a tendency toward larger

estimated coefficients (i.e., less bias toward zero) in high-choice markets.19 The effect is similar in

the pooled model that I estimate: φ̂1 is upward-biased by measurement error in x jm that is

negatively correlated with choice.

         A second possible bias is economic. There is some evidence that the educational labor

market is more liquid in markets that have many districts competing for teachers’ talent than in

those with more concentrated governance (Luizer and Thornton, 1986). This may make it easier for

a high- x jm school to attract good teachers in a high-choice market than in one with less choice.



19One source of unreliability might bias the choice-peer group interaction downward: School size is negatively correlated
with the choice measure I use. This will attenuate the peer-group effect by more in high-choice than in low-choice
markets. I present a specification below that attempts to absorb any size-related attenuation with interactions of the
peer group with a polynomial in the within-school sample size; this has no impact on the estimated choice effect.

                                                           16
Any such effect would imply a positive effect of choice on the reduced-form peer effect γ , which

will appear as a positive contribution to φ̂1 .20


D. Supply-side effects

         Effects of competition on the production of effectiveness may work in the opposite

direction, leading to a smaller effect of choice on effectiveness sorting than in my static model. To

                                                                                               [ ]
look for these dynamic effects, I note that competitive effects should cause E m µ jm to increase

(Brennan and Buchanan, 1980; Hoxby, 2000; 1999b) and, in some models (e.g., Hoxby, 1999b),

     ( )
varm µ jm to decline with choice.

         The MSA-level mean of equation (2) is

                                           t m = α m + x m (β + γ ) + µ m + ε m .                                     (7)


If E[α m + ε m |c m , x m , Z m ] = 0 , the choice coefficient in a regression of t m on cm, x m and Zm is

informative about choice’s effects on average effectiveness, µ m . I present estimates of the effect of

choice on average MSA scores in Section VII.

         Moving to the second prediction, note that

                                           ( )             ( )
                                      varm µ jm = varm x jm θ m 2 + varm ν jm .( )                                    (8)

This term is not identified without further assumptions, as θm cannot be distinguished from γ nor

          ( )                                 ( )
can varm ν jm be separated from varm ε jm . However, structural assumptions about the causal peer

effect and about the variance components in (5A) allow estimation of the components of (8). A

                                         ( )
natural approximation is that varm ε jm is inversely proportional to the within-school sample size,

with the remaining component of the within-MSA residual variance of school mean scores


20Note that this effect has nothing to do with parents’ use of their power to choose: It arises from teachers moving to
schools with students who are easy to teach, rather than from parents moving to schools with good teachers.

                                                            17
                       ( )
attributable to varm ν jm .21 I use this assumption with the residual variance from single-market

                                         ( )
estimates of (5A) to estimate varm ν jm . Similarly, the coefficients from (5A) can be combined with


                                                          ( )                       (
assumptions on γ to estimate θm, and, via it, varm µ jm and ρ m ≡ corrm x jm , µ jm = θ m     )        varm ( x jm )
                                                                                                       varm ( µ jm )
                                                                                                                       . I


discuss analyses along these lines in Section VII.


IV.      Data

         The empirical strategy outlined above requires data describing the distribution of peer

groups and outcomes across schools within metropolitan areas that differ in the amount of Tiebout

choice. I use two data sets for information about student outcomes. First, the National Educational

Longitudinal Survey (NELS) surveyed approximately 25 8th-grade students from each of about 1,000

schools (750 of them in metropolitan areas) in 1988. Students were given tests in several subjects,

and were re-interviewed several times thereafter. I focus on two outcomes: The 8th-grade composite

score, and an indicator for whether the student was still in school or had graduated at the time of the

1992 follow-up survey.

         Second, I use a restricted-access data set consisting of observations on 330,000 metropolitan

SAT-taker observations from the cohort that graduated from high school in 1994. The SAT is an

entrance exam required by many colleges, so is taken by a large fraction of college-bound students.

My sample includes about one third of SAT-takers from the 1994 cohort, who comprised nearly 20

percent of high school graduates in that year.22 The data contain students’ SAT scores along with

high school indicators and several family background measures.



21 This implicitly rules out Manksi’s (1993) endogenous and correlated peer effects, each of which would introduce a
school-level error component beyond effectiveness.
22 SAT-takers who reported their ethnicity were sampled with probability one if they were black or Hispanic or if they

were from California or Texas, and with probability one-quarter otherwise. Due to an error in the processing of the file,

                                                           18
         The SAT data offer the important advantage that the sample includes a substantial number

of students from nearly every high school in the United States, whereas the NELS offers only two or

three schools from each metropolitan area and small samples within each school. Moreover, parents

are likely to be particularly concerned with schools’ capacity to raise students’ SAT scores, as these

scores have personal consequences that most other tests do not. Finally, because SAT-takers’

parents are presumably above average in both their financial resources and their involvement in their

children’s education, this population is likely to be especially willing to choose a neighborhood on

the basis of the local school’s quality, and to pay a premium for the preferred neighborhood.

         On the other hand, endogenous selection into SAT-taking may introduce biases. Dynarski

(1987) demonstrates that at large geographic scales the SAT-taking rate is negatively correlated with

average scores, as would be expected if SAT-takers were positively selected. I take several steps to

try to reduce selection bias in the SAT analyses. First, I limit my sample to metropolitan areas in 23

“SAT states,” where most college-bound students take the SAT.23 Second, all analyses of the SAT

data control for an inverse Mills ratio in the metropolitan SAT-taking rate. Finally, I present several

alternative specifications designed to locate additional selection bias in the SAT analyses.

         I define housing markets as Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs), using definitions

appropriate to the 1990 Census (U.S. Census Bureau, 2001).24 Metropolitan-level control variables

are drawn from the 1990 Census, Summary Tape File 3C (U.S. Census Bureau, 1993). One key

control variable is not available from the Census: The degree of equalization built into the state


students who did not report an ethnicity are excluded from the sample. In data for 1999, in which I have a complete
version of the file, these students comprise about 12 percent of SAT-takers.
23 In the remaining states, many college applicants submit scores from the ACT, a competing exam, instead of SAT

scores, and SAT-takers are primarily students hoping to attend out-of-state colleges (Clark, 2003). An analysis available
from the author demonstrates that Dynarski’s evidence for selection bias comes primarily from contrasts between SAT
and ACT states, and that there is no correlation between SAT-taking rates and scores among the SAT states.
24 Most MSAs are defined along county boundaries; in New England, where town boundaries define MSAs, I use the

alternative—and larger—county-based definitions. In the largest urbanizations outside New England, I treat several
Primary MSAs (PMSAs) within the same larger Consolidated MSA (CMSA) as distinct markets, but estimate standard
errors that are robust to arbitrary correlation among observations in the same CMSA.

                                                           19
school finance rule may have direct effects on the benefits of attending a school in a wealthy

neighborhood. I use two state-level measures of finance equalization, both derived from Card and

Payne’s (2002) study of these policies. The first is an indicator for whether the state had a Minimum

Foundation Plan financing rule in 1991, the most redistributive in the Card and Payne typology.

The second is the coefficient from a state-specific, school-district-level regression of per-capita

operating expenditures on median family income.25

         Table 1 reports summary statistics for the primary metropolitan, school, and individual-level

variables used in the current analysis. Columns A and B report statistics for the full set of MSAs and

for the NELS data, while columns D and E report the same statistics for MSAs in SAT states and

for the SAT sample. Additional information about data sources, variable construction, and the

algorithms used to assign NELS and SAT schools to MSAs is available from the author.

A. Measuring the peer group

         It is helpful to have a one-dimensional index of student quality at each school. To create

one, I estimated a flexible regression of individual NELS and SAT scores on student characteristics,

controlling for school fixed effects:

                                               t ijm = ψ jm + Wijm βW + e ijm .                                         (9)

The school fixed effects absorb all sources of across-school variation in scores; only within-school

variation in W and t is used to estimate βW. 26 In the SAT analysis, the W vector included effects for



25 I am grateful to David Card for providing these variables. For MSAs that span state borders, I compute averages
among the relevant states, weighting by the share of the MSA population in each state. Neither finance variable is
available for Alaska or Hawaii, so Anchorage and Honolulu are excluded from all analyses. The latter is convenient, as
Hawaii’s school governance is unique, with a single statewide district and several sub-districts. Models that exclude the
finance variables but include these cities produce similar results.
26 Although I use the same data sets to estimate the β coefficients as for estimation of (5B), this does not complicate
                                                        W
the analysis: The latter is estimated across schools, so it uses different variation in both left- and right-hand-side
variables. Note also that endogenous selection into schools may bias estimates of βW, but does not create a problem for
my estimation strategy as long as the bias affects all background variables equally. As described below, these coefficients
are used only to assign relative weights to the different W variables.

                                                             20
100 parental education categories (10 for the mother’s education interacted with 10 for the father’s,

each including a non-response category) and the interactions of six ethnicity indicators with two

gender categories (11 parameters) and with 12 family income bins (66 additional parameters). The

NELS regression was of necessity sparser, with a complete interaction of gender and race, two

parental education dummies (also interacted with race), and 15 family income categories.27

         I next defined a student background index as the predicted values (excluding the estimated

school effect) from (9), x ijm ≡ ψ + W ijm βˆW , and an index of peer quality as its average in the school,

x jm = ψ + W jm βˆW . This construction implicitly normalizes β from equation (2) to one, and the peer-

group index has the interpretation of the school sample’s predicted average performance at a

nationally representative school.28 Table 1 reports summary statistics for the indices, and Figure 4

shows the strong correlation between peer groups and test scores across schools in the NELS and

SAT samples. Specification checks reported in Section VI explore the sensitivity of the results to

deviations from the single-index model.


V. Measuring Tiebout choice

         Public education in the United States is provided by local school districts, typically

independent governmental units wholly contained within a county. With some exceptions, residents

of a particular district must attend that district’s schools or opt out of the public education system

entirely. Most districts operate multiple schools, and establish attendance zones for each school that


27 The model explained 33 percent of the cross-sectional variance in individual SAT scores; school effects alone explain
22 percent. The corresponding numbers in the NELS data are 33 and 25, respectively.
28 An index calculated from 1995 SAT data correlated 0.94 with the 1994 version at the school level, indicating high

reliability. I also estimated a version of (9) with region-specific βW coefficients. The restrictions in the national model
were rejected, but the resulting peer quality indices were very similar across schools within MSAs and produced similar
results in the analyses below. Finally, note that                             (         )
                                                    t jm ≡ ψˆ jm + W jm βˆW ≡ ψˆ jm − ψ + x jm . Thus, were I to replace
school average test scores in (5B) with the estimated fixed effects   ψ̂ jm , the only effect would be to reduce the x jm main
effect by precisely one.

                                                              21
regulate the within-district school assignment of district residents based on residential location.

Thus, families may in principle exercise Tiebout choice among districts, and within districts among

school attendance zones.29

         Following previous authors (Borland and Howsen, 1992; Hoxby, 2000), I focus on districts

rather than schools in measuring the availability of Tiebout choice. One good reason for this is that

within-district attendance-zone boundaries are subject to relatively frequent revision and in any case

programs such as magnet schools, busing, and formal or informal choice programs often weaken the

link between residential location and within-district school assignment.30 These may make it difficult

to exercise Tiebout choice over schools within a large district, as families may not move frequently

enough to keep up with changing boundaries. A second important reason to focus on districts

rather than schools is less principled: School size varies relatively little across metropolitan areas, and

choice among schools is very nearly a deterministic function of metropolitan population.

         To assign a numeric measure of choice among districts, I use Hoxby’s (2000) Herfindahl-

style index of the concentration of public enrollment in the largest districts. If e dm is the enrollment

of district d in MSA m (drawn from the Common Core of Data, U.S. Department of Education,

1990) as a share of total metropolitan enrollment, the choice index for market m is

c m = 1 − ∑d ∈m e dm
                  2 31
                     . Columns C and F of Table 1 report the bivariate correlations of all other

variables with the choice index. High-choice markets tend to be larger; to have fewer blacks and



29 Direct peer effects almost certainly operate at the school level. Both the indirect peer effects referred to in Section
III—parental involvement, resources, teacher quality— and effectiveness may operate at either the school or the district
level, however, depending upon the level at which the hiring, effort, and budgetary relevant decisions are made.
30 On desegregation remedies, which frequently dictate within-district school attendance zones but almost always respect

district boundaries, see Welch and Light (1987), Orfield (1983), and Milliken v. Bradley 418 U.S. 717, 1974. Kane et al.
(2004) discuss frequent desegregation-related changes in attendance zone boundaries within the Charlotte-Mecklenburg
school district, while Reber (2003) discusses cross-district residential responses to within-district desegregation policies.
31 In many states, elementary (grades 1-8) and secondary (grades 9-12) schools are managed by different, overlapping

school districts. Families cannot meaningfully be said to choose between districts or schools operating at different levels
(Urquiola, 1999). My choice indices are calculated over enrollment in grades 9-12 only, although explorations with
alternative definitions have not turned up sensitivity of the primary results.

                                                             22
Hispanics, higher incomes, and less inequality; and to be outside the South. They also seem to be

located in states with financing rules that do less to promote equality in school spending.

         I use two tests to ensure that the district choice index captures meaningful variation in

parents’ ability to exercise Tiebout choice. First, we might expect that MSAs offering more public-

sector choice would have lower rates of private school enrollment. Second, the most basic

implication of Tiebout-style models like that in Section II is that high-choice markets should exhibit

more stratification across schools (Eberts and Gronberg, 1981; Epple and Sieg, 1999).

         The bivariate correlations in Table 1 support both hypotheses, taking school racial

segregation as a measure of stratification. 32 Table 2 presents regression results. Columns A and B

present models for metropolitan private enrollment rates, first with a vector of conventional

demographic controls, and second including measures of census-tract-level residential segregation in

the MSA. The regressions indicate that the district-choice index is a strong predictor of the private

enrollment rate, suggesting that MSAs with high index values impose fewer constraints on parents’

ability to choose within the public sector.33

         The remaining columns of Table 2 present estimates of the relationship between the choice

index and measures of student racial stratification across schools. Using both isolation and

dissimilarity indices (Cutler et al., 1999) for the distribution of white students relative to nonwhites

and measuring these indices over either public or public and private schools, Columns D through G

indicate, again, that the choice index has a large effect in the expected direction.




32 Income stratification would be preferable to racial segregation, but the data on school racial composition—here, from
censuses of public (the Common Core of Data) and private (the Private School Survey) schools—are much better than
those on family income.
33 Miguel Urquiola (personal communication) reports that, in his experience, the public choice-private enrollment

relationship is sensitive to the precise specification. I have not found particular sensitivity in the data used here, and
Hoxby (2000) reports similar results from a different specification. Nevertheless, with only 318 observations it would be
surprising if one could not find a specification in which the choice effect is insignificant.

                                                           23
VI.      Empirical Results: Within-market sorting

         I begin my analysis of the within-MSA relationship between peer quality and average scores

with nonparametric estimates that allow the peer effect to be nonlinear in student background. The

median MSA contains only 16 schools in the SAT sample and 2 in the NELS, neither sufficient to

support unrestricted nonparametric estimation. As an alternative, I group MSAs into quartiles by

the district choice index and estimate separate school-level kernel regressions of test scores on the

student background index for each quartile. Panel A of Figure 5 displays the estimated functions for

NELS 8th-grade composite scores, and Panel B repeats the exercise with the SAT data.34 Neither

indicates important differences in reduced-form educational production functions among quartiles,

nor any substantial nonlinearity in the peer group-test score relationship. For this reason, I impose a

linear structure throughout the remainder of the analysis.

         Table 3 reports basic regression results. Column A reports a simple specification for NELS

8th-grade scores, containing only MSA fixed effects, the student background index, and its

interactions with the MSA choice index and with census division fixed effects.35 The peer-group

main effect—which estimates β + γ + φ 0 , with β standardized to one—is a surprisingly large 1.70.

There is no indication, however, that high-choice MSAs exhibit a stronger apparent effect of peer

groups: The estimated choice effect ( φ̂1 ) is -0.19, suggesting a weaker (though insignificantly so)

relationship in high-choice MSAs. Column B adds a vector of MSA control variables, each




34 For comparability between the data sets, NELS scores are standardized to the same mean (1000) and individual
standard deviation (200) as SAT scores. An alternative version of Figure 5 that deviates from MSA means—and so
                                                  (           )
allows the peer effect to be a nonlinear function of x jm − x m rather than of x jm —is nearly identical.
35In this table, as in the remainder of the analysis unless otherwise specified, schools are weighted by the sum of
individual sampling weights, adjusted at the MSA level to weight MSAs by their 17-year-old populations. All standard
errors are clustered to allow for arbitrary correlation among schools in the same MSA or CMSA. All MSA-level control
variables are demeaned before being interacted with the background index.

                                                         24
interacted with the background index, while Column C adds a few additional controls. Standard

errors grow with the additional controls, but there is no indication of a positive choice effect.

           Columns D through F repeat the analysis, this time taking as the dependent variable the

fraction of the school’s 8th-grade sample that remains in school at the time of the 12th-grade follow-

up survey four years later. (The sample average is 0.84.) Columns G through I turn to the SAT

data, this time adding an interaction of the MSA SAT-taking rate with the background index to all

specifications. Standard errors are substantially smaller in the SAT data, reflecting the greatly

enlarged sample size (5,711 schools, versus 741 from the NELS), but point estimates are very

similar.

           Nothing in Table 3 offers evidence of a meaningful positive choice interaction. Only one of

the nine coefficient estimates is positive, and that has a t statistic of only 0.4. Moreover, that

estimate derives from a saturated specification, with 18 MSA-level controls and only 177 MSAs. My

preferred specification, that in Columns B, E, and H, produces negative point estimates for all three

outcomes. In the SAT sample, where estimates are sufficiently precise to distinguish interesting

hypotheses, even at the upper limit of the confidence interval the choice effect (φ1) is small relative

to the implied average peer-group effect (γ+φ0) of 0.68.

           Table 4 presents additional estimates that involve slight changes to the sample and

specification. Estimates are presented for NELS 8th-grade scores in Panel A, then for SATs in Panel

B. Row 1 in each panel repeats the key coefficients from the baseline specifications in Columns B

and H of Table 3. Row 2 adds interactions of the peer group with quadratics in the school sample

size and its inverse. Because high-choice MSAs tend to have smaller schools, attenuation of the

peer-group effect due to measurement error in small schools may bias the peer group-choice

interaction in the primary specifications downward. The size controls should absorb any such




                                                    25
attenuation and eliminate bias in the choice effect. The choice effect is essentially unchanged when

these controls are included.

        Rows 3 through 5 explore alternative specifications of the peer effect. Row 3 allows the peer

effect to depend upon the standard deviation of the background index at the school as well as upon

its mean. The standard deviation term enters significantly (in the SAT data, although not in the

NELS), indicating that heterogeneous schools produce higher scores than homogeneous schools

with the same average student background, but the coefficient on the interaction of the background

average with choice is essentially unchanged. Row 4 allows the racial and ethnic composition of the

sample to have an independent effect on average scores. If there are cultural biases in the tests, for

example, individual ethnicity may have a different effect than does the composition of the peer

group. The racial composition variables also enter significantly, but again have little effect on the

coefficients of interest. Finally, row 5 uses average family income as the peer-group measure. The

choice interactions are positive (although not significant) in this specification. This effect is likely

attributable to the importance of non-income peer-group characteristics in prediction; as argued

above, these should load more heavily on income as choice increases.

        Rows 6 through 8 explore alternative samples. In row 6 I exclude private schools, as the

process by which students sort between the public and private sectors differs from that modeled

above. Row 7 excludes 26 MSAs (18 in the SAT sample) with only one school district each. The

choice index is necessarily zero in these cities, placing them 2.3 standard deviations from the overall

mean and 3.4 standard deviations from the mean of multiple-district MSAs. Row 8 additionally

excludes schools from central city school districts, as choices from among suburban districts may

more closely resemble the Tiebout model than do choices between the center city and the suburbs.

None of these three estimates indicates that the full sample understates the choice effect, and indeed

the latter two samples in the SAT data produce large negative coefficients, one significant.

                                                    26
         Rows 9 and 10 consider the possibility that the district-choice index is a poor measure of the

extent of parents’ realistic choices. The high-SES parents whose preferences drive the equilibrium

allocation in the model above may choose based on effectiveness, but only from schools offering a

minimum peer-group quality. If so, a choice index that weights all school districts, even those that

do not meet the peer-group requirements, will overstate the options that parents are willing to

consider. I consider two sets of weights meant to capture the concentration of governance of the

relevant districts in the MSA. The first (row 9) computes districts’ market shares from their share of

SAT-takers—a proxy for college-bound students—and the second (row 10) by their share of

families with incomes above the metropolitan median. In the SAT sample, I also estimate models

with these choice indices using only schools with above-average SAT participation rates. None of

these specifications estimates a positive choice effect.

         The final rows of Table 4 investigate the possibility that the choice index is endogenous to

school quality or to the sorting process. This might be true if, as Hoxby (2000) proposes, suburban

school districts have been less willing to consolidate with their central-city neighbors in areas where

the central-city schools are badly run.36 Hoxby proposes generating exogenous variation from

differences across MSAs in conditions influencing the pre-consolidation governance structure. In

Row 11, I estimate the basic model by instrumental variables with an instrument similar to Hoxby’s

“smaller streams” variable, derived from the Geographic Names Information System (U.S.

Geological Survey, 2002), which might capture geographic differences in the optimal district layout

before modern transportation networks were developed. Row 12 uses a stronger instrument, a

choice index computed using information on the number of school districts operating in the MSA in

1942 (Gray, 1944), just at the beginning of the great postwar wave of district consolidation. By the


36There was a great deal of school district consolidation in the United States in the postwar period, with the total
number of districts falling by nearly 80 percent between 1950 and 1970. The latter year marked the approximate end of
the consolidation wave (Kenny and Schmidt, 1994; National Center for Education Statistics, 1973).

                                                         27
logic underlying the streams approach, this historical measure should be a valid instrument

(Rothstein, 2004b). The IV results are noisy, with standard errors nearly double those from the OLS

model, and two of the four coefficients are positive. None of the estimates come close to rejecting

either zero effect or the OLS point estimate, however, and there seems little reason given this to

prefer IV to OLS in this context.37

         Although results are not presented here, I have estimated several additional specifications of

the basic empirical test with similar results. In particular, the choice-background interaction is

largely invariant to several alternative ways of weighting schools within and across MSAs.

A. Evidence on potential selection bias in SAT data

         Table 5 presents several specifications designed to look for signs of bias in the SAT analyses

from endogenous SAT participation. Row 1 reproduces the background index main effect and its

choice interaction from Column H of Table 3. Row 2 reports the same coefficients from a model

that also includes a control for the school-level participation rate. Here, the choice coefficient is

slightly positive but very small.38 Row 3 takes another approach to variation in school participation

rates, dropping from the sample any school with a rate below the MSA average.

         In Row 4, I take advantage of a variable on the SAT data characterizing each student’s high

school class rank (reported as the first or second decile, or by quintile below that). I discard all

observations reporting a rank in the bottom 40 percent of their class, then reweight the remaining

observations so that the weighted rank distribution at each school is balanced, with one sixth of the



37 In MSA-level regressions for the choice index, F statistics for tests of the exclusion of the instruments are 11.7 and
129.4, respectively.
38 The school SAT-taking-rate coefficient of 57 (s.e. 10) indicates that schools with higher participation have

substantially higher average scores, even conditional on the observed x jm . This is consistent with a model in which
unobserved effectiveness influences both the participation rate and latent scores, and with one in which SAT
participation is exogenously determined but unobservably-advantaged SAT-takers cluster together. Note that all
specifications in the SAT data include a control for the MSA-level participation rate.

                                                             28
overall weight in each of the top two deciles and one third in each of the next two quintiles. Under

the assumption that selection into SAT-taking is uncorrelated with of the potential score conditional

on class rank and the school attended, this re-weighting should recover estimates that would be

obtained were SAT scores available for all students ranked in the top three quintiles of their schools.

Results from the reweighted sample are again similar to those obtained earlier.

         The remainder of Table 5 examines what is potentially the most important selection problem

in the SAT data, that the background index is estimated only over sample individuals and may not

accurately measure the school peer group.39 There is no alternative source of detailed peer-group

information at the school level. At the district level, however, the School District Data Book

(SDDB) tabulates 1990 Census data to provide estimates of district demographics.

         Row 5 estimates the basic model on data collapsed to the district level, still using the SAT-

taker background index. (Note that private schools must be dropped from the sample for the

district-level analysis; also, because the specification includes MSA fixed effects, single-district MSAs

are effectively dropped.) The sample size is smaller here and standard errors are larger, but results

are otherwise similar to the school-level specification. Row 6 replaces the SAT background index

with the log of median household income in the district. Here, the choice effect is large, positive,

and significantly different from zero.

         As noted earlier, the choice effect in row 6 may be upward-biased if income is not the only

important component of the peer group.40 To gauge the importance of this bias, I projected the

SAT-based peer group onto MSA fixed effects, the district median income, and interactions of

income with the usual MSA-level control variables. As expected, the choice interaction in this


39 It is plausible that SAT-takers’ friends are drawn disproportionately from other SAT-takers at the school, which might
make the SAT-taker background index average a better peer-group measure for the current purpose than would be a
schoolwide measure. Absent better data, this cannot be tested.
40 Recall that estimates in Table 4 using the peer-group average income in place of the background index also produce

positive choice interactions, consistent with this claim.

                                                           29
projection—row 7—is large and nearly significant. Row 8 re-estimates the model from row 6, this

time including the SAT background index (but not its interactions with MSA-level variables) to

absorb the causal peer effect. The choice-median income interaction is much reduced and is no

longer significant, although the point estimate is still somewhat large. Moreover, this result could

arise from differential representativeness of the SAT sample with choice as easily as from the

hypothesized omitted-variables bias. As a result, the district income analyses do not really resolve

the question of whether the use of a background index computed over SAT-takers introduces

substantial biases; the best evidence on this point remains the fact that estimates of both the

background index main effect and its choice interaction are similar in the NELS random sample, the

SAT data, and the alternative SAT specifications in rows 2 through 4.


VII. Results on effectiveness supply

        If competition among schools leads to less variation in effectiveness, the regression of

effectiveness on the peer group might not be steeper in high-choice markets regardless of parental

demand. I identified two observable implications of this claim in Section III-D. First, it suggests

that the residual variance of effectiveness after regressing it on the peer group should be

unambiguously lower in high-choice markets. Second, reduced variance most likely accompanies an

increased mean, so choice should increase average effectiveness and average scores.

A. Choice and the variance of effectiveness

        To test the first hypothesis, I estimated an MSA-by-MSA regression of test scores on the

peer group. I next regressed the within-MSA residual variance from this regression—




                                                  30
        (          )
varm ν jm + ε jm —on choice and the usual vector of other MSA-level controls.41 The choice

coefficient in this regression was negative and significant, indicating that a one-unit increase in

choice reduces the across-school standard deviation of residual scores by 20 percent of its zero-

choice average. This is at least consistent with the claim that high-choice MSAs exhibit less

variability in school effectiveness, which complicates the interpretation of the earlier results as

informative about parental demand.

                        ( )                        (      )
            Both varm µ jm and ρ m = corrm µ jm , x jm are functions of the observable data and the

unknown peer-effect parameter γ. Under several assumptions about γ, I estimated each vector and

tested for choice effects using the same controls as in the base specifications above. Estimates, not

                                                               ( )
reported here, indicate that choice’s effect on varm µ jm is comparable to that on residual variance,

while choice has a positive but small and statistically insignificant effect on ρ m . These results cast

doubt on my maintained assumption of constant effectiveness variance, though they suggest that

deviations from this assumption are likely reasonably small.

B. Choice and average scores

            Table 6 presents estimates of the choice-average SAT relationship (7) from MSAs in SAT

states.42 Columns A through E present OLS results. In all specifications that control for differences

between MSAs in average student-background characteristics, the choice effect is negative and

significantly different from zero.43 The effect is fairly small, however: In my preferred specification




41   The regression also included a control for the MSA average of   N jm −1 , where Njm is the number of observations at
school j, to absorb differences in       ( )
                                     varm ε jm .
42 Hoxby (2000) finds a positive effect of choice on average scores in the NELS data, although Rothstein (2004b) is
unable to reproduce Hoxby’s results. I do not report estimates for NELS scores here, but specifications similar to those
in Table 6 produce similar results.
43 Note that in the two specifications with adequate controls, an inverse Mills ratio computed from the MSA SAT-taking

rate is positive and significant, as would be expected if students are positively selected into taking the SAT.

                                                              31
(Column D), increasing choice by one standard deviation lowers average SAT scores by 6.6 points,

or 3 percent of an MSA-level standard deviation.

        Hoxby (2000; 1999a) has argued that the choice coefficient in models like these is biased

upward by endogeneity of the choice index to public school quality. Columns F, G, and H report

instrumental variables estimates using the instruments discussed earlier, first separately and then

together. All produce significantly negative choice effects, the first even rejecting the OLS estimate

in favor of a more negative effect.

        In further explorations not reported here, I have found evidence that the negative choice

effects reported in Table 6 are not completely robust: Other specifications can produce insignificant

estimates, and sometimes even small positive coefficients. There is no indication, however, that

high-choice markets produce significantly or substantively higher average scores, once differences in

observables are controlled. Models that have such an effect as an important implication, such as

Hoxby’s (1999b) model of competition among districts, appear not to provide an explanation for the

lack of a choice effect on the peer-group coefficient in the earlier analysis.

        The coefficient on the background index in the across-market models in Table 6 is itself

interesting, and quite similar to that found within metropolitan areas in the earlier analysis. As there

is likely little sorting across metropolitan areas on school effectiveness, the across-market coefficient

is likely a nearly unbiased estimate of the causal effect of student characteristics (β+γ); its similarity

to the within-market coefficient supports the earlier indication that residential effectiveness sorting

(θ) may not be an important feature of the production process.


VIII. Conclusion

        The effects of choice policies on the incentives faced by school administrators depend

crucially on how parents choose. If parents have strong preferences for well-run, productive


                                                     32
schools that focus on academic skills related to test performance, we might expect administrators to

compete for students by implementing policies that lead to increased scores. If parents look for

other characteristics in schools, however, incentives toward productive management can be diluted.

In particular, if the peer group is important to parental preferences, coordination failures can arise,

preventing the market from rewarding school effectiveness.

        This paper has argued that strong parental preferences for effective schools produce a

correlation between effectiveness and the peer group in Tiebout equilibrium that is stronger when

parents have more ability to buy their way into their desired school, and that this correlation is

observable as an upward bias in cross-sectional estimates of the peer effect. Tests of the

relationship between measured “Tiebout choice” and the peer group-test score relationship offer no

evidence that the gradient of school average test scores with respect to student characteristics varies

systematically with choice. Even at the upper extreme of the estimated confidence intervals, the

performance gap between more- and less-desirable schools is not meaningfully larger in markets

with decentralized governance than in those with less Tiebout choice.

        Several candidate explanations are unsatisfactory. The choice index used appears to capture

meaningful variation in the availability of Tiebout choice, as it is strongly predictive of both private

enrollment and across-school racial stratification. Moreover, although the analysis relies on

observational rather than experimental variation in choice, the coefficients of interest do not seem

particularly sensitive to the choice of control variables or to reasonable variations in the sample.

Although some analyses indicate that estimates from the SAT data may be biased by endogenous

selection into SAT-taking, estimates from NELS data, which are free of selection biases, are similar.

        I find some evidence that choice is associated with small reductions in the dispersion of

effectiveness across schools, which weakens the theoretical predictions. In contrast, I find no

evidence that average effectiveness rises with choice. In light of these conflicting results, I

                                                   33
tentatively conclude that choice is unlikely to have sufficiently strong effects on the production of

school effectiveness to invalidate my primary analysis. This, however, bears further investigation.

         Another important interpretive issue is that the tests developed here do not well distinguish

the case where parents value school effectiveness to the exclusion of all else and that where they

attach no value to effectiveness, as in neither case does my model predict differences in

“effectiveness sorting” between high- and low-choice markets. I believe the former to be

implausible, for two reasons. First, parents seem to believe that peer effects are important, so they

would be unlikely to ignore the peer group in their choices. Second, the performance measures

available to parents—generally average outcomes at the school—are highly correlated with peer-

group quality, even in the absence of peer effects, and parents are likely unable to fully correct for

this. It is worth noting in this regard that policymakers have had little success in devising reliable,

accurate measures of effectiveness for use in school accountability programs (Kane and Staiger,

2002); it is not implausible that parents face similar difficulties.

         The most plausible explanations for the current results are that parents place a low weight on

school effectiveness—or, with heterogeneous preferences, that relatively few parents attach great

weight to effectiveness—in their preferences over neighborhoods;44 that parents value effectiveness

greatly but lack the information needed to identify effective schools; or that “effectiveness” as

defined here, encompassing only school characteristics not causally dependent upon the enrolled

population, is a relatively unimportant component of the across-school variation in student

outcomes. Under any of these, there is little theoretical support for the claim that Tiebout-choice

markets create strong incentives for school administrators to exert greater effort to raise student

performance (Chubb and Moe, 1990). Of course, under the second explanation the provision of


44 With heterogeneous preferences, choice can of course increase the match quality between parents and schools.
Nothing in the analysis here can reject the claim that some parents use the opportunity to select effective schools,
although it does suggest that most do not.

                                                            34
more complete information—e.g., new accountability measures that better distinguish effectiveness

from the peer group—might materially change the nature of Tiebout equilibrium, as parents appear

to respond to existing accountability scores (Figlio and Lucas, 2004).

       Great caution is required in generalizing from this paper’s results to choice markets that do

not link school assignment to residential location, as choices may be sensitive to factors (such as

non-school neighborhood amenities) that have not been considered here. Moreover, voucher

programs that encourage market entry may provide more choice than is achievable in even the most

decentralized of governmental structures. It nevertheless seems likely that choice programs will

need mechanisms—like compensatory funding, better and more widely available performance

measures, or targeted vouchers—that reduce the importance of peer groups in parental choices in

order to produce market pressure toward greater school productivity.




                                                  35
References

Antos, Joseph R. and Rosen, Sherwin. "Discrimination in the Market for Public School
        Teachers." Journal of Econometrics, May 1975, 3(2), pp. 123-50.
Bayer, Patrick; Ferreira, Fernando and McMillan, Robert. "A Unified Framework for
        Measuring Preferences for Schools and Neighborhoods." Mimeo, Yale University, August
        2003.
Belfield, Clive R. and Levin, Henry M. "The Effects of Competition between Schools on
        Educational Outcomes: A Review for the United States." Review of Educational Research,
        Summer 2002, 72(2), pp. 279-341.
Black, Sandra E. "Do Better Schools Matter? Parental Valuation of Elementary Education."
        Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 1999, 114(2), pp. 577-99.
Bogart, William T. and Cromwell, Brian A. "How Much Is a Neighborhood School Worth?"
        Journal of Urban Economics, March 2000, 47(2), pp. 280-305.
Borland, Melvin V. and Howsen, Roy M. "Student Academic Achievement and the Degree of
        Market Concentration in Education." Economics of Education Review, March 1992, 11(1), pp.
        31-39.
Brennan, Geoffrey and Buchanan, James. The Power to Tax: Analytical Foundation of a Fiscal
        Constitution. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1980.
Card, David and Payne, A. Abigail. "School Finance Reform, the Distribution of School
        Spending, and the Distribution of SAT Scores." Journal of Public Economics, 2002, 83(1), pp.
        49-82.
Chubb, John and Moe, Terry M. Politics, Markets, and America's Schools. Washington, D.C.: The
        Brookings Institution, 1990.
Clark, Melissa. "Selection Bias in College Admissions Tests." Mimeo, Princeton University 2003.
Cullen, Julie Berry; Jacob, Brian A. and Levitt, Steven D. "The Impact of School Choice on
        Student Outcomes: An Analysis of the Chicago Public Schools." Journal of Public Economics,
        forthcoming.
Cutler, David M.; Glaeser, Edward L. and Vigdor, Jacob L. "The Rise and Decline of the
        American Ghetto." Journal of Political Economy, June 1999, 107(3), pp. 455-506.
Dynarski, Mark. "The Scholastic Aptitude Test: Participation and Performance." Economics of
        Education Review, 1987, 6(3), pp. 263-73.
Eberts, Randall W. and Gronberg, Timothy J. "Jurisdictional Homogeneity and the Tiebout
        Hypothesis." Journal of Urban Economics, September 1981, 10(2), pp. 227-39.
Epple, Dennis ; Romer, Thomas and Sieg, Holger. "Interjurisdictional Sorting and Majority
        Rule: An Empirical Analysis." Econometrica, November 2001, 69(6), pp. 1437-65.
Epple, Dennis and Sieg, Holger. "Estimating Equilibrium Models of Local Jurisdictions." Journal
        of Political Economy, August 1999, 107(4), pp. 645-81.
Epple, Dennis and Romano, Richard E. "Ends against the Middle: Determining Public Service
        Provision When There Are Private Alternatives." Journal of Public Economics, November 1996,
        62(3), pp. 297-325.
Fernandez, Raquel and Rogerson, Richard. "Income Distribution, Communities, and the
        Quality of Public Education." Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 1996, 111(1), pp. 135-
        64.
____. "Keeping People Out: Income Distribution, Zoning, and the Quality of Public Education."
        International Economic Review, February 1997, 38(1), pp. 23-42.

                                                 36
Figlio, David N. and Lucas, Maurice E. "What's in a Grade? School Report Cards and the
        Housing Market." American Economic Review, 2004, 94(3), pp. 591-604.
Friedman, Milton. Capitalism and Freedom. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1962.
Gray, E. R. Governmental Units in the United States 1942. Washington, D.C.: Bureau of the Census,
        1944.
Hanushek, Eric A. "The Economics of Schooling: Production and Efficiency in Public Schools."
        Journal of Economic Literature, September 1986, 24(3), pp. 1141-77.
____. "Throwing Money at Schools." Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, Fall 1981, 1(1), pp. 19-
        41.
Hoxby, Caroline M. "Do Private Schools Provide Competition for Public Schools?" National
        Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #4978, December 1994.
____. "Does Competition among Public Schools Benefit Students and Taxpayers?" American
        Economic Review, December 2000, 90(5), pp. 1209-38.
____. "The Effects of School Choice on Curriculum and Atmosphere," in S. E. Mayer and P. E.
        Peterson, eds., Earning and Learning: How Schools Matter. Washington D.C.: Brookings
        Institution Press, 1999a, 281-316.
____. "The Productivity of Schools and Other Local Public Goods Producers." Journal of Public
        Economics, October 1999b, 74(1), pp. 1-30.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Urquiola, Miguel. "When Schools Compete, How Do They Compete?
        An Assessment of Chile's Nationwide School Voucher Program." Mimeo, Columbia
        University, August 2003.
Kane, Thomas J. and Staiger, Douglas O. "The Promise and Pitfalls of Using Imprecise School
        Accountability Measures." Journal of Economic Perspectives, Fall 2002, 16(4), pp. 91-114.
Kane, Thomas; Staiger, Douglas O. and Riegg, Stephanie. "Estimating the Housing Market
        Valuation of School Characteristics: Using Boundaries and Changing Assignments in
        Mecklenburg County, North Carolina." Unpublished manuscript 2004.
Kenny, Lawrence W. and Schmidt, Amy B. "The Decline in the Number of School Districts in
        the U.S. : 1950-1980." Public Choice, April 1994, 79(1-2), pp. 1-18.
Kézdi, Gábor. "Robust Standard Error Estimation in Fixed-Effects Panel Models." Mimeo,
        University of Michigan, February 2002.
Krueger, Alan B. and Zhu, Pei. "Another Look at the New York City School Voucher
        Experiment." Princeton University Education Research Section Working Paper #1, April
        2003.
Luizer, James and Thornton, Robert. "Concentration in the Labor Market for Public School
        Teachers." Industrial and Labor Relations Review, July 1986, 39(4), pp. 573-84.
Manski, Charles F. "Identification of Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection Problem." Review
        of Economic Studies, July 1993, 60(3), pp. 531-42.
Mayer, Daniel P.; Peterson, Paul E.; Myers, David E.; Tuttle, Christina Clark and Howell,
        William G. "School Choice in New York City after Three Years: An Evaluation of the
        School Choice Scholarships Program." Mathematica Policy Research, Inc., 2002.
National Center for Education Statistics. "Elementary and Secondary General Information
        System (ELSEGIS): Public School Universe Data, 1969-1970 through 1972-1973." 1973.
Orfield, Gary. Public School Desegregation in the United States, 1968-1980. Washington, D.C.: Joint
        Center for Political Studies, 1983.
Reback, Randall. "Capitalization under School Choice Programs: Are the Winners Really the
        Losers?" National Center for the Study of Privatization in Education Occasional Paper #66,
        December 2002.

                                                  37
Reber, Sarah. "Court-Ordered Desegregation: Successes and Failures Integrating American Schools
       since Brown." Unpublished manuscript, November 2003.
Ross, Stephen and Yinger, John. "Sorting and Voting: A Review of the Literature on Urban
       Public Finance," in P. Cheshire and E. S. Mills, eds., Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics.
       New York: North-Holland, 1999, 2001-60.
Rothstein, Jesse M. "College Performance Predictions and the SAT." Journal of Econometrics, July-
       August 2004a, 121(1-2), pp. 297-317.
____. "Does Competition among Public Schools Benefit Students and Taxpayers? Comment."
       Mimeo, February 2004b.
Rouse, Cecilia Elena. "Private School Vouchers and Student Achievement: An Evaluation of the
       Milwaukee Parental Choice Program." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 1998, 113(2), pp.
       553-602.
Technical Design Group. "Construction of California's 1999 School Characteristics Index and
       Similar Schools Ranks." California Department of Education PSAA Technical Report 00-1,
       2000.
Tiebout, Charles M. "A Pure Theory of Local Public Expenditures." Journal of Political Economy,
       October 1956, 64(5), pp. 416-24.
U.S. Census Bureau. "Census of Population and Housing, 1990 [United States]: Summary Tape
       File 3c." 1993.
____. "Metropolitan Areas and Components, 1990, with FIPS Codes." Web page:
       http://www.census.gov/population/estimates/metro-city/90mfips.txt, 2001.
U.S. Department of Education. "Common Core of Data, Local Education Agency (School
       District) Universe Survey Data." Electronic file, 1990.
U.S. Geological Survey. "Geographic Names Information System." State Gazeteer electronic data,
       2002.
Urquiola, Miguel. "Demand Matters: School District Concentration, Composition, and
       Educational Expenditure." University of California, Berkeley, Center for Labor Economics
       Working Paper #14, April 1999.
Welch, Finis and Light, Audrey. New Evidence on School Desegregation. Washington, D.C.: United
       States Commission on Civil Rights, 1987.
Willms, J. Douglas and Echols, Frank H. "Alert and Inert Clients: The Scottish Experience of
       Parental Choice of Schools." Economics of Education Review, December 1992, 11(4), pp. 339-50.
____. "The Scottish Experience of Parental School Choice," in E. Rasell and R. Rothstein, eds.,
       School Choice: Examining the Evidence. Washington, D.C.: Economic Policy Institute, 1993.




                                                  38
Appendix: Proofs of Propositions

        Note that the budget constraint c = x − h can be introduced directly into the utility function:

                                                                                       ∂ ⎛ ∂U ( x − h , q ) ∂h ⎞
U (c , q ) = U (x − h , q ) . The single-crossing property (eq. 1) implies that           ⎜                      ⎟<0.
                                                                                      ∂x ⎜⎝ ∂U ( x − h , q ) ∂q ⎟⎠

One implication is that family x’s indifference curve through any given point in q-h space is steeper,

the larger is x. This gives us the following Lemma (Epple and Romano, 1996):


Lemma 1. Let q j > q k and h j > hk . With single crossing,

   i.         (            )                                        (            )
        If U x 0 − h j , q j ≥ U (x 0 − hk , q k ) and x > x 0 , U x − h j , q j > U (x − hk , q k ) .

  ii.         (            )                                        (            )
        If U x 0 − h j , q j ≤ U (x 0 − hk , q k ) and x < x 0 , U x − h j , q j < U (x − hk , q k ) .


Proof of Lemma 1. I prove part i; the remainder follows directly by a similar argument. Consider S,

                                                                                                   (
the indifference curve of family x0 through (q k , hk ) in q-h space. By assumption, q j , h j lies on or    )
above S. From single crossing, for any x > x 0 and any (q , h ) ∈ S , x’s indifference curve through (q,

h) is steeper than S. This implies that x’s indifference curve through (q k , hk ) lies strictly above S for

all q > q k , and, in particular, that it lies above S at q = q j . The result follows directly. 


Proof of Proposition 1. Let rG ( j ) be the mapping from community index numbers to quality rank

                                                                             (
                                                                                               (         )
in some allocation rule G, so q j > q k ⇔ rG ( j ) < rG ( k ) . Also, define x j ≡ F −1 1 − Njn as the income

of the jn wealthiest family. The Proposition states that the following are necessary conditions for G

to be an equilibrium allocation with housing price vector ( h1 , K , h J ):

   i.    h j > hk whenever rG ( j ) < rG (k ) ,

               (
  ii.   if x ≥ x 1 , then rG (G( x )) = 1 , and

                                                           39
           (            (
 iii.   if x j −1 > x ≥ x j for j = 2, K , J , then rG (G (x )) = j .

        I prove this by contradiction. (i) is easily dismissed: If rG ( j ) < rG (k ) but h j ≤ hk , then j

dominates k in every family’s preferences. To satisfy EQ2, G −1 (k ) must be the empty set. But a

community cannot be empty, by EQ1 and N > n ( J − 1) , so this is impossible.

        Now assume that (i) holds, but (ii) or (iii) does not. There must be some community j, with
                                       (
rank r = rG ( j ) < J , and some x 0 ≥ x r , such that rG (G( x 0 )) > r . This, in turn, requires that there be

                                                                        (
some k, with rG (k ) ≤ r , such that either G (x 1 ) = k for some x 1 < x r or ∫ 1(G (x ) = k )dF ( x ) < n N .

The first possibility violates EQ2, by Lemma 1. The second, with EQ1, implies hk = 0 ; in this case,

no community with quality less than qk (of which there must be at least one, since rG (k ) ≤ r < J )

attracts any residents with nonnegative prices. Again, there are not enough communities for one to

be empty, so this is impossible. 


Proof of Proposition 2. I prove the Proposition by construction. First, without loss of generality,

let the µ j s be sorted in descending order: µ j > µ j +1 for all j < J . As before, let

(
           (
x j ≡ F −1 1 −   jn
                      N   ),   j = 1, K , J − 1 . Define an allocation rule:

                                               ⎧1               (
                                                     for x ≥ x 1 ;
                                      ~        ⎪         (            (
                                      G (x ) = ⎨ j   for x j −1 > x ≥ x j , j = 2, K , J ;                    (A5)
                                               ⎪J        (
                                                     for x J −1 > x .
                                               ⎩

This rule assigns the n highest-income families to district 1—the district with the highest µ —the

next n families to district 2; and so on. Let

                                        ⎧0                                             for j = J
                                                          ) ((                     )
                                  ~ ⎪~                     (
                                  h j = ⎨h + q − q U 2 x j − h j +1 , q j +1
                                                (                                      for j < J .            (A6)
                                        ⎪ j +1
                                        ⎩
                                               j  j +1     (
                                                       U 1 x j − h j +1 , q j +1   )

                                                               40
                           ~         ~        ~
                                                      {            }
        I demonstrate that G (⋅) and h1 , K , h J are an equilibrium. EQ1 is clear by construction.

                ~          (
Note that under h , family x j is indifferent between j and j+1, so EQ2 comes directly from Lemma

                    ~
1. By definition of G (⋅) , x j > x k whenever µ j > µk , so q j = x j δ + µ j > x kδ + µ k = q k for any

δ ≥ 0 , so in particular q j ≠ q k .


Proof of Proposition 3. By Proposition 1, equilibrium allocations amount to permutations of J bins

of the income distribution among the J communities, with the restriction that wealthier families live

in higher-quality districts. When δ = 0 , q j ≡ x j δ + µ j ≡ µ j , so the only possible quality ranking is

the ranking by effectiveness and only one permutation is admissible. (When δ > 0 , a high-income

population can allow an ineffective school to outrank an effective one.)

        In order to maintain this permutation as an equilibrium, housing prices must separate the

income bins, so that the lowest-income family in bin j prefers district j to the next-lower-ranked

district, while the next-lower-income family has the opposite preferences. The price vector

described in the proof of Proposition 2 accomplishes this. If the income distribution is continuous,

any change to that vector would change some family’s choices so would be impermissible in
                                                      (                (
equilibrium. With a discrete income distribution, any x j satisfying F x j ≡ 1 −                              ( )       jn
                                                                                                                             N   could be used to

form prices that would satisfy EQ2 with the perfectly-effectiveness-sorted allocation. 


Proof of Proposition 4. Let G be an allocation rule satisfying Proposition 1 such that qG ( y ) > qG (w )

                                              (
whenever y > w and G ( y ) ≠ G (w ) , and let x j and rG ( j ) be as above. Define housing prices

                             ⎧0                                                                                   for   j=J
                  ~          ⎪
                  hr ( j ) = ⎨~
                              h r ( j +1 ) +
                                             U2   (
                                                  ( ~
                                                                                 )(
                                                  x j − hrG ( j +1) , q rG ( j +1)
                                                                                   q r ( j ) − q rG ( j +1)   )         j < J.
                                                                                                                                             (A7)
                             ⎪
                             ⎩               U1   (
                                                  ( ~
                                                                                 )
                                                  x j − hrG ( j +1) , q rG ( j +1) G
                                                                                                                  for




                                                                        41
for j < J . These housing prices, together with G, form an equilibrium. EQ1 and EQ3 follow
                                                                              (
directly from the assumptions. The housing prices make the family with income x j indifferent

between the jth and (j+1)th ranked communities. EQ2 then follows directly from Lemma 1. 




                                               42
Figure 1: Illustrative allocations of school effectiveness and community desirability.

      Panel A: The perfectly effectiveness-sorted allocation in a 3-             Panel B: An imperfectly effectiveness-sorted equilibrium
      district market                                                            allocation in a 3-district market
 6                                                                          6
                 Effectiveness                                                             Effectiveness
                 Peer group                                                                Peer group
 4               Perceived quality with δ=1.5                               4              Perceived quality with δ=1.5


 2                                                                          2


 0                                                                          0


 -2                                                                         -2
      0   0.1    0.2    0.3    0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7           0.8    0.9     1        0   0.1    0.2   0.3    0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7          0.8       0.9   1
                              Income percentile                                                         Income percentile


      Panel C: The perfectly effectiveness-sorted allocation in a 10-            Panel D: An imperfectly effectiveness-sorted equilibrium
      district market                                                            allocation in a 10-district market
 6                                                                          6
                 Effectiveness                                                              Effectiveness
                 Peer group                                                                 Peer group
 4               Perceived quality with δ=1.5                               4               Perceived quality with δ=1.5


 2                                                                          2


 0                                                                          0


-2                                                                          -2
      0   0.1    0.2    0.3    0.4   0.5    0.6   0.7    0.8    0.9     1        0   0.1    0.2   0.3    0.4   0.5    0.6   0.7   0.8       0.9   1
                              Income percentile                                                         Income percentile


      Panel E: An imperfectly effectiveness-sorted nonequilibrium
      allocation in a 10-district market
 6
                 Effectiveness
                 Peer group
 4               Perceived quality with δ=1.5


 2


 0


 -2
      0   0.1    0.2    0.3    0.4   0.5    0.6    0.7   0.8    0.9     1
                              Income percentile
Figure 2: Effectiveness experienced in average simulation equilibrium, by income
percentile, number of districts, and parental concern for peer group.
                                     Panel A: No concern for peer group (δ=0)                       Panel B: Small concern for peer group (δ=1.5)
                            2                                                              2
                                                3 Districts
                            1                   10 Districts                               1


                            0                                                              0


                            -1                                                             -1
School Effectiveness (µ )




                            -2                                                             -2
                                 0     0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9            1         0     0.1 0.2    0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7        0.8 0.9   1

                                     Panel C: Moderate concern for peer group (δ=3)                 Panel D: Large concern for peer group (δ=6)
                            2                                                              2


                            1                                                              1


                            0                                                              0


                            -1                                                             -1


                            -2                                                             -2
                                 0     0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9            1         0     0.1 0.2    0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7        0.8 0.9   1


                                                                            Income Percentile (F (x ))
Notes: Each horizontal line segment represents the effectiveness of schools attended by families in the indicated income range,
averaged over 5,000 simulated equilibria. See text for details.
Figure 3: Slope of effectiveness with respect to average income in simulated
equilibria, by number of districts and δ .

              1

                                         δ =0
            0.8
                                             δ =1
            0.6
    dµ dx




            0.4                                      δ =2


            0.2                                               δ =3
                                                                          δ =4
                                                                                            δ =6
              0                                                                                                δ =8

            -0.2
                     2           3           4            5           6           7           8            9          10
                                                          Number of districts

Notes: Each point represents the coefficient from a district-level regression of effectiveness on equilibrium average income,
using as data 5,000 simulated markets (with the indicated number of districts in each market and with parental preferences
characterized by the indicated δ ) and including a fixed effect for each market. See text for details.
Figure 4: School-level student characteristics-test score relationships.

Panel A: NELS
                                          1500
      Average 8th-Grade Composite Score




                                          1400
                                          1300
                                          1200
                                          1100
                                          1000
                                           900
                                           800
                                           700                                     t jm = α m + 1.66 * x jm + e jm
                                           600                                 (                        )
                                                                          corr t jm − t m , x jm − x m = 0.84
                                           500
                                              800   900              1000            1100                            1200
                                                          Average Student Background

Panel B: SAT
                                          1500
                                          1400
                                          1300
            Average SAT Score




                                          1200
                                          1100
                                          1000
                                           900
                                           800
                                           700
                                                                               t jm = α m + 1.74 * x jm + e jm
                                           600
                                                                              (                         )
                                                                          corr t jm − t m , x jm − x m = 0.86
                                           500
                                              800   900              1000            1100                            1200
                                                          Average Student Background


Notes: Each circle represents one school. Only 10 percent of sample schools are shown in Panel B. Circle areas are
proportional to the sum of sampling weights in the school, adjusted at the MSA level to weight MSAs in proportion to their 17-
year-old populations; factors of proportionality differ between panels.
Figure 5: Kernel estimates of the student background-test score relationship, by
choice quartile.
Panel A: NELS 8th-grade data

                                            1200      Least-choice quartile
     Kernel mean, average score at school




                                                      3rd quartile
                                                      2nd quartile
                                            1100
                                                      Greatest-choice quartile

                                            1000


                                             900


                                             800


                                             700
                                                850   900             950           1000           1050      1100
                                                             Average student background index at school

Panel B: SAT data

                                            1200
   Kernel mean, average score at school




                                            1100


                                            1000


                                             900


                                             800


                                             700
                                                850   900             950           1000           1050      1100
                                                             Average student background index at school

Notes: Sample MSAs are divided into quartiles by their choice indices. The quartile thresholds are index values of 0.74, 0.85, and
0.92. Within each quartile, the indicated functions are estimated school-level kernel means, using an Epanechnikov kernel
(bandwidth 10 in Panel A, 3 in Panel B); graphs depict estimates over the middle 96 percent of school-level background index
values. Schools are weighted by the sum of NELS/SAT sampling weights, adjusted at the MSA level to weight MSAs by their 17-
year-old populations.
Table 1: Summary statistics for MSAs, individuals, and schools.

                                                              All MSAs                       MSAs in SAT states
                                                           MA-level                                      MA-level
                                                          correlation                                   correlation
                                           Mean S.D. with choice                          Mean S.D. with choice
                                            (A)     (B)       (C)                          (D)   (E)        (F)
Panel A: MSA-level variables                       N = 320                                       N = 179
 Choice index (over districts' HS enroll.) 0.76    0.25       1.00                         0.75 0.26        1.00
 ln(Population)                            14.00 1.21         0.20                        14.17 1.18        0.10
 Pop.: Fr. Black                            0.13   0.09      -0.18                         0.12 0.09       -0.25
 Pop.: Fr. Hispanic                         0.11   0.14      -0.19                         0.14 0.15       -0.18
 Mean log HH income                        10.23 0.19         0.34                        10.27 0.20        0.36
 Gini, HH income                            0.43   0.03      -0.39                         0.43 0.03       -0.45
 Pop: Fr. BA+                               0.22   0.06       0.16                         0.23 0.06        0.21
 Finance: Foundation Plan rule              0.71   0.44      -0.07                         0.65 0.46       -0.03
 Finance: d(oper. exp.)/d(median inc.)      3.17   2.70       0.19                         3.09 2.93        0.11
 South                                     32%               -0.30                        36%              -0.29
 SAT-taking rate                            0.28   0.14       0.08                         0.36 0.08        0.30
 Private enrollment share (HS)              0.11   0.05      -0.10                         0.11 0.05       -0.19
 Racial dissimilarity index, high schools   0.49   0.14       0.36                         0.47 0.13        0.28
 Racial isolation index, high schools       0.28   0.16       0.22                         0.28 0.14        0.17
 1942 choice index                          0.92   0.20       0.35                         0.91 0.23        0.41
 Number of streams in MSA                   271     222       0.71                         283   214        0.73
Panel B: Individual samples                    NELS (N = 15,589)                          SAT-takers (N = 330,688)
 NELS 8th-grade test / SAT                 1012     203       0.26                         995   201        0.29
 NELS continuation rate                    85%                0.04
 Black                                     15%               -0.22                         12%              -0.32
 Hispanic                                  12%               -0.21                         12%              -0.23
 Asian                                      5%               -0.18                         10%              -0.04
 Female                                    50%               -0.06                         55%              -0.28
 Family income ($000s)                      $43     $39       0.09                         $46    $26        0.43
 Background index                          1012      77       0.23                         995     82        0.40
Panel C: School samples                          NELS (N = 748)                             SAT-takers (N = 5,779)
 Test score (NELS/SAT) mean                1012     104       0.26                         995     95        0.29
 Size (students per grade)                  263     430      -0.07                         387    211       -0.44
 Mean background index                     1012      52       0.23                         995     48        0.40
 Public                                     0.84              0.09                         0.90              0.42
 Number of SAT-takers                                                                      179    116       -0.19
 SAT-taking rate                                                                           0.49   0.195      0.31
Notes: MSA-level statistics are weighted by the MSA 17-year-old population. Individual NELS and SAT-taker data are
weighted by inverse sampling probabilities, and school means by the sum of individual weights; both are adjusted at the
MSA level to weight MSAs in proportion to their 17-year-old populations.
Table 2: Choice as a predictor of private enrollment rates and of the racial
segregation of schools.

                                                             Measures of White/Non-White Segregation
                                     MA Private
                                                                 Dissimilarity          Isolation
                                   Enrollment Rate
                                                              All HS Public HS All HS Public HS
                               (A)                (B)           (C)         (D)     (E)          (F)
Choice index                 -0.047             -0.054         0.13        0.15     0.12         0.16
                             (0.014)            (0.013)       (0.03)      (0.04)  (0.04)        (0.05)
ln(Population) / 100           0.99               0.75         -0.42       -0.52   -2.99        -3.89
                              (0.29)             (0.28)       (0.83)      (0.93)  (2.41)        (2.72)
Pop.: Fr. Black                0.12               0.07         0.16        0.08     0.24         0.06
                              (0.05)             (0.07)       (0.11)      (0.13)  (0.18)        (0.20)
Pop.: Fr. Hispanic            -0.05              -0.05         0.05        0.06     0.00        -0.04
                              (0.03)             (0.03)       (0.04)      (0.05)  (0.07)        (0.07)
Mean log HH income             0.03               0.02         0.01        0.00     0.17         0.18
                              (0.03)             (0.03)       (0.04)      (0.05)  (0.09)        (0.10)
Gini, HH income                0.29               0.16         0.05        -0.13    0.64         0.45
                              (0.17)             (0.16)       (0.27)      (0.31)  (0.50)        (0.56)
Pop: Fr. BA+                   0.04               0.12         0.05        0.13    -0.21        -0.21
                              (0.06)             (0.07)       (0.16)      (0.17)  (0.32)        (0.35)
Finance: Fndtn. Plan           0.02               0.02         -0.01       -0.01   -0.06        -0.06
                              (0.01)             (0.01)       (0.02)      (0.02)  (0.05)        (0.06)
Finance: Slope /100            0.16               0.17         0.23        0.15    -0.30        -0.64
                              (0.19)             (0.17)       (0.38)      (0.44)  (0.67)        (0.74)
Tract-level segregation measures
   Dissimilarity Index                           0.03           1.06           1.11           0.25           0.26
                                                (0.07)         (0.13)         (0.14)         (0.24)         (0.27)
    Isolation Index                              0.06          -0.25          -0.20           0.61           0.72
                                                (0.08)         (0.11)         (0.13)         (0.15)         (0.17)
    X-tract share of                            -0.06           0.33           0.33           0.37           0.45
    variance, log(HH inc.)                      (0.09)         (0.16)         (0.19)         (0.33)         (0.38)

    2
R                                    0.52        0.53           0.84           0.82           0.70           0.67

Notes: Observations are MSAs; N=318 (287 in Columns C-F, which exclude MSAs missing racial composition for
schools with more than 25 percent of enrollment). All models include fixed effects for 8 census divisions. All standard
errors are clustered on the (C)MSA.
Table 3: Choice and the within-MSA average outcome-peer group gradient.

                                                        NELS                                          SAT data
                                    8th-grade score      HS continuation per 1000                     SAT score
                                  (A)      (B)   (C)       (D)     (E)      (F)                  (G)    (H)      (I)
Average student                   1.70    1.78 1.78        1.67    1.71     1.71                 1.74 1.68      1.68
background index                (0.06) (0.07) (0.07)      (0.13) (0.18) (0.18)                  (0.02) (0.02) (0.01)
Interactions of average background index with MSA-level:
* Choice index                   -0.19 -0.07 -0.15        -0.76   -1.30    -1.28                -0.24 -0.04       0.05
                                (0.17) (0.51) (0.47)      (0.44) (1.02) (1.30)                  (0.08) (0.13)   (0.13)
* ln(Population) / 100                    -0.06 -0.12             -0.04    -0.07                        3.31     3.07
                                         (0.09) (0.11)            (0.25) (0.33)                        (2.49)   (3.05)
* Pop.: Frac. Black                       -1.11 4.97              -1.91    -1.34                       -0.17     -2.86
                                         (1.28) (5.07)            (4.55) (12.30)                       (0.34)   (0.98)
* Pop.: Frac. Hispanic                    0.20 3.48                0.87     0.85                        0.11     -1.89
                                         (0.71) (3.62)            (1.63) (8.38)                        (0.18)   (0.64)
* Mean log HH income                      -0.88 -1.23             -0.04    -0.24                        0.06     -0.06
                                         (0.89) (0.82)            (2.09) (2.06)                        (0.19)   (0.16)
* Gini, HH income                         -0.26 -7.47             -4.89    -7.34                        2.14     1.73
                                         (5.33) (4.75)           (11.73) (13.22)                       (1.31)   (1.40)
* Pop: Frac. BA+                          2.21 7.91                2.40     4.40                        1.81     1.78
                                         (3.00) (4.00)            (6.49) (11.63)                       (0.44)   (0.64)
* Finance: Slope / 100                    -0.25 -5.13              6.06     4.41                       -0.34     -0.54
                                         (5.18) (5.22)           (13.53) (15.19)                       (0.88)   (0.77)
* Finance: Fndtn. Plan                    -0.11 -0.23              0.29     0.25                        0.02     0.00
                                         (0.20) (0.22)            (0.51) (0.57)                        (0.07)   (0.05)
* ln(Pop. density) / 10                          2.61                       0.74                                 0.01
                                                (1.38)                     (5.56)                               (0.30)
* Pop: Frac. LTHS                                7.29                       2.85                                 0.79
                                                (3.88)                    (11.30)                               (0.80)
                        2
* Pop: Frac. White                               4.31                       0.53                                 -1.62
                                                (3.13)                     (7.52)                               (0.54)
* MSA SAT-taking rate                                                                            1.49 0.86       0.95
                                                                                                (0.59) (0.43) (0.39)
# schools / MSAs                      741 / 209                     723 / 207                         5,711 / 177
R2                               0.79    0.80 0.80             0.54   0.58    0.58               0.78 0.78       0.78

Notes: Dependent variable is the weighted score (or continuation rate in columns D-F) at the school. NELS scores are
standardized to the same individual mean (1000) and standard deviation (200) as SATs. Schools are weighted by the sum of
individual sampling weights, with an MSA-level adjustment to weight MSAs by their 17-year-old populations. MSA-level
explanatory variables are demeaned before being interacted with the school-average background index. All models include
MSA fixed effects and interactions of the background index with demeaned census division dummies, and standard errors are
clustered at the (C)MSA level (Kezdi, 2002).
Table 4: Alternate specifications.
                                                                   Peer group          Peer gp.-choice Number
                                                                   main effect           interaction      of
                                                                  Coeff. S.E.          Coeff. S.E.     schools
                                                                   (A)     (B)          (C)      (D)     (E)
Panel A: NELS Sample (8th-grade scores)
    1. Basic model                                                 1.78      (0.07)      -0.07     (0.51)        741
Alternative background controls
    2. Interact bkgd. with school sample size poly.                1.62      (0.10)      -0.17     (0.51)        741
    3. Control for S.D. of peer group at school                    1.77      (0.07)      -0.06     (0.50)        739
    4. Control for school racial composition                       2.02      (0.08)      -0.08     (0.46)        741
    5. Student bkgd. is avg. income ($1,000s)                      3.64      (0.26)       0.72     (1.27)        741
Alternative samples
    6. Sample excludes private schools                             1.68      (0.08)       0.02     (0.61)        559
    7. Sample excludes 1-district MSAs                             1.78      (0.07)      -0.11     (0.61)        711
    8. Sample also excludes central city districts                 1.76      (0.10)      -0.13     (0.66)        518
Alternative choice measures
    9. SAT-taker choice index                                      1.79       0.07       -0.43     (0.52)        741
   10. SES choice index                                            1.78       0.07       -0.08     (0.56)        741
Instrumental variables estimates
   11. IV: Streams as instrument                                   1.77      (0.07)       0.11     (0.99)        741
   12. IV: 1942 choice as instrument                               1.82      (0.08)      -1.28     (1.00)        741
Panel B: SAT Sample
    1. Basic model                                                 1.68      (0.02)      -0.04     (0.13)       5,711
Alternative school-level controls
    2. Interact bkgd. with school sample size poly.                1.65      (0.02)      -0.02     (0.13)       5,711
    3. Control for S.D. of peer group at school                    1.68      (0.01)      -0.10     (0.12)       5,566
    4. Control for school racial composition                       2.09      (0.08)      -0.08     (0.10)       5,711
    5. Student bkgd. is avg. income ($1,000s)                      5.42      (0.07)       0.60     (0.50)       5,674
Alternative samples
    6. Sample excludes private schools                             1.66      (0.02)      -0.04     (0.13)       4,454
    7. Sample excludes 1-district MSAs                             1.71      (0.01)      -0.36     (0.15)       5,460
    8. Sample also excludes central city districts                 1.79      (0.03)      -0.48     (0.27)       4,331
Alternative choice measures
    9. SAT-taker choice index                                      1.68       0.02       -0.01     (0.14)       5,711
   10. SES choice index                                            1.68       0.02       -0.03     (0.13)       5,711
  9A. SAT-taker index, high SAT participation schls                1.69       0.02       -0.14     (0.21)       3,388
 10A. SES index, high SAT participation schls                      1.69       0.02       -0.18     (0.19)       3,388
Instrumental variables estimates
   11. IV: Streams as instrument                                   1.68      (0.02)      -0.28     (0.34)       5,711
   12. IV: 1942 choice as instrument                               1.68      (0.02)       0.22     (0.22)       5,711
Notes: "Basic model" in row 1 is that from Table 3, Column B or H. Remaining rows reestimate this model with small
changes to the specification or sample. Rows 11-12 instrument the student background-choice interaction with the
interaction of background and the listed instrument. See text for details.
Table 5: Tests for bias from selection into SAT-taking.

                                                                   Peer group          Peer gp.-choice       N
                                                                   main effect            interaction   (schools /
                                                                  Coeff. S.E.          Coeff.     S.E.   districts)
                                                                   (A)     (B)           (C)      (D)       (E)
 1. Basic model                                                    1.68 (0.02)          -0.04    (0.13)    5,711
 2. Control for school SAT-taking rate                             1.54 (0.03)           0.03    (0.13)    5,711
 3. Sample: School SAT-taking rate above MA avg.                   1.69 (0.02)          -0.19    (0.17)    3,388
 4. Sample reweighted using class rank                             1.68 (0.02)           0.06    (0.14)    4,606
District-level models
 5. Basic model                                      1.60                    (0.04)     -0.08      (0.22)        2,570
 6. Peer group is median log HH income in dist.      206.8                   (14.5)     129.3      (54.9)        2,487
 7. Peer group is median log HH income in dist.;
      dependent variable is SAT background index     121.6                   (3.5)       48.6      (28.9)        2,487
 8. Peer group is median log HH income in dist., but
      include control for avg. SAT background        12.0                    (22.6)      51.5      (32.8)        2,487

Notes: "Basic model" in row 1 is that from Table 3, Column H. Remaining rows reestimate this model with small changes to
the specification, sample, or weighting. See text for details.
Table 6: Across-MSA models for average SAT scores.

                                                                                                    IV
                                                       OLS                                          1942
                                                                                     Streams                   Both
                                                                                                  Choice
                              (A)              (B)   (C)    (D)     (E)                  (F)         (G)        (H)
Choice index                  38.9           -17.2 -25.4 -25.3 -23.8                   -68.3       -17.5       -24.5
                             (12.1)           (8.2) (7.6) (5.7) (7.0)                  (19.4)       (6.9)       (6.1)
Inv. Mills, MSA SAT-taking rate               -7.7   3.7    30.2 30.4                   15.5        32.9        30.5
                                             (11.5) (10.8) (7.6) (8.0)                 (15.4)       (7.8)       (7.9)
Average student background                    1.54   1.78 1.82 1.87                     2.04        1.78        1.81
                                             (0.07) (0.07) (0.20) (0.21)               (0.20)      (0.18)      (0.18)
ln(Population)                                       5.69 1.77 1.20                     5.48        1.09        1.70
                                                    (1.28) (1.40) (1.86)               (2.40)      (1.33)      (1.31)
Pop.: Fr. Black                                               25     17                   59          19         24
                                                            (32)   (40)                 (33)        (29)        (30)
Pop.: Fr. Hispanic                                            46     39                   62          43         46
                                                            (16)   (24)                 (23)        (15)        (16)
Mean log HH income                                           3.4   -0.5                 -4.4          4.8        3.5
                                                            (7.6) (7.8)                (10.3)       (7.7)       (7.5)
Gini, HH income                                              -83    -88                 -297         -44         -79
                                                            (50)   (53)                (106)        (73)        (63)
Pop: Fr. BA+                                                 121    111                   84         128         122
                                                            (33)   (36)                 (40)        (30)        (31)
Finance: Slope / 100                                         1.5    1.5                  2.1          1.4        1.5
                                                            (0.6) (0.6)                 (0.8)       (0.6)       (0.6)
Finance: Fndtn. Plan                                        -1.9   -1.9                  3.4         -2.9       -2.0
                                                            (2.9) (2.9)                 (3.7)       (3.8)       (3.2)
ln(Pop. density)                                                    1.5
                                                                   (2.3)
Pop: Fr. LTHS                                                      -1.6
                                                                  (33.5)
                 2
Pop: Fr. White                                                     -8.3
                                                                  (22.5)
Census divis. effects                 n         n     n        y      y                  y            y           y

R2                                  0.09      0.81      0.88     0.92      0.93
P-value, exog. test                                                                     0.01        0.20        0.89

Notes: N=177 MSAs in SAT states. Dependent variable is the weighted average SAT score across all sample students
attending schools in the MSA; MSAs are weighted by their 17-year-old populations. Standard errors are clustered on the
(C)MSA.
