NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HEALTH IN AN AGE OF GLOBALIZATION
Angus Deaton
Working Paper 10669
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10669
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2004

Prepared for the Brookings Trade Forum, Brookings Institution, Washington, DC., May 13th- 14th, 2004. I
am grateful to Henry Aaron, Sir George Alleyne, Gary Burtless, Anne Case, Lincoln Chen, Susan Collins,
Janet Currie, Richard Easterlin, Helen Epstein, Carol Graham, Davidson Gwatkin, William Jack, Sandy
Jencks, Adriana Lleras-Muney, John Hobcraft, Martin Ravallion, Rodrigo Soares, and Jim Smith for
comments and help in the preparation of this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Angus Deaton. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Health in an Age of Globalization
Angus Deaton
NBER Working Paper No. 10669
August 2004
JEL No. F1, I1, I31, O1, O3
ABSTRACT
Disease has traveled with goods and people since the earliest times. Armed globalization spread
disease, to the extent of eliminating entire populations. The geography of disease shaped patterns
of colonization and industrialization throughout the now poor world. Many see related threats to
public health from current globalization. Multilateral and bilateral trade agreements do not always
adequately represent the interests of poor countries, the General Agreement on Trade in Services
may restrict the freedom of signatories to shape their own health delivery systems, and it remains
unclear whether current arrangements for intellectual property rights are in the interests of citizens
of poor countries with HIV/AIDS. However, to the extent that globalization promotes economic
growth, population health may benefit, and there has been substantial reductions in poverty and in
international inequalities in life-expectancy over the last 50 years. Although there is a strong inverse
relationship between the poverty and life-expectancy in levels, gains in life expectancy have been
only weakly correlated with growth rates and, in the last decade, the HIV/AIDS epidemic has
widened international inequalities in life expectancy. The rapid transmission of health knowledge
and therapies from one rich country to another has led to a swift convergence of adult mortality rates
among the rich of the world, particularly men. Globalization would do much for global health if
transmission from rich to poor countries could be accelerated.
Angus Deaton
328 Wallace Hall
Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1013
and NBER
deaton@princeton.edu

0. Introduction
When economists write about globalization, they focus on the movement of goods, people,
information, and ideas, and they look at the effects on economic growth, poverty and inequality.
Health is not a primary focus of their attention. By contrast, much of the literature in public
health sees globalization as a threat to international health. On the relatively few occasions where
economists have addressed health, they focus on the indirect effects, arguing that the economic
benefits of globalization are good for health—because poverty is the major determinant of health
in poor countries—and that, if there are unwelcome side-effects on health, they can best be dealt
with by suitable public health measures, not by policies that slow the globalization process. Both
sides of this (mostly non-) argument have substance, and one aim of this paper is to present some
of the arguments from the public health literature as seen through the eyes of at least one
economist. There is also much to be learned from looking at previous episodes of globalization,
and at the history of trade and health, and it is with this that I begin.
If it is true that income is the primary determinant of health, at least in poor countries, then
the consequences of globalization for public health depend on its well-researched (although still
disputed) consequences for economic growth, particularly for the poorest countries. Although the
income to health mechanism is undoubtedly present—everything is easier with money, and some
improvements are impossible without it—I argue that the transmission of health related
knowledge is ultimately more important. Social forces, including not only income, but also
education and politics, are central because they govern they way in which new knowledge is
transformed into population health. The health and life-expectancy of the vast majority of
mankind, whether they live in rich countries or poor countries, depends on ideas, techniques, and
2

therapies developed elsewhere, so that it is the spread of knowledge that is the fundamental
determinant of population health. The trade-borne transmission of infectious disease has been the
focus of international health authorities since seventeenth century Italy and remains important
today. But, at least since the middle of the last century, a more important influence has been the
international transmission of ideas, techniques, and technologies. It is plausible that the recent
acceleration of the pace of globalization has been accompanied by faster transmission of health in
rich countries, although it is probably too soon to be sure. But the current lack of treatment of
HIV/AIDS in subSaharan Africa, as well as the annual deaths of 10.5 million children in poor
countries that would not have taken place had they been born in rich countries, are major failures
of globalization to date.

1. Health and globalization in history
Disease has been an unwelcome companion of trade at least since the plague of Athens in 430
BC killed perhaps as much as one third of the population. The black rats, which carried bubonic
and pneumonic plague to Europe in 1347, were most likely carried by trading ships. More than
three hundred years later, the city states of northern Italy developed the first systems of national
and international public health in their attempts to control recurrent episodes of the disease, Carlo
Cippola (1981, 1992). Merchants wanted quarantine restrictions to be internationally coordinated
in order to minimize the disruption to their business, yet even at this early date, health concerns
tended to run second to the needs of trade. In 1630–31, when Pistoia (near Florence) had locked
its gates to quarantine itself against the encroaching plague, and had expelled all foreigners,
mountebanks, and Jews, the city was temporarily opened up to all comers to facilitate the export
3

of its wine, Cipolla (1981, pp53–4.). And in the trade and health dispute between Florence and
Genoa in 1652, quarantines were used to favor domestic over foreign traders as much as to
protect public health. At the same time, the fundamentally mistaken notions of the how the
plague was spread, particularly the overstatement of the risks of person to person contagion, and
the lack of understanding of the role of rats and fleas, led to the imposition of quarantines that
did little to hamper the spread of the plague but which sometimes destroyed the livelihood of a
trade-dependent city, as in Verona in 1575, Cipolla (1992, p. 78). This story of policy-making in
the face of a mistaken understanding and of bitterly contested quarantines was to be repeated into
the 20th Century, see for example Margaret Humphreys on yellow fever in the southern US in the
late 19th century.
The Pan-American Sanitary Bureau (now PAHO) was founded in 1902, and was the first of
the international public health agencies. Like the public health magistrates in seventeenth century
Italy, the original function was to deal with merchants’ dissatisfaction with the lack of
international coordination of health measures. Fifty years earlier, in 1851, the first international
sanitary conference was held in Europe, as the rising volume of international trade, driven by
reductions in costs from better ships and railways, came into conflict with national health
measures. Not only had national quarantine measures failed to halt the spread of cholera during
the epidemics of the first half of the century, but the measures were costly to merchants who
sought international co-ordination, David Fidler (2001). But these concerns did not lead to
international health control until the setting up of the World Health Organization in 1948.
International public health has always been as much concerned with facilitating trade as with
protecting health and, as many writers have noted, when the two come into conflict, as with
4

Pistoia’s wine in 1630, or in the dispute between Florence and Genoa in 1652, trade tends to
trump health. In perhaps the most extreme example, Britain went to war with China in 1839–42
to open Chinese markets to the import of British opium from India.
Disease followed the movement of people as well as of goods. The decimation and even
eradication of the peoples of central America and Oceania by European germs are well-known,
Jared Diamond (1997). In the slave trade between west Africa and the Americas around a sixth of
the victims died during the middle passage, and enough bodies were thrown overboard for sharks
to learn to follow the ships, Encyclopedia Brittanica (2004). Daron Acemoglu, Simon Johnson
and James Robinson (2001, 2002) argue that patterns of colonization were shaped by the
mortality of white imperialists, so that in places where it was unhealthy for colonists to settle, the
imperial powers set up extractive (plantation and mining) regimes for whom the health of the
native population was of little direct concern. These regimes permanently compromised the
development prospects of the countries which were affected. The Bengal famine of 1770, in
which a third of the population died, did not inspire the East India company to suspend its tax
collection, and Emma Rothschild has argued that this example was very much in the minds of
American colonists in the years leading up to the revolution; taxation without representation was
a recipe for impoverishment and famine.
Quarantine is used to control the movement of people, as well as of goods. And as was the
case for goods, health policy for immigrants and travelers is always affected by other factors. The
National Institutes of Health in the United States was set up to research yellow fever and cholera
after the first Federal Quarantine Act of 1878. Only federal (or international) agencies can hope
to solve the coordination and verification problems that arise when local (or national) authorities
5

have unfettered authority to restrict the movement of goods and people. The US Immigration Act
of 1891 excluded those with “loathsome and contagious diseases,” but through a process of
labeling immigrants and ethnic groups as inherently diseased, the quarantine measures became
methods of discrimination and exclusion, even in the absence of threats to public health, Howard
Markel and Alexandra Stern (2002). While it makes obvious sense for a harbor master to refuse
admission to a ship signaling the cholera on board by flying the yellow jack, it is much less clear
that US immigration policies that preclude the entry of those with specified diseases (trachoma a
century ago, AIDS, TB, and syphilis now) has had any positive effect on public health. Indeed,
the US Congress, led by Senator Jesse Helms, made AIDS an excludable disease for immigrants
in 1987 against the opposition of the then Secretary of Health and Human Services. Once again,
the public health was subservient to domestic political needs.

2. Globalization and health: arguments from economics and public health
Although several economists have addressed the health consequences of globalization, health is
most notable by its absence from even critical discussions of globalizations in the economics
literature. Michael Bordo, Alan Taylor, and Jeffrey Williamson’s (2003) edited volume on the
history of globalization has no chapter on health, nor does health appear in the index, an absence
shared by the terms “colonialism” and “slavery,” as noted by Branco Milanovic (2003). The
recent (2004) report of the World Commission on the Social Dimensions of Globalization, whose
membership included globalization critic Joseph Stiglitz, gives only cursory mention to
international health, confining its references to HIV/AIDS and TRIPS (trade-related aspects of
intellectual property rights). Health is evidently not one of the discontents of globalization. The
6

World Bank’s 2002 flagship publication on globalization, Globalization, growth and poverty,
written by Paul Collier and David Dollar, lists good health and good healthcare provision, along
with education, as essential preconditions for successful globalization, a view that is shared by
many of those who are more critical of globalization, such as Andrea Cornia (2001). Indeed,
since the conditions are not met in much of the world, including most of Africa, this argument is
consistent with the critics’ view that globalization is often harmful to health in the poorest
countries of the world.
For economists who are broadly in favor of globalization, the story about health runs
something as follows. Stanley Fischer (2003) notes that much of the current disagreement is
factual, whether or not human wellbeing has improved over the past two or three decades. And
as he points out, both life expectancy and child mortality have improved dramatically since 1970,
with the notable exceptions, particularly after 1990, of subSaharan Africa, and to a somewhat
lesser extent, the countries of the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe. That globalization
might have had something to do with these improvements comes from the idea that higher
incomes promote better health. In the 1980s and 1990s, there was a broad increase in world
incomes, and a reduction in poverty, both as a fraction of the world’s population, and in absolute
numbers. What happened to income inequality is disputed, but the most favorable view,
associated with David Dollar and Aart Kraay (2001), is that there was no relationship between
growth and changes in income inequality so that, on average over countries, the growth in
incomes of the poor was the same as growth at the mean, so that growth was a powerful engine
of poverty reduction. Although this argument has many problems—the data on inequality are not
very good, GDP growth may be overstated and many of the items that are growing more rapidly
7

neither reach the poor nor are covered in the inequality statistics, Angus Deaton (2004)—there is
little doubt that there has been real poverty reduction in the world as a whole. The link between
income and health in poor countries is typically thought to be strong, Samuel Preston (1975,
1980), Lawrence Summers and Lant Pritchett (1998), so that it is entirely plausible that
globalization-induced poverty reduction has improved population health.
Even the strongest defenders of globalization note qualifications. Cheaper and faster travel
enhances the dangers of the spread of infectious diseases. When travel was by sea, most
infectious diseases would pass through the incubation period during the voyage and the ship
could be prevented from landing. But a traveler could go six times round the world during the
incubation period of SARS, Sir George Alleyne (2004). The spread of HIV/AIDS was certainly
accelerated by the ease and volume of modern travel. Yet it is surely not the case that reversing
or slowing globalization, even if it were possible, is the appropriate policy response, Dollar
(2001). Indeed it can been argued that the same speeding up of communications makes the
response to the disease faster and more effective, see in particular the WHO’s description of its
response to SARS, WHO (2004). Dollar also notes that the international architecture, particularly
the WTO and TRIPS agreements, needs to be set up in a way that ensures that the health of the
poor is not threatened, for example by undermining occupational or environmental health.
The literature in the health sciences takes a more negative view of globalization. Some of the
difference is that non-economists take a broad definition of globalization, encompassing not only
the international transfer of goods, information, and ideas, but also such policies as privatization,
user fees, and structural adjustment programs. In much of this literature, globalization is seen, not
as a voluntary expansion of exchange, but as the forced adoption of American models of social
8

and economic arrangements. Even when such models would not be freely chosen, developing
countries have little choice in the matter because they have little effective power in the
international organizations, such as the World Bank, the IMF, and the World Trade Organization,
which are dominated by western, and particularly American interests. Poor countries lack both
the financial and human resources that would allow them to be equal participants in the
international bodies in which decisions are taken that affect them and, beyond that, in setting the
rules under which the international system operates. Globalization is seen as completing the
unfinished business of colonization, Ronald Labonte (2003).
One particular source of (widely shared) concern is the 1995 General Agreement on Trade in
Services (GATS), whose (not very clearly defined) provisions can be read as requiring
governments to open national health services to international commercial suppliers of health
services and health insurance; indeed, only “service provided in the exercise of government
authority” are clearly excluded, not those supplied “on a commercial basis, nor in competition
with one or more service suppliers,” Aaditya Mattoo (2003). Such provisions may limit the
ability of governments to design and operate their own health systems, and are seen by many as a
threat to public health. Privatization of health services, even if incomes are growing rapidly (and
perhaps especially if income are growing rapidly), is seen as a threat to the health of the poor,
who are typically served (if at all) by public provision. That there are grounds for such concern is
illustrated by the much slower improvement in population health in China that accompanied the
rapid economic growth after the reforms, Jean Drèze and Amartya Sen (2002, Chapter 4.) The
assessment of the GATS by Leah Belsky et al (2004) suggests that the worst fears may be
exaggerated, but the authors acknowledge that there is a great deal of uncertainty about how the
9

agreement will operate. There are also concerns about bilateral trade agreements, particularly
between the US and other countries, in which the interests of the US pharmaceutical companies
are strongly represented. Press reports indicate that countries, in exchange for access to American
markets, are pressed to impose high local prices for drugs, threatening the health of their own
citizens, as well as to restrict re-exportation of drugs to the US, threatening the health of
Americans.
The multinational (especially American) pharmaceutical industry is under attack by the
opponents of globalization for putting profits ahead of lives. Defenders accuse their critics of
wilfully misunderstanding the trade-offs involved between funding research and selling drugs,
although it is not always clear how much of the basic research was funded by the companies as
opposed to US taxpayers through NIH. US trade policy is seen as serving corporate interests,
particularly those of the pharmaceutical industry. One acrimonious debate has been over the $15
billion promised by the Bush administration for fighting AIDS, and whether these funds may be
spent on the cheaper (and likely more effective) anti-retroviral drugs manufactured in India. Even
so, it is far from clear that the unavailability of patented drugs is the main barrier to population
health in poor countries, many of whom have weak health delivery systems that already fail to
deliver many essential drugs that are not under patent. Other multinational corporations,
particularly in tobacco and food, are also seen as a threat to public health. Smoking began as a
luxury for the rich in rich countries, but as the health risks became apparent, it became a habit of
the poor in rich countries. Even that is now under threat, as public health legislation, law suits,
and taxation make it more and more difficult to sell tobacco in the west. Consumers in poor
countries may be the next safe haven for tobacco, and while WTO rules allow governments to
10

control tobacco sales, provided they do not discriminate between domestic and foreign brands,
some countries worry that their ability to regulate is no match for well-funded international
corporations. Food companies are also seen as a threat, and the WHO and other health writers
emphasize the growing “epidemic” of obesity in poor countries, noting that Africa is now the
only continent in which the majority of deaths are from infectious diseases, rather from heart
disease and cancer, World Health Report (2004). Of course, the rise in non-communicable
disease is in large part the result of reductions in infectious disease child mortality, both of which
are entirely positive developments. And some of the increase in obesity comes from the fact that
fewer people in poor countries now engage in manual labor; and even in the US, there is far from
general agreement on the causes of recent increases in obesity, and what role, if any, has been
played by fast food companies, see for example David Cutler, Edward Glaeser, and Jesse Shapiro
(2003.)
Anti-globalizers also challenge the economists on their own ground. They question whether
globalization has promoted economic growth in general, and argue that it has widened income
inequalities, both within countries, and between them. Contrary to the standard economic model
in which more open trade reduces the return to labor in the labor-scarce north, while increasing it
in the labor-rich south, thus narrowing the difference between them, they argue that globalization
has benefitted the rich and hurt the poor in both the north and the south, while leaving behind (or
making worse off) whole countries that are unable to participate in globalization, because they
lack geographical access, or an educated and healthy population. Such arguments receive some
support from a recent economic literature that investigates trade in intermediate goods, or
outsourcing, which replaces high cost but relatively low-skill western workers with highly11

trained but much cheaper workers in developing countries, particularly India, Robert Feenstra
and Gordon Hanson (2001), Susan Zhu and Daniel Trefler (2001). It is argued that increases in
income inequality undermine social cohesion, and are bad for population health, not just for
those who lose out, but also for everyone who lives in a less equal society, Richard Wilkinson
(1996, 2002), Ichiro Kawachi, Wilkinson, and Bruce Kennedy (1999). The critics note that,
overall, health in the south has not improved as rapidly in the 90s as it did in the 80s; for
example, infant mortality rates in India fell by 30 percent in the 1980s but only by 12.5 percent in
the 1990s, Deaton and Drèze (2002), and indeed the rate of decline in child mortality in the
1990s was lower than in the 1980s in all of the WHO’s regions except the Western Pacific, Omar
Ahmad, Alan Lopez, and Mie Inoue (2000).
That the income distribution has widened between countries is correct, and many countries
have indeed seen widening domestic income inequality. Yet it is also true that, because the
economies of India and China have grown so rapidly in the 90s, income distribution among the
citizens of the world has become more equal. In any case, there is no evidence that income
inequality by itself is a risk to population health, Deaton (2003); the early (and immensely
influential) cross-country correlations between life-expectancy and income inequality, Wilkinson
(1992), were driven by flawed measures of inequality and cannot be reproduced with credible
data.

3. Life-expectancy, incomes, and the gifts of globalization
The starting point for any discussion about incomes, health, and knowledge, is Samuel Preston’s
(1975) investigation into the changing relationship between life-expectancy and GDP. The
12

millennium version of the Preston curve is shown in Figure 1, which plots country lifeexpectancy (using circles whose size is proportional to population) against per capita GDP in
purchasing power parity dollars. The curve is a non-parametrically fitted regression function,
weighted by population. For the current argument, the main feature of this curve is that the slope
of life-expectancy with respect to income is steep among the poorest countries. While no one
would argue that the slope of a regression function is the same as the effect of income on lifeexpectancy, many writers have found it plausible that, at low incomes, income itself is an
important (perhaps the most important) determinant of health. Preston himself argued that
technical change in private and public health knowledge was more important overall (or about
equally important, Preston, 1980) than changes in income, but noted that the poorest countries
had benefitted little from new knowledge, presumably because the implementation and adoption
of even inexpensive techniques cannot be done without money. Adequate nutrition is also an
important determinant of health in poor countries, and the link between income, food, and
nutrition is a direct and obvious one. The same can be said for the construction of clean-water
supplies and for waste disposal. Such arguments are central to the economists’ case that
globalization is indirectly good for health, at least in those countries where globalization has
increased per capita income.
Figure 2 shows the changes on changes version of Figure 1, plotting changes in lifeexpectancy from 1960 to 2000 against the corresponding average annual rate of growth of GDP
in real PPP dollars. The relationship here is much weaker and the positive slope depends almost
entirely on China (an unweighted regression has an insignificant slope that is only one fifth of the
size), whose increase in life-expectancy since 1960 reflects not only genuine new progress, but
13

also that 1960 was a year of crisis mortality during the “Great Leap Forward.” Between 1970 and
2000, when life-expectancy in China increased, not by 34 years, but by 8.5 years, the worldwide
correlation between the growth rate of GDP and the change in life-expectancy is only 0.18, and
the population weighted regression corresponding to Figure 2 has a slope of 0.2 with a t-value of
only 1.9. Both the slope and its significance increase somewhat among the initially poorest
countries; for the 26 (58) countries whose logarithm of real per capita GDP in 1970 was less than
7 (8), the slope is 0.49 (0.32), with a t-values of 2.1 (2.2). The connection between income and
life-expectancy at low incomes may be plausible but, even among the initially poorest countries,
differences in income growth explain less than a sixth of the variance in improvements in lifeexpectancy, and even an increase in the 30-year growth rate by 2 percent a year would add only 1
year to life-expectancy. Even if it were accepted that globalization increases growth rates under
suitable conditions, then this is a weak channel through which globalization might improve
health. Of course, the argument works the other way too. If globalization has indeed
impoverished some countries, the effect on their population health has also likely been modest.
The weak relationship between growth and gains in life-expectancy calls for discussion. It
simply defies belief that the low levels of life-expectancy on the left of the Preston curve in
Figure 1 have nothing to do with poverty. In which case we would expect those countries that
have done the most to eliminate poverty over the last forty years to be those showing the greatest
gains in life-expectancy. Among many economists, including those who believe in the indirect
health benefits of globalization, that this relationship holds is taken as proven fact, and the
citation most frequently given is Pritchett and Summers’ aptly-titled paper “Wealthier is
healthier.” Yet Pritchett and Summers, although they use a different selection of data and a
14

shorter time period, find exactly the same result as here, that changes in life-expectancy are
insignificantly related to changes in real income. The finding of their title comes from the
relationship between income and infant (or child mortality) not life expectancy. As they point
out, estimates of life-expectancy for a good number of countries are derived from measures of
infant and child mortality (though this is less so now, given the importance of HIV/AIDS), which
makes it surprising that the relationships with income would be so different. The tracking down
of these discrepancies is an important task, but is beyond the scope of this paper.
The literature on mortality decline in poor countries provides many clues towards resolving
the conflict between the strong effects of income in Figure 1, and the weak or absent effects in
Figure 2. While income makes many things possible in the long run, the more important
proximate determinants of mortality decline are clean water, health systems, a demand for
adequate and adequately operated health systems, and basic sanitary knowledge. The provision of
the last two has much to do with education, particularly the education of women, and all seem to
depend on active participation in health matters of people and, see in particular Jack Caldwell
(1978, 1981) and Drèze and Sen (2002). To this “integrated” route to mortality decline, many
would add the “vertical” and externally-driven (by WHO and other international agencies)
disease eradication campaigns against malaria, smallpox, river blindness, and polio, as well as
the later campaigns for immunization, breast-feeding, growth monitoring, and oral-rehydration
therapy. All of these routes to mortality decline have been effective, and sometimes have been so
in the absence of economic growth. In some cases, as in China after the economic reforms,
growth may actually hinder progress, at least for a time. Yet it is hard to imagine many of these
programs being sustained in the long-run in the absence of growth if only because education and
15

health are themselves the foundations of higher incomes in the future. Indeed, Drèze and Sen
argue that it is unlikely that post-reform growth in China could have taken place without the
health and literacy achievements that provided it. More broadly, the WHO’s (2001) Commission
on Macroeconomics and Health has recently emphasized the economic benefits that are to be
expected from improvements in health. While the statistical analysis to support this picture
largely remains to be done, it is consistent with both Figures 1 and 2.
I now turn to the distributions of growth and increases in life-expectancy over countries. The
first panel of Table 1 shows the changes in life expectancy by decade, starting in 1960. Even if
we exclude China between 1960 and 1970, the rate of improvement of life-expectancy was
declining throughout the period. To some extent, this is a consequence of the population health
reversals during the last decade in subSaharan Africa and in Eastern Europe and the countries of
the former Soviet Union. But life-expectancy rose less rapidly in the 1990s than in the 1980s,
even though per capita growth rates were typically higher. In poor countries not affected by
HIV/AIDS, this slowdown comes from a virtually worldwide reduction in the rate of decline in
child mortality rates.
The second panel presents the data on growth rates of GDP. World growth rates were higher
in the 1990s than in the 1980s, a result that is driven by Asia, by the Middle East and North
Africa, and by Latin America, which partially recovered from negative growth in the 1980s.
Notable exceptions to the pattern are subSaharan Africa and Eastern Europe. One simple way of
looking at both health and income together is to multiply income per capita by the number of
years which a newborn can expect to receive it, and growth rates of this product are presented in
the final panel. The behavior of this more comprehensive measure is similar to that of real
16

income. SubSaharan Africa does much better in the 1960s and 1970s, because there were
substantial reductions in child mortality in spite of weak or non-existent economic growth, and
much worse in the 1980s and 1990s, because of HIV/AIDS. In Asia, strong economic growth has
been accompanied by substantial reductions in mortality and the growth of the compound
measure has been consistently high.
The relationship between income and health is further explored in Figures 3 and 4. As is
often the case with international comparisons, results depend on whether countries are treated as
single points, with each country treated as a unit, as is appropriate when we are looking at the
effects of policies of which there is one per country, or whether countries are weighted by
population, as is required for welfare calculations where we care about people, not countries.
Figure 3 shows that the improvement in life-expectancy between 1970 and 2000 was greater for
people living in countries with lower GDP in 1960, the weighted line, but was lower for
countries with lower GDP in 1960, the unweighted line. In Figure 4, we see that for both
countries and people, the gain in life-expectancy from 1970 to 2000 was greater for those whose
life-expectancy was lower in 1960. The countries in the bottom left of both figures which show a
fall in life-expectancy are mostly in subSaharan Africa, and without them and the effects of
HIV/AIDS, both relationships would have been stronger. I have drawn these graphs with 1960 on
the x-axis, in order to avoid a spurious negative slope from measurement error (or white noise) in
life-expectancy estimates. Another way to do the same thing is to regress the change in life
expectancy from 1970 to 2000 on life-expectancy in 1970, using life expectancy in 1960 as an
instrument. It is also possible to look at the joint effect of base ln(GDP) and life-expectancy
simultaneously, but both become individually (although not jointly) significant. The data cannot
17

support estimates of their separate effects.
That the least healthy countries have seen the largest increases in life-expectancy does not
necessarily imply that international inequality in life-expectancy is decreasing. However, Table 2
shows that inequality has in fact fallen. Between 1960 and 2000, when the population weighted
average of life-expectancy at birth rose from 49 (heavily affected by China) to 67, the standard
deviation of life-expectancy across countries fell from 12.8 to 11.1 years in 1990, rising to 12.0
in 2000 in consequence of HIV/AIDS in Africa. Across people, the decline in inequality is even
more dramatic, from 12.9 to 8.1 in 1990, rising only to 8.7 years in 2000. Both sets of numbers
ignore the within-country component of dispersion in life-expectancy at birth, and the population
weighted numbers are heavily affected by India and China, and downplay the African experience.
As the next two columns show, the behavior of the cross-country dispersion of per capita GDP is
quite different from that of life-expectancy. Convergence, if it takes place at all, is much weaker.
With each country as a unit, the variance of logs of GDP has been increasing and there is no
convergence in GDP per capita, even in logarithms. This is the “increasing inequality between
countries” that is emphasized in the public health literature. By contrast, once we weight by
population, the standard deviation of log GDP declined from 1980 to 2000. Because I am
ignoring inequality within countries, which has been increasing in many countries, including
India and China, these figures overstate the decline in interpersonal inequality. But because the
between country component contributed more to overall inequality than does the within country
component, overall inequality in the world has been improving, see for example François
Bourguignon and Christian Morrisson (2002). As has been widely recognized, rapid progress in
India and China since 1980 is driving much of this result.
18

In a recent paper, Gary Becker, Tomas Philipson, and Rodrigo Soares (2002) have argued
that changes in income should be combined with the changes in life-expectancy to give a more
comprehensive (“full income”) measure of well-being, and that once this is done, the divergence
in per capita incomes across countries turns into convergence in full income. Becker and
Philpson’s calculations use values of additional life years from Kip Viscusi and Joseph Aldy’s
(2003) international compendium of market based estimates, and also include a calculation of the
utility gain from the increased opportunities for intertemporal substitution associated with longer
life. A cruder (albeit simpler) calculation comes from ignoring the value of intertemporal
substitution and looking at the measure presented in the last panel of Table 1, the product of lifeexpectancy and per capita GDP. The final columns of Table 1 show what has happened to the
dispersion of this approximation to full income. As is the case for income per capita, dispersion
in the logarithm of full income has been increasing, while dispersion over people has been
decreasing. Because the gain in life-expectancy adds more to the growth in full income in the
poorest countries, the reduction in dispersion over people of (log) full income is a good deal
more marked than that in per capita income.
The increase in health and in full income in the poorest countries, in Latin America and
Africa in the 1970s and 1980s, and in Asia since 1960, represents a large increase in well-being.
And these gains followed even faster gains in many poor countries in the decade immediately
after the Second World War, Davidson Gwatkin (1980), an issue to which I shall return. While it
is unlikely that much of the health gains came from growth in income, let alone from
globalization induced growth in income, globalization in the broader sense has much to do with
them. A substantial fraction of health gains in poor countries are generated by the transfer of
19

knowledge from rich countries, about vaccines, about antibiotics, and ultimately about the germ
theory of disease, all of which was originally discovered or formulated in the (now) rich
countries. In this sense, the first world has been responsible for producing the global public
goods of medical and health-related research and development, from which everyone has
benefitted, in poor and now rich countries alike. Of course, not all of the gains are pure gifts from
North to South; many cannot be implemented without substantial investments in education and in
physical infrastructure, nor without a sometimes lengthy process by which new information and
ways of doing things are absorbed into the population as a whole.
There is also a serious questions whether “full income” or life-expectancy does not overstate,
or at least seriously mismeasure the true welfare gains in poor countries. The estimates of the
value of life are computed from a conceptual experiment in which adults reveal their willingness
to pay for a reduction in the risk of dying. Even if we accept that such measures of the value of
risk reduction can be legitimately converted, using expected utility theory, into the value of
extending life, then it does not necessarily follow that we can use these measures to assess the
value of reductions in infant and child mortality which, until the advent of HIV/AIDS, was the
main force driving changes in life-expectancy in poor countries.
To illustrate, suppose that in the initial situation, a half of all children die at, or immediately
after, birth, while those who do not die live until they are 60, so that life-expectancy is 30. We
then introduce immunization, oral rehydration therapy, and antibiotics, and clean up the water
supply, after which only one quarter of children die, so that life expectancy rises by 15 years to
45. By the Becker et al calculation, everyone gets an additional 15 years, each of which is valued
at per capita annual GDP. But this is hardly the end of the story. In the initial situation, women
20

had many children, knowing that many would die. In a healthier world, they will have fewer.
Suppose, after a possibly long transition, the total fertility rate is reduced from 6 to 4, so that each
woman has exactly the same number of children (3) who survive beyond birth. Once this new
equilibrium has been established, both the size and the age-structure of the population are exactly
the same as they were before the health innovations.
It is clear that, in this situation, the increase in welfare is not correctly assessed by valuing the
additional life-expectancy at per capita GDP or any other income-based number. Indeed, given
that there are exactly the same number of people as before, enjoying (by assumption) the same
level of lifetime income, it would be tempting to conclude that welfare has not changed. But that
would miss the gain to the mothers, who now bear fewer children in order to have the same
number of surviving offspring, whose own health is improved, who have wider opportunities to
do other things, and who are (at least in part) spared the agony of watching their children die. But
there is no reason to suppose that these gains to the mothers are related to the increased life
expectancy at birth of their infants. (Although the mothers themselves are likely to live longer.)
What about the value of the lives of the children who are saved? One possibility is to count, as a
welfare gain, the 60 years of life for the quarter of children who would have died, but who now
survive. This would be one additional 60-year lifespan for each mother. But if we count these
lives, we must also subtract the value of the equal number of lives that would have been, but
which are now not lived, because their mothers choose not to give birth to those who would have
lived them, John Broome (2003). There are two babies per mother who would not have been
born, one of whom would have survived, and whose lost lifespan needs to be offset against that
of the born child who survives. Either way, we reach the same result, which is that the only gain,
21

and certainly the most important one, is the better lives lived by the mothers.

4. Globalization and the determinants of health
It is hard to think about the relationship between globalization and health without taking some
view of the determinants of the long term worldwide decline in mortality rates. If income is the
primary determinant of mortality decline, then the globalization and health question depends on
the familiar argument about the effects of globalization on income, on which I have nothing new
to say. But as I argued above, growth in income is not strongly predictive of declines in mortality,
and the finding here is consistent with other evidence, both econometric, Dean Jamison, Martin
Sandbu and Jia Wang (2001), and historical, Richard Easterlin (1996, 1999), Preston (1975,
1980, 1996), Joel Mokyr (2004), that the transmission of health knowledge and technology is at
least as important as changes in income.
Another possible argument, following Richard Wilkinson, is that mortality in rich countries is
primarily determined not by income, but by income inequality, so that the effect of globalization
on rich country health depends on the effects of globalization on rich country income inequality.
Like the effects on income, the effects of globalization on income inequality are well-debated.
But even if we were to accept the argument that, at least in some rich countries, some of the
increase in income inequality has come from globalization, there is no good evidence that
national mortality rates are affected by national income inequality, see Deaton (2003). The
possible exception is infant mortality rates, where low income still has an effect, even in rich
countries so that, at a given level of income per head, more income inequality means more
poverty, and higher infant mortality, see also Kenneth Judge and Michaela Benzeval (1997).
22

Perhaps the most promising line of enquiry is one that considers the effects of globalization
on the transmission of health knowledge and health technology. Lowering the costs of trade will
speed the rate at which new therapies are installed in one country, having been proved effective
in another, and this might be important for health for such items as neonatal intensive care units
(NICUs), kidney dialysis equipment, screening equipment, and cardiac units, for example, as
well as with earlier and lower technology interventions in poor countries, all of which have been
connected with declining mortality. Similarly, cheaper and more rapid transmission of
information, through international television transmission and the internet, will speed up the
transmission of ideas, for example about the health consequences of smoking, exercise, or the
use of salt, as well as inexpensive medical procedures, such as the use of beta-blockers or aspirin
in the treatment of heart attacks. While these ideas do not change health without being
incorporated into behavior, institutions, and access, processes that sometimes take time, there
remains a presumption that cheaper and faster information flows will enhance the speed at which
health knowledge is transmitted.
These transmission effects, if they are important, will generate two effects that we can look
for in the data. First, international movements in health indicators, particularly mortality rates,
should be more closely coordinated than once was the case, particularly for causes of death where
health technology and knowledge are important. Second, as emphasized by Easterlin (1996),
there will be pressure for mortality rates to converge across countries. In the simplest case, a new
technique is introduced in one place so that the relevant mortality rate falls, followed by similar
falls elsewhere. If the transmission of delayed or prevented, mortality rates can diverge, and
initially similar mortality rates may become widely dispersed, at least for a while. And if there is
23

a stream of new therapies, with some places adopting more rapidly than others, there will be a
variable gap between leaders and followers, albeit with mortality rates falling everywhere.
Matters are complicated further if disease depends in part on cumulative exposure, as in the link
between smoking and cancer.
That transmission of technology is important was previously argued in Deaton and Christina
Paxson (2004), who compared the time-series evidence on age-specific mortality rates for males
and females between the US and the UK. Although mortality rates are higher in the US until
about age 60, their evidence showed that changes in mortality trends for infants and for middleaged men and women tended to show up in the US about four years prior to similar appearance in
the UK. Although techniques are not necessarily invented in the US, the competitive and forprofit healthcare system allows their speedier introduction than in the government-controlled and
less well-funded British system, see e.g. Henry Aaron and William Schwartz (1984). Hence, if
new technologies such as neonatal intensive care units, cardiac bypass grafts, beta-blockers, and
catheterization do actually save lives, we would observe this pattern of lags in mortality rates. Of
course, none of this rules out alternative explanations, such as the spread of infectious disease
(AIDS mortality shows a similar pattern of the US leading the UK in mortality increase), or
health-related behaviors, particularly smoking.
Figure 5 refines the all-cause mortality plots in Deaton and Paxson (2004) by focusing on
cardiovascular disease for males and females aged 50 to 64 from 1950 to 2000 for the US and
Britain; this is the cause of death where technical progress has arguably had the greatest impact.
For males, the patterns are the same in both countries, with mortality relatively flat or rising in
the early years, and then declining thereafter, by a half or more in both countries. However, the
24

decline in mortality in the US starts around 1970, which appears to be before the new techniques
were available, but not until a decade later in Britain, a substantially longer lag than the four
years in all-cause mortality. The pattern for women, if it exists at all, is much less pronounced.
For both men and women, these mortality rates are essentially the same by te end of the century.
While the acceleration in mortality decline in Britain after 1980 is apparent, there is no obvious
sustained change in the US. Of course, there are other factors affecting mortality, of which likely
the most important is smoking. However, patterns of tobacco use were similar in the two
countries over the two periods. In the 1950s, both American and British men were much more
likely to be smokers than women, While the prevalence of smoking among men declined
throughout the period, that among women increased until the mid-1970s, achieving parity with
men in Britain, and close to it in the US. Thereafter, the prevalence of smoking declines in
parallel for both men and women. Smoking is a risk factor for heart disease though, unlike lung
cancer, the risk is thought to be reduced or eliminated immediately after quitting. In consequence,
these patterns of smoking do little to explain the differences in male-female mortality from CVD,
nor do they offer an alternative to the technology story for the increase in the rate of mortality
decline.
Figure 6 shows all-cause mortality for the countries in the OECD. Once again, we see the
characteristic patterns of health transmission among males, but not among females. The patterns
of mortality decline are strongly correlated across countries, and beyond that, for males but not
females, there is increasing convergence of rates. In 1950, mortality rates for men in this age
group ranged from 1 percent to more than 2 percent. By 2000, and with the exception of latecomer Korea, the rates cluster between 0.8 and 1.3 percent. Figure 7 shows the same plots, but
25

for mortality from cardiovascular disease alone. Because this is such a large share of total
mortality, it shows that much of the convergence in mortality rates is driven by what has been
happening to cardiovascular mortality. Unlike the case of all-cause mortality, there is evidence of
convergence and of some acceleration in the rate of mortality decline among women as well as
among men.
These patterns can be reconciled with reference to international patterns of smoking. Figure
8, taken from the International Mortality and Smoking Statistics data base, Barbara Forey, John
Hamling, Peter Lee, and Nicholas Wald (2002), show survey based estimates of prevalence rates
of smoking (of manufactured cigarettes) for five year periods from 1951–55. These figures are
age-adjusted by applying five-year age-specific prevalence to a standard European population. It
is clear that different countries have responded very differently to the common knowledge about
the health risks of smoking. Almost everywhere at the beginning of the period, men were more
likely than women to smoke, and almost everywhere the differential narrowed between 1950 and
2000. In most OECD countries, although not all, there has been a consistent, long-term decline in
the prevalence of smoking among men. In some countries, particularly the English speaking
countries, the US, Canada, Britain, New Zealand, Australia, and Ireland, prevalence of cigarette
smoking was falling for both men and women well before the end of the century. However, for
much of the rest of Europe, the fraction of women smoking is still rising in the latest surveys, and
there are some countries, particularly in Eastern Europe, where prevalence continues to rise for
both men and women. Overall, smoking prevalence is generally declining for men, and there is
some international narrowing in the dispersion of rates. For women, by contrast, there is no
general decline in prevalence, and little convergence.
26

These smoking patterns have clear counterparts in international patterns of mortality from
lung-cancer, which are shown in Figure 9. For men, lung-cancer mortality rates rose for most of
the period, and international rates diverged, along with international smoking patterns, but by the
late 1980s, mortality rates were declining in many countries, and beginning to converge. Lung
cancer mortality among women, like prevalence of smoking among women, started from much
lower levels than for men, but is still rising and diverging in most countries, although the
beginnings of a decline can be seen in some. These lung-cancer mortality rates are only a fraction
of the mortality rates from cardiovascular disease, only a fifth for men and less for women, and
cigarettes are likely responsible for more deaths through heart than lung disease. But taking both
together, it is clear that, at least after the mid-1970s, therapeutic improvements have been
working together with changes in behavior for men, but largely against one another for women.
(Note that there has been little or no progress in the treatment of lung-cancer.) And because the
smoking behavior of women differs so much from country to country, and there is no
convergence, we do not see the convergence in mortality among women that is so clear among
men. Note too that an “all smoking” explanation is insufficient, if only because of the (albeit
limited) progress and convergence in female mortality, in spite of the lack of a general decline in
smoking and a divergence in the prevalence of smoking. Nor is there any sharp decline in the
prevalence of smoking among men around 1970–80, which would explain the marked
acceleration in the rate of mortality decline, in general, and for cardiovascular disease in
particular.

27

5. Summary and conclusions
The health of nations is as globally interdependent now as it has been in the past. In the first
wave of globalization, or rather colonization, the transmission of disease to populations with no
immunity played a central role, not only in the decimation of peoples, but in the conquest of the
New World by the Old. Later in the era of colonization, patterns of settlement and exploitation,
including who colonized whom, and what mode of colonization and exploitation resulted,
depended on the ability of potential settlers and colonizers to deal with the burden of local
disease. The movement of people propagated, and was conditioned by, the patterns of disease.
Today, the health of most people in the world, in rich as well as poor countries, depends on their
ability to adopt locally health knowledge and health technologies that have been discovered and
developed elsewhere.
In the middle of the 20th Century, child mortality rates, and with them life-expectancy,
improved throughout poor countries. Gwatkin (1980) labels this as the third of three great waves
of mortality decline. The first, starting at the end of the 19th century, began in North and Western
Europe, and was quickly transmitted to the United States. The second wave, beginning in the
1920s, was in South and Eastern Europe, and the rate of gain of life-expectancy was even more
rapid than in the first, with some countries showing increases in life-expectancy of more than
half a year per year over a decade or more. Because this second wave had the experience and
knowledge of the first to draw on, it could be more rapid, and by the middle of the 20th Century,
life expectancies in the south and east of Europe were close to those in the north and west.
Gwatkin’s third great wave was in the poor countries, and began in earnest after the Second
World War, greatly aided by international public health efforts, particularly by the WHO and by
28

UNICEF. In some countries, the increase in life expectancy was greater than a year per year, and
in a few cases, such as Mauritius and Sri Lanka, faster than two years per year.
Again, much of the progress came from applying the knowledge gained in the earlier waves.
As Preston (1960) writes: “With the exception of water and sewerage improvements and
smallpox vaccination, the techniques of preventative and curative healthcare that have been
widely deployed in LDCs are twentieth century products. Virtually all were facilitated by the
ultimate acceptance of the revelatory germ theory of disease at the turn of the century” (p 304).
Yet there were new tools too, and much of the most rapid progress in the 1940s and 1950s came
from vector control, particularly DDT spraying against malaria, and from the use of newly
developed antibiotics against tuberculosis. Although some of the progress was subsequently
reversed, new treatments became available, particularly oral rehydration therapy after 1979, and
there was continued in coverage of immunization. And while gains in income were undoubtedly
important, for improving nutrition, and for funding for better water and sanitation schemes, some
countries made progress in reducing child mortality even in the absence of economic growth,
recapitulating the history of health improvements in Europe 50 to 75 years before. This wave of
health improvement ultimately came from the globalization of knowledge, facilitated by local
political, economic, and educational conditions.
More recently, mortality decline among the rich countries of the world has depended on
transmission of new knowledge and technology, and in particular, as I have tried to demonstrate
above, by the diffusion of knowledge about the risks of cigarette smoking, and by the diffusion of
new techniques for saving the lives of those with cardiovascular disease. The medical changes,
although in some cases expensive, diffuse more rapidly than do changes in behavior, which
29

respond slowly and unevenly to changes in knowledge about risks. Indeed, there are important
parallels between the slow changes in cigarette habits and the slow adoption of the germ-theory
of disease into individual behavior almost a century earlier, Nancy Tomes (2000).
Among countries that are not in the richest group, the convergence of health slowed towards
the end of the 20th century. When we look at the 50-64 year old group outside of the OECD, and
redraw the figures on all-cause and cardiovascular mortality rates, the picture is very different.
Mortality rates in Eastern Europe and the countries of the former soviet union show mortality
increases and mortality divergence, not mortality decreases and mortality convergence. And in
Latin America and the Caribbean, the other area that is covered by the WHO mortality statistics,
the decline of mortality is much slower, and there is only very limited evidence of convergence.
There is clearly a long way to go before the habits and technology of the rich countries are fully
adopted even in middle-income countries.
Among the poorest countries, the gifts of global health have been diminishing or otherwise
limited in the 1990s. Declines in child mortality have been less rapid in the 1990s than they were
in the 1980s, perhaps because the easy gains were made earlier. By 2000, the HIV/AIDS
epidemic had widened the gap in life-expectancy between Europe and North America on the one
hand and sub-Saharan Africa to more than its level in 1950. If we accept the argument that health
is largely determined by the transfer of technology and knowledge, the current state of mortality
from the epidemic in Africa is evidence of the failure of globalization to transfer effective antiretroviral drug-based technology and treatment from the rich countries to sub-Saharan Africa.
More broadly, there are 10.5 million child deaths each year that are preventable in the sense that
those children would not have died had they been born in rich countries, Lopez (2000). The
30

model in which global public health goods are produced by the rich countries and made available
to all has yet to work in this case.
While AIDS is arguably unique, and indeed antiretrovirals are the only important case where
drugs listed as “essential medicines” by the WHO are still on patent, Amir Attaran (2004), it is
hardly an exception that can be ignored. There are between 25 to 28 million people in subSaharan Africa who are infected with HIV/AIDS, of which 2.2 to 2.4 million are dying each year.
Many of these deaths are preventable and would be prevented with adequate resources. People
who live in rich countries have full access to the technology that prevents, or at least long
postpones, death from AIDS. People who live in poor countries do not. And it is this inequality
in outcomes, not only from AIDS, but also from measles, from diarrhea, and from pneumonia,
that fuels much of the anger that is so characteristic of the literature in health. As illustrated in
Section 3, the last half century has seen enormous advances in knowledge that have generated
unprecedented declines in mortality among the citizens of the rich countries. These advances will
eventually reach the poor of the world so that, in the long run, they too will benefit, but in the
meantime we are living with appalling inequalities, in which the poor of the world die of AIDS
and, more broadly, where poor people around the world die of diseases that are readily
preventable elsewhere, including in the first-world hospitals and clinics that serve the rich in
poor countries. What is required is not less globalization, but more, or at least more globalization
of a different kind. Deaths that can be prevented should be prevented, and they will be prevented
if we can find faster ways of diffusing first-world health technologies, including the creation of
the economic, educational, and political conditions that would permit their more rapid diffusion.

31

References:
Aaron, Henry J. and William B. Schwartz, 1984, The painful prescription: rationing hospital care,
Washington, DC. Brookings.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James Robinson, 2001, “The colonial origins of comparative
development,” American Economic Review 91 (5) 1369-401
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James Robinson, 2002, “Reversal of fortune: geography and
institutions in the making of the world income distribution,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117,
1231–94.
Ahmad, Omar B., Alan D. Lopez, and Mie Inoue, 2000, “The decline in child mortality: a reappraisal,”
Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 78(10), 1175–91.
Alleyne, Sir George, 2003, “Globalization and challenges to Caribbean health,” Kingston, Jamaica.
Michael Manley Memorial Lecture.
Attaran, Amir, 2004, “How to patents and economic policies affect access to essential medicines in
developing countries?” Health Affairs, 23(3), 155–166.
Becker, Gary, Tomas Philipson, and Ricardo Soares, 2003, “The quantity and quality of life and the
evolution of world inequality,” Cambridge, MA. NBER Working Paper, No. 9765.
Belsky, Leah, Reidar Lie, Aditya Mattoo, Ezekiel J. Emanuel and Gopal Sreenivasan, 2004, “The
General Agreement on Trade in Services, implications for health policymakers,” Health Affairs,
23(3), 137–45.
Bordo, Michael D., Alan M. Taylor, and Jeffrey G. Williamson, 2003, Globalization in historical
persoective, Chicago and London. University of Chicago Press.
Bourguignon, François and Christian Morrisson, 2002, “Inequality among world citizens,” American
Economic Review, 92(4), 727–44.
Broome, John, 2002, “Measuring the burden of disease by aggregating well-being,” in Summary
measures of population health: concepts, ethics, measurement, and applications, edited by
Christopher J. L. Murray, Joshua A Salomon, Colin D. Matthews, and Alan D. Lopez, Geneva.
World Health Organization.
Caldwell, John C., 1986, “Routes to low mortality in developing countries.” Population and
Development Review 12( 2), 171-220.
Caldwell, John C., 1991, “The soft underbelly of development: demographic transition in conditions of
limited economic change,” in The World Bank Annual Conference on Development Economics 1990,
Washington, DC. World Bank.
Cipolla, Carlo, 1981, Fighting the plague in seventeenth century Italy, Madison. University of Wisconsin
Press.
Cipolla, Carlo, 1992, Miasmas and disease: public health and the environment in the pre-industrial age,
New Haven. Yale University Press.
Cornia, Giovanni Andrea, 2001, “Globalization and health: results and options,” Bulletin of the World
Health Organization, 79(9), 834–41.
Cutler, David M., Edward L. Glaeser, and Jesse M Shapiro, 2003, “Why have Americans become more
obese?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 73(3), 93–118.
Deaton, Angus and Jean Drèze, 2002, “Poverty and inequality in India: a reexamination,” Economic and
Political Weekly, September 7th, 3729–48.
Deaton, Angus, 2003, “Health, inequality, and economic development,” Journal of Economic Literature,
41, 113–58.
Deaton, Angus and Christina Paxson, 2004, “Mortality, income, and income inequality over time in
Britain and the United States,” in Perspectives on the economics of aging, edited by David Wise,

32

Chicago and London. University of Chicago Press, 247–80.
Deaton, Angus, 2004, “Measuring poverty in a growing world, or measuring growth in a poor world,”
Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.
Diamond, Jared D., 1997, Guns, germs, and steel: the fates of human societies, New York. Norton.
Dollar, David, 2001, “Is globalization good for your health?” Bulletin of the World Health Organization,
79(9), 827–33.
Dollar, David and Aart Kraay, 2002, “Growth is good for the poor,” Journal of Economic Growth, 7,
195–225.
Drèze, Jean and Amartya K. Sen, 2002, India. Development and participation, Delhi, Oxford University
Press.
Easterlin, Richard A., 1996, Growth triumphant: the twenty-first century in historical perspective, Ann
Arbor. University of Michigan Press.
Easterlin, Richard A., 1999, “How beneficent is the market: a look at the modern history of mortality,”
European Review of Economic History, 3(3), 257–94.
Encyclopaedia Brittanica. The Middle Passage 2004 [cited April 8 2004]. Available from
http://www.search.eb.com/eb/article?eu=53857.
Feenstra, Robert C., and Gordon H. Hanson, 2001, “Global production sharing and rising inequality: a
survey of trade and wages,” Cambridge, MA. NBER Working Paper No. 8372.
Fidler, David P., 2001, “The globalization of public health: the first 100 years of international health
diplomacy,” Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 79(9), 842–9.
Fischer, Stanley, 2003, “Globalization and its challenges,” American Economic Review, 93(2), 1–30.
Forey, Barbara, John Hamling, Peter Lee, and Nicholas Wald, 2002, International smoking statistics: a
collection of historical data from 30 economically developed countries, 2nd edition, London, Wolfson
Institute of Preventive Medicine, and Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Gwatkin, Davidson, 1980, “Indications of change in developing country mortality trends: the end of an
er?” Population and Development Review, 6(4), 615–44.
Humphries, Margaret, 1992, Yellow Fever and the South, Baltimore and London. Johns Hopkins
University Press.
Jamison, Dean T., Martin Sandbu and Jia Wang, 2001, “Cross-country variation in mortality decline,
1962–87: the role of country specific technical progress,” Commission on Macroeconomics and
Health, Working Paper WG1, No 4.
Judge, Ken, Jo-Ann Mulligan, and Michaela Benzeval, 1998, “Income inequality and population health,”
Social Science and Medicine, 46 (4-5), 567–79.
Kawachi, Ichiro, Richard G. Wilkinson, and Bruce P. Kennedy, “Introduction,”in The society and
population health reader: income inequality and health, edited by Ichiro Kawachi, Richard G.
Wilkinson, and Bruce P. Kennedy, New York. The New Press. xi–xxxiv.
Labonte, Ronald, 2003, Dying for trade: why globalization can be bad for our health, Toronto. CSJ
Foundation for Research and Education.
Lopez, Alan D., 2000, “Reducing child mortality,” Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 78(10),
1173.
Markel, Howard, and Alexandra Minna Stern, 2002, “The foreignness of germs: the persistent
association of immigrants and disease in American society,” The Milbank Quarterly, 80(4), 757–88.
Mattoo, Aaditya, 2003, “The GATS and trade in health services,” presented to conference on
Globalization and Justice, Bethesda, MD. Available at
http://www.bioethics.nih.gov/globalslides/mattoo.pdf
Milanovic, Branko, 2003, “The two faces of globalization: against globalization as we know it,”
Washington DC. The World Bank, processed.

33

Mokyr, Joel, 2002, The gifts of Athena: historical origins of the knowledge economy, Princeton, NJ.
Princeton University Press.
Preston, Samuel H., 1975, “The changing relation between mortality and level of economic
development,” Population Studies, 29, 231–48.
Preston, Samuel H., 1980, “Causes and consequences of mortality declines in less developed countries
during the twentieth century,” in Population and economic change in developing countries, edited by
Richard A. Easterlin, Chicago and London. University of Chicago Press, 289–360.
Preston, Samuel H., 1996, American Longevity: past present and future, Syracuse NY. Maxwell School
Center for Policy Research, Policy Brief No. 7/1996.
Pritchett, Lant, and Lawrence H. Summers, 1996, “Wealthier is healthier,” Journal of Human Resources,
31(4), 841–68.
Tomes, Nancy, 1998, The gospel of germs: men, women, and the microbe in American life, Cambridge,
MA. Harvard University Press.
Viscusi, W. Kip and Joseph E. Aldy, 2003, “The value of a statistical life: a critical review of market
estimates from around the world,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 27, 5–76.
Wilkinson, Richard, G., 1992, “Income distribution and life expectancy,” British Medical Journal,
304(6820), 165–8.
Wilkinson, Richard G., 1996, Unhealthy societies: the afflictions of inequality, London. Routledge.
Wilkinson, Richard G., 2000, Mind the gap: hierarchies, health, and human evolution, London.
Weidenfeld and Nicholson.
World Commission on the Social Dimension of Globalization, 2004, A fair globalization: creating
opportunities for all, Geneva. International Labour Organization.
World Health Organization, 2004, World Health Report, Geneva, WHO.
World Bank, 2002, Globalization, growth, and poverty: building an inclusive world economy, Oxford
and Washington, DC. Oxford University Press and the World Bank.
Zhu, Susan Chun and Daniel Trefler, 2001, “Ginis in general equilibrium: trade, technology, and
southern inequality,” Cambridge, MA. NBER Working Paper No. 8446.

34

Table 1
Changes in life-expectancy and growth rates of GDP per capita and of full income, by region and decade
All

East Asia &
Pacific

South Asia

SubSaharan
Africa

Latin
America &
Caribbean

Middle-East
& N.
Africa

Eastern
Europe and
Central Asia

North
America &
Western
Europe

5.3
5.8
6.1
3.5

2.1
–0.9
1.4
–1.5

1.5
2.5
2.1
1.9

4.7
1.1
0.5
2.4

..
..
..
–1.8

3.4
2.5
2.1
2.0

..
..
..
–2.1

1.6
2.5
2.0
1.8

Change in Life Expectancy (years)
1960–1970
1970–1980
1980–1990
1990–2000

8.4
3.9
2.7
1.2

18.0
5.1
2.8
1.8

5.0
4.7
4.9
3.9

4.0
3.4
2.4
–3.5

4.1
4.1
3.3
2.4

Growth rate of real GDP per head (percent per year)
1960–1970
1970–1980
1980–1990
1990–2000

3.1
2.0
1.7
2.2

4.9
2.9
3.4
3.9

2.2
0.7
3.6
3.5

1.8
0.4
–0.5
–0.3

2.8
3.0
–0.8
1.9

Growth rate of real GDP per head x Life Expectancy (percent per year)
1960–1970
1970–1980
1980–1990
1990–2000

4.8
2.6
2.1
2.5

8.6
3.7
3.8
4.2

5.0
4.8
4.9
4.0

3.9
3.4
2.4
–4.0

3.5
3.7
–0.2
2.2

5.7
2.0
1.5
3.0

Notes: Life-Expectancy from World Development Indicators, (separately) population weighted for all countries available in 1960, 1970, 1980, 1990, and 2000,
and changes calculated on a regional basis. GDP is real chain weighted gross domestic product per capita from the Penn World Table, and is also population
weighted. The last two panels are calculated only for those countries with non-missing values for both life-expectancy and PWT GDP. There are 106 such
countries in 1960, 110 in 1970, 115 in 1980, and 131 in 1990 and 2000. The life-expectancy data in the first panel use data from 161 countries in 1960, 162 in
1970, 173 in 1980, 188 in 1990, and 191 in 2000.

35

Table 2
Convergence and divergence in life-expectancy and GDP per capita
Life Expectancy
Mean
weighted
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000

49.0
58.3
62.2
65.2
66.9

Standard Deviation
weighted
12.9
9.4
8.9
8.1
8.7

unweighted

ln(GDP per capita)

ln(GDP per capita * LE)

Standard deviation

Standard Deviation

weighted
1.03
1.09
1.10
1.02
0.95

12.8
12.0
11.5
11.1
12.0

unweighted

weighted

unweighted

0.90
0.98
1.03
1.10
1.11

1.26
1.20
1.20
1.12
1.07

1.11
1.17
1.20
1.26
1.29

Notes: Calculated for countries with both life expectancy in World Development Indicators 2003, and real PPP chain-weighted per capita GDP in
the Penn World Table. There are 106 countries in 1960, 110 in 1970, 115 in 1980, and 131 in 1990 and 2000. All weighted statistics are weighted
by population in the relevant year, including life expectancy at birth.

36

Figure 1: The Millennium Preston curve
Source: Author’s calculations based on World Development Indicators 2003 (life expectancy and Penn World Table (GDP.)
Note: Circles have diameter proportional to population size
37

Figure 2: Change in life expectancy and GDP growth, 1960–2000
Source: See Figure 1. Note: Circles have diameter proportional to population size. The life-expectancy gain in China, which is the
largest circle, is artificially by the famine conditions in 1960.
38

Figure 3: Change in life expectancy 1970–2000 versus per capita GDP
Source: See Figure 1
39

Figure 4: Change in life expectancy 1970–2000 and life expectancy in 1960
Source: See Figure 1.
40

Figure 5: Age-adjusted mortality rates from cardiovascular disease, US and UK, 1950–2000
Source: Author’s calculations based on WHO mortality database.
41

Figure 6: OECD all-cause age-adjusted mortality rates, 1950–2000
Source: See Figure 5
42

Figure 7: OECD mortality rates from cardiovascular disease
Source: See Figure 5
43

Figure 8: OECD smoking prevalence rates
Source: International Mortality and Smoking Statistical Database.
44

Figure 9: OECD lung-cancer mortality rates, age-adjusted
Source: See Figure 5.
45

