                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              WHY WAS EUROPE LEFT AT THE STATION WHEN AMERICA’S
                    PRODUCTIVITY LOCOMOTIVE DEPARTED?

                                            Robert J. Gordon

                                         Working Paper 10661
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10661


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2004




This research has been supported in part by the National Science Foundation. I am grateful to Bart van Ark
and Robert McGuckin for the data underlying Tables 2 and 3, and to them, and Martin N. Baily, Jean-Paul
Fitoussi, and Edmund S. Phelps for many discussions of the central ideas. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Robert J. Gordon. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Why was Europe Left at the Station When America’s Productivity Locomotive Departed?
Robert J. Gordon
NBER Working Paper No. 10661
August 2004
JEL No. N0, N10, O30
                                       ABSTRACT

After fifty years of catching up to the United States level of productivity, since 1995 Europe has been
falling behind. The growth rate in output per hour over 1995-2003 in Europe was just half that in the
United States, and this annual growth shortfall caused the level of European productivity to fall back
from 94 percent of the United States level to 85 percent. Fully one-fifth of the European catch-up (from
44 to 94 percent) over the previous half-century has been lost over the period since 1995.

Disaggregated studies of industrial sectors suggest that the main difference between Europe and the
United States is in ICT-using industries like wholesale and retail trade and in securities trading. The
contrast in retailing calls attention to regulatory barriers and land-use regulations in Europe that inhibit
the development of the big box retailing formats that have created many of the productivity gains in the
United States. For many decades, the United States and Europe have gone in opposite directions in the
public policies relevant for metropolitan growth. The United States has promoted highly dispersed low-
density metropolitan areas through its policies of building intra-urban highways, starving public transit,
providing tax subsidies to home ownership, and allowing local governments to maintain low density by
maintaining minimum residential lot sizes. Europeans have chosen different policies that encourage high-
density residential living and retail precincts in the central city while inhibiting the exploitation of
greenfield suburban and exurban sites suitable for modern big box retail developments.

The middle part of the paper draws on recent writing by Phelps: economic dynamism is promoted by
policies that promote competition and flexible equity finance and is retarded by corporatist institutions
designed to protect incumbent producers and inhibit new entry. European cultural attributes inhibit the
development of ambition and independence by teenagers and young adults, in contrast to their
encouragement in the United States. While competition, corporatism, and culture may help to explain
the differing transatlantic evolution of productivity growth, they reveal institutional flaws in both
continents that are inbred and likely to persist.

The final section of the paper identifies the roots of the favorable environment for innovation in the
United States compared to Europe. Elements include an openly competitive system of private and public
universities, government subsidies to universities through peer-reviewed research grants rather than
unconditional subsidies for free undergraduate tuition, the world dominance of United States business
schools and management consulting firms, strong United States patent protection, a flexible financial
infrastructure making available venture capital finance to promising innovations, the benefits of a
common language and free internal migration, and a welcoming environment for highly-skilled
immigrants.

Robert J. Gordon
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208-2600
and NBER
I. Introduction

       After a half century following World War II of catching up to the level of U. S.

productivity, since 1995 Europe has experienced a productivity growth slowdown while

the United States has experienced a marked acceleration. As a result, just in the past eight

years, Europe has already lost about one-fifth of its previous 1950-95 gain in output per

hour relative to the United States. Starting from 71 percent of the U. S. level of productivity

in 1870, Europe fell back to 44 percent in 1950, caught up to 94 percent in 1995, and has now

fallen back to 85 percent. What were the causes of this stunning setback?

       This paper argues that the discussion of policy reform in Europe has been too

narrowly focussed on the deregulation of product and labor markets. A broader set of

social choices matters for productivity, and some of these differences between the U. S. and

Europe may be irreversible. Much of the surprising acceleration of U. S. productivity

growth since 1995 originates in the trade sector, particularly retail trade, and goes far

beyond the use of information and communication technology (ICT). The retail sector in

the U. S. has been revolutionized by the ʺbig boxʺ format epitomized by Wal-Mart, and

perhaps the most important factor of production in making this format possible is a large

plot of virgin land which is much more widely available in the sprawling American

metropolitan areas than in tightly regulated European environment of land-use planning

and protection of old central city retail zones. The American explosion of productivity

growth in retailing calls attention to basic life-style choices that constitute yet another form

of ʺAmerican Exceptionalism.ʺ While the American form of metropolitan organization may

promote productivity growth, Europeans are rightly skeptical of unmeasured costs of low

urban density in America as promoted by explicit government policies. Europeans decry

side-effects of the American system that may promote productivity without creating

consumer welfare, including excess energy use, pollution, and time spent in traffic

congestion.
                                                                 Leaving the Station, Page 2



       A second set of major differences originates in what could be called ʺEuropean

exceptionalism.ʺ As Phelps has argued, European growth is still retarded by corporatist

institutions which are designed to protect incumbent producers and inhibit new entry.

European cultural attitudes inhibit the development of ambition and independence of

teenagers and young adults, who are cradled in subsides such as free tuition for higher

education while American teenagers are expected to get out into the marketplace, work,

and contribute real money to their own college education. The differing behavior of

productivity growth since 1995 helps to call attention to differences between Europe and

the U. S. which have long been present but seemed unimportant during the five decades

prior to 1995 when Europe was rapidly catching up to the American level of productivity.

       A third issue raised by the U. S. post-1995 productivity revival has been an explosion

of innovation in the production and use of ICT. The past decade has witnessed a growing

concentration of innovative activity in the United States, not only in computer hardware

and software, but also in pharmaceuticals and biotech research. The sources of this

innovative advantage call attention to European shortcomings that cannot be easily cured

by deregulation. These include the continuing U. S. advantage of a unified market

unincumbered by differences in customs, language, or electric plugs; the competitive U.

S. system of private and public universities; the system of peer review that guides U. S.

government support of research; well-enforced patent protection; a dynamic capital market

able to fund promising start-ups; and the welcome extended by the United States to foreign

graduate students in all fields and especially to highly skilled immigrant engineers.

       It is important at the outset not only to set out the topic issues discussed in this

paper, but also those that are outside its purview. We have nothing to say here about the

well-trodden issues in the functioning of the European labor market, deregulation of labor

markets past, present, or future, and specific issues involving product market regulations,
                                                                                    Leaving the Station, Page 3



e.g. shop-closing hours. Also, while this paper highlights life-style and cultural differences,

it does not attempt a comprehensive comparison of standards of living, and its several

dimensions of praise for the American system should not be interpreted as an endorsement

for well-known failures such as the lack of universal government-financed health care in

the United States.1

         The paper begins with basic data on productivity growth in Europe and the United

States over selected intervals since 1870 and displays the relative level of European

productivity, falling behind until 1950, catching up until 1995, and then falling behind since

then. Data on differences at the sectoral level are then displayed, highlighting the role in

the U. S. revival of ICT-using industries, especially retailing. The paper then continues

with a comparison of the retailing environment in the U. S. vs. Europe, followed by

attention to broader cultural issues. It concludes with a multi-part comparison of the

stimuli and barriers to technical change and innovation on the two sides of the Atlantic.


II. Data on Trans-Atlantic Productivity Differences: Growth Rates and
Levels

         The long history of productivity growth and levels is displayed in Table 1. The data

from 1870 to 1990 come from Maddison (2001) and refer to the total economy, that is, real

GDP per hour. These data are updated for 1990-2003 with OECD data on the private

economy. While productivity growth in the private economy is usually slightly faster than

in the total economy, this is true both in the U. S. and in Europe, and so the break in

coverage at 1990 should not affect our main point of concern, that is, transatlantic




   1. A more balanced view that attempts to quantify an overstatement of U. S. welfare relative to Europe is
provided in Gordon (2002).
                                                                                     Leaving the Station, Page 4



differences in growth rates and their implications for relative levels.2

         The left section of Table 1 shows average annual percentage growth rates of

productivity in the U. S., Europe and the U. S. - Europe difference, for selected intervals

since 1870. The familiar story is that Europe fell behind from 1870 to 1950, then caught up

after 1950. Less familiar is the extent to which Europe has fallen behind again after 1995.

As shown in the right section of Table 1, Europe had almost closed the gap in productivity

levels by 1995, but its slow growth since then has caused its relative productivity level to

slip back from 94 to 85 percent, eroding 9 points of its 50 point catch-up between 1950 and

1995.

         A closer look at the divergence is provided by Table 2, which contrasts the 1990-95

period with 1995-2003 and provides a uniform treatment of the total economy based on a

new Conference Board pamphlet by McGuckin-van Ark (2004). The initial European

slowdown evident in data for 1995-2000 worsened with data for 2000-2003, whereas the U.

S. sustained its productivity growth revival. We should note that the 1995-2003 difference

between U. S. and European productivity growth is less than in Table 1, and so the extent

of European retrogression depends on whether we use the post-1990 data on the private

economy, as in Table 1, or on the total economy, as in Table 2. Given the well-known

difficulties in measuring productivity in the government and non-profit sector, we prefer

to emphasize the greater difference shown in Table 1.3


   2. The Maddison data refer to 12 countries weighted by relative GDP; these are the 15 members of the
EU minus Greece, Portugal, and Spain. The post-1990 OECD data refer to all 15 EU members. While the
Maddison are available through 1998, he provides no intermediate data between 1990 and 1998, and we
choose 1995 as a preferable break date which highlights the starting point of the transatlantic productivity
growth divergence.

    3. The less impressive U. S. performance in Table 2 is due to the use by McGuckin and van Ark (2004) of
household employment figures to calculate economy-wide productivity, unlike Table 1 where the OECD
follows U. S. practice by calculating private-sector productivity based on the slower-growing payroll
employment data. For a discussion of this discrepancy, see Gordon (2003, p. 258-61 and the sources cited
                                                                  Leaving the Station, Page 5



          The right-hand column of Table 2 displays the change in output, hours, and output

per hour between 1990-95 and 1995-2003. The post-1995 acceleration in output growth was

slightly less in Europe than in the U. S., 0.6 vs. 0.9 percentage points, respectively. Most of

the literature on the failure of Europe to achieve a post-1995 productivity growth

acceleration treats Europe as overregulated and stuck in the mud. On the contrary

Europeʹs performance in hours of work was the diametric opposite of the U. S., accelerating

by almost two percentage points compared to pre-1995, whereas there was no change in

hours growth in the U. S. As a result, the productivity change between 1990-95 and 1995-

2003 was the mirror image of the hours change, with an acceleration of almost one percent

per annum for the U. S. and a deceleration of more than one percent for Europe.

Understanding Europe: Distinguishing the Stars from the Basket Cases

          If the decomposition of growth sources is a booming academic industry on the west

side of the Atlantic, laments about Europeʹs performance are the corresponding concern

of academics on the east side of the Atlantic. While the U. S. enjoyed a productivity growth

revival after 1995, as we have seen in Tables 1 and 2, a growth deceleration occurred in

numerous European countries as well as in the European Union as a whole. This Europe-

U. S. contrast seems to fly in the face of the widespread evidence (Oliner-Sichel, 2000, 2002;

Jorgenson-Stiroh 2000) that investment in information and communications technology

(ICT) was the basic source of the U. S. achievement. How could ICT be the main source of

the U. S. growth revival, while Europe fell behind? Business firms, not to mention

university professors, use the same PCs and Microsoft software everywhere in Europe, and

Europe is widely acknowledged to be ahead in the use of mobile telephones.

          Part of the European puzzle is resolved when we recognize that heterogeneity



there).
                                                                                  Leaving the Station, Page 6



among European countries is more pronounced than the difference between the European

Union and the U. S. Numerous studies have shown a relatively strong positive correlation

between MFP growth and measures of ICT use, e.g., the ratio of ICT expenditure to GDP

or the change in PC use per 100 inhabitants over the 1990s. In such comparisons, numerous

countries achieve higher MFP growth rates than the U. S. over the 1990s, including Ireland,

Finland, Sweden, Denmark, Norway, Canada, and Australia. Some, but not all, of these

countries surpass the U. S. in PC use per household and/or in the share of ICT expenditure.

What differs most between Europe and the U. S. is the low level of PC adoption and ICT

expenditure in the ʺolive beltʺ ranging from Portugal and Spain on the west to Italy and

Greece in the east.4 The contrast between the Nordic and olive-belt countries suggests

irreverent comments about how Scandinavians in their dark winters find PCs more

appealing than do olive-belt residents cavorting on their sunny beaches.

         Contrasts within Europe also suggest that perhaps we could try to disaggregate the

U. S. to provide a more appropriate comparison with Europe. Silicon Valley could be

compared to Ireland and Finland, New England could be compared to Denmark and

Sweden, Texas to Australia, and the midwestern heartland to France and Germany. What

stands out in this suggestion is the absence of any U. S. equivalent for the European olive-

belt countries. Political borders are a product of history, and perhaps the U. S. would look

more like Europe, which includes the olive belt, if we were to aggregate U. S. data with

those for the tequila belt, i.e., Mexico.

The Industry Decomposition of the Europe-U. S. Difference

         A comprehensive recent study by OʹMahoney and van Ark (2003) provides a few

answers at a more formal level. As shown in Table 3, they support the widespread


   4. Scatter plots supporting these correlations between MFP growth and computer intensity are presented
in Bartelsman et al. (2002, Figures 8 and 9).
                                                                  Leaving the Station, Page 7



impression that America accelerated while Europe fell behind. The top line in Table 3

shows that U. S. productivity growth accelerated by 1.1 percent in the late 1990s while

European growth decelerated by 0.6 percent. An initial caveat is that Europe looks much

better when the entire decade of the 1990s is aggregated into a single 1990-2001 period;

European productivity growth averages out to 2.0 percent per year, considerably higher

than U. S. growth of 1.6 percent per year. It is important to remember the different

terminal dates in Tables 1 and 2 vs. Table 3. The first two tables end in 2003 and

incorporate explosive U. S. productivity growth in 2001-03, whereas Table 3 ends in 2001

and is influenced by slow U. S. growth during its 2001 recession.

       The OʹMahoney and van Ark study allows us to trace the location of productivity

growth accelerations and decelerations to particular industrial sectors, divided into ICT-

producing, ICT-using, and non-ICT industries. There has been no productivity revival in

U. S. industries that are classified as neither ICT-producing nor ICT-using, and this is

confirmed on the bottom line of Table 3 for the U. S. These industries are also the core of

the European problem, exhibiting a deceleration in the late 1990s slightly greater than for

the European economy as a whole. In ICT-producing industries there was an acceleration

after 1995 of 1.9 percent per year in the U. S. and a similar 1.6 percent per year in Europe,

but the U. S. started from a higher base. The core of the U. S. success story, and the source

of its difference from Europe, appears to have been in ICT-using industries, i.e., retail,

wholesale, and securities trading industries.

       A separate analysis by van Ark et al. (2003, Figure 2a) shows that literally all of the

productivity growth differential of the U. S. over Europe in the late 1990s came from these

three industries, with retail contributing about 55 percent of the differential, wholesale 24

percent, and securities trade 20 percent. The remaining industries had small positive or

negative differentials, netting out to zero. As might have been expected, the U. S.-Europe
                                                                  Leaving the Station, Page 8



differential was negative in telecom services, reflecting U. S. backwardness in mobile

phones.


III. The Retailing Phenomenon

          We know that U. S. productivity growth accelerated after 1995, and we can speculate

about the aspects of ICT innovation that helped this acceleration to occur. But the

simultaneous acceleration in productivity growth and in ICT investment as a share of GDP

amounts, at least in part, to circumstantial evidence. Questions can be raised about the link

between ICT innovation and the productivity revival, given evidence of a further

acceleration of productivity growth in the years after 2000, a period when ICT investment

collapsed.      Other aspects of innovation beyond ICT may be as important as ICT in

explaining the outstanding productivity performance since 1995 of the U. S. retail trade

sector.

          This performance did not occur evenly across the board in retailing but rather was

concentrated in ʺlarge stores offering a wide array of goods accompanied by low prices and

relatively high use of self-service systemsʺ (Sieling et al. 2001, p. 10). A complementary

finding by Foster et al. (2002) based on a study of a large set of individual retail

establishments shows that all of retail productivity growth (not just the revival but the

entire measured amount of productivity growth over the decade of the 1990s) can be
                                                                                 Leaving the Station, Page 9



attributed to more productive entering establishments which displaced much less

productive existing establishments. The average establishment that continued in business

exhibited zero productivity growth, and this despite the massive investment of the retail

industry in ICT equipment that presumably went to both old and new establishments.

In the Foster results, productivity growth reflects the greater efficiency of newly opened

stores, and the Sieling comment implies that most of these highly efficient new stores were

large discount operations, the proverbial ʺbig boxesʺ like Wal-Mart, Home Depot, Best Buy,

Circuit City, and new large supermarkets.

        The Sieling and Foster findings seem to conflict with the Oliner-Sichel (2000, 2002)

finding that, at least for the period through 1999, all of the productivity revival in retailing

was achieved by purchasing new computers, software, and communications equipment.5

All retailers, whether new estabilishments of the 1990s or older establishments of the 1980s

or prior decades, have adopted ICT technology. Bar-code readers have become universal

in new and old stores. It is likely that the productivity revival in retailing associated with

newly built ʺbig boxʺ stores involves something beyond the use of computers, including

large size, economies of scale, efficient design to allow large-volume unloading from

delivery trucks, stacking of merchandise on tall racks with fork-lift trucks, and large-scale



   5. A concise summary of the Oliner-Sichel findings for 1973-95 contrasted with both 1995-99 and 1995-
2002 appears in Gordon (2003, Table 10, p. 252).
                                                                                   Leaving the Station, Page 10



purchases taken by customers to vehicles in adjacent parking lots.

         As we have seen, the van Ark et al. (2002) results identify the retail sector as a major

factor explaining Europeʹs poor performance in the late 1990s. Just as the U. S. retailing

sector has achieved efficiency gains for reasons not directly related to computers, including

physical investments in a new type of ʺbig boxʺ organization, so we can suggest in parallel

that Europe has fallen back because European firms are much less free to develop the ʺbig

boxʺ retail formats.6 Impediments include land use regulations that prevent the carving

out of new ʺgreenfieldʺ sites for ʺbig boxʺ stores in suburban and exurban locations, shop-

closing regulations that restrict the revenue potential of new investments, congestion in

central-city locations that are near the nodes of Europeʹs extensive urban public transit

systems, and restrictive labor rules that limit flexibility in organizing the workplace and

make it expensive to hire and fire workers with the near-total freedom to which U. S. firms

are accustomed.

         A complementary interpretation is provided in a cross-country study of productivity

differences in the service sector by the McKinsey Global Institute (1992). Their set of policy

recommendations (Chapter 2-D, pp. 13-14) seem as relevant today as when written a

decade ago and echo the previous paragraph by pointing to impediments to the


   6. Any generalizations here about "Europe" must be qualified by differences across countries. The
Germans until recently were notorious for restrictive shop-closing hours, while the French firm Carrefour
and the Swedish firm Ikea are innovators in "big box" retailing formats.
                                                                Leaving the Station, Page 11



development of modern retailing in some but not all European countries. European

policymakers have adopted a set of policies that encourage high density and a

concentration of retailing activity in the central city. The development of modern ʺbig boxʺ

retailing formats has been hindered by these policies and the resulting high cost of real

estate and the complex and precarious process of obtaining planning approval for large

plots of land.

       An issue identified by McKinsey is the role of resale price maintenance policies that

in the U. S. assure new competitors that they will be able to attain the same access to

suppliers at roughly the same prices as existing retailers. In contrast, in some European

countries producers refuse to discount to new, high-volume, low-cost retailing formats in

order to protect smaller high-cost merchants. In some European countries, regulations

directly prohibit the entry of large-scale stores and/or limit store opening days and hours,

thus preventing large stores from fully amortizing their investments.

       A partial survey of other cross-country studies reveals a disappointing lack of

specific conclusions at the level of the van Ark et al. and McKinsey studies. The typical

study conducts a growth accounting exercise, concludes that Europe has lagged behind the

U. S. in adopting ICT technology to a greater or lesser degree, does not trace differences in

behavior to specific industries, and concludes with a general plea for unspecified structural

reforms. Among the studies that fit this characterization are Colecchia and Schreyer (2001),
                                                               Leaving the Station, Page 12



Daveri (2002), Rhine-Westphalia Institute for Economic Research (2002), and Vijselaar and

Albers (2002).

      A final caution is in order. The superior performance of U. S. retailing in achieving

rapid productivity growth may in part be due to a measurement procedure that allows

quality improvements in manufacturing to spill over to the retail sector. Imagine a 2003

computer sold at the same price as a 1993 computer but containing four times the ʺquality,ʺ

measured by a hedonic price regression that includes the computerʹs speed, memory, and

additional attributes (presence of CD-DVD read-write capability, presence of USB ports,

better speakers, etc). Then the 2003 computer represents four times the real output of the

manufacturing sector and four times the real sales of the retail sector. If all that the

retailing sector sold was computers, and if computer boxes sold per retail employee were

constant, the U. S. methodology would register an annual productivity growth rate for

retailing of 13.9 percent per year. While there has been substantial discussion of the role

of hedonic price indexes in improving the measured productivity performance of the U.

S. manufacturing sector, I am unaware of any similar comments about the potential for

noncomparability in retailing productivity.



IV. Economic Institutions and Culture

      A refreshing contrast is provided by Phelps (2003), who takes a broader view of
                                                                Leaving the Station, Page 13



economic institutions that promote economic ʺdynamismʺ and those that suppress it. His

analysis of ʺdynamismʺ starts from Schumpeterʹs concept of ʺcreative destructionʺ. He

adds to Schumpeterʹs emphasis on entrepreneurship an equal if not greater emphasis on

ʺfinanciership,ʺ that is, the ability of financial markets to steer finance to worthy

innovations. The greater success of the U. S. in encouraging innovation is attributed in part

to its greater emphasis on venture capital and initial public equity offerings (IPO) than in

Europe.

Europe: Corporatism and Spoiled Youth

       In Phelpsʹ view, the relatively poor economic performance of continental Europe

results both from the underdevelopment of capitalist institutions like venture capital and

equity finance, and the overdevelopment on corporatist institutions which suppress

innovation and competition.         These corporatist institutions impose ʺpenalties,

impediments, prohibitions, and mandates . . . generally intended to damp down creative

destruction.ʺ Among these impediments are licenses and permissions to set up a new plant

or firm, the need to consult with workers on changes in the mix of products or plants, and

employment protection legislation. Because these institutions are designed to suppress the

changes inherent in ʺunbridled capitalism,ʺ they also lead to the underdevelopment of the

stock market, resulting in lower ratios of stock market valuation to GDP in continental

Europe than in the U. S. and other less corporatist economies like Britain, Canada, and
                                                                 Leaving the Station, Page 14



Australia.    Phelps provides a complementary analysis of cultural differences between

Europe and the U. S. Europeans view with disdain the money-grubbing Americans with

their out-sized rewards for CEOs and successful entrepreneurs. American children begin

to work earlier than European children, earning baby-sitting money in their early teens,

working in fast-food outlets while in high school, and are forced to work during college in

contrast to European youth who ʺfree rideʺ on government-paid college tuition and

stipends. Phelps concludes that Europe has developed a culture of ʺdependencyʺ that

ʺbreeds an unduly large share of young people who have little sense of independence and

are unwilling to strike out on their own.ʺ He might have added that high levels of long-

term youth unemployment discourage independence and encourage young adults to live

with their parents in their 20s and, in Italy, into their 30s.

Caveats

       Europeans do not take these criticisms lying down. Yes, they admit that high youth

unemployment, low labor force participation, and a generation of young adults living with

their parents represent an economic and social failure. But they are quick to criticize

aspects of American economic and political institutions that, while making it easy for Wal-

Mart and Home Depot to find the land to build thousands of ʺbig boxʺ stores, has offsetting

disadvantages.

       Europeans find abhorrent the hundreds of billions, or even trillions, that Americans
                                                               Leaving the Station, Page 15



have spent on extra highways and extra energy to support the dispersion of the population

into huge metropolitan areas spreading over hundreds or even thousands of square miles,

in many cases with few transport options other than the automobile. Productivity data do

not give Europe sufficient credit for the convenience benefits of frequent bus, subway, and

train (including TGV) public transit. Excessive American dispersion is viewed as a

response to misguided public policies, especially subsidies to interstate highways in vast

amounts relative to public transport, local zoning measures in some suburbs that prohibit

residential land allocations below a fixed size, e.g., two acres, and the infamous and

politically untouchable deduction of mortgage interest payments from income tax.

      Europeans enjoy shopping at small individually owned shops on lively central city

main streets and pedestrian arcades, and recoil with distaste from the ubiquitous and

cheerless American strip malls and big-box retailers — although Carrefour, Ikea, and

others provide American-like options in some European cities. To counter the effects of

American land use regulations that create overly dispersed metropolitan areas, Europeans

counter with their own brand of land use rules that preserve greenbelts and inhibit growth

of suburban and exurban retailing. A more complete consideration of these differences

leads to the conclusion that GDP data understate the Europe/U. S. ratio of both

productivity and real GDP per capita (see Gordon, 2002).
                                                                 Leaving the Station, Page 16



V. Incentives for Innovation in the U. S. and Europe

       Thus far we have concluded that ICT investment has been exaggerated as the sole

source of the U. S. productivity revival of the late 1990s, and it is even more clear that lack

of ICT investment has been wrongly cited as the main source of the contrasting

productivity performance in Europe. The main U. S. advantage was in retail and wholesale

trade, where the expansion of new establishments raised productivity growth for many

reasons going well beyond ICT investment, and the ability of Europe to expand in tandem

was hampered by regulations and institutions that have long been cited as a drag on

European economic growth.

       Albeit narrowly based in computer hardware, at least in the official statistics, the

apparent ʺruptureʺ or discontinuity in the rate of technical change in the mid-1990s forces

to inquire as to its sources and lessons for understanding the economic history of the U. S.

and other nations. America is now almost universally believed to have surged to the

forefront in most of the ICT industries. But our overview of the stimuli and barriers to

technological change and innovation focusses not just on computer hardware more broadly

on software, telecommunications, pharmaceuticals, and biotech. Why did the U. S. have

a comparative or absolute advantage in innovative capacity in the late 1990s, more than a

century after its initial leadership in the invention of electricity and its early lead in the
                                                                                 Leaving the Station, Page 17



exploitation of the internal combustion engine?

National Technological Leadership: General Considerations

        The mid-1990s discontinuity of technical change in the United States was not

predicted in advance, although its significance was spotted almost immediately by Business

Week and some other astute observers.7 A decade earlier it had been ʺJapan as Number

Oneʺ, and briefly the market value of Japanese equities exceeded that of American equities.

Rosenberg (1986, p. 25) perceptively generalizes about the difficulty of forecasting the

consequences of inventions in advance: ʺA disinterested observer who happened to be

passing by at Kitty Hawk on that fateful day in 1903 might surely be excused if he did not

walk away with visions of 747s or C-5As in his head.ʺ The great success of Japanese firms

in dominating many leading technologies in the 1980s did not appear to give them any

head start in dominating the new technologies of the 1990s. Rosenberg points to the failure

of carriage makers to play any role in the development of the automobile, or even the

failure of steam locomotive makers to participate in the development of the diesel

locomotive. Thus it is perhaps not surprising that Japanese electronics companies did not

participate to any great extent in the particular interplay of chip-making technology and

software development that created the Internet and the post-1995 technical acceleration in



   7. Most notably Edward Yardeni, now the Chief Economist of Prudential Securities, who early in the
1990s predicted both the stock market boom and the revival of productivity growth.
                                                                                    Leaving the Station, Page 18



computer hardware, although the Japanese more recently have been leaders in the

development of mobile phones with cameras and internet capability.

         Many inventions initially created to solve a narrow problem (for instance, the steam

engine was initially invented to pump water out of flooded mines) turned out to have

widespread further uses that were not initially foreseen.                             Major inventions spawn

numerous complementary developments; while the initial motivation for the internal

combustion engine was to improve the performance-to-weight ratio of the steam engine,

it made possible not only motor transport and air transport, but such complementary

developments as the suburb, supermarket, superhighway, and the tropical vacation

industry. In turn, the complementary inventions raise the consumer surplus associated

with the invention, and this may continue for a long time. The invention of the Internet is

just one of many byproducts of the invention of electricity that raise the consumer surplus

of that initial major invention.8

         The literature on technology distinguishes between the initial invention and its

subsequent development and diffusion. A longstanding puzzle in the retardation of British

economic growth after the 1870s is the fact that many inventions initially made by British

inventors were brought to commercial success in the U. S., Japan, and elsewhere. This



   8. An explicit analysis of the effect of complementary inventions on the consumer surplus of the initial
invention is provided by Bresnahan and Gordon (1997, pp. 7-11).
                                                                                Leaving the Station, Page 19



issue of who captures the fruits of innovation suggests that the British were not alone in

losing out. The U. S. invention of videotape was followed by exploitation of the consumer

VCR market that was almost entirely achieved by Japanese companies. The Finnish

company Nokia took over leadership in mobile phones from Motorola. Within any

economy there are winners and losers as upstart companies (Intel, Microsoft) seize the

advantage in developing technology while leaving older competitors (IBM, Wang, Digital

Equipment, Xerox) behind.

        While predicting technological developments in advance is exceedingly difficult,

there is an ample literature which points to particular national characteristics that help to

explain, at least in retrospect, why particular inventions and industries came to be

dominated by particular countries.9 Perhaps the one generalization that spans most

industries is the role of the product cycle. No matter what the causes of initial national

leadership, technology eventually diffuses from the leading nations to other nations that

may have lower labor costs. It is beyond the scope of this discussion to explain why some

nations, e.g., Korea, Taiwan, and Singapore, seem to have done so much better than other

nations, e.g., Brazil or Bangladesh, in combining technological duplication with an

advantage, at least initially, in labor costs, in industries ranging from automobiles to chip,



  9. The generalizations in the next several paragraphs select among the more important points made by
Mowery and Nelson (1999a).
                                                                   Leaving the Station, Page 20



computer, and disk-drive manufacturing.

The Traditional Sources of U. S. Advantage.

       According to the standard data compiled by Maddison and others, summarized for

Europe (but not individual countries) in Table 1 above, the level of output per hour in the

United States moved ahead of that in the United Kingdom in the late nineteenth century

and has remained in first place among the major developed nations ever since. An

extensive literature on the sources of U. S. superiority (e.g., Wright, 1990) identifies national

advantages both in the supply of resources and in national characteristics of demand. The

U. S. achieved initial leadership in petrochemicals in part because of its abundant supply

of cheap domestic petroleum, while its leadership in machine tools was the result of its

early adoption of mass production methods, which in turn reflected its relative scarcity of

labor and its large internal market. In turn mass production, together with long distances,

cheap land, and the low density of urban development help to explain why the U. S.

achieved such an enormous early lead in automobile production and ownership in the

1920s. In turn the mass market for automobiles fed back into a rapidly increasing demand

for gasoline and stimulated further developments in petroleum and petrochemical

manufacturing. The enormous American lead in its 1929 capacity to manufacture engines

for motor vehicles, with perhaps 80 percent of worldwide capacity, contributed the core

of the astounding production achievement of the 1942-45 ʺArsenal of Democracy.ʺ
                                                                   Leaving the Station, Page 21



       However, it is less clear that Americaʹs large domestic market provided a universal

source of advantage throughout the history of technological development over the last two

centuries. Between 1870 and 1914 flows of goods, capital, and immigrants were notably

free, and trade could create international markets on the scale of the U. S. domestic

markets, as demonstrated by German dominance in chemicals. After 1960 Japan rose to

prominence and even domination in one industry after another, with export markets

providing the scale that was lacking, at least initially, at home. Several small countries, e.g.,

the Netherlands and Sweden, have remained close to the productivity frontier over the past

century despite their small relative size.

Educational Attainment and University Research.

       Close integration of industrial R&D and university research is credited with German

domination of the chemical products industry between the 1870s and early 1920s, as well

as German and Swiss leadership in the development of pharmaceuticals in the early part

of the 20th century. More generally, a rise in educational attainment is one of the sources

of rising output per hour. While the first cited role of the education system in technological

development is the rise of the German chemical industry after 1870, a set of relatively

uncoordinated policies at the state and local level resulted in the U. S. achieving the first

universal secondary education between 1910 and 1940 (Goldin, 1998) and the highest rate

of participation in college education after World War II.
                                                                 Leaving the Station, Page 22



       Even in the dismal days of American pessimism during the years of the 1972-95

productivity slowdown, it was widely recognized that Americaʹs private and state-

supported research universities were its most successful export industry, at least as

measured by its lead over other countries and its appeal for students from the rest of the

world. The interplay among these research universities, government research grants, and

private industry was instrumental in achieving American leadership in the IT industry, and

it was no coincidence that Silicon Valley happened to be located next to Stanford University

or that another concentration of IT companies in the hardware, software, and biotech

industries was located in the Boston area near M.I.T. and Harvard.

       A U. S. educational advantage of possible importance is its early development of the

graduate school of business and its continuing near-monopoly in this type of education.

The mere existence of business schools did not provide any solution to the productivity

slowdown of the 1970s and 1980s, and indeed the ongoing superiority of Japanese firms

in automobiles and consumer electronics elicited the cynical joke in those years that ʺthe

secret advantage of the Japanese manufacturers is that they have no world-class business

schools.ʺ While U. S. business schools were indeed weak in teaching such specialities as

manufacturing production and quality control, they excelled in finance and general

management strategy. These skills came into their own in the 1990s and interacted with

the rise of the venture capital industry and internet start-up companies; in the United States
                                                               Leaving the Station, Page 23



more than elsewhere there was a ready supply of thousands of well-educated MBAs, both

knowledgeable about finance and receptive to a culture of innovation and risk-taking.

Further, U. S. business schools have provided a wealth of talent to further develop U. S.

worldwide dominance in investment banking, accounting, and management-consulting

firms.

Government-funded Military and Civilian Research.

         Ironically for a country that has been suspicious of government involvement, it is

the United States that appears to demonstrate the closest links between government policy

and technological leadership. The central role of government subsidies in achieving

economic growth in the United States go back to the last half of the nineteenth century,

when free farmland under the Homestead Act encouraged immigration and the settlement

of the frontier, while land grants to railroads promoted the building of infrastructure.

Efficiency in the development of Americaʹs endowment of land and raw materials was

fostered by agricultural experiment and research stations and by schools of mining

established as part of Americaʹs then-new network of state universities and colleges

(Wright, 1990). In the modern era research support from the National Institutes of Health

and National Science Foundation are credited with postwar American leadership in

pharmaceuticals and biomedical research, as well as basic research in the sciences.

Defense-funded research and government-funded grants is credited with the early
                                                                  Leaving the Station, Page 24



emergence of American leadership in semiconductors, computers, software, biotech, and

the Internet itself. Government antitrust policy is credited with the emergence of a

software industry largely independent of computer hardware manufacturers.

       There are notable differences between the U. S. method of supporting higher

education and research and that found in European countries like France, Germany, and

the U. K. First, the U. S. mix of private universities and those financed at the state and local

level promotes competition and allows the top tier of the private university sector the

budgetary freedom to pay high salaries, fund opulent research labs, and achieve the

highest levels of quality, in turn attracting many top faculty members and graduate

students from other countries. Second, much of U. S. central government research support

is allocated through a peer-review system that favors a meritocracy of young, active

researchers and discourages elitism and continuing support for senior professors whose

best ideas are in the past. In Europe a much larger share of central government support

to universities and research institutes goes to general budgetary support that tends to result

in a more equal salary structure less prone to reward academic ʺstarsʺ and also relies less

on the periodic quality hurdle imposed by peer review. This set of differences is in

addition to specific national shortcomings, e.g., the hierarchical dominance of senior

research professors in Germany.

Other Government Policies.
                                                               Leaving the Station, Page 25



       Explicit government policies to encourage the development of specific industries by

trade protection and financial subsidies may have been successful in helping to accelerate

the rise of Japan and Korea to industrial success, but they have been less successful in the

United States and Europe and indeed may have backfired in Japan in the past decade. The

relevance of particular government policies, from protection to defense spending to

antitrust, differs sufficiently across industries as to discourage generalizations. In the

industries that have received the most credit for the post-1995 productivity revival —

semiconductors, computer hardware, and computer software — the most important

aspect of public policy appears to have been the relatively unfocussed support of research

and training by the U. S. government. The literature on the American resurgence in

semiconductor production as well as its continuing dominance in software also emphasizes

the role of private enforcement of intellectual property rights and regulation of licensing

agreements (see Bresnahan and Melerba, 1999, and Mowery, 1999).                 The U. S.

pharmaceutical industry initially gained an advantage through massive government

support during World War II, health-related research support during most of the postwar

period, and a long tradition of strong U. S. patent protection — patent protection was also

strong in parts of Europe, but not in Italy and also not in Japan. U. S. drug companies also

were able to make high profits, much of which was reinvested in R&D, as a result of high

rents earned in the face of a fragmented health care system with no attempt by the
                                                                Leaving the Station, Page 26



government to place price or profit ceilings on drug companies (see Pisano 2002).

       Another set of U. S. policies could be interpreted as ʺenforcement of benign neglect.ʺ

The U. S. government took no action to arrest the erosion of state sales tax revenues as

internet e-commerce merchants sold items without charging any sales tax to customers.

In effect, the freedom of e-commerce transactions from the burden of sales taxes amounted

to government subsidization of shipping charges, since for e-commerce these usually

amounted to roughly the same surcharge on listed prices as sales taxes at traditional bricks

and mortar outlets. The U. S. government also maintained a zero-tariff regime for trade

in electronic components, fostering large trade flows in both directions and a large U. S.

trade deficit in IT manufacturing.

Capital Markets

       In the 1980s American capital markets seemed to be a source of American industrial

weakness, with their emphasis on short-run profit maximization, and there was much envy

of the access of Japanese firms to low-cost bank capital that played a role in the temporary

period of Japanese domination of the semiconductor industry. But the American capital

market turned out to be a blessing in disguise. A long tradition of government securities

regulation that forced public disclosure and information and of access of equity research

analysts to internal company information had fostered a large and active market for public

offerings, and this together with the relatively recent emergence of the venture capital
                                                                                     Leaving the Station, Page 27



industry provided ample finance for start-up companies once the technological

groundwork for the Internet was laid in the mid-1990s.10 Lerner (2002) identifies a critical

policy change as fostering the relatively recent rise of the U. S. venture capital industry,

namely a ruling that allowed pension funds to invest in venture capital firms. While the

stock market collapse in 2000-02 brought the venture capital industry down with it, the

financial infrastructure is still there seeking out the next round of innovation. Only a small

part of this endowment of innovation-seeking financial specialists was lost during the 2000-

02 stock market decline. Further, the next wave of equity financing will take place in an

environment in which accounting scandals have been discovered, perpetrators have been

tried and jailed, and public confidence in the integrity of financial statements has been

substantially increased.

Language and Immigration

         The literature on technological leadership omits two sources of American advantage

that are surely not insignificant. While language has little to do with domination in

computer hardware (where indeed many of the components are imported), it is surely

important for the American software industry that English long ago became the worldʹs



    10. As usual there are interconnections between the various sources of American advantage. For
instance, the best U. S. private universities have been a critical source of U. S. technological leadership and
their wealth and power has been further augmented by their recent investments in U. S. venture capital firms.
For instance in 1999 Harvard made roughly a 150 percent return on its venture capital investments and a
return of over 40 percent on its entire endowment which now totals almost $20 billion.
                                                                Leaving the Station, Page 28



leading second language in addition to being spoken as a first language by a critical mass

of the worldʹs educated population. Another oft-neglected factor that should be discussed

more often is the longstanding openness of the United States to immigration and the role

of immigrants from India, East Asia, and elsewhere in providing the skilled labor that has

been essential to the rise of Silicon Valley. Likewise, Indians returning from Silicon Valley

have taken the lead in developing Indiaʹs capabilities in programming and call centers that

have fueled the current American debate about the potential harm or benefit of

ʺoutsourcing.ʺ

       Another aspect of American advantage and disadvantage is also perhaps too little

discussed. The technology literature summarized above places heavy emphasis on the

unique role of American research universities in providing a competitive atmosphere

geared to the attraction of the best faculty performing the best research. Yet every year

another set of test results is announced in which Americans score far down the league

tables in math and science when compared to numerous countries in Europe and Asia.

Those who wring their hands about the state of American elementary and secondary

education might better spend their energies lobbying Congress to increase the immigration

quotas for highly educated individuals with skills in those areas where some Americans

are weak, especially science and engineering. And those who would argue that loosening

of high-skilled quotas should occur at the cost of a reduction in low-skilled quotas are
                                                                                      Leaving the Station, Page 29



urged to consider the many benefits of immigration in general, including the provision of

new workers to ease the strain of overly tight labor markets, the revitalization of many

central cities, and the postponement forever of any so-called Social Security ʺcrisis.ʺ11

Comparisons with Other Countries

         In most comparisons among the leading industrialized nations Britain (and

sometimes Canada) occupy a central ground between the extremes of American

exceptionalism and the opposite tendencies of the continental Europeans and Japanese,

whether concerning the level of unemployment, employment protection or the lack thereof,

the degree of inequality, and the extent of government spending. Yet in comparing the

extent of American technological leadership with other countries, the story is not one of

extremes, and the balance of advantage varies widely by industry.

         Americans dominate most strongly in microprocessors and in computer software.

As documented by Langlois (2002), the extent of Intelʹs domination of the worldwide

market for microprocessors is perhaps unprecedented in industrial history, and the same

could be said for Microsoft. However, the U. S. advantage in computer hardware is

qualified by the role of Asian countries in providing components like memory chips, hard

drives, and laptop screens. In fact the United States runs a large trade deficit in computer



   11. A detailed critique of the current immigration assumptions of the U. S. social security trustees is
contained in Gordon (2003, pp. 264-9).
                                                                                 Leaving the Station, Page 30



hardware and peripherals, both because of component imports from Asia and because a

substantial share of production by American companies like Intel and Dell takes place not

just at home but also in foreign countries like Malaysia and Ireland. In mobile telephones

the U. S. has been handicapped by regulation that favored too much competition and

allowed multiple standards, thus allowing the dominant producers of GSM equipment and

infrastructure (Nokia and Ericsson) to run away with the worldwide mobile phone market.

The American pharmaceutical industry also faces strong competition from British, German,

and Swiss firms, although recent evidence suggests that key research labs are moving from

Europe to Boston, the Bay Area, and other U. S. research centers.12

         Several sources of systemic U. S. advantage stand out, most notably the mixed

system of government- and private-funded research universities, the large role of U. S.

government agencies providing research funding based on a criterion of peer review, and

the strong position in a worldwide perspective of U. S. business schools and U. S.-owned

investment banking, accounting, and management-consulting firms. By comparison

Germany seems particularly weak in its failure to reform its old-fashioned hierarchical

university system, its bureaucratic rules that inhibit start-up firms, its reliance on bank debt

finance, and its weakness in venture capital and equity finance (Siebert and Stolpe, 2002).


   12. A meeting of the Governors for Health Care at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland,
on January 22, 2004, centered on the current "brain drain" of pharmaceutical research from Europe to the
U. S.
                                                                 Leaving the Station, Page 31



France suffers from overcentralized government control, a system of universities and

research institutions which places more emphasis on rewarding those with an elite

educational pedigree rather than those currently working on the research frontier, and a

culture (with its frequent strikes by farmers and government workers) which is relatively

hostile to innovation and change (see Messerlin, 2002).

       Until its structural reforms and privatizations of the 1980s and 1990s, Britain shared

with France and Germany a labor market dominated by strong unions. While the strong

unions are gone, Britain continues to suffer from handicaps that date back a century or

more, including a shortfall of technical skills among manual workers and a lack of graduate

management training and business-oriented culture among highly educated workers.

Where Britain does well, as in investment banking or as a destination of inward foreign

investment, it relies on a relatively narrow set of advantages, including the traditional role

of the City of London as a financial center, and the same advantage that the English

language provides, i.e., as a comfortable place for Asian firms to build plants, to the United

States, Canada, Ireland, Australia, and other parts of the former British Empire.



VI. Conclusion

       After fifty years of catching up to the U. S. level of productivity, since 1995 Europe

has been falling behind. The growth rate in output per hour over 1995-2003 in Europe was
                                                                 Leaving the Station, Page 32



just half that in the United States, and this annual growth shortfall caused the level of

European productivity to fall back from 94 percent of the U. S. level to 85 percent (Table

1 above). Fully one-fifth of the European catch-up (from 44 to 94 percent) over the

previous half-century has been lost over the period since 1995.

       Since Europe uses the same computer hardware and software as the U. S., the

impediments to European growth must lie elsewhere than inadequate investment in ICT.

The new upsurge of U. S. productivity growth during 2000-03, a period when ICT

investment slumped, also suggests that ICT investment has previously been given too

much credit for the U. S. productivity achievement, and insufficient attention has been

directed to other contributing factors. References to ʺEuropeʺ disguise a wide variety of

performance, with Ireland and Finland exhibiting much faster productivity growth than

the U. S., but ʺolive beltʺ nations like Italy and Greece scoring low on productivity and ICT

investment (except for mobile phones). Disaggregated studies of industrial sectors suggest

that the main difference between Europe and the U. S. is in ICT-using industries like

wholesale and retail trade and in securities trading. The contrast in retailing calls attention

to regulatory barriers and land-use regulations in Europe that inhibit the development of

the ʺbig boxʺ retailing formats that have created many of the productivity gains in the U. S.

       For many decades, the U. S. and Europe have gone in opposite directions in the

public policies relevant for metropolitan growth. The U. S. has promoted highly dispersed
                                                                 Leaving the Station, Page 33



low-density metropolitan areas through its policies of building intra-urban highways,

starving public transit, tax subsidies to home ownership, and allowing local governments

to maintain low density by maintaining minimum residential lot sizes. Europeans have

chosen different policies, including public transit subsidies that seem lavish by American

standards, with less generous tax subsidies to home ownership and land use policies which

encourage high-density residential living and retail precincts in the central city while

inhibiting the exploitation of ʺgreenfieldʺ suburban and exurban sites suitable for modern

ʺbig boxʺ retail developments.

       Phelps provides a unifying framework in which economic dynamism is promoted

by policies that promote competition and flexible equity finance and is retarded by

corporatist institutions which are designed to protect incumbent producers and inhibit new

entry. He also points to European cultural attributes that inhibit the development of

ambition and independence by teenagers and young adults, in contrast to their

encouragement in the U. S. While competition, corporatism, and culture may help to

explain the differing evolution of productivity growth on the two sides of the Atlantic since

1995, they reveal institutional flaws in both continents that are inbred and likely to persist.




       The outstanding performance of American productivity growth since 1995 raises the

danger of a resurgent American triumphalism, perhaps symbolized by an imaginary Arc
                                                                                      Leaving the Station, Page 34



de Triomphe erected over Sand Hill Road at the border between Palo Alto and Menlo Park,

CA, the heart of Silicon Valley. No doubt the growing American dominance of innovation

in ICT, biotech, and pharmaceuticals reflects in part the fruitful collaboration of

government research funding, world-leading private universities, innovative private firms,

and a dynamic capital market.                    However, we should be cautious.                   The favorable

preconditions that fostered innovation after 1995 did not prevent the U. S. from

experiencing the dismal 1972-95 years of the productivity growth slowdown and near-

stagnation of real wages, and they do not give the U. S. an advantage in many other

industries. A quarter century after the invasion of Japanese auto imports, the quality

rankings of automobiles still are characterized by a bimodal distribution in which Japanese

nameplates (even those manufactured in the U. S.) dominate the highest rankings and

American nameplates dominate the lowest.13 The U. S. shows no sign of regaining

leadership in the manufacturing of computer peripherals or machine tools. The U. S.

innovation infrastructure remains fertile soil when the right seeds are planted, as after 1995,

but fertile soil without the right seeds can lie fallow for decades.




  13. See Consumer Reports, April, 2004, and the latest J. D. Powers initial quality rankings.
                                                             Leaving the Station, Page 35



                                   REFERENCES

Bartlesman, Eric, Bassanini, Andrea, Haltiwanger, John, Jarmin, Ron, Scarpetta, Stefano,
       and Schank, Thorsten (2002). ʺThe Spread of ICT and Productivity Growth: Is
       Europe Really Lagging Behind in the New Economy,ʺ OECD draft report presented
       at Conference ʺThe Information Economy: Productivity Gains and the Digital
       Divide,ʺ Catania, Sicily, June 15.

Bresnahan, Timothy F., and Gordon, Robert J. (1997). ʺIntroduction,ʺ The Economics of New
      Goods. University of Chicago Press for NBER, pp. 1-26.

__________ and Malerba, Franco (1999). ʺIndustrial Dynamics and the Evolution of Firmsʹ
      and Nationsʹ Competitive Capabilities in the World Computer Industry,ʺ in Mowery
      and Nelson, eds. (1999b), pp. 79-132.

Colecchia, Allessandra, and Schreyer, Paul (2001). ʺICT Investment and Economic Growth
      in the 1990s: Is the United States a Unique Case?ʺ OECD, Paris, draft paper,
      October 7.

Daveri, Francesco (2002). ʺThe New Economy in Europe (1992-2001),ʺ IGIER Working Paper
      no. 213, April.

Foster, Lucia, Haltiwanger, John, and Krizan, C. J. (2002). ʺThe Link between Aggregate
       and Micro Productivity Growth: Evidence from Retail Trade,ʺ NBER Working
       Paper 9120, August.

Goldin, Claudia (1998). ʺAmericaʹs Graduation from High School: The Evolution and
      Spread of Secondary Schooling in the Twentieth Century.ʺ Journal of Economic
      History, vol. 58 (June), pp. 345-74.

Gordon, Robert J. (2002). ʺTwo Centuries of Economic Growth: Europe Chasing the
     American Frontier,ʺ working paper, Northwestern University, November.
     Available at http://faculty-web.at.northwestern.edu/economics/gordon

__________ (2003). ʺExploding Productivity Growth: Context, Causes, and Implications,ʺ
      Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 207-98.
                                                                  Leaving the Station, Page 36



Jorgenson, Dale W. and Stiroh, Kevin J. 2000. ʺRaising the Speed Limit: U. S. Economic
      Growth in the Information Age,ʺ Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 31, no.
      1, pp. 125-211.

Langlois, Richard N. (2002). ʺComputers and Semiconductors,ʺ in Steil, Benn, et al., eds.
      (2002), pp. 265-84.

Lerner, Josh (2002). ʺVenture Capital,ʺ in Steil, Benn, et al., eds. (2002), pp. 327-46.

Maddison, Angus (2001). The World Economy: A Millennial Perspective. Paris: OECD.

Messerlin, Patrick A. (2002). ʺFranceʺ, in Steil, Benn, et al., eds. (2002), pp. 148-77.

McGuckin, Robert H., and van Ark, Bart (2004). Performance 2003, Productivity, Employment
     and Income in the Worldʹs Economies. New York: The Conference Board, March.

McKinsey Global Institute (1992). Service Sector Productivity. Washington, October.

Mowery, David C. (1999). ʺThe Computer Software Industry,ʺ in Mowery and Nelson, eds.
    (1999b), pp. 133-68.

__________ and Nelson, Richard R. (1999). ʺExplaining Industrial Leadership,ʺ in Mowery
      and Nelson, eds. (1999b), pp. 359-82.

__________ and Nelson, Richard R., eds. (1999b). Sources of Industrial Leadership: Studies
      of Seven Industries. Cambridge UK: Cambridge University Press.

__________ and Rosenberg, Nathan (2000). ʺTwentieth-Century Technological Change,ʺ
      in Stanley L. Engerman and Robert E. Gallman, The Cambridge Economic History of
      the United States, Volume III, the Twentieth Century. Cambridge University Press, pp.
      803-925.

Oliner, Stephen D., and Daniel E. Sichel (2000). ʺThe Resurgence of Growth in the Late
       1990s: Is Information Technology the Story?ʺ Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol.
       14, Fall, pp. 3-22.

__________ (2002). ʺInformation Technology and Productivity: Where Are We Now and
                                                                 Leaving the Station, Page 37



       Where Are We Going?ʺ Economic Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta (third
       quarter), pp. 15-44.

OʹMahony, Mary, and van Ark, Bart (2003). EU Productivity and Competitiveness: An
     Industry Perspective: Can Europe Resume the Catching-up Process? DG Enterprise,
     European Union, Luxembourg.                         Downloadable from
     http://www.ggdc.net/pub/EU_productivity_and_competitiveness.pdf.

Phelps, Edmund S. (2003). ʺEconomic Underperformance in Continental Europe: A
      Prospering Economy Runs on the Dynamism from its Economic Institutions,ʺ
      lecture, Royal Institute for International Affairs, London, March 18.

Pisano, Gary P. (2002). ʺPharmaceutical Biotechnology,ʺ in Steil, Benn, et al., eds. (2002),
      pp. 347-66.

Rhine-Westphalia Institute for Economic Research (RWI) (2002). New Economy: An
      Assessment from a German Viewpoint. Essen, February.

Rosenberg, Nathan (1986). ʺThe Impact of Technological Innovation: A Historical View,ʺ
      in Ralph Landau and Nathan Rosenberg, eds., The Positive Sum Strategy: Harnessing
      Technology for Economic Growth. Washington DC: National Academy Press, pp. 17-
      32.

Siebert, Horst, and Stope, Michael (2002). ʺGermany,ʺ in Steil, Benn, et al., eds. (2002), pp.
       112-47.

Sieling, Mark, Friedman, Brian, and Dumas, Mark (2001). ʺLabor Productivity in the Retail
       Trade Industry, 1987-99,ʺ Monthly Labor Review (December), pp. 3-14.

Stiel, Benn, Victor, David G., and Nelson, Richard R. (2002). Technological Innovation and
        Economic Performance. Princeton and Oxford: Princeton University Press.

van Ark, Bart, Inklaar, Robert, and McGuckin, Robert H. (2003). ʺChanging Gear:
     Productivity, ICT and Service Industries in Europe and the United States,ʺ in J. F.
     Christensen and P. Maskell, eds., The Industrial Dynamics of the New Digital Economy.
     Edward Elgar, pp. 56-99.
                                                            Leaving the Station, Page 38



Vijselaar, Focco, and Albers, Ronald (2002). ʺNew Technologies and Productivity Growth
       in the Euro Area,ʺ European Central Bank Working Paper no. 122, February.

Wright, Gavin (1990). ʺThe Origins of American Industrial Success: 1879-1940,ʺ American
      Economic Review, vol. 80 (September), pp. 651-68.
                                   TABLE 1

              Growth Rate and Level of GDP per Hour Worked,
                       U. S. vs. Europe, 1870-2003

             Annual Average Growth Rate         Europe Level, U. S. =100

                                   U. S. -              Europe /
              U. S.      Europe    Europe                U. S.

                                                 1870         71
1870-1913         1.92      1.55       0.37      1913         61
1913-1950         2.48      1.56       0.92      1950         44
1950-1973         2.77      4.77      -2.00      1973         79
1973-1995         1.48      2.25      -0.77      1995         94
1995-2003         2.33      1.15       1.18      2003         85


Source: 1870-1990, Maddison (2001, Tables E-8 and E-9, pp. 352-3)
        1990-2003, OECD Economic Outlook, December 2003, Table 13
                                    TABLE 2

       Annual Rate of Change of Output, Hours, and Output per Hour,
                        U. S. vs. Europe, 1990-2003

                                                                        1995-2003
                       1990-95      1995-2000 2000-03         1995-2003 vs. 1990-95

United States
 Output                       2.4           4.1         2.0          3.3      0.9
 Hours                        1.4           2.2         0.1          1.4      0.0
 Output per Hour              1.0           1.9         1.9          1.9      0.9

European Union
 Output                       1.5           2.6         1.2          2.1      0.6
 Hours                       -1.0           1.1         0.3          0.8      1.8
 Output per Hour              2.5           1.5         0.9          1.3     -1.2

Source: McGuckin-van Ark (2004, Table 1).
                                                      TABLE 3

        Labor Productivity by Industry Group, U. S. vs. Europe,
        1990-95 vs. 1995-2001, Annual Growth Rates in Percent

                                        United States                European Union
                                1990-       1995-     1990-     1990-    1995-     1990-
                                1995        2001      2001      1995      2001      2001

Total Economy                        1.1        2.2       1.6       2.3      1.7       2.0

ICT Producing Industries             8.1       10.0       8.7       5.9      7.5       6.5

ICT Using Industries                 1.2        4.7       2.9       2.0      1.9       1.9

Non-ICT Industries                   0.3       -0.2       0.0       1.2      0.5       0.8



Source: O'Mahony and van Ark (2003, Table III.3).
