NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

NEIGHBORS AS NEGATIVES:
RELATIVE EARNINGS AND WELL-BEING
Erzo F.P. Luttmer
Working Paper 10667
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10667
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2004

I would like to thank Iris Bohnet, Suzanne Cooper, David Cutler, Tom DeLeire, Joe Doyle, Sue Dynarski,
David Ellwood, Amy Finkelstein, Roland Fryer, Ed Glaeser, Caroline Hoxby, Brian Jacob, Sandy Jencks,
Matt Kahn, Larry Katz, Elizabeth Keating, Asim Khwaja, Brian Knight, Jeff Liebman, Helen Levy, Ellen
Meara, Ben Olken, Martin Sandbu, Jesse Shapiro, Cybele Raver, Mark Rosenzweig, Bas ter Weel, Richard
Zeckhauser and seminar participants of the NBER Labor Studies Summer Institute, Wharton and Columbia
for helpful discussions and useful comments. All errors are my own. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Erzo F. P. Luttmer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Neighbors as Negatives: Relative Earnings and Well-Being
Erzo F. P. Luttmer
NBER Working Paper No. 10667
August 2004
JEL No. D6, H0, J0
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates whether individuals feel worse off when others around them earn more. In
other words, do people care about relative position and does "lagging behind the Joneses" diminish
well-being? To answer this question, I match individual-level panel data containing a number of
indicators of well-being to information about local average earnings. I find that, controlling for an
individual's own income, higher earnings of neighbors are associated with lower levels of selfreported happiness. The data's panel nature and rich set of measures of well-being and behavior
indicate that this association is not driven by selection or by changes in the way people define
happiness. There is suggestive evidence that the negative effect of increases in neighbors' earnings
on own well-being is most likely caused by interpersonal preferences, i.e. people having utility
functions that depend on relative consumption in addition to absolute consumption.
Erzo F.P. Luttmer
JFK School of Government
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
erzo_luttmer@harvard.edu

1. Introduction

Classical economists understood that individuals are motivated at least partly by concerns
about relative position. Adam Smith (1759), for example, wrote: “Nothing is so mortifying as to
be obliged to expose our distress to the view of the public, and to feel, that though our situation
is open to the eyes of all mankind, no mortal conceives for us the half of what we suffer. Nay, it
is chiefly from this regard to the sentiments of mankind, that we pursue riches and avoid
poverty.” Arthur Pigou (1920) approvingly quotes John Stuart Mill’s observation that “men do
not desire to be rich, but richer than other men.”1 Of course, the belief that people may compare
themselves to others around them goes back much further. After all, the framer of the Ten
Commandments apparently judged it necessary to forbid humans from coveting their neighbor’s
possessions. Not all humans, however, appear to abide by this Commandment and possible
effects of social comparisons on consumption and savings behavior are analyzed in the classic
works of Veblen (1899) and Duesenberry (1949).
Though contemporary economists are aware that individuals may care about relative
position, the accepted mainstream model states that individuals derive utility from their own
consumption, U(C), rather than from a combination of own and relative consumption, U(C,
C/ C ), where C denotes some measure of the consumption of relevant others.2 For many
applications it does not matter whether utility has a relative component; whenever C is fixed or
given, U(C) and U(C, C/ C ) are isomorphic. Indeed, unless an individual’s behavior can affect

1

This is quoted in Graham and Pettinato (2002).
Becker (1974) introduces a more general framework for incorporating social considerations into a utility function.
C need not be the simple average of the consumption of relevant others, but could be some weighted average with
the weight depending on the similarity of the respondent to the other person or on the level of consumption of the
other person.

2

1

C , U(C) and U(C, C/ C ) cannot be distinguished by individual behavior without placing

additional structure on the utility function.3 In light of this, it is perhaps not surprising that most
economists tend to rely on an absolute formulation of utility: U(C).
Whereas individuals may in many cases take C as given, policy decisions often affect
C . Hence, the distinction between absolute and relative formulations of utility has important

implications for tax and expenditure policy, as analyzed by Boskin and Sheshinski (1978),
Layard (1980), Oswald (1983), Ng (1987), Seidman (1987), Ireland (1998), Ljungqvist and
Uhlig (2000) and Abel (2003). In particular, if utility depends on relative consumption, one
person’s increase in consumption has a negative externality on others because it lowers the
relative consumption of others. In this case, taxes that discourage consumption are not as
distortionary as previously thought because they also serve to internalize the negative externality
of consumption on others.
When utility depends on one’s consumption relative to nearby others, residential sorting
by consumption level will reduce inequality of utility because people will compare themselves
with others more like themselves. Comparing oneself to similar others reduces inequality in
perceived relative position, which is one component of inequality of utility. If utility is linear in
relative consumption and additive in absolute and relative consumption, then residential sorting
by consumption level does not affect average utility, but for other functional forms it can
increase or decrease average utility. Thus, when people care about relative position, the degree

3

A structure that specifies that relative concerns are more important for some goods (e.g. present consumption or
luxury consumption items) than for other goods (e.g. leisure or future consumption) yields behavioral implications.
See, for example, Pollak (1976) or Frank (1985). As Dupor and Liu (2003) make clear, if the consumption of others
affects own marginal utility rather the level of own utility, the consumption of others can influence asset pricing,
risk taking, savings, intensity of job search, work effort, economic growth and income inequality. See, e.g., Abel
(1990), Robson (1992), Galí (1994), Carroll, Overland and Weil (1997), Campbell and Cochrane (1999), Stutzer and
Lalive (2001), Becker, Murphy and Werning (2003) and Zeckhauser and Rizzo (2003).

2

of residential sorting has direct effects on the distribution of well-being in addition to the indirect
effects usually identified (e.g. due to the financing of local public goods).
The distinction between relative and absolute formulations of utility is also pertinent to
the longstanding debate on whether the poverty line should be absolute (a fixed consumption
basket), as it is in the U.S. and in many developing countries, or relative (a fraction of mean or
median income), as it is in much of Europe (Sen, 1983). It also matters for the question whether
increases in inequality due to a rise in the top incomes are a matter of policy concern. Feldstein
(1998), for example, argues forcefully that only poverty, not increases in inequality due to
increased top incomes, warrant policy attention because the latter is a pure Pareto improvement
under the assumption that people only derive utility from their own consumption. He notes that
this argument would not hold for “spiteful egalitarians,” or people who say “It makes me worse
off to see the rich getting richer.” While one may reject spiteful egalitarianism on moral grounds
(and therefore use a paternalistic argument to exclude this spiteful utility component from any
social welfare function), it is an empirical question to determine whether people actually suffer
from this affliction. In other words, do people actually feel worse off when those around them
are richer?4
This paper tries to answer that question and finds evidence of “spiteful egalitarianism.” I
use panel data on individuals’ self-reported happiness, other measures of well-being and other
characteristics from the 1987-88 and the 1992-94 waves of the National Survey of Families and
Households (NSFH). I match this data to information on local earnings, where localities are socalled Public Use Microdata Areas (“PUMAs”), which have about 150,000 inhabitants on
average. Average annual earnings in each PUMA are estimated by applying national earnings by
4

Samuelson (2004) and Rayo and Becker (2004) offer evolutionary explanations of relative consumption effects.
Postewaite (1998) discusses the advantages and drawbacks of modeling relative position as an argument of the
utility function rather than as an instrument to getting more own consumption in the future.

3

industry, occupation and year from the Current Population Survey to the industry and occupation
mix of that PUMA from the 1990 Census five percent Public Use Micro Sample. I find that
higher PUMA-level earnings are associated with lower levels of happiness, controlling for a host
of individual characteristics including income.5 This effect is large, robust to changes in
specification and highly statistically significant. An increase in neighbors’ earnings and a
similarly sized decrease in own income each lead to a reduction in happiness of about the same
order of magnitude.
This paper builds on previous papers that have empirically examined the relationship
between relative position and well-being.6 In a series of papers, Easterlin (1974, 1995 and 2001)
notes that income and self-reported happiness are positively correlated across individuals within
a country but that average happiness within countries does not seem to rise over time as countries
become richer. Easterlin interprets these findings as evidence that relative income rather than the
level of income matters for well-being. Veenhoven (1991) and Diener et al. (1993) show that
happiness is not purely a relative concept, but they cannot rule out that concerns about relative
position matter. Van de Stadt, Kapteyn and Van de Geer (1985) find that the income level that
respondents say they need to reach a certain level of satisfaction rises both with own income and
with income in one’s reference group as defined by education and age. They interpret this as
5

Though, at a conceptual level, relative consumption rather than relative income or earnings affects well-being, I
use measures of earnings and income as proxies for consumption in the empirical section because of data
availability.
6
Frey and Stutzer (2002) provide an excellent review of this literature. Layard (2003) also discusses much of this
literature as part of his engaging Lionel Robbins Memorial Lectures on happiness. Relative position may affect
outcome variables other than subjective well-being. Clark and Oswald (1996) show evidence on job satisfaction
while Neumark and Postlewaite (1998) and Bowles and Park (2002) relate it to labor supply decisions. There is a
long literature on the effects of inequality on health outcomes. Deaton (2003) surveys this literature and concludes
that the evidence on the relation between income inequality and health needs to be treated skeptically though he
believes there is convincing biological evidence that increases in rank can be protective of health. Eibner and Evans
(2001) find evidence for the U.S. that relative deprivation (which is a measure of rank and the income gap with
those who are richer) increases mortality. Similarly, local variables other than income may affect well-being. Clark
(2003) finds effects of local unemployment on happiness that may be explained by concerns about relative position.
Alesina, Di Tella and MacCulloch (2001) investigate how inequality affects well-being and, intriguingly, find
negative effects in Europe but not in the U.S.

4

evidence that utility is (partly) relative, but the findings could also be driven by reference group
income proxying for poorly measured own income.7 Using a self-reported measure of relative
position, Graham and Pettinato (2002) find suggestive evidence in developing countries that
well-being is influenced by relative income concerns though their measure of relative position
might also proxy for own income.
Using Canadian data, Tomes (1986) relates self-reported happiness and life-satisfaction
to own income and income in the local community. In a number of specifications, he finds that
increases in income in certain parts of the community income distribution reduce well-being and
he concludes that his “results support the interdependent preferences model, but defy any simple
characterization in terms of inequality aversion or relative economic status.” Using the German
Socio-Economic Panel, Ferrer-i-Carbonell (2004) finds compelling evidence that, controlling for
own income, subjective well-being is decreasing in income of the reference group defined by
education × age × region cells where region is East or West Germany. Stutzer (2004) shows that
self-reported happiness of Swiss individuals depends negatively on income aspirations when
own income is held constant. Income aspirations, in turn, depend positively on the average
income in one’s community, thus providing a mechanism by which average local income reduces
self-reported happiness. Using U.S. data, McBride (2001) and Oswald and Clark (2004) both
find tantalizing evidence that relative income affects subjective well-being but they caution about
the statistical reliability of their findings.8

7

Van Praag and Kapteyn (1973) found previously that income needed to reach a certain level of satisfaction rises
with own income and interpret this as “preference drift,” or evidence of habit formation. See Van Praag and Frijters
(1999) for more details on the approach to measuring welfare using income need questions.
8
Using a sample of 324 individuals from the General Social Survey, McBride (2001) finds that, controlling for own
income, self-reported happiness depends negatively on the average income in one’s age cohort defined as those
within 5 years of the respondent’s age though this effect is only just significant at the 5% level in one of his two
specifications and not significant in the other. Oswald and Clark (2004) find that, controlling for own income, there
is a sizeable but statistically insignificant negative effect of per capita state income on self-reported happiness,
providing suggestive evidence that individuals care about relative position. They also find that relative income

5

This paper contributes in three ways to this literature. First, it takes seriously the concern
that living in a prosperous area might affect one’s definition of happiness even if it does not
affect one’s true or experienced well-being. I use other outcome measures that are less prone to
definition shifts in response to neighbors’ earnings to investigate this concern and conclude that
this concern is not driving the results.
Second, the paper examines whether the inverse relationship between happiness and
neighbors’ earnings might be spurious due to omitted individual or local characteristics. The
panel nature of the NSFH data enables me to run specifications with individual fixed effects, its
detailed geographical information allows for the inclusion of state×time-specific fixed effects,
and the use of a predicted measure of local earnings filters out many local earnings shocks
caused by unobserved local factors that might simultaneously influence happiness. The results
hold up under these specifications, reducing the concern that they are due to omitted variable
bias.
Third, the paper offers suggestive evidence concerning the mechanism mediating the
negative relationship neighbors’ earnings and happiness. Is it a psychological externality of the
form U(C, C/ C ) as laid out above? Or might there be market interactions (e.g. in the housing
market) that give rise to this pattern? In contrast to what one would expect if the findings were
driven by effects in local housing markets, I find no evidence that there is any difference in the
effect for renters and owners. Yet, I do find evidence that the results are stronger for people who
socialize more with neighbors but not for those who socialize more with friends outside the
neighborhood. I also find that the effects on happiness are mostly driven by changes in one’s

enters significantly if entered as household income per capita / state income per capita. However, because this
regression controls for the log of household income per capita rather than the level of household income per capita,
the relative income term may be significant because it offers an alternative functional form for own household
income and not because of variation in state income per capita.

6

satisfaction with one’s material position (e.g. one’s financial situation) rather than changes with
one’s satisfaction with other aspects of life (e.g. one’s family life). Finally, individuals’
happiness decreases if neighbors with the same educational attainment earn more but hardly
responds to earnings of neighbors with different levels of educational attainment. Together, these
findings indicate that interpersonal preferences that incorporate relative income concerns, rather
than other mechanisms, drive the negative association between neighbors’ earnings and own
well-being.

2. Empirical Strategy

Can data on behavior reveal whether people’s well-being is affected by the incomes of
others around them? Unless one assumes that neighbors’ incomes affect an individual’s
marginal utility of other goods, the only behavior affected is the individual’s choice of reference
group implicit in the decision where to locate.9 Individuals’ concerns about relative position
might then be capitalized in house prices with houses in high-income neighborhoods costing
relatively less than similar houses in low-income neighborhoods because a homeowner in a rich
neighborhood needs to be compensated for being relatively poor.10 This prediction, of course,
only holds if individuals are both (i) aware that their utility depends on relative position and (ii)
correctly forecast the utility effect of the change in reference group associated with moving.

9

See, Falk and Knell (2003) for evidence on reference groups choices from a questionnaire study.
This prediction is derived from Frank’s (1984) model in which he analyzes the effects of relative income concerns
on wage distributions. He assumes that the reference group consists of coworkers and deduces that a worker in firm
with highly productive (and highly paid) workers must be paid more than a similar worker in a low productivity firm
because the worker needs to be compensated for the utility loss of being a relatively low earner if he joins the firm
with the high earners.

10

7

Loewenstein, O’Donoghue and Rabin (2003) describe a number of experiments that show
systematic biases in individuals’ predictions of their future utility. With respect to endogenous
reference groups, they note that “when people make decisions that cause their comparison
groups to change – such as switching jobs or buying a house in a new neighborhood – projection
bias predicts that people will underappreciate the effects of a change in comparison groups and
hence, consistent with Smith’s assertion, overestimate the long-term satisfaction that would
accompany such a change. As a result, people may be prone to make reference-group-changing
decisions that give them a sensation of status relative to their current reference group. If a
person buys a small house in a wealthy neighborhood in part because it has a certain status
value in her apartment building, she may not fully appreciate that her frame of references may
quickly become the larger houses and bigger cars that her new neighbors have.” These
considerations make credible identification of relative income concerns from mobility decisions
or housing price information very challenging.
The identification of relative income concerns therefore probably falls in the limited set
of research questions for which one needs to turn to a proxy for utility to answer it (see, Di Tella
et al., 2001, Gruber and Mullainathan, 2002, or Frey et al., 2004, for other examples of such
questions).11 Though some skepticism towards self-reported measures of well-being is
warranted (see, Bertrand and Mullainathan, 2001, and Ravallion and Lokshin, 2001), there is
ample psychological evidence that confirms the validity and reliability of self-reported happiness
as a measure of well-being (see, e.g. Kahneman, 1999). Frey and Stutzer (2002) therefore
conclude that “the existing research suggests that, for many purposes, happiness or reported
subjective well-being is a satisfactory empirical approximation to individual utility”
11

Zeckhauser (1991), Solnick and Hemenway (1998) and Johansson-Stenman (2002) find evidence for positional
concerns by asking subjects to make choices over hypothetic scenarios with different levels of absolute and relative
income.

8

To determine whether well-being depends partly on relative income concerns, one might
then estimate an equation of the form:12
(1)

self-reported well-being = f(own income, average income in locality, controls)

To make the discussion of the empirical strategy more concrete, a very basic linear OLS
regression with self-reported happiness (on a 1-7 scale) as the outcome variable yields a
coefficient of 0.20 (s.e. of 0.014) on log own household income and a coefficient of -0.20 (s.e. of
0.04) on log average per capita income in one’s locality (PUMA).13 This regression previews the
general findings of the more elaborate regressions presented in detail in the results section below.
Can this finding of a negative coefficient on average income in locality (and a positive one on
own income) be interpreted as evidence that utility is at least partly determined by relative
income? Or are there plausible alternative stories that could give rise to the same result even if
utility is purely a function of own income? Below, I discuss the three most serious threats to a
causal interpretation of the coefficient on average income in locality and consider ways of testing
them.
The first alternative story is that the definition of happiness shifts: people answer the
question about their happiness in relative rather than absolute terms (Tversky and Griffin, 1991,
and Frederick and Loewenstein, 1999).14 In this case, self-reported happiness would be a proxy
for relative experienced well-being rather than absolute experienced well-being. Suppose, for
example, that each individual’s experienced well-being, Ui, is equal to her income, Yi, and that
individuals are asked whether they are happy or not. Individuals now face the task of translating
12

I enter average income in locality separately in this specification rather than in form of the ratio of own income to
average income in locality. I do this because, in practice, I have a number of proxies for own income instead of a
single measure.
13
For simplicity, no other controls are included in this illustrative regression. Standard errors are adjusted for
clustering at the PUMA level.
14
King et al. (2004) explain how vignettes can be used to anchor the scale of subjective questions thereby making
the answers comparable across people. No such vignettes, however, were used in the NSFH.

9

experienced well-being into an answer to this question. If people respond that they are happy
whenever Ui exceeds some fixed (but possibly individual-specific) cutoff value, then they answer
the question in absolute terms. In this case, an increase of everyone’s income by the same factor
would increase the fraction of people answering they are happy. However, if people respond that
they are happy whenever their Ui exceeds some cutoff value that is a function of the population
distribution of Ui (such a the mean or median Ui), they are answering the question in relative
terms. In this case, an increase of everyone’s income by the same factor may not affect the
proportion of individuals answering that they are happy even though every individual’s
experienced utility is higher.15 I address this concern by using alternative indicators of wellbeing that have a relatively objective definition, such as the frequency of financial worries or the
frequency of marital disagreements.
The second alternative story is that the results are driven by unobserved local area
characteristics that are both correlated with average local income and self-reported happiness.
One might expect most of this type of omitted variable bias to go in the other direction; e.g., one
would expect higher income areas to have less crime, better local schools and other positive
amenities that raise happiness. The concern about local omitted variables driving the result is
addressed in three ways. First, if the results hold up after inclusion of state×time fixed effects,
they cannot be driven by unobservables that operate at that level, such as climate, state policies,
or regional shocks. Second, one may be concerned that local incomes just proxy for the local
price level. Thus, conditional on nominal income, an individual living in a high-income area
would face higher prices and thus have less real income, reducing happiness.16 However, if we

15

This is also a potential explanation for the findings in a number of studies that levels of self-reported happiness or
life satisfaction remain remarkably constant in a country over time even as incomes rise. See, e.g. Easterlin (1974).
16
Note however that if higher price levels reflect positive local amenities, they do not reduce real income; in effect,
the individual is purchasing the local amenity by locating in an expensive area. This means that only unobserved

10

control for real income instead, there is no longer a role for local area incomes to proxy for local
price levels, and any negative effect of local income on happiness cannot be explained by this
price level story. To control for real income, I include only those individual controls that do not
vary with local prices. This excludes nominal earnings and home value, but still includes
education, age, and average national earnings for someone in the same industry and occupation
as the respondent. Third, instead of using actual local income, I use a predicted measure of local
earnings. The predictor is based on the industry×occupation composition of the locality at one
point in time (1990) and national industry×occupation earnings trends (excluding data from
one’s own state).17 Thus, predicted local earnings vary across areas for two reasons: (i) the
industry×occupation mix at a point in time, which we can control for using area fixed effects,
and (ii) national earnings trends by industry and occupation, which we have no reason to believe
to be correlated with unobserved local shocks. This predictor therefore filters out any local
shocks (such as quality of local government) that may both affect local incomes and happiness. I
refer to this measure as LnPumaEarnings or more informally as neighbors’ earnings and use it as
the measure of local earnings throughout this paper unless otherwise noted. The use of predicted
local earnings, however, does not rule out that higher local earnings affect an unobserved local
variable, which in turn reduces happiness. Two obvious candidates for such unobserved
variables are quality of local schooling and changes to the housing market. If this is the case, we
expect to see different effects by homeownership and by presence of children in the household.

variation in local prices due to transportation cost or local production costs could possibly explain the findings.
Since we can control for state×time fixed effects, the transportation or production cost differences should be within
states to explain away the results. The scope for such variation is considerably less than the scope of transportation
and production cost differences in the nation as a whole.
17
This predictor follows similar predictors used by Bartik (1991), Blanchard and Katz (1992), Bound and Holzer
(2000) and Autor and Duggan (2003). See appendix B for details on the construction of this predictor.

11

The third story is that the results are driven by omitted individual characteristics that
influence both the decision where to live and self-reported happiness. In particular, selection of
individuals with unobservables that make them relatively happy (or relatively likely to report
being happy) into localities with relatively low incomes would also result in a negative
coefficient on average income in locality. Though one might expect that most selection would
go in the opposite direction (high income in one’s locality proxying for higher unobserved own
income), there could be selection effects that lead to a spurious negative effect of average
income in locality. For example, individuals receiving an inheritance may be relatively unhappy
(because of the unobserved death of a relative) but able to move to a relatively high-income
locality, or intrinsically happy people might be better able to deal with the rougher aspects of
low-income areas thus selecting to live there. This paper exploits the panel aspect of the NSFH
data to deal with this concern. If, after inclusion of individual fixed effects, average income in
the locality still matters, then we know that time-invariant unobserved individual characteristics
cannot be driving the results.
To preserve statistical power, the baseline specification to test for relative income
concerns is a pooled cross-section OLS regression of the form:
(2)

Happinessipt = LnPumaEarningspt β1 + Xit β2 + wavet β3 + εipt

where i indexes individuals, p indexes PUMAs, and t indexes the wave of the survey. In the
baseline specification, Happiness is self-reported happiness (measured on a seven-point scale),
but other correlates of well-being are used in alternative specifications. LnPumaEarnings are
average predicted earnings in the PUMA of the respondent where the prediction is based on the
PUMA’s industry×occupation composition and national earnings trends. The vector Xit is a set
of individual-specific controls that include a number of proxies for income as well as basic

12

demographics. Finally, wavet is a dummy for the wave of the survey and εipt is an error term that
may be clustered within PUMAs. If individuals derive utility in part from relative position, we
would expect β1 to be negative.
The baseline sample consists of individuals who are married or cohabitating in both
waves of the NSFH. I limit the sample to married or cohabiting individuals for two reasons.
First, for these observations, we also have information about spouses or interactions with one’s
spouse, which are useful in a number of further tests of the baseline results. Second, it turns out
that married individuals drive the baseline results, though neighbors’ earnings still have a
negative and significant effect on happiness in the full sample that includes non-married
individuals.
Since most questions are asked of both the main respondent and his or her spouse, it
makes sense to also exploit the spousal information. Adding the spousal information as a
separate observation to the regression may bias standard errors downwards because the error
term of the respondent and the error term of his or her spouse are likely to be correlated.18
Instead, I average the values of the individual level variables for the main respondent and his or
her spouse, and enter those as a single observation in the regression. I thus do not exploit intrahousehold level variation, but this does not matter since the main explanatory variables of
interest (neighbors’ earnings and own household income) do not vary within households.
In the results section, I will present various modifications of this baseline regression to
investigate whether the baseline results are spurious, whether they are robust, and what
mechanisms drive them. These modifications will be explained in detail later and include adding

18

I already cluster at the PUMA level (the level at which neighbors’ earnings vary), and therefore cannot easily
cluster at the household level at the same time.

13

individual fixed effects, adding state×wave fixed effects, exploring other outcome or control
variables, and interacting LnPumaEarnings with other variables.

3. Data

National Survey of Families and Households
The data on subjective well-being as well as the individual-level control variables come
from the National Survey of Families and Households.19 The NSFH consists of a nationally
representative sample of individuals, age 19 or older (unless married or living in a household
with no one age 19 or older), living in households, and able to speak English or Spanish. The
first wave of interviews took place in 1987-88 and a second wave of interviews took place in
1992-94. Though the questionnaires are not identical in both waves, many questions were asked
twice making it possible to treat the data as a panel of about 10,000 individuals. What makes
this dataset particularly well-suited for this paper is that, in addition to being a panel with both
measures of well-being and extensive demographic information, it can be merged with detailed
geographic information. The respondents of the baseline sample live in 580 separate Public Use
Microdata Areas in the first wave, in 965 PUMAs in the second wave, while 555 PUMAs have
respondents living there in both waves (more about the definition of PUMAs later).
The main outcome variable is self-reported happiness, which is the answer to the
question: “Next are some questions about how you see yourself and your life. First taking things
all together, how would you say things are these days?” Respondents answer on a seven-point
19

The NSFH is a survey that was primarily designed for demographers interested in family and household issues.
More information on the NSFH can be found in Sweet, Bumpass and Call (1988), in Sweet and Bumpass (1996) or
at the NSFH website: http://www.ssc.wisc.edu/nsfh/home.htm

14

scale where 1 is defined as “very unhappy,” 7 is defined as “very happy” but intermediate values
are not explicitly defined. Other measures of well-being include the frequency of financial
worries, the frequency of open disagreements with one’s spouse on a number of topics, items
from Lenore Radloff’s (1977) depression scale, and, only in the second wave, self-reported
satisfaction with various aspects of one’s life. Detailed descriptions of these variables are
included in appendix A.
The individual-level controls in the baseline specification consist of income proxies,
labor market variables, demographic characteristics and religious affiliation. The main income
variable is log household income while log value of the home and a dummy for being a renter
may also proxy for own income. Any missing values are dummied out as are logarithms of any
dollar amounts smaller than $100/year.20 The demographic controls consist of gender, a set of 4
race/ethnicity dummies, log household size, and a 3-segment spline in age (breakpoints at 35 and
60). Religious affiliation is controlled for by 12 dummy variables.

Census and Current Population Survey
The smallest geographical area in the 1990 Census 5% Public Use Micro Sample
(PUMS) is the so-called Public Use Microdata Area. PUMAs consist of neighborhoods, towns
or counties aggregated up, or subdivided, until they contain at least 100,000 inhabitants. In
1990, there were 1726 PUMAs in the U.S. and the median and mean size of a PUMA was
respectively 127,000 and 144,000 inhabitants. The 1990 Census microdata are used to estimate
the 3-digit industry × 3-digit occupation composition of each PUMA, which is later used to
predict PUMA earnings. In addition, I use the Census to estimate average 1989 earnings for
each PUMA, which will serve as a check on the predictor.
20

All $ amounts are in real 1982-84 dollars using the CPI-U.

15

I use the Merged Outgoing Rotation Groups (MORG) from the Current Population
Survey (CPS) in the years 1987-88 and 1992-94 to estimate average earnings by 3-digit industry
× 3-digit occupation cell in each of the two time periods when NSFH interviews took place. For
each PUMA, I calculate these average national earnings by time-period×industry×occupation
cell excluding data from the state in which this PUMA lies.
Predicted PUMA earnings for each wave are formed by applying average national
earnings by industry×occupation cell during that time period to each observation in the
corresponding industry×occupation cell in the PUMA. Details of this procedure are found in
appendix B. Appendix A gives summary statistics and precise definitions of all variables.

4. Results

Basic results
Column 1 of Table 1 shows the baseline specification in full. This is a pooled crosssection OLS regression of self-reported happiness on log predicted PUMA earnings and
individual controls. Individual level variables in this regression are averages of the main
respondent and his or her spouse. Standard errors are corrected for clustered error terms at the
PUMA level and the sample includes all NSFH respondents who are married or cohabiting in
both waves. The first row shows that, controlling for own income and other own characteristics,
predicted PUMA earnings have a significantly negative effect on self-reported happiness. In
other words, individuals with richer neighbors report being less happy. As expected, own
household income has a positive effect on happiness but its coefficient may be relatively small

16

because the regression includes other proxies for income, such as the value of one’s home and a
dummy variable for renting.21 Usual working hours has an insignificant negative effect,
unemployment status has a large and significant negative effect while a dummy for being out of
the labor force has a significant positive effect on happiness.22 The other demographic controls
yield few surprising insights.
Column 2 shows the same regression using only data from the main respondent rather
than averaging the respondent’s data with that of the spouse. This regression confirms that the
results are not sensitive to the averaging procedure used in the baseline regression though power
increases moderately when the data of the main respondent and the spouse are averaged.23
The coefficient on own household income in the baseline regression is likely biased
downwards due to measurement error in income and the inclusion of other income proxies. In
specification 3, I try to get a more accurate estimate of the effect of own income by eliminating
two other income proxies (home value and the dummy for renter) and by instrumenting log
household income by the predicted household earnings, where the prediction based on the
industry×occupation information of the respondent and the spouse and national earnings
information (excluding the own state) by industry×occupation and time period from the CPS
MORG.24 Instrumenting results in an estimated effect of own household income on happiness
that is about three times as large as the estimate in the baseline specification. Moreover, the
estimate is now larger than the absolute value of the estimate of neighbors’ earnings, though this
difference is not statistically significant. The point estimates imply that if both own income and
21

Ln Value of home has been demeaned. Hence, the dummy for renter is relative to a homeowner with a home of
average value.
22
Ln Usual working hours has been demeaned. Hence, the dummies for unemployment and out of the labor force
are relative to an employed person working the average number of hours.
23
I also stacked the data for the main respondent and the spouse, thus treating each as a separate observation in the
regression. This yields essentially the same coefficients but the standard errors are smaller than those of the baseline
regression.
24
See appendix B for details on the construction of this predictor.

17

neighbors’ earnings rise by the same percentage, a person would feel better off, indicating one’s
absolute economic situation matters for happiness in addition to one’s relative position.

Could the results be spurious?
Table 2 investigates whether selection or omitted area characteristics could be driving the
results. The first row of Table 2 replicates the baseline regression.
The second row includes individual-specific fixed effects, thus controlling for all timeinvariant individual characteristics. The coefficient on neighbors’ earnings remains negative and
similar in magnitude though it is now only significant at the 10% level. This finding discounts
the possibility that the cross-section results are driven by selection of people who are happier by
nature into areas that are relatively poor. Of course, this specification does not rule out selection
based on unobserved time-variant characteristics. The third row shows a regression that is
identical to the baseline regression, except that a full set of state×wave fixed effects, a dummy
for living in a metropolitan area and log metropolitan population size are added as controls.
Both the coefficients on neighbors’ earnings and on own income change little and remain
statistically significant. Hence, the results are driven by variation in neighbors’ earnings within
states at each point in time. This specification thus rules out that the baseline results are spurious
due to unobserved variables that operate at the state level or above, such as a poorer (southern)
states having happier residents on average, for example because of unobserved better weather.
One might worry that movers have something unobserved happen to them and that perhaps this
unobserved factor causes the happiness to be inversely related to average neighbors’ earnings.
The fourth row tests this by showing the baseline regression excluding all respondents who

18

moved to a different PUMA. Again the coefficients on neighbors’ earnings and own income are
hardly affected, showing that the baseline results are not just driven by movers.
The regression in the fifth line is identical to the one in the fourth row, except that it
includes individual fixed effects. Because the sample is limited to non-movers, the individual
fixed effects also serve as PUMA fixed effects (i.e., any PUMA fixed effects would be absorbed
by the individual fixed effects). Thus, the coefficient on neighbors’ income in this regression is
purely identified off of changes in neighbors’ earnings that are solely due to different national
trends in earnings in different industry×occupation cells. The individual fixed effects absorb any
time-invariant individual characteristics as well as any effect correlated with the
industry×occupation composition of each PUMA. Time-varying unobserved characteristics
cannot affect one’s neighbors’ earnings because the sample is limited to non-movers.
Unfortunately, the standard error in this specification is too large for this regression to provide
any evidence on selection.
Could neighbors’ earnings proxy for local price levels? In this case, the negative
coefficient on neighbors’ earnings would simply reflect that happiness falls as real incomes fall.
Recall that neighbors’ earnings are measured by LnPumaEarnings, which is a predictor of local
earnings based on the local industry×occupation mix but national earnings data (excluding data
from one’s own state). Hence, local price variation would only be picked up by
LnPumaEarnings to the extent it is correlated with the local industry×occupation mix.
Moreover, we saw in row 3 that the estimates are robust to the inclusion of state×wave fixed
effects, implying that only local price variation within states at a point in time could possibly be
driving the results. Since migration within states is relatively easy, one would wonder what the
source of such price variation is. If higher prices merely reflect better local amenities (such as

19

better schools or less crime), one shouldn’t deflate incomes by local prices, because the higher
local prices simply imply that one substitutes amenities for physical goods. Thus, in that case,
higher local prices should not reduce well-being. On the other hand, if higher local prices reflect
transportation costs or higher local production cost, local wages would need to rise
proportionally to prevent an outflow of labor. In this case, individuals in an area with high local
prices would earn more but not be any better off than similar individuals in an area with low
local prices. Thus, if we don’t measure a respondent’s income by monetary variables (such as
household income, home value) but instead use proxies that don’t respond to local wage levels
(national earnings in the respondent’s industry ×occupation cell), then there would be no role for
LnPumaEarnings to serve as a control for local prices. Hence, the coefficient on
LnPumaEarnings should become insignificant if it were just spuriously picking up local price
variation. The sixth row of table 2 estimates the baseline regression purged of any controls that
proxy for the respondent’s nominal income. The coefficient on LnPumaEarnings drops in size
but remains negative and significant. This rules out that LnPumaEarnings is just picking up
variation in local price levels.
Table 3 investigates the robustness of the baseline results. The first row again reproduces
the baseline regression. One might be concerned that the results are driven by the somewhat
complicated procedure used to predict LnPumaEarnings. The second row alleviates this
concern; if anything, the estimate on LnPumaEarnings becomes more negative and more
significant if we replace the predicted value by the actual value in 1989. Similarly, the third row
shows that using log PUMA income instead of earnings yields similar results. The fourth row
runs the baseline regression on all the observations in the balanced panel (rather than only the
ones married in both waves). The coefficient on neighbors’ earnings remains highly significant,

20

but drops somewhat in magnitude, giving a first indication that the estimates are primarily driven
by the married subsample. This issue will be explored further in Table 7, discussed below.
Could neighbors’ earnings proxy for non-linearities in the effect of own income? This concern is
ruled out by the fifth row, which shows that the estimate on neighbors’ earnings hardly changes
after the inclusion of a 5th-order polynomial in log household income. Since the outcome
variable, self-reported happiness, is ordinal rather than cardinal, an OLS regression may not be
appropriate. Specification six estimates the baseline regression using an ordered Probit and finds
that the coefficient on neighbors’ earnings remains negative and highly significant. Moreover,
the ratio of the coefficient on neighbors’ earnings to the coefficient on own income remains
roughly constant.25 Finally, the seventh row shows that the results are insensitive to replacing
log own household income by the couple’s log total earnings.

Do neighbors’ earnings affect other outcomes?
Could an increase in neighbors’ earnings merely change what individuals define as happy
rather than their true underlying well-being? This concern is hard to rule out definitively, but
using other outcome measures that may be less prone to shifts in definition yields some insights.
The first specification in Table 4 uses a measure of financial worries as an alternative
outcome measure. If increases in neighbors’ earnings reduce happiness because one cannot
afford the goods that neighbors consume, one would expect respondents to have more financial
worries. Financial worries are measured by the question “How often do you worry that your
total family income will not be enough to meet your family’s expenses and bills?” I find that
respondents in areas with higher average earnings indeed have more financial worries after
25

The coefficients in the ordered Probit turn out to be similar in magnitude to those in the baseline regression partly
because the root mean square error of the baseline regression is 1.06 and thus close to unity, to which the error term
in the latent model of the ordered Probit is normalized.

21

controlling for own income and other own characteristics. Because this question is less prone to
a definition shift in response to neighbors’ earnings, this finding alleviates the concern about a
shifting definition in the happiness question.
One might also expect that a couple surrounded by neighbors earning more, would have
more disagreements about material issues as their aspirations might be shaped by spending
patterns of those around them (Stutzer, 2004). The regressions in specification 2 show that
higher neighbors’ earnings are significantly associated with more frequent disagreements about
money, marginally significantly associated with more frequent disagreements about household
tasks, but not significantly with the frequency of fights about the children, sex, in-laws or
spending time together. It may be less clear why neighbors’ earnings would be associated with
disagreements about household tasks, though one can make up plausible stories to explain this
finding.26 Because the questions about open disagreements seem less prone to a shift in
definition in response to neighbors’ earnings, this finding also offers suggestive evidence that the
estimated effect of neighbors’ earnings on self-reported happiness is not solely due to a shift in
the definition of happiness.
The third specification in Table 4 considers a measure of depression, which is the sum of
the 12 items of the Radloff depression scale that are included in both waves of the survey. Since
many of the items have more of an absolute definition (e.g. “having a poor appetite,” “sleeping
restlessly”) or at least a definition for which it might be hard to use neighbors’ behavior as a
reference, the depression scale may be less prone to shifting definitions. On the other hand,
depression and well-being, though correlated, are two distinct concepts and it is very well
possible that increases in neighbors’ earnings reduce true well-being without increasing

26

For example, financial stress could reduce the room for contracting out household tasks or buying appliances that
ease household chores, leading to more disagreements about household tasks.

22

depression. As the regression shows, neighbors’ earnings have no significant impact on the
depression index. Because the depression index is quite skewed, I also looked at the effect of
neighbors’ earnings on the probability of being in each part of the distribution of depression
index. As specification four shows, higher neighbors’ earnings significantly increase the
probability of being in the top four quintiles of the depression index but do not significantly
affect the probability of being in the top three, top two or top quintile of the depression index.
Thus, the effect of neighbors’ earnings seems to be limited to the bottom of the depression index
distribution (i.e., only those furthest removed from being depressed come somewhat closer to
being depressed). Overall, the findings with depression as an outcome variable only slightly
alleviate concerns about shifting definitions of happiness, though depression might be a
sufficiently different concept from well-being to pick up relative position effects.27
Since a large literature examines the effect of relative position on health outcomes, the
fifth specification uses self-reported health status (relative to one’s age group) as an outcome
measure.28 I find no significant relation between average neighbors’ earnings and self-reported
health. This finding, of course, does not rule out that such a relationship might exist, but it does
not show up using my baseline specification.29

Mechanisms behind the association between neighbors’ earnings and happiness

27

In their study of the randomized Moving to Opportunity experiment, Kling et al. (2004) find that individuals
moving to lower poverty census tracts report lower levels of psychological distress. Thus, for mental health
measures such as depression or psychological distress the benefits associated with richer areas (such as lower crime)
apparently outweigh any relative position effect.
28
Self-reported health is measured by the question “Compared with other people your age, how would you describe
your health?” with possible answers being very poor, poor, fair, good and excellent. Since the question about health
explicitly asks respondents to compare themselves to other people of their age, this outcome cannot be used to
address any concerns about a shifting definition of happiness.
29
Many papers on relative position and health use relative deprivation (the income gap with those earning more)
rather than average neighbors’ income to measure status. In addition, my sample might be too small or the measure
of self-reported health too noisy to pick up an effect.

23

One can think of overall self-reported happiness as being driven by one’s satisfaction
with various domains of life, such as one’s family life, financial situation or friendships (Van
Praag, Frijters and Ferrer-i-Carbonell, 2003). Only in wave 2, the NSFH asks respondents to rate
their satisfaction with 11 such domains on a 7-point scale. Table 5 shows a regression of selfreported happiness on these 11 measures of satisfaction (but no other controls) to give the reader
a sense of the relative importance of these satisfaction components for self-reported happiness.
According to this regression, the top three predictors of self-reported happiness are satisfaction
with family life, financial situation and sex life (in that order).
Table 6 explores which mechanisms underlie the relationship between happiness and
neighbors’ earnings by adding satisfaction measures as additional control variables. If the
addition of a control variable reduces the magnitude of the coefficient on neighbors’ earnings,
some of the effect of neighbors’ earnings apparently runs through that control variable. The first
row of the table replicates the baseline regression for wave 2 because the satisfaction measures
are only available in wave 2. Specification 2 shows the effects of including satisfaction
measures as additional controls. None of the satisfaction measures alone can render the effect of
neighbors’ earnings insignificant, but the effect of neighbors’ earnings is reduced most strongly
if satisfaction with one’s home, financial situation or amount of leisure time is included as a
control. Simultaneously controlling for these three satisfaction measures makes the relationship
between neighbors’ earnings and happiness statistically and economically insignificant. Thus,
apparently, higher neighbors’ earnings reduce happiness for a large part through their effect on
satisfaction with one’s home, finances and leisure time. If neighbors’ consumption patterns
shape one’s aspirations, it is not surprising that higher neighbors’ earnings reduce one’s
satisfaction with one’s financial situation or one’s home. Perhaps less expected is that

24

satisfaction amount of leisure can account for part of the relationship between neighbors’
earnings and happiness, but higher neighbors’ earnings could reduce satisfaction with the amount
of leisure time because one might cut back on the purchase of certain services (cleaning, yard,
maintenance) in order to keep up with the neighbors in the consumption of more visible goods.
Even if status influences happiness, one would not expect it to affect happiness with
aspects of life that are largely unaffected by comparisons with neighbors. Indeed, the remaining
eight questions on life satisfaction cannot account for much of the relationship between
neighbors’ earnings and happiness, even though they include important general predictors of
happiness such as satisfaction with family life and health (recall Table 5).30 Even controlling for
all eight simultaneously leaves the relationship between neighbors’ earnings and happiness
significant at the 5% level. Thus it seems that, by and large, neighbors’ earnings affect
happiness primarily through those components of happiness for which one would expect relative
earnings to matter most.

Interaction effects
Table 7 investigates whether the relationship between neighbors’ earnings and happiness
operates across a range of demographic subgroups. Specification 1 shows that both females and
males report being less happy if earnings in their area rise. Specification 2 shows that the
happiness of individuals in various age ranges is negatively related to neighbors’ earnings. Even
though the coefficients on neighbors’ earnings are not statistically significantly different from
each other at the 10% level, the effect seems least strong for individuals aged 30 or younger,

30

One might have expected satisfaction with present job to be influenced by neighbors’ earnings. Perhaps this
question measures job aspects (such as corporate culture) that are less subject to comparison with neighbors.

25

which may not be surprising because this group is probably less settled and therefore less
inclined to compare themselves to their current neighbors.
Specification 3 finds that both those with more and with less education report lower
levels of happiness when surrounded by richer neighbors. For each educational group, the point
estimate is negative and the point estimates are not significantly different from each other at the
10 percent level. Specification 4 shows the relationship between local earnings and happiness
across groups based on marital status. Though the hypothesis that the coefficients on neighbors’
earnings are all equal to each other cannot be rejected at the 10% level, there seems to be little or
no effect of neighbors’ earnings on happiness for never-married individuals or those
experiencing marital status transitions. This is not surprising because these individuals are likely
to be less settled and thus less inclined to consider their neighbors as their reference group.
Might neighbors’ earnings not matter by themselves but only affect people’s happiness
because they are correlated with the price of housing? In this case, we would expect to see a
differential effect between renters (who dislike increases in the price of housing) and
homeowners (most of whom like seeing the value of their home rise). Specification 5 shows that
this is not the case. Or might neighbors’ earnings somehow operate through the quality of
schooling (e.g. richer neighbors leaving the public school system)? In this case, we should see
different effects for those with and without children, which, as specification 6 shows, is not the
case. Finally, specification 7 finds that the effect of neighbors’ earnings seems to be somewhat
stronger for relatively new residents (less than 7 years) than for longer-term residents, but the
difference is not statistically significant.31
To investigate which parts of the happiness distribution are affected by neighbors’
earnings, I create four dummy variables corresponding respectively to reporting a level of
31

Looking at finer partitions of duration of residence did not reveal any interesting patterns.

26

happiness of at least 4, 5, 6 and 7.32 Regressions (not-reported) of these dummy variables on
neighbors’ earnings and the remaining controls of the baseline regression yield a significantly
negative coefficient on neighbors’ earnings in all four cases, showing that the effect of
neighbors’ earnings operates throughout the happiness distribution. In additional unreported
regressions, I also examine whether the relation between neighbors’ earnings and happiness
displays non-linearities but I find no evidence of such effects. The point estimates of neighbors’
earnings on self-reported happiness are similar and not significantly different for those above
mean earnings in their PUMA compared to those below. Other specifications show that the point
estimates on a quadratic term in neighbors’ earnings or the interaction between own household
income and neighbors’ earnings are both small and statistically insignificant.
If the neighbors’ earnings reduce self-reported happiness because people engage in social
comparisons, we would expect a stronger effect for those with more contacts with their
neighbors. Table 8 investigates this hypothesis. The NSFH asks all main respondents about the
frequency of social interactions with neighbors, relatives, friends living outside the neighborhood
and people they work with. Each specification in Table 8 compares the effect of neighbors’
earnings for those who have infrequent social contacts (less than once a month) to those with
frequent social contacts with the type of person indicated, controlling for the direct effect of
social interactions.33 The table shows that the effect of neighbors’ earnings is significantly
stronger for those who socialize frequently with neighbors but not for those who socialize more
frequently with relatives, friends outside the neighborhood or people they work with. These

32

I don’t partition the happiness distribution at 3 and 2 because only 3.5% and 1.0% of the observations respectively
report levels of happiness lower than these values.
33
The direct effect is positive in all cases but only significant for socializing with neighbors or relatives. Of course,
the direct effect should not be interpreted causally.

27

findings are consistent with what one would expect if social comparisons with neighbors partly
determine people’s happiness.
Table 9 explores whether individuals predominantly compare themselves with neighbors
who have a similar level of education. For each PUMA, I constructed predicted earnings for
PUMA residents with a college degree and for those without.34 Specification 1 shows the
regression of self-reported happiness on the interaction of these two measures of local earnings
with own educational attainment. The regression also includes all the controls of the baseline
regression. Though standard errors are large, the point estimates indicate that the happiness of
those without a college degree declines with the earnings of neighbors without a college degree
but is insensitive to the earnings of neighbors with a college degree. Similarly, the happiness of
those with a college degree declines with the earnings of neighbors with a college degree but is
relatively insensitive to the earnings of neighbors without one. Moreover, for both those with
and without a college degree, the point estimates on the earnings of one’s own education group
are similar (the diagonal coefficients are -0.28 and -0.40) as are the point estimates on the
earnings of the other group (the off-diagonal coefficients are 0.02 and -0.07). In specification 2,
I restrict the diagonal coefficients to be the same and the off-diagonal coefficients to be the same.
Now there is a marginally significant relationship between happiness and earnings of neighbors
with the same level of education but not between happiness and earnings of neighbors with a
different level of education, though the test of equality of all coefficients is not rejected at the
10% level. Though the results in table 9 should be treated with caution because of low statistical
power, they are suggestive of respondents comparing themselves mostly with neighbors who are
similar in terms of educational attainment.

34

This measure is constructed the same way as the predicted Ln PUMA earnings measure used in the baseline
regression, except that everything is done separately by level of education.

28

5. Conclusion
This paper shows that individuals’ self-reported happiness is negatively affected by the
earnings of others in their area. By looking at alternative outcome measures, such as frequency
of financial worries, I provide evidence that this finding is not simply an artifact of the way
people report happiness. I investigate the concern that the finding could be driven by omitted
variables, but find no evidence of selection in a number of specification tests. Though the
mechanism by which increases in neighbors’ earnings reduce happiness is hard to identify
precisely, I provide suggestive evidence that interpersonal preferences are likely to be
responsible for them. Increased neighbors’ earnings by and large reduce satisfaction with
material (rather than immaterial) aspects of one’s life and have the strongest negative effect on
happiness for those who socialize more in their neighborhood. I therefore conclude that the
negative effect of neighbors’ earnings on well-being is real and that it is most likely caused by a
psychological externality, i.e. people having utility functions that depend on relative
consumption in addition to absolute consumption.
The size of the effect is economically meaningful. An increase in neighbors’ earnings
and a similarly sized decrease in own income each have roughly about the same negative effect
on well-being. This suggests that an increase in own income leads to a negative externality on
neighbors’ well-being that is of the same order of magnitude as the positive effects on own wellbeing. Unless one chooses to disallow these negative externalities on the ground that they appear
to stem from an interpersonal preference component that is morally questionable, externalities of
this size can in principle substantially affect the optimal policies dealing with income taxation,
consumption taxation and residential sorting.

29

References
Abel, Andrew B. 1990. “Asset Prices under Habit Formation and Catching Up With the
Joneses,” American Economic Review, 80(2), pp. 38-42.
Abel, Andrew B. 2003. “Optimal Taxation When Consumers Have Endogenous Benchmark
Levels of Consumption,” Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.
Alesina, Alberto; Rafael Di Tella, and Robert J. MacCulloch. 2001. “Inequality and Happiness:
Are Europeans and Americans Different?” NBER working paper 8198; Journal of Public
Economics, forthcoming.
Autor, David H. and Mark G. Duggan. 2003. “The Rise in the Disability Rolls And the Decline
in Unemployment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(1), pp. 157-205.
Bartik, Timothy. 1991. Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development Policies?
Kalamazoo, MI: Upjohn Institute.
Becker, Gary S. 1974. “A Theory of Social Interactions,” Journal of Political Economy, 82(6),
pp.1063-93.
Becker, Gary S., Kevin M. Murphy and Iván Werning. 2003. “The Equilibrium Distribution of
Income and the Market for Status,” Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.
Bertrand, Marianne and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2001. “Do People Mean What They Say?
Implications for Subjective Survey Data,” American Economic Review, 91(2), pp.67-72.
Blanchard, Olivier Jean and Lawrence F. Katz. 1992. “Regional Evolutions,” Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity, pp. 1-61.
Blanchflower, David G. and Andrew J. Oswald. 2004. “Well-Being over Time in Britain and
the USA,” Journal of Public Economics, 88(7-8), pp. 1359-1386.
Boskin, Michael and Eytan Sheshinski. 1978. “Optimal Redistributive Taxation When Individual
Welfare Depends on Relative Income,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 92(4), pp. 589601.
Bowles, Samuel and Yongjin Park. 2002. “Emulation, Inequality, and Work Hours: Was
Thorstein Veblen Right?” mimeo, Santa Fe Institute.
Bound, John and Harry J. Holzer. 2000. “Demand Shifts, Population Adjustments, and Labor
Market Outcomes during the 1980s,” Journal of Labor Economics, 18, 20-54.
Campbell, John Y. and John H. Cochrane. 1999. “By Force of Habit: A Consumption-Based
Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy,
107(2), pp. 205-51.
Carroll, Christopher D.; Jody Overland, and David N. Weil. 1997. “Comparison Utility in a
Growth Model,” Journal of Economic Growth, 2, pp. 339-67.
Clark, Andrew E. 2003. “Unemployment as a Social Norm: Psychological Evidence from Panel
Data.” Journal of Labor Economics, 21(2), pp. 323-51.
Clark, Andrew E. and Andrew J. Oswald. 1996. “Satisfaction and Comparison Income,” Journal
of Public Economics, 61(3), pp. 359-81.
Deaton, Angus. 2003. “Health, Inequality and Economic Development,” Journal of Economic
Literature, 41(1), pp. 112-158
Di Tella, Rafael; Robert J. MacCulloch and Andrew J. Oswald. 2001. “Preferences over Inflation
and Unemployment: Evidence from Surveys of Happiness,” American Economic Review,
91(1), pp. 335-41.

30

Diener, Ed; Ed Sandvik; Larry Seidlitz, and Marissa Diener. 1993. “The Relationship Between
Income and Subjective Well-Being: Relative or Absolute?” Social Indicators Research,
28, pp. 195-223.
Duesenberry, James S. 1949. Income, Savings and the Theory of Consumer Behavior.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Dupor, Bill and Wen-Fang Liu. 2003. “Jealousy and Equilibrium Overconsumption,” American
Economic Review, 93 (1), pp. 423-28.
Easterlin, Richard A. 1974. “Does Economic Growth Improve the Human Lot? Some Empirical
Evidence,” in Nations and Households in Economic Growth: Essays in Honor of Moses
Abramowitz. Paul A. David and Melvin W. Reder, eds. New York: Academic Press, pp.
89-125
Easterlin, Richard A. 1995. “Will Raising the Incomes of All Increase the Happiness of All?”
Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 27(1), pp. 35-48.
Easterlin, Richard A. 2001. “Income and Happiness: Towards a Unified Theory,” Economic
Journal, 111(473), pp. 465-84.
Eibner, Christine E. and William N. Evans. 2001. “Relative Deprivation, Poor Health Habits
and Mortality,” Journal of Human Resources, forthcoming
Falk, Armin and Markus Knell. 2003. “Choosing the Joneses: On the Endogeneity of Reference
Groups,” mimeo, University of Zurich.
Feldstein, Martin S. 1998. “Income Inequality and Poverty,” NBER working paper 6770.
Ferrer-i-Carbonell, Ada. 2004. “Income and Well-being: An Empirical Analysis of the
Comparison Income Effect,” Journal of Public Economics, forthcoming
Frank, Robert H. 1984. “Are Workers Paid Their Marginal Products?” American Economic
Review, 74(4), pp. 549-71.
Frank, Robert H. 1985. Choosing the Right Pond. New York: Oxford University Press
Frederick, Shane and George Loewenstein. 1999. “Hedonic Adaptation,” in Well-Being: The
Foundations of Hedonic Psychology. Daniel Kahneman, Ed Diener and Norbert Schwarz,
eds. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, pp. 302-29
Frey, Bruno S. and Alois Stutzer. 2002. “What Can Economists Learn from Happiness
Research?” Journal of Economic Literature, 40(2), pp. 402-35.
Frey, Bruno S., Simon Luechinger and Alois Stutzer. 2004. “Valuing Public Goods: The Life
Satisfaction Approach,” CESifo Working paper 1158.
Galí, Jordi. 1994. “Keeping Up with the Joneses: Consumption Externalities, Portfolio Choice
and Asset Prices,” Journal of Money Credit and Banking, 26(1), pp. 1-8.
Graham, Carol and Stefano Pettinato. 2002. “Frustrated Achievers: Winners, Losers and
Subjective Well-Being in New Market Economies,” The Journal of Development Studies,
38(4). pp. 100-140.
Gruber, Jonathan and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2002. “Do Cigarette Taxes Make Smokers
Happier?” mimeo, MIT, October.
Ireland, Norman J. 1998. “Status-Seeking, Income Taxation and Efficiency,” Journal of Public
Economics, 70, pp. 99-113.
Johansson-Stenman, Olof; Fredrik Carlsson and Dinky Daruvala. 2002. “Measuring Future
Grandparents’ Preferences for Equality and Relative Standing,” Economic Journal,
112(479), pp. 362–383.

31

Kahneman, Daniel. 1999. “Objective Happiness,” in Well-Being: The Foundations of Hedonic
Psychology. Daniel Kahneman, Ed Diener and Norbert Schwarz, eds. New York: Russell
Sage Foundation
King, Gary; Christopher J. L. Murray; Joshua A. Salomon and Ajay Tandon. 2004. “Enhancing
the Validity and Cross-Cultural Comparability of Measurement in Survey Research,”
American Political Science Review, 98(1), pp. 191-207.
Kling, Jeffrey R.; Jeffrey B. Liebman; Lawrence F. Katz and Lisa Sanbonmatsu. 2004. “Moving
to Opportunity and Tranquility: Neighborhood Effects on Adult Economic SelfSufficiency and Health from a Randomized Housing Voucher Experiment,”
mimeographed, Princeton University.
Layard, Richard. 1980. “Human Satisfactions and Public Policy,” Economic Journal, 90(363),
pp. 737-50.
Layard, Richard. 2003. “Happiness: Has Social Science A Clue?,” Lionel Robbins Memorial
Lectures, London School of Economics. (http://cep.lse.ac.uk/layard/).
Ljungqvist, Lars and Harald Uhlig. 2000. “Tax Policy and Aggregate Demand Management
under Catching Up with the Joneses,” American Economic Review, 90(3), pp. 356-66.
Loewenstein, George; Ted O’Donoghue, and Matthew Rabin. 2003. “Projection Bias in
Predicting Future Utility,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(4), pp. 1209- 1248.
McBride, Michael. 2001. “Relative-Income Effects on Subjective Well-Being in the Crosssection,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 45(3), 251-278.
Neumark, David and Andrew Postlewaite. 1998. “Relative Income Concerns and the Rise in
Married Women’s Employment,” Journal of Public Economics, 70(1), pp. 157-83.
Ng, Yew-Kwang. 1987. “Relative-Income Effects and the Appropriate Level of Public
Expenditure,” Oxford Economic Papers, 39(2), pp. 293-300.
Oswald, Andrew J. 1983 “Altruism, Jealousy and the Theory of Optimal Non-Linear Taxation,”
Journal of Public Economics, 20(1), pp. 77-87.
Pigou, Arthur C. 1920. The Economics of Welfare. London: MacMillan
Pollak, Robert A. 1976. “Interdependent Preferences,” American Economic Review, 66(3), pp.
309-20.
Postlewaite, Andrew. 1998. “The Social Basis of Interdependent Preferences,” European
Economic Review, 42(3-5), pp. 779-800.
Radloff, Lenore S. 1977. “The CES-D Scale: A Self-Report Depression Scale For Research In
The General Population,” Applied Psychological Measurement, 1, pp. 385-401.
Ravallion, Martin and Michael Lokshin. 2001. “Identifying Welfare Effects from Subjective
Questions,” Economica, 68(271), pp. 335-57.
Rayo, Luis, and Gary S. Becker. 2004. “Evolutionary Efficiency and Mean Reversion in
Happiness,” mimeographed, University of Chicago.
Robson, Arthur J. 1992. “Status, the Distribution of Wealth, Private and Social Attitudes to
Risk”, Econometrica, 60(4), pp. 837-857.
Saez, Emmanuel. 2001. “Using Elasticities to Derive Optimal Income Tax Rates,” Review of
Economic Studies, 68(1). pp. 205-229.
Samuelson, Larry. 2004. “Information-Based Relative Consumption Effects,” Econometrica,
72(1), pp. 93-118.
Seidman, Laurence S. 1987. “Relativity and Efficient Taxation,” Southern Economic Journal,
54(2). pp. 463-74.
Sen, Amartya. 1983. “Poor, Relatively Speaking,” Oxford Economic Papers, 35(2), pp. 153-69.

32

Smith, Adam. 1759. The Theory of Moral Sentiments. London: A. Millar; Edinburgh: A.
Kincaid and J. Bell.
Solnick, Sara J. and David Hemenway. 1998. “Is more always better?: A survey on positional
concerns,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 37(3), pp. 373-383
Stutzer, Alois. 2004. “The Role of income aspirations in individual happiness,” Journal of
Economic Behavior and Organization, 54(1), pp. 89-110.
Stutzer, Alois and Rafael Lalive. 2001. “The Role of Social Work Norms in Job Searching and
Subjective Well-Being,” University of Zurich, working paper 51
Sweet, James A. and Larry L. Bumpass. 1996. “The National Survey of Families and
Households - Waves 1 and 2: Data Description and Documentation,” Center for
Demography and Ecology, University of Wisconsin-Madison
(http://www.ssc.wisc.edu/nsfh/home.htm), 1996
Sweet, James A.; Larry L. Bumpass, and Vaughn Call. 1988 “The Design and Content of The
National Survey of Families and Households,” Center for Demography and Ecology,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, NSFH Working Paper #1.
Tomes, Nigel. 1986. “Income Distribution, Happiness and Satisfaction: A Direct Test of the
Interdependent Preferences Model,” Journal of Economic Psychology, 7, pp. 425-446.
Tversky, Amos and Dale Griffin. 1991. “Endowment and Contrast in Judgements of WellBeing,” in Strategy and Choice, Richard J. Zeckhauser, ed., Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
pp. 297-318.
Van de Stadt, Huib; Arie Kapteyn, and Sara van de Geer. 1985. “The Relativity of Utility:
Evidence from Panel Data,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 67(2), pp. 179-87
Van Praag, Bernhard M. S. and Arie Kapteyn. 1973. “Further Evidence on the Individual
Welfare Function of Income: An Empirical Investigation in the Netherlands,” European
Economic Review, 4(1), pp. 33-62.
Van Praag, Bernhard M. S. and Paul Frijters. 1999. “The Measurement of Welfare and WellBeing: The Leyden Approach” in Well-Being: The Foundations of Hedonic Psychology.
Daniel Kahneman, Ed Diener and Norbert Schwarz, eds. New York: Russell Sage
Foundation, pp. 302-29
Van Praag, Bernhard M.S.; Paul Frijters and, Ada Ferrer-i-Carbonell. 2003. “The Anatomy of
Subjective Well-Being,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 51, pp. 23-49.
Veblen, Thorstein. 1899. The Theory of the Leisure Class. New York: Macmillan.
Veenhoven, Ruut. 1991. “Is Happiness Relative?” Social Indicators Research, 24, pp. 1-24
Zeckhauser, Richard J. and John A. Rizzo. 2003. “Reference Incomes, Loss Aversion, and
Physician Behavior,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 85(4), pp. 909-22.
Zeckhauser, Richard J., 1991. “The strategy of choice,” In: Strategy and Choice, Zeckhauser,
R.J. (Ed.), MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, pp. 1-21.

33

Appendices:
Appendix A: Variable Definitions and Summary Statistics
The baseline sample consists of individuals who are married or cohabitating in both waves of the
NSFH and have non-missing information on own household income. Unless otherwise noted,
the variables in the baseline sample consist of the average of the non-missing values of that
variable for the main respondent and his or her spouse. All dollar amounts are converted to
1982-84 real dollars using the CPI-U from Bureau of Labor Statistics.
Table A1: Variable Definitions
Description
The answer to the question: “Next are some questions about how you see yourself
and your life. Taking things all together, how would you say things are these days?”
where 1 denotes “very unhappy” and 7 denotes “very happy”. Values in between
did not have explicit labels.
Ln PUMA earnings (predicted) Log average predicted pre-tax earnings of all non-institutionalized working age
persons (16 ≤ age < 65) with non-missing industry and occupation codes living in
the PUMA of the NSFH respondent. See Appendix B for details.
Ln PUMA earnings (actual)
Log average actual pre-tax earnings of all non-institutionalized working age persons
(16 ≤ age < 65) with non-missing industry and occupation codes living in the
PUMA of the NSFH respondent.
Ln PUMA income (actual)
Log average actual pre-tax per-capita income of all non-institutionalized persons
living in the PUMA of the NSFH respondent.
Ln PUMA earnings (pred.)|no Same as Ln PUMA earnings (predicted) described above, except that the prediction
college, Ln PUMA earnings
is done separately for people in the PUMA with and without a college degree. See
(pred.)| college
Appendix B for details
Ln Household income
Log household total pre-tax income constructed by the NSFH using information
from both the main respondent and his or her spouse. NSFH variable names:
“IHTOT2” in wave 1 and “MUHHTOT” in wave 2.
Ln Predicted earnings of R and Log pre-tax earnings of the main respondent and his/her spouse based on the
spouse
industry×occupation codes of the respondent and the spouse and the earnings by
industry×occupation×time-period from the CPS MORG. See Appendix B for
details.
Ln Actual earnings of R and
Log pre-tax earnings of the main respondent and his/her spouse.
spouse
Ln Value of home
Log current value of the respondent’s home if the respondent is a homeowner.
Answer to the question “How much do you think your home would sell for now?”.
Renter
Dummy for renting one’s home.
Ln Usual working hours
Log total usual working hours in one’s main and secondary job. Non-working
individuals are assigned the mean log working hours to make the dummies for
unemployment and not-in-the-labor force more easily interpretable.
Unemployed
Dummy for being unemployed defined as not currently employed and having
looked for work during the past 4 weeks.
Not in the labor force
Dummy for those neither currently employed nor unemployed.
Non-Hispanic white; Black;
Answer to the question “Which of the groups on this card best describes you? 01Hispanic; Asian; Other race or Black; 02-White-not of Hispanic origin; 03-Mexican American; Chicano,
Mexicano; 04-Puerto Rican; 05-Cuban; 06-Other Hispanic; 07-American Indian;
race n/a
08-Asian; 09-Other”. Categories 3,4,5 and 6 are combined into “Hispanic” and
categories 7,9 and no answer are combined into “Other race or race n/a”.
Married or cohabiting;
Cohabiting individuals (even if separated, divorced or widowed) are coded into the
Separated; Divorced;
Married or cohabitating category.
Variable name
Self-reported happiness

34

Widowed; Never married;
Missing marital status
Educational attainment (years) Years of completed education at the time of the wave 1 interview as defined by the
NSFH constructed variable “EDUCAT”.
Religious affiliation dummies Answer to the question: “What is your religious preference? (IF PROTESTANT,
(13)
ASK): What specific denomination is that?”. I grouped the 65 possible responses
to this question into 13 major categories.
Wave
The wave of the NSFH data. Wave 1 was fielded between March 1988 and May
1989 with most of the interviews conducted in the summer of 1988. Wave 2 was
fielded between July 1992 and July 1994 with most of the interviews conducted in
1993.
Spousal record exists
Dummy if a spouse was interviewed.
Frequency of financial worries The answer to the question: “How often do you worry that your total family income
will not be enough to meet your family's expenses and bills. Would you say: 1Almost all the time; 2-Often; 3-Once in a while; 4-Hardly ever; 5-Never.” This
question was only asked in wave 2.
Frequency of open marital
The answer to the question: “The following is a list of subjects on which couples
disagreements about
often have disagreements. How often, if at all, in the last year have you had open
[household tasks; money;
disagreements about each of the following [household tasks; money; spending time
spending time together; sex; in- together; sex; in-laws; the children]: 01-Never; 02-Less than once a month; 03laws; the children]:
Several times a month; 04-About once a week; 05-Several times a week; 06-Almost
everyday.”
Depression Index (based on
Twelve items from the Radloff depression index were asked in both waves: “Next is
Radloff)
a list of the ways you might have felt or behaved during the past week. On how
many days during the past week did you: [Feel bothered by things that usually don't
bother you?; Not feel like eating; your appetite was poor?; Feel that you could not
shake off the blues, even with help from your family or friends?; Have trouble
keeping your mind on what you were doing?; Feel depressed?; Feel that everything
you did was an effort?; Feel fearful?; Sleep restlessly?; Talk less than usual?; Feel
lonely?; Feel sad?; Feel you could not get going?] (number of days).” The answer
to each question is the number of days (0-7) on which the condition applied. The
depression index is the sum of the answers to these 12 questions. This variable is
only based on the responses by the main respondent because the depression items
were not asked of the spouse in the first wave.
Self-reported health status
The answer to the question: “Compared with other people your age, how would you
describe your health? 1-Very poor; 2-Poor; 3-Fair; 4-Good; 5-Excellent”
Satisfaction with [home;
The answer to the question: “Overall, how satisfied are you with... [Your home?;
neighborhood; city or town;
Your neighborhood?; Your city or town?; Your financial situation?; The amount of
financial situation; amount of leisure time that you have?; Your health?; Your physical appearance?; Your
leisure; health; physical
friendships?; Your sex life?; Your family life?; Your present job?] where 1 denotes
appearance; friendships; sex “very dissatisfied” and 7 denotes “very satisfied”. Values in between did not have
life; family life; present job]
explicit labels. These questions were only asked in wave 2.

35

Table A2: Summary Statistics
Variable:
Self-reported happiness
Ln PUMA earnings (predicted)
Ln PUMA earnings (actual)
Ln PUMA income (actual)
Ln PUMA earnings (pred.)|no college
Ln PUMA earnings (pred.)| college
Ln Household income
Ln Predicted earnings of R and spouse
Ln Actual earnings of R and spouse
Ln Value of home
Renter
Ln Usual working hours
Unemployed
Not in the labor force
Female
Age
Non-Hispanic white
Black
Hispanic
Asian
Other race or race n/a
Married or cohabiting
Separated
Divorced
Widowed
Never married
Missing marital status
Educational attainment (years)
Dummy for college or more
Ln Household size
No religion
Catholic
Jewish
Baptist
Episcopalian
Lutheran
Methodist
Mormon
Presbyterian
Congregational
Protestant, no denomination
Other Christian
Other religions / missing

Whole Sample
N=23,010
Mean Std. Dev.
5.346
1.38
9.824
0.27
9.820
0.24
9.471
0.30
9.451
0.15
10.904
0.16
9.886
1.10
9.825
1.12
9.804
0.74
10.871
0.88
0.409
0.49
3.692
0.44
0.029
0.17
0.342
0.47
0.605
0.49
44.669
16.91
0.734
0.44
0.179
0.38
0.073
0.26
0.009
0.10
0.005
0.07
0.601
0.49
0.041
0.20
0.121
0.33
0.104
0.31
0.133
0.34
0.0002
0.01
12.518
3.11
0.178
0.38
0.914
0.56
0.084
0.28
0.240
0.43
0.020
0.14
0.235
0.42
0.020
0.14
0.054
0.23
0.097
0.30
0.022
0.15
0.033
0.18
0.017
0.13
0.043
0.20
0.114
0.32
0.022
0.15

36

N
19795
22979
22979
22979
22979
22979
19037
16984
19676
12408
23010
13416
23010
23010
23010
23010
23010
23010
23010
23010
23010
23010
23010
23010
23010
23010
23010
22924
23010
23010
23010
23010
23010
23010
23010
23010
23010
23010
23010
23010
23010
23010
23010

Baseline Sample Only
N=8944
Mean Std. Dev.
N
5.553
1.08
8944
9.843
0.26
8944
9.835
0.24
8944
9.492
0.29
8944
9.471
0.14
8944
10.917
0.15
8944
10.346
0.75
8944
10.197
0.92
8125
10.131
0.62
8091
10.979
0.82
6788
0.217
0.41
8944
3.694
0.39
7255
0.019
0.10
8944
0.317
0.36
8944
n/a
n/a
n/a
43.282
14.03
8944
0.828
0.36
8944
0.091
0.28
8944
0.059
0.22
8944
0.010
0.09
8944
0.012
0.08
8944
1.000
0.00
8944
0.000
0.00
8944
0.000
0.00
8944
0.000
0.00
8944
0.000
0.00
8944
0.000
0.00
8944
12.997
2.62
8940
0.232
0.37
8944
1.139
0.39
8944
0.084
0.23
8944
0.242
0.40
8944
0.023
0.14
8944
0.201
0.37
8944
0.021
0.13
8944
0.063
0.22
8944
0.106
0.28
8944
0.028
0.16
8944
0.041
0.18
8944
0.021
0.12
8944
0.030
0.13
8944
0.118
0.29
8944
0.023
0.12
8944

Wave
Spousal record exists
Additional variables for table 4
Frequency of financial worries
(wave 2 only)
Frequency of open marital
disagreements about:
money
the children
household tasks
sex
spending time together
in-laws
Depression Index (based on Radloff)
Self-reported health status
Additional variables for tables 5 & 6
(wave 2 only)
Satisfaction with family life
Satisfaction with financial situation
Satisfaction with sex life
Satisfaction with home
Satisfaction with health
Satisfaction with present job
Satisfaction with amount of leisure
Satisfaction with friendships
Satisfaction with city or town
Satisfaction with physical appearance
Satisfaction with neighborhood

1.435
0.503

0.50
0.50

23010
23010

1.538
0.893

0.50
0.31

8944
8944

3.093

1.21

9713

2.997

1.02

5001

2.069
2.097
1.992
1.748
1.997
1.494
14.913
3.949

1.15
1.27
1.07
1.11
1.29
0.88
16.68
0.86

13019
10277
13026
12700
12974
12765
21511
21992

2.079
2.366
2.022
1.782
1.998
1.568
12.215
4.021

0.99
1.67
0.93
0.95
1.07
1.50
14.49
0.65

9125
8664
9122
9044
9120
9156
8782
9173

Observations
in wave 2: 10004
5.749
1.42
4.525
1.71
5.011
1.87
5.491
1.52
5.384
1.54
5.161
1.68
4.558
1.80
5.697
1.35
5.317
1.54
5.144
1.47
5.420
1.60

37

9682
9658
9232
9742
9694
7036
9685
9688
9643
9692
9719

Baseline observations
in wave 2: 5067
5.881
1.06
4806
4.780
1.40
4800
5.276
1.39
4766
5.622
1.18
4806
5.436
1.16
4805
5.301
1.36
4150
4.514
1.47
4805
5.676
1.03
4803
5.383
1.23
4803
5.118
1.12
4805
5.532
1.28
4805

Appendix B: Construction of Predictor for PUMA- and Industry×Occupation Earnings
This appendix provides a detailed description of the construction of both the PUMA-level
earnings predictor and the predictor of average earnings at the industry×occupation level. The
construction of these predictors is described in seven steps.
Step 1: Creation of a common set of industry×occupation codes
The industry and occupation codes in the first wave of the NSFH as well as in the 1987
and 1988 CPS MORG files are 3-digit 1980 Census codes, while 3-digit 1990 Census codes were
used in the second NSFH wave, the 1992-1994 CPS MORG files and (obviously) the 1990
Census PUMS. I create a crosswalk to make these two sets of codes compatible. In general, the
1980 and 1990 Census industry and occupation classification is very similar. In a few cases, I
need to merge several 3-digit occupations or industries together in order to make the codes
comparable. I exclude the active-duty military. The crosswalk transforms 231 industry codes
from the 1980 Census and 236 industry codes from the 1990 Census into a set of 225 unique and
comparable industry codes. Similarly, it transforms 503 occupation codes from the 1980 Census
and 501 occupation codes from the 1990 Census into a set of 496 unique and comparable
occupation codes.
Step 2: Calculation of average industry×occupation×time-period earnings from CPS MORG:
I use the NBER CPS labor abstracts to obtain usual weekly earnings (“earnwke”) by
industry×occupation for the years 1987-88 and 1992-94 for all employees (self-employed
individuals are excluded because their earnings data is often unreliable). To ensure compatibility
over time, all earnings are deflated by the 1982-84 CPI-U, all topcoded earnings are replaced by
twice the value of the topcode35, and the sum of weights is made identical across years. Step 2
yields two variables: LnEarn1, average log annual earnings by industry×occupation cell in 19871988, and LnEarn2, average log annual earnings by industry×occupation cell in 1992-1994.
These variables differ by state because data from the own state is excluded in calculating the
average.
Step 3: Prediction of average earnings by industry×occupation×time-period cell
Because many industry×occupation cells have very few observations or are empty in the
CPS data but are non-empty in the NSFH or Census PUMS, I use a linear regression to predict
earnings in each industry×occupation cell in each time period. I regress LnEarn1 on a full set of
3-digit industry dummies and a full set of 3-digit occupation dummies where each
industry×occupation cell is weighted by the weighted number of observation in that cell in the
MORG. I run this regression separately for each state (because of the exclusion of the own state
information). On average, these regressions have about 20,000 observations. The regressions
yield the earnings predictor LnEarnPred1. Similar regressions for wave 2 yield the earnings
predictor LnEarnPred2.
Step 4: Taking a weighted average between actual and predicted earnings
The benefit of the predictor described in step 3 is that it yields predicted earnings for
industry×occupation×time-period cells that are empty in the CPS MORG and that it increases the
35

This is the expectation of a topcoded earnings variable if the tail of the earnings distribution follows a Pareto
distribution with a parameter of 2, which seems to be the case empirically (Saez, 2001).

38

precision of the earnings estimate for industry×occupation×time-period cells with very few
observations (in wave 1 (2), 75% of the industry×occupation cells have 8 (9) or fewer
observations in them). However, by not allowing industry×occupation interactions, the
regression may not be the best predictor of earnings for cells with a large number of
observations. To balance these two concerns, I take a weighted average, LnEarnHatt, between
predicted earnings and actual earnings, where the weight depends on n, the number of
observations in that cell. Specifically, for wave 1:
 n1eff 
 n 
LnEarnHat1 =  eff
 LnEarnPred 1 +  eff
 LnEarn1
 n1 +n 
 n1 +n 

and similarly for wave 2. The parameter, nteff or the relative weight on predicted earnings is
estimated by a non-linear least squares regression of log average earnings from the PUMS on the
left hand side of the equation above, where industry×occupation cells are weighted by the
weighted number of observations in them in the PUMS. This yields neff of 22.9 and 25.1 for
wave 1 and wave 2 respectively. The R2 of these regressions are 0.74 and 73 respectively. The
variable LnEarnHatt is merged to the NSFH data (based on the wave of the survey and the
respondent’s industry, occupation and state) and is the instrument for own household income
used in specification 3 of table 1.
Step 6: Prediction of PUMA-level earnings
Using data from the 1990 Census 5% PUMS, I assign to each non-institutionalized
person aged 16-65 the level of the predicted earnings, exp(LnEarnHat), based on that person’s
industry, occupation and state. I do this both for predicted earnings in 1987-88 and in 1992-94.
Next, I calculate the average predicted level of earnings for each PUMA for each time period.
The log of the average predicted level of earnings for each time period and PUMA is the variable
LnPumaPred.
Step 7: Rescaling of LnPumaPredt
To test the predictive power of LnPumaPredt, I regress both LnPumaPred1 and
LnPumaPred2 on log actual PUMA-level earnings in 1989 (from the 1990 Census) for the
sample of 1315 PUMAs that occur in the NSFH data.36 Though both regressions have a high R2
(0.846 and 0.861 respectively), the coefficient on log actual 1989 PUMA level earnings is only
around a half. Thus, while the predictor apparently does a good job ranking PUMAs by
earnings, it underestimates earnings differences. To correct for this underprediction, I multiply
each predictor by 2.19. After this rescaling, a regression of the average of LnPumaPred1 and
LnPumaPred2 on log actual PUMA-level earnings in 1989 yields a coefficient of exactly one.
This rescaling reduces the coefficient on PUMA-level earnings as an independent variable by a
factor of about two but it of course does not affect the statistical significance of any of the results
in the paper. In the rest of the paper, I refer to the rescaled predictor of PUMA-level earnings as
Ln Puma Earnings (predicted) or, when there is no risk of confusion, Ln Puma Earnings for
short.
36

Some of these PUMAs do not contain NFSH main respondents but only secondary NSFH respondents (such as
ex-spouses). Hence, there are more PUMAs in this sample than in the baseline sample described in the data section.

39

Validation using NSFH data
As a check on both the PUMA-level and industry×occupation-level predictors of
earnings, I regress log earnings of NSFH respondents (with earnings of at least $100/year) on
these predictors. The first row shows that the predictor of PUMA level earnings is highly
significant, has a coefficient of about 0.75 and explains about 3.5% of the individual-level
earnings variation. The second row shows that results are similar if we use the log of average
actual earnings in the PUMA of the respondent in 1989. This shows that the use of predicted
rather than actual earnings does not entail a huge loss of predictive power. The third, fourth and
fifth row show that the results are similar for each wave and hold up if state fixed effects are
included.
Rows (6) through (10), repeat these checks for the measure of industry × occupation
earnings constructed in step 5 above. This measure is highly significant and has a coefficient
reasonably close to one in all cases. Row (7) shows that results remain similar if we instead use
log average earnings in 1989 by industry×occupation cell from the 1990 Census. This confirms
that results are not driven by any peculiarities of my procedure of creating the measure for
industry×occupation earnings.
Table A2: Validation of Earnings Predictor by PUMA and by Industry × Occupation
Dependent variable: Ln Respondent’s Real Earnings
Independent variable
Ln PUMA earnings (predicted)
Ln PUMA earnings (actual, 1989)
Ln PUMA earnings (predicted)
Ln PUMA earnings (predicted)
Ln PUMA earnings (predicted)

Comment
baseline
actual 1989, not predicted
only wave 1
only wave 2
including state fixed effects

Coefficient
0.751
0.931
0.702
0.852
0.676

S.E.
0.04
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.04

Adj. R2
0.0341
0.0418
0.0320
0.0400
0.0434

N
14845
14845
7899
6946
14845

Ln Industry×occupation earnings
Ln Census Industry×occupation
earnings in 1989
(8) Ln Industry×occupation earnings
(9) Ln Industry×occupation earnings
(10) Ln Industry×occupation earnings

baseline
Average 1989 earnings by
ind.×occ. from 1990 Census
only wave 1
only wave 2
including state fixed effects

0.859
0.721

0.02
0.02

0.2732
0.2513

13980
12541

0.852
0.854
0.849

0.02
0.03
0.02

0.2754
0.2622
0.2836

7644
6336
13980

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)

Note: In specifications (1)-(5), standard errors are corrected for clustering at the PUMA level while in specifications
(6)-(10) they are adjusted for clustering at the industry × occupation level.

40

Table 1: Baseline Regression
Dependent variable:
Self-reported happiness

Ln PUMA earnings (predicted)

Baseline
Coeff.
S.E.
-0.208** 0.052

(2)
Only main
Respondent
Coeff.
S.E.
-0.249** 0.069

Ln Household Income
Ln Value of home
Renter

0.121**
0.052**
-0.182**

0.020
0.021
0.032

0.110**
0.051**
-0.222**

0.024
0.024
0.038

0.365**

0.100

Ln Usual working hours
Unemployed
Not in the labor force

-0.068**
-0.428**
0.149**

0.044
0.124
0.043

-0.111**
-0.255**
0.066**

0.036
0.114
0.043

-0.137**
-0.352**
0.252**

0.052
0.148
0.065

**

-0.018
0.002**
0.013**

0.004
0.002
0.004

-0.046**
-0.019**
0.002**
0.009**

0.034
0.005
0.003
0.005

-0.020**
0.001**
0.018**

0.005
0.002
0.005

-0.060**
0.278**
-0.067**
-0.136**
0.011**
-0.166**

0.050
0.063
0.117
0.216
0.007
0.038

-0.012**
0.189**
-0.150**
0.085**
0.010**
-0.176**

0.060
0.074
0.129
0.405
0.007
0.044

-0.054**
0.286**
-0.045**
-0.093**
-0.007**
-0.180**

0.052
0.067
0.117
0.210
0.012
0.040

0.170**
-0.310**
0.130**
-0.063**
0.003**
0.048**
0.041**
-0.013**
0.040**
0.042**
0.105**
0.041**

0.058
0.098
0.041
0.091
0.055
0.045
0.079
0.073
0.095
0.103
0.047
0.104

-0.155**
-0.288**
0.058**
-0.008**
-0.089**
0.063**
-0.037**
-0.103**
-0.055**
0.035**
0.025**
0.070**

0.061
0.112
0.045
0.097
0.064
0.051
0.088
0.077
0.103
0.078
0.054
0.121

-0.162**
-0.314**
0.147**
-0.066**
0.003**
0.049**
0.048**
-0.008**
0.072**
0.065**
0.122**
-0.070**

0.058
0.098
0.041
0.092
0.056
0.045
0.085
0.072
0.098
0.104
0.049
0.108

Female
Age spline (effect p.y. on segment 19-35)
Age spline (effect p.y. on segment 35-60)
Age spline (effect p.y. on segment 60 plus)
White(omitted)
Black
Hispanic
Asian
Other race / ethnicity
Years of education
Ln Household size
Catholic (omitted)
No religion
Jewish
Baptist
Episcopalian
Lutheran
Methodist
Mormon
Presbyterian
Congregational
Protestant, no denomination
Other Christian
Other religions / missing

Adjusted R2
Number of observations

(1)

0.0371
8944

0.0238
8023

(3)
IV
for own income
Coeff.
S.E.
-0.279** 0.067

…
8944

Notes: Robust standard errors adjusted for clustering on PUMAs (1000 clusters in specifications 1 and 3; 974 clusters in specification 2). Ln
usual hours and Ln home value are demeaned. All regressions also include dummy variables for independent variables with missing values. Selfreported happiness is measured on a scale of 1 to 7, with 7 representing “very happy.” The sample consists of respondents of NSFH waves 1 and
2 that are married or cohabiting in both waves. In specifications (1) and (3) the variables are the average of the respondent’s value and that of his
or her spouse. In specification (3), ln household income is instrumented by predicted ln household earnings where predicted earnings are based
on the industry × occupation of the respondent and his or her spouse.

41

Table 2: Testing for Selection
Dependent variable:
Self-reported happiness
Specification:

Ln PUMA earnings
Coeff.
S.E.

Ln HH income
Coeff. S.E.

Adj.
R2

N

(1) Baseline

-0.208**

0.052

0.121** 0.020

0.0371

8944

(2) Individual Fixed Effect

-0.232**

0.135

0.053** 0.052

0.3102

8944

(3) Including State×Wave fixed effects, a
dummy for metropolitan areas and log
metropolitan area population

-0.189**

0.065

0.119** 0.020

0.0391

8944

(4) Observations remaining in same PUMA

-0.204**

0.063

0.129** 0.024

0.0381

6894

(5) Observations remaining in same PUMA
and individual fixed effects

0.212**

1.421

0.047** 0.066

0.3170

6894

-0.123**

0.050

0.0320

8944

(6) Using predicted household income instead
of household income and home value

…**

…**

Robust standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the PUMA level. All regressions include the same controls as the baseline regression
reported in table 1, column 1. Whenever individual fixed effects are included, spousal variables are only used if the identity of the spouse
remains the same in both waves.

42

Table 3: Robustness Checks
Dependent variable:
Self-reported happiness
Specification:

Ln PUMA earnings
Coeff.
S.E.

Ln HH income
Coeff. S.E.

Adj.
R2

N

(1) Baseline

-0.208**

0.052

0.121** 0.020

0.0371

8944

(2) 1989 actual Ln PUMA earnings as control
(instead of predicted Ln PUMA earnings)

-0.266**

0.057

0.124** 0.020

0.0377

8944

(3) 1989 Ln PUMA p.c. income as control
(instead of predicted Ln PUMA earnings)

-0.204**

0.052

0.123** 0.020

0.0372

8944

(4) Full balanced panel sample
(including non-married individuals)

-0.155**

0.042

0.121** 0.017

0.0651

15568

(5) Controlling for 5th order polynomial in Ln
household income

-0.212**

0.052

0.160** 0.030

0.0375

8944

(6) Ordered probit

-0.209**

0.051

0.110** 0.020

0.0107

8944

(7) Ln earnings of R and spouse as control
(instead of Ln HH income)

-0.195**

0.052

0.082** 0.017

0.0370

8944

Robust standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the PUMA level. All regressions include the same controls as the baseline regression
reported in table 1, column 1. The terms in the polynomial in specification 5 are demeaned. Hence, the coefficient on the first term (reported in
the table) is the slope of Ln household income for someone with mean Ln household income. The regression in specification (4) also included 4
marital status dummies as controls.

43

Table 4: Other Outcome Measures
Dependent variable:

Ln PUMA earnings
Coeff.
S.E.

Ln HH income
Coeff. S.E.

Adj.
R2

N

(1) Financial worries

0.221**

0.063

-0.388** 0.034

0.2199

5001

(2) Frequency of open disagreements about:
a. money
b. the children
c. household tasks
d. spending time together
e. sex
f. in-laws

0.129**
0.096**
0.080**
0.059**
0.053**
0.020**

0.044
0.062
0.044
0.055
0.044
0.051

-0.104**
-0.034**
-0.049**
-0.049**
-0.046**
-0.046**

0.018
0.029
0.015
0.020
0.016
0.025

0.2261
0.0781
0.1865
0.1484
0.1481
0.0743

9125
8522
9122
9120
9044
9096

-0.065**

0.764

-1.334** 0.251

0.0654

8782

-0.015**

0.023

-0.037** 0.007

0.0495

8782

0.011**

0.025

-0.030** 0.008

0.0517

8782

0.012**

0.023

-0.017** 0.009

0.0470

8782

0.067**

0.018

-0.003** 0.007

0.0367

8782

-0.008**

0.034

0.095** 0.013

0.1489

9173

(3) Depression Index
Index (sum of 12 Radloff items)
(4) Distribution of the Depression Index
a. Dummy for being in the top
quintile of the depression index
b. Dummy for being in the top two
quintiles of the depression index
c. Dummy for being in the top three
quintiles of the depression index
d. Dummy for being in the top four
quintiles of the depression index
(5) Health status relative to age group

Robust standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the PUMA level. All regressions include the same controls as the baseline regression
reported in table 1, column 1 except for the regressions in specification 2, which also control for self-reported quality of relationship with spouse.
The variable Financial worries exists only in wave 2 and is the answer to the question “How often do you worry that your total family income
will not be enough to meet your family's expenses and bills?” where 1 corresponds to “never” and 5 to “almost all the time.” The frequency of
open disagreements is measured on a scale of 1 (“never”) to 6 (“almost every day”). The depression index is the sum of the 12 Radloff items that
appear in both waves of the NSFH. Each item is the number of days in the past week that the respondent felt or experienced a symptom related to
depression. Examples of such symptoms are “sleeping restlessly,” “talking less than usual,” and “feeling sad.” Self-reported health status is the
answer to the question “Compared with other people your age, how would you describe your health?”, where 1 corresponds to “very poor” and 5
to “excellent.” Specifications 3 and 4 only use data from the main respondent because the depression questions were only asked of the main
respondent in all waves.

44

Table 5: Components of Happiness
Dependent variable:
Self-reported happiness
satisfaction with family life
satisfaction with financial situation
satisfaction with sex life
satisfaction with home
satisfaction with health
satisfaction with present job
satisfaction with amount of leisure time
satisfaction with friendships
satisfaction with city or town
satisfaction with physical appearance
satisfaction with neighborhood
R2
Number of observations

Coeff.

S.E.

0.278**
0.144**
0.098**
0.092**
0.088**
0.053**
0.039**
0.042**
0.022**
-0.015**
-0.024**

0.019
0.013
0.011
0.016
0.019
0.014
0.013
0.018
0.015
0.018
0.015

0.3989
4808

Robust standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the PUMA level. Not reported but included in the regression are dummies variables for
missing values of the satisfaction questions. The satisfaction variables are answers to the question; “Overall, how satisfied are you with... X,”
where X is “your family life,” “your financial situation,” etc. The answers are recorded on a 7-point scale with 1 corresponding to “very
dissatisfied” and 7 corresponding to “very satisfied”.

45

Table 6: Mechanisms
Dependent variable:
Self-reported happiness
Specification:

Ln PUMA earnings
Coeff.
S.E.

(1) Baseline (wave 2 only)

-0.280**

0.072

(2) Additional controls for Satisfaction with
(wave 2 only):
a. home
b. financial situation
c. amount of leisure time
d. sex life
e. present job
f. friendships
g. health
h. family life
i. physical appearance
j. neighborhood
k. city or town

-0.139**
-0.146**
-0.165**
-0.180**
-0.190**
-0.198**
-0.203**
-0.205**
-0.237**
-0.241**
-0.307**

0.064
0.063
0.066
0.062
0.068
0.064
0.063
0.059
0.065
0.068
0.065

-0.058**
-0.139**

0.058
0.055

l. Top 3 (home, finance, leisure)
m. Bottom 8 (sex – city or town)

Ln HH income
Coeff. S.E.

Adj.
R2

N

0.0298

4808

0.030
0.029
0.030
0.029
0.030
0.029
0.029
0.027
0.030
0.030
0.031

0.1768
0.1918
0.1340
0.2171
0.1165
0.1635
0.1556
0.2974
0.1305
0.0916
0.0946

4808
4808
4808
4808
4808
4808
4808
4808
4808
4808
4808

0.011** 0.028
0.094** 0.026

0.2663
0.3630

4808
4808

0.160** 0.031

0.138**
-0.038**
0.130**
0.120**
0.111**
0.142**
0.104**
0.140**
0.141**
0.152**
0.149**

Robust standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the PUMA level. All regressions include the same controls as the baseline regression
reported in table 1, column 1.

46

Table 7: Interactions With Respondent Characteristics
Dependent variable:
Self-reported happiness
Specification:
(1) Gender
Male
Female

Ln PUMA earnings
Coeff.
S.E.

Ln HH income
Coeff.
S.E.

-0.210**
-0.283**

0.093
0.092

0.114**
0.107**

0.033
0.033

age ≤ 30
30 < age ≤ 40
40 < age ≤ 60
60 < age

-0.089**
-0.229**
-0.250**
-0.225**

0.114
0.089
0.090
0.151

0.086**
0.105**
0.172**
0.099**

0.042
0.039
0.034
0.045

(3) Education
Missing
High school dropout
High school degree
Some college
College degree or more

-0.540**
-0.203**
-0.254**
-0.101**
-0.195**

0.340
0.189
0.120
0.130
0.096

0.018**
0.130**
0.178**
0.088**
0.052**

0.130
0.049
0.037
0.049
0.040

(4) Marital status transitions
Remains married or cohabiting
Remains divorced or separated
Remains widowed
Remains never married
Marital status change

-0.200**
-0.392**
-0.159**
-0.116**
-0.019**

0.067
0.154
0.180
0.179
0.093

0.120**
0.13**
0.074**
0.116**
0.125**

0.023
0.048
0.058
0.051
0.034

(5) Home ownership
Rents
Owns

-0.191**
-0.235**

0.102
0.060

0.185**
0.092**

0.036
0.024

(6) Presence of child(ren) aged ≤ 18
No child(ren) present in HH
Child(ren) present in HH

-0.212**
-0.206**

0.077
0.067

0.127**
0.111**

0.025
0.028

(7) Lives in current home…
less than 7 years
7 years or more
duration is missing

-0.207**
-0.156**
-0.431**

0.070
0.076
0.141

0.096**
0.144**
0.141**

0.026
0.029
0.063

(2) Age

Adj.
R2
0.0236

N
8023
[3636]
[4387]

0.0376

8944
[1660]
[2943]
[3000]
[1342]

0.0377

8944
[291]
[1401]
[3263]
[1915]
[2075]

0.0536

14500
[8023]
[1524]
[1032]
[995]
[2926]

0.0376

8944
[1939]
[7005]

0.0372

8944
[3853]
[5091]

0.0375

8944
[4193]
[3870]
[881]

Robust standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the PUMA level. Each specification is a single OLS regression in which Ln PUMA earnings
and Ln household income are interacted with an exhaustive set of dummies. All regressions also include as controls the uninteracted set of
dummy variables as well as the same controls as the baseline regression reported in table 1, column 1. Except for specification (4), the baseline
sample consisting of individuals married or cohabiting in both waves is used. In specification (1) only information from the main respondent is
used (because there is virtually no variation in the average gender of couples). In specification (4), no interactions with PUMA earnings or own
household income are included for 2 observations with missing marital status transitions. The hypothesis that the coefficients on Ln PUMA
earnings are all equal to each other cannot be rejected at a significance level of 0.10 or lower for any of the specifications. The number of
observations in each category is denoted between square brackets.

47

Table 8: Interactions With Frequency of Respondent’s Social Contacts
Dependent variable:
Self-reported happiness
Specification:
(1) Socialize with a neighbor
Less than once a month or missing
Once a month or more frequently
P-value on test of equal coefficients
(2) Socialize with relatives
Less than once a month or missing
Once a month or more frequently
P-value on test of equal coefficients
(3) Socialize with friends who live outside
the neighborhood
Less than once a month or missing
Once a month or more frequently
P-value on test of equal coefficients
(4) Socialize with people one works with
Less than once a month or missing
Once a month or more frequently
P-value on test of equal coefficients

Ln PUMA earnings
Coeff.
S.E.
[p-value]

Ln HH income
Coeff.
S.E.
[p-value]

-0.121**
-0.314**

0.071
0.064
[0.029]

0.129**
0.110**

0.026
0.027
[0.575]

-0.140**
-0.243**

0.077
0.061
[0.257]

0.139**
0.110**

0.033
0.023
[0.452]

-0.233**
-0.185**

0.083
0.064
[0.640]

0.154**
0.088**

0.031
0.026
[0.106]

-0.187**
-0.249**

0.064
0.081
[0.536]

0.137**
0.070**

0.023
0.036
[0.110]

Adj.
R2

N

0.0400

8944
[5076]
[3868]

0.0383

8944
[2927]
[6017]

0.0376

8944
[4119]
[4825]

0.0374

8944
[6325]
[2619]

Robust standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the PUMA level. Each specification is a single OLS regression in which Ln PUMA earnings
and Ln household income are interacted with an exhaustive set of dummies. All regressions also include as controls the uninteracted set of
dummy variables as well as the same controls as the baseline regression reported in table 1, column 1. In wave 1, respondents were asked how
often they “spend a social evening” with various types of people while in wave 2 they were asked how often they “get together socially” with
these types of people. The number of observations in each category is denoted between square brackets. Frequency of social contacts is the
frequency of social contacts of the main respondent because this variable was not collected of spouses in both waves.

48

Table 9: Neighbors’ Earnings by Education Interacted with Own Education
Dependent variable:
Self-reported happiness
(1) Unrestricted Interaction
Own Education
Less than College
College or more

Ln Predicted PUMA Earnings of neighbors with:
Less than college
College or more
-0.284 (0.225)
0.017 (0.305)
-0.069 (0.201)
-0.402 (0.304)

Adjusted R2
N

0.0249
7523

(2) Restricted Interaction
Own Education
Less than College
College or more

Ln Predicted PUMA Earnings of neighbors with:
Less than college
College or more
-0.316 * (0.190)
-0.048 (0.176)
-0.048 (0.176)
-0.316 * (0.190)

Adjusted R2
N

0.0251
7523

Robust standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the PUMA level. All regressions also include as controls the uninteracted variables as well
as the same controls as the baseline regression reported in table 1, column 1. The sample is limited to the baseline sample for which the
respondent and his or her spouse both have non-missing values for educational attainment.

49

