                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         DO GENDER STEREOTYPES REDUCE GIRLS’
                              HUMAN CAPITAL OUTCOMES?
                         EVIDENCE FROM A NATURAL EXPERIMENT

                                               Victor Lavy

                                          Working Paper 10678
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10678


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2004




I would like to thank Daron Acemoglu, Joshua Angrist, David Author, Abhijit Banerjee, Raquel Fernandez,
Oded Galor, Esther Duflo, Guy Michaels, Sendhil Mullainathan, Analia Schlouser, Michael Steinberger for
discussion and suggestions and seminar participants at CEPR conference, Hebrew University, MIT and Tel-
Aviv University for useful comments. I also thank the Israeli Education Ministry officials for assisting with
the data. Alex Levkov provided excellent research assistance. All errors are my own. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Victor Lavy. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Gender Stereotypes Reduce Girls’ Human Capital Outcomes? Evidence from a Natural
Experiment
Victor Lavy
NBER Working Paper No. 10678
August 2004
JEL No. I21, J24

                                            ABSTRACT

Schools and teachers are often said to be a source of stereotypes that harm girls. This paper tests for

the existence of gender stereotyping and discrimination by public high-school teachers in Israel. It

uses a natural experiment based on blind and non-blind scores that students receive on matriculation

exams in their senior year. Using data on test results in several subjects in the humanities and

sciences, I found, contrary to expectations, that male students face discrimination in each subject.

These biases widen the female nmale achievement gap because girls outperform boys in all subjects,

except English, and at all levels of the curriculum. The bias is evident in all segments of the ability

and performance distribution and is robust to various individual controls. Several explanations based

on differential behavior between boys and girls are not supported empirically. However, the size of

the bias is very sensitive to teachers’ characteristics, suggesting that the bias against male students

is the result of teachers’, and not students’, behavior.

Victor Lavy
Department of Economics
Hebrew University
Mt. Scopus, Jerusalem 91905
Israel
msvictor@mscc.huji.ac.il
1.      Introduction

Schools and teachers are often said to be a source of stereotypes that harm girls. Bernard (1979), Dusek

and Joseph (1983), Madon et al. (1998), and Tiedemann (2000) are only a few of the many scholars who

have claimed that teachers occasionally rely on stereotypes in forming perceptions about their students.

Examples of such stereotypical perceptions are that boys excel in math and science and girls excel in other

subjects, or that boys have more talent and that girls compensate by working hard (Deaux and LaFrance;

1998). Girls are then encouraged, on the basis of these stereotypes, to pursue traditionally female studies

instead of mathematics, science, and other traditionally male subject areas (Carr, Jessup and Fuller; 1999)

and women are steered toward certain occupations (Glick, Wilk and Perrault, 1995, Rowsey, 1997, Deaux

and LaFrance, 1998). Another claim about stereotypes is that beliefs are manifested through teachers’

evaluation of students (Fennema, 1990; AAUW, 1992; Jacob and Eccles, 1992; Ben-Zvi Mayer et al.,

1995; Hilderbrand, 1996).1 The bottom line of the literature on gender stereotypes is that they are partly

responsible for one of the alleged form of discrimination against women and that they may have far

reaching implications and consequences regarding gender differences in human capital investment and

outcomes. However, there is very little convincing evidence to date that substantiates these claims and this

study attempts, using a unique empirical context, to fill some of this gap.

       This paper tests for the existence of gender stereotyping and discrimination by public high-school

teachers in Israel. It uses a natural experiment based on blind and non-blind scores that students receive on

matriculation exams in their junior and senior years. The natural experiment arises from rules that are used

in Israel to determine scores in matriculation subjects. The final matriculation score in a given subject is

the mean of two intermediate scores. The first of the two is based on state exams that are “external” to the

school because they are written and scored by an independent agency. The scoring process for these exams

is anonymous; the external examiner is not told the student’s name and gender. The second intermediate

score is based on a school-level (“internal”) exam that mimics the state exam in material and format but is


1
  Distortions in teachers’ evaluation of their students were also discussed recently in another context, that of test-
based accountability systems in education. For example, Jacob and Levitt (2003) have shown that teachers cheat on
standardized tests and that the frequency of cheating appears to respond strongly as incentive for high test scores
increase even mildly.

                                                          1
scored by the student’s own teacher, who of course knows the student’s name and gender. This testing

protocol elicits two scores, a blind and a non-blind score, both of which are meant to measure the student’s

knowledge of the same material. Due to this testing method, we may safely assume that the blind score is

free of any bias that might be caused by stereotyped discrimination on the part of the external examiner.

The non-blind score, however, may reflect biases occasioned by teachers’ gender stereotypes. As long as

the two scores are comparable, i.e., as long as they measure the same skills and cognitive achievements, the

blind score may be used as the counterfactual measure to the non-blind score, which may be affected

(“treated”) by stereotyping and discrimination. This identification framework is similar to that used by

Goldin and Rouse (2000) and by Blank (1991).

       Using data on all matriculation scores of several cohorts of high-school seniors in Israel, I applied

this natural-experiment framework to test for gender bias in the non-blind test scores for nine subjects—

four in the humanities (English, history, literature and biblical studies), mathematics, and four in science

(biology, chemistry, computer science, and physics). The distributions of the blind and non-blind scores in

many of these subjects are very similar and, in many cases, are identical. The basic results of these quasi-

experiments show that, contrary to expectations, the bias in test scores is against male students. The sign of

the bias is the same in all nine subjects examined and in all tests in cases where there is more than one

exam per subject. The extent of the bias varies by subject and test, ranging from 0.05 to 0.25 of the

standard deviation of the blind-score distribution. This bias against male students, on average, doubles the

gender-score gap because female students outperform male students on state external exams in all subjects

except English. The results are not sensitive to various student-level controls because the identification

strategy is based on differences-in-differences at the student level, for which reason individual fixed effects

are assumed away. In some subjects the bias is strongest against low achievers but is measurable, and in

some subjects it is actually strongest against the most proficient male students.

       The basic results withstand several specification checks. Overall, they do not support the hypotheses

that the anti-male bias in the non-blind score reflects statistical discrimination against male students. For

example, limiting the sample to schools where boys outperform girls on average, overall or in specific

subjects, leaves the results basically unchanged. The variance in performance of boys is higher on average

                                                      2
and in every subject than that of girls, suggesting that statistical discrimination against boys may also occur

due to “noisier” signals in boys’ test scores. The data, however, do not support this interpretation because

the anti-boy bias is not different in schools where girls demonstrate more variability in performance on

average.

       An interesting and obvious question in this context is whether the estimated anti-male bias

represents students’ behavior or teachers’ behavior. An example of students’ behavior that may explain the

anti-male bias is differential pattern of mean reversion by gender, e.g., due to stronger and more vigorous

reaction of male students to a negative shock in the school score. The data, however, do not support such

an explanation. Another possibility is that the estimated biases reflect nonconformist behavior by male

students that teachers do not like, e.g., absenteeism or discipline problems in the classroom. The data do

not support this hypothesis either.

       The paper also examines explanations based on empirical insights gained from experiments in social

psychology. One such important insight is that a “stereotype threat”—the threat of being perceived as a

negative stereotype or the fear of a poor performance that would confirm the stereotype—may be powerful

enough to shape the intellectual performance and academic identities of entire groups of people. The

implication in our context is that the bias in favor of girls reflects the inferior performance of girls in non-

blind tests because it involves a stereotype threat and superior performance in blind test that conceal their

gender. The evidence provided in this paper does not allow us to state that this mechanism explains the

estimated negative male bias. Instead, the data support the hypothesis that teachers’ behavior is responsible

for the anti-male bias. I show that the bias in various subjects is very sensitive to teachers’ characteristics

such as gender, age, years of experience, and even family size. There is no reason to expect this pattern of

sensitivity of male bias to teachers’ characteristics to reflect students’ behavior.

        The paper is organized as follows: The next section discusses the literature of stereotypes and

discrimination, especially evidence about teachers’ stereotypical behavior culled from experiments in

social psychology. Section 3 explains the design of the study, the Israeli high-school matriculation exam

system, and the comparability of school- and state-exam scores, and presents a graphical exposition of the



                                                        3
blind–non-blind test score gap by gender. The basic results of the experiment are presented in Section 4.

Sections 5–7 discuss alternative interpretations and explanations and Section 8 concludes.



2.      Teachers’ Stereotypes and Behavior

Psychologists who have studied stereotypes have assumed traditionally that beliefs about social groups are

a powerful determinant of attitudes and behaviors toward members of these groups (Fisk, 1998).

Stereotyping is thought to promote prejudice, which promotes discrimination (Dovido et al., 1996). In

other words, beliefs about members of a social group are assumed to arouse liking or disliking for the

group, and these, in turn, dictate behavior toward group members. Recent experimental evidence shows

that stereotypes and prejudice do appear to be positively associated. However, there is little evidence about

the link between stereotypes and discrimination. Research on the relationship between stereotypes and

racial discrimination, for example, has found only a modest relationship between whites’ stereotypes of

American blacks and measures of discriminatory actions, or degrees of discrimination (Dovido et al.,

1996). Thus, very little research demonstrates that stereotypes cause discrimination.

        Several studies document how stereotypes affect teachers’ behavior in the classroom. Teachers

give boys more praise, criticism, encouragement, and permission for strategy use than they give girls.

Teachers often view boys’ rebellious invented strategies as signs of a promising future in math and

unconsciously control girls more than boys. They apply this control by encouraging strategy use or

accepting girls’ lack of participation (Hyde and Jaffee, 1998). Carr, Jessup, and Fuller (1999) argue that in

teacher-student interactions girls and boys are influenced to develop different skills, knowledge, and

motivation. For example, interaction of teachers with boys often increases boys’ understating and self-

concepts in math and that interaction of teachers with girls does not have this outcome. Rebhorn and Miles

(1999) found that teachers often call on boys and praise them but give girls more time for easy tasks.

Middleton and Spanias (1999) report that teachers reinforce learning helplessness among girls: when

teachers encounter girls who do not want to succeed, they are liable to allow them to persist in their

apathetic view of mathematics. According to the National Center of Education Statistics (1997), females

are less likely than males to be advised, counseled, and encouraged to take mathematics courses. Fennema

                                                     4
and Hart (1994) found that teachers tend to structure their classrooms in ways that favor male learning.

Hallinan and Sorensen (1987) found that intra-class ability groupings in school were influenced more by

pupils’ gender than by their performance in math and that boys tended to be assigned to higher ability

groups. Girls with strong mathematical aptitude were less likely to be assigned to a high set than boys with

similar aptitude. Intra-class grouping was found to have no effect on pupil performance compared with

whole-class teaching.

         It was also found that parents, especially mothers, often entertain stereotypic gender-role beliefs

about their children’s abilities that interact with and reinforce teachers’ stereotypes. For example, parents

often overestimate sons’ abilities in math and science and underestimate the abilities of their daughters

(Eccles, Jacobs, and Harold, 1990). Other related studies found that parents’ perceptions of the value of

math and its difficulty for their children colored both the children’s confidence in their ability and the

likelihood that they would enroll in advance math classes (Jacobs and Eccles, 1992).



3.       Study Design

3.1      The Israeli High-School Matriculation Exam System

Israeli post-primary education consists of middle school (grades 7–9) and high school (grades 10–12).

High-school students are enrolled either in an academic track leading to a matriculation certificate (bagrut

in Hebrew)2 or in a vocational track leading to a high-school diploma. Students complete the matriculation

process by passing a series of state exams in core and elective subjects beginning in tenth grade and

additional tests in eleventh grade and, in greater part, in twelfth grade. Students choose to be tested at

various levels of proficiency, each test awarding one to five credit units per subject, depending on

difficulty. Some subjects are mandatory and, for many, the most basic level of study is three credits. A

minimum of twenty credits is required to qualify for a matriculation certificate. About 52 percent of high-




2
  The matriculation certificate is a prerequisite for university admission and is one of the most economically important
education milestones. Many countries and some American states have similar high-school matriculation exams, e.g.,
the French Baccalaureate, the German Certificate of Maturity (Reifezeugnis), the Italian Diploma di Maturità, the
New York State Regents examinations, and the recently instituted Massachusetts Comprehensive Assessment System.

                                                           5
school graduates in 2002 and 46 percent of members of the relevant age cohort received matriculation

certificates.3

          The score in each matriculation subject is an average of the score on a state exam and a school-

awarded score based solely or mainly on a school-level exam. The state exam is termed an “external exam”

and the school exam is called a matkonet, derived from the word matkon, recipe, meaning that the school

exam follows the “recipe” of the state exam. The school exam not only follows the exact format of the state

exam, but it also draws its questions from the same bank of question used for the state exam. However,

there is one important difference between the two exams: all state tests are scored by expert teachers in a

central state examination center, each student’s exam by two evaluators. The student’s identity is

concealed; only his or her I.D. number appears on the exam notebook. School-level “matkonet” tests, in

contrast, are graded in school by the student’s teacher and are not anonymous.

          Students are admitted to post-secondary programs mainly on the basis of their matriculation scores.
4
    Therefore, higher-education institutions and the National Council for Higher Education, which monitors

the level of difficulty of all exams and their comparability from year to year, scrutinize these tests closely.

To assure long-term consistency in the state exams, they are written under contract by an outside

independent nonprofit organization that has been doing this for many years.

          To assure comparability between school-exam and state-exam scores, the Ministry of Education

has since 1996 been using a scheme of close supervision of the gaps between the school and the state

scores and a set of rules about sanctions when large gaps are found. Schools and teachers are well aware

and informed about this scheme (called “Differential Weighting”) because the sanction in cases where the

gaps recur in several subjects and in few consecutive years involve revoking altogether the school privilege

to administer school matriculation scores.5 The purpose of this system is “to insure the validity of the final


3
  See the Israel Ministry of Education web site (www.education.gov.il) and Lavy (2002, 2003).
4
  Each higher-education institution undertakes to rank applicants according to the same formula, thus producing an
index based on a weighted average of the student’s average score on all his/her matriculation exams and the average
score on the national exams in three core subjects (math, English, and Hebrew). Students may replace the second
component in the formula with an ATS-type score from an examination administered by the National Testing Center.
5
  A Ministry of Education document describes the rules of the Differential Weighting scheme in detail. If the average
school score in a given exam is higher than the school average score in the state test by 20 points or more or if it is
lower by 10 points or more, the case is considered an outlier. If the probability of such an event is 1:10,000, the
weights of the two scores are adjusted to 30 percent and 70 percent, respectively, instead of 50 percent each. If the

                                                          6
matriculation scores so that they may be viewed as a unified and credible criterion in the process of

admission to higher-education institutions” (Ministry of Education, High School Division web site). The

Ministry guidelines to schools indicate that the school score should be submitted to the Ministry before the

state matriculation exams and should reflect the student’s knowledge of the subject. The exam on which

the school score is based is administered several weeks before the state exam. 6



3.2      The Data

The data used in this study pertain to the school years 2000–2002. The micro student files included the full

academic records of each student on matriculation exams taken during high school (grades 10–12) and

student characteristics (gender, parents’ schooling, family size, and recent-immigrant status, where

applicable) for the three cohorts of high-school seniors in 2000–2002. The information about each

matriculation exam included its date, subject, applicable credits, and score. Members of the Ministry of

Education staff and experts from an independent agency write each matriculation exam. There are two

exam “seasons”—winter (January) and summer (June)—and all students are tested in a given subject on

the same date. The exams are graded centrally; each exam by two independent external examiners and the

final external score is the average of the two. This protocol eliminates the possibility of teachers grading

their own students’ exams and, thereby, reduces the possibility that teachers will inflate their students’

scores dishonestly.

         The school data provide information about the ethnic (Jewish or Arab) nature of each school and

the religious orientation (secular or religious) of Jewish schools. In this study I used a sample that includes

only Jewish secular schools, which account for about 60 percent of all schools and enrollment


probability of such an event is 1:1,000,000, the two scores are weighted at 10 percent and 90 percent, respectively. If
outliers are defined in 8 percent or more of the exams, in at least two subjects and in two of three consecutive years,
disciplinary actions are taken against the school. In particular, a ministerial committee may prohibit the school from
submitting school scores and advertise its decision in the national print media. Since this decision implies significant
consequences for the school, it has to be approved by the Ministry director general.
6
  The Ministry of Education’s formal guidelines about the school score state specifically that it should measure only
the student’s level of knowledge in the subject of study, and the school-level exam is intended to measure just that.
However, schools are allowed to deviate from the score on the school exam to reflect the student’s performance on
previous exams. As I show below, the distributions of the school and state scores are very similar and are even
identical on many tests. Casual evidence also suggest that teachers tend to rely completely on the school exam in



                                                           7
countrywide. I excluded Jewish State-Religious schools and Arab schools because many of them are either

all-male or all-female and in many others classes are segregated by gender. This unique feature may be

correlated and confounded with different patterns of gender stereotyping and discrimination in comparison

with secular schools.



3.3      Comparability of School- and State-Exam Scores

Table 1 presents the mean and the standard deviations of the school and state test scores for a

representative sample of tests in nine subjects: six math exams (two at the basic level, two intermediate,

and two advanced), four English exams (two at the basic level and one apiece at the intermediate and the

advanced level), five in biology (all in the advanced program), two in Hebrew literature, two in chemistry,

three in physics, and one each in computer science, history, and bible studies. The mean gap between the

school and state test scores is in most cases positive and significantly different from zero (T tests for the

difference are presented in column 6 of Table 1). The standard deviation of the school score is also

generally 10–15 percent smaller than in the state exam. In several subjects, however, the internal score is

lower than the external score; there are also cases in which the extent of score variation is similar in both

cases.

         Figures 1–8 present kernal-density estimates of the school and state exams of some of the tests

presented in Table 1. The distributions of the state and the school test scores (the first graph in each row)

are very different across subjects and tests. Some do not resemble a normal distribution shape. A striking

feature in all the figures, however, is the overall similarity between the distribution of the internal and the

external scores for each given test in comparison with the large differences between and within subjects. In

other words, the distributions of the internal and external scores in each exam change in a similar way from

one test to another. In most cases, the school-score distribution is a constant shift, to the right, of the state-

exam test score distribution. The direction of the shift is expected after one observes the pattern in

differences in means, as shown in Table 1. The figures also reveal that the internal score distribution in



determining the school score to avoid parental pressure and to protect themselves against the “differential weighting”
sanctions discussed above.

                                                          8
many exams is “thinner” at the left tail of the distribution. In many tests, however, the two distributions are

almost completely identical, a feature that we exploit in the analysis presented in the sections to come.



3.4     The Blind–Non-Blind Test Score Gap by Gender: Graphical Exposition

Figures 1–8 also present kernal-density estimates of the school and state test score distributions by gender

(second and third graph in each row). Both score distributions for each test are similar for male and female

students, respectively. However, the leftward shift of the school-score distribution relative to the external-

score distribution is always larger for female students than for male students. Even in cases where the shift

factor is negative, i.e., where the school-score distribution is to the left of the external-score distribution (as

occurred in three biology tests, several math exams, and several cases in which the two distributions

intersected), the gap is less negative for female students than for male students. The next section estimates

these gaps and their statistical confidence intervals more precisely and subjects the main results to several

specification tests.



4.      Estimating Gender-Stereotyped Discrimination

I took advantage of the blind and non-blind nature of the scoring procedures for the state and school

exams, across subjects and tests, to identify the effect of the procedure of anonymous evaluation of

cognitive ability on the likelihood that male or female abilities would be systematically under- or over-

valued. The score of student i on test j is a function of gender (M) and the anonymous or non-anonymous

nature of the evaluation (NB). The repetitive structure of two scores in each subject (and across various

tests in each subject), one blind (subscript b=0) and the other non-blind (subscript b=1), made it possible to

use a differences-in-differences estimation strategy. Assuming a linear specification, the score equation

may be written as

(1)      Sijb = α + λ M i + δ NBijb + γ   (M   i   x NBijb ) + uijb

The coefficients for M and NB identify the effects of being male and a non-blind scoring procedure,

respectively, on the test score. The parameter of interest is that pertaining to the interaction of M and NB, γ,

which measures the difference between the non-blind scores of male students and those and of female
                                                             9
students, given the respective difference in the blind score. The differences-in-differences nature of the

estimation of Equation (1) implies that individual and school fixed effects are implicitly assumed away in

this model with regard to the estimated coefficient of interest, γ, as long as they have the same effect on the

blind and non-blind scores. The coefficient of interest, γ, could also be estimated from the following

difference equation and its estimate would be algebraically identical to that estimated from equation (1).

(1’)    Sijb − Sijnb = α + γ   (M   i   x NBij ) + uij

where Sijb is the blind score, Sijnb is the non-blind score. However, using the specification of equation (1)

has the advantage of revealing the estimates of the other parameters. It should also be noted that the

differences in differences nature of equation (1) or (1’) implies that a any student fixed effect is accounted

for in both equation with regard to the estimate of γ. For equation (1) it also implies that any within

student’s correlation between the random term in the blind and the non-blind score are netted out and

indeed the standard errors estimated using equation (1) and (1’) are identical.

        Table 2 presents the estimated parameters for Equation (1) in nine subjects—bible studies, biology,

chemistry, computer science, English, Hebrew literature, history, math, and physics—obtained from data

for 2001. In each subject, the data set is a stacked file including the internal and external scores for each of

the exams in the respective subject. All test scores were standardized to a distribution with zero mean and a

unit standard deviation. This procedure was applied within subjects to each test separately. The sample size

varied by subjects, including most students in compulsory subjects but much fewer in elective subjects.

Table 2 reports all the parameter estimates of equation (1). The standard errors reported in the Table 2 are

adjusted for clustering at the school level, using formulas set forth by Liang and Zeger (1986).



4.1     Empirical Results

Overall, female high-school students in Israel had higher achievements on the state matriculation exams

(blind tests) in all subjects presented in Table 2 except for English. Girls had advantages of 0.24 of a

standard deviation of the external-score distribution in bible studies, 0.14 in biology, 0.12 in chemistry,

0.12 in history, 0.48 in literature and 0.11 in math. In physics (0.02), and computer science (0.04), the


                                                         10
advantage of female students was positive but not statistically different from zero. The advantage of male

students in English was 0.11 and statistically different from zero. The male indicator coefficients may

reflect the selective distribution of students among elective subjects and among levels of study (basic,

intermediate, and advanced) in compulsory subjects; therefore, these estimates may be biased. However, as

I show below, the advantage of female students recurred at all levels of study, suggesting that the selection

bias may not have been very important. For example, girls had on average higher math scores in the blind

test at all three levels of study: basic, intermediate, and advanced.

        The mean differences between the (non blind) school scores and the (blind ) state scores,

conditional on gender and on the interaction between gender and non-blind testing, were very small and

seldom significantly different from zero. The largest differences were in biology (–0.059) and in English

(0.048) and in both of these cases they were significantly different from zero. These results are important

because they imply that the large and significant differences between the blind and the non-blind mean

scores seen in Table 1 disappear once the controls included in equation (1) are taken into account.

        The main parameter of interest is the estimated coefficients of the interactions between the gender

indicator for male students and the non-blind test indicator. These estimates were negative and

significantly different from zero in all nine subjects. The highest estimate was in English (–0.180), the

lowest was in literature (–0.053), and in four of the nine subjects the estimate exceeded one-tenth of a

standard deviation in the respective anonymous test score distribution.7

        The signs of the estimated coefficients for the interactions of the male and non-blind test

indicators—the focal points of this study—differ from common perceptions and beliefs. Insofar as

coefficients reflect a bias in the perception of cognitive ability by students’ gender, due to stereotypes or

other sources of discrimination, then the evidence is that such stereotypes act against male students and not

female students. These results may suggest that teachers favor female students by consciously or

unconsciously “inflating” their scores on non-blind tests. The direction of the bias enhances the female




7
  I also estimated Equation (1) while using the percentile-rank score as a dependent variable instead of the
standardized score. The evidence from this specification is very similar to the results presented in Table 2.

                                                       11
students’ advantage on the blind test. In English, the bias in favor of female students more than offset these

students’ “real” disadvantage, as reflected on the blind test (0.180 versus 0.114).

         To account for individual characteristics (X), the following equation was also estimated:

(2)      Sijb = α + λ M i + δ NBijb + γ    (M   i   x NBijb ) + X i θ + uijb

The student characteristics included in X are mother’s and father’s years of schooling, number of siblings,

immigration status, and a set of dummy variables for ethnic origin—Asia/Africa, America/Europe, former

Soviet Union, Ethiopia, and Israel-born—and two average measures of achievements on external

matriculation tests taken in tenth and eleventh grade (lagged outcomes). The two measures are the mean

credit-weighted average score on all previous matriculation exams (coding zeros for those who had taken

no exams) and the respective overall number of credits. These measures are powerful predictors of

students’ success on each matriculation exam in twelfth grade in each subject (Angrist and Lavy, 2002). As

noted above, adding student, school, or specific-exam fixed effects should lead to exactly the same

estimates of the coefficients of the interaction between gender and the non-blind test indicator because the

basic specification of Equation (1) saturates all these fixed effects, since the difference in differences

occurs at the student level within each subject and exam. These results are presented in Table 3. Only

minor changes were observed in the male estimated coefficients, while the estimates on the non-blind score

and the male and non-blind score interactions were left unchanged.8

         In the following two sections, we check the robustness of the basic results and attempt to assess

empirically the validity of possible explanations. However, we should note a concern regarding the validity

of the scores in the state tests as a blind score: the scoring of state exams may be less “blind” if examiners

can guess student’ gender by his or her handwriting. Girls’ handwriting is clearly if not perfectly

distinguishable from boys’. Furthermore, since Hebrew verbs are gender-marked, the verbs used on the

examination forms reveal the examinee’s gender. This, of course, may be the case in the context of this

study. The state tests in some subjects, however—such as English, math, biology, physics, and computer

science—are composed mainly or exclusively of multiple-choice questions or writing of numbers without


8
  The results obtained from the 2000 and 2001 data are very similar to the findings presented in Tables 2–3; therefore,
they are not presented in this paper.

                                                             12
any text. As I showed above, the bias against boys estimated in these subjects was not very different from

that of other subjects in which girls’ tests could more easily be identified through their handwriting.

Examples of such tests are also mentioned below in the analysis of additional empirical work reported in

the following sections.



5.      Checking the Robustness of the Estimates

5.1     The Blind and Non-Blind Scores Measure Different Skills?

A material issue of relevance in interpreting the estimated anti-male bias is the possibility that the blind

and non-blind tests measure different abilities or that one of the two reflects attributes not included in the

other. These differences are a real concern if they are not gender-neutral. An obvious example would be

that the estimated biases reflect non-conformist behavior by male students that teachers do not like, e.g.,

absenteeism or discipline problems in class. If teachers adjust scores to reflect such undesired behavior,

even though the scores should reflect only the students’ knowledge of the subject, a discrepancy between

male students’ blind scores and non-blind scores would occur. Although this interpretation may be

consistent with the foregoing evidence, other results presented below suggest that the likelihood of its

being the source of the bias is very small.

        To check for the possibility that the non-blind score reflects male students’ behavioral problems,

the best way would be to control for such behavior. Since data on students’ behavior are not available, a

reasonable alternative is to include in Equation (2) a variable that accounts for students’ behavior. If

students’ behavior in twelfth grade correlates with behavior in earlier grades, then the non-blind state score

on a matriculation exam taken earlier in high school may reflect this consideration as well. For most

students, the math program entails a matriculation exam also at the end of eleventh grade, with the same

evaluation format including a blind and a non-blind score. Assuming that the behavior of students in

eleventh and twelfth grades is highly correlated, the inclusion in Equation (2) of the eleventh-grade math

non-blind score as an explanatory variable will control for variations in students’ behavior. Table 4 reports

the results when this control is added in two alternative specifications: In Column (2), the non-blind

eleventh grade math score is added as a main effect as well as an interaction with the twelfth grade non-

                                                     13
blind test indicator. In Column (3), two other interaction terms are added; the eleventh grade non-blind

score interacted with the male indicator and also with the male and the twelfth-grade non-blind test

indicators. Since the sample used in Columns 2–3 is smaller than the full sample used in Table 2, Column

(1) in Table 4 presents the results of an estimation of the basic model that does not include these additional

controls. As Table 4 shows, the sign and the implied size of the male bias in Columns 2–3 are just slightly

lower than the estimated male-bias effect in Column (1) of Table 4.9 10

         Another insight that can help determine whether the results above reflect a difference in the

abilities measured by the two scores can be gained by restricting the empirical analysis to exams for which

the distribution of blind and non-blind scores seems absolutely identical. Several of the distributions in

Figures 1–8 meet this criterion: Intermediate Math 3, Advanced Math 2 and 3, Basic Literature 1,

Advanced Physics 2 and 4, and Intermediate and Advanced English. Table 5 presents the estimates of the

effect of the interaction between the gender and blind-test indicators in each exam in this subset. The

results from this sample of exams are very similar to results based on the pooling of all exams into one

sample in each subject: negative and significant estimates of interaction between the male-gender and the

non-blind score indicators. This suggests that even in cases where the two score distributions are

unquestionably identical, in which it may safely be assumed that they measure the same outcome, the bias

is in the same direction and of similar magnitude.



5.2      Male Bias in Non-Blind Scores with Control for Student Ability

The differences-in-differences nature of the estimates in Tables 2–5 means that account is taken of any

ability measure that has a similar effect on the anonymous and non-anonymous scores. It may well be,

9
   Additional evidence about student behavior may be revealed by the propensity to disqualification or to suspected
cheating on the matriculation exams. No systematic differences by gender in this propensity were revealed: in some
subjects, a higher proportion of male students was caught cheating in exams, in others, girls had the upper hand in this
respect.
10
    The 11th grade matriculation test scores provide the twelfth-grade math teachers ample opportunity to become
highly familiar with each student in their class. It is interesting to note that the bias against male students persist even
when this information is available to the twelfth-grade teacher. The persistent of the male bias in the face of signals of
student’s true ability resembles the confirmatory bias discussed and modeled in Rabin and Schrag (1999). A person
suffers from confirmatory bias if he tends to misinterpret ambiguous evidence as confirming his current hypothesis
about the world. Rabin and Schrag used frequently as an example the situation where teachers misread performance



                                                            14
however, that ability affects each of the scores differently and, for this reason, directly affects the

difference of the two scores. This model implies the following modification of equation (1’):

(3)      Sijb − Sijnb = α + γ   (M   i   x NBij ) + δ Ai + uij

where Sijb is the blind score, Sijnb is the non-blind score, and Ai is student ability. The average score in all

previous matriculation exams taken during tenth and eleventh grades can measure student ability.

However, the credit-weighted average score on all previous blind exams may be thought of as a more

precise reflection of student ability. For the purpose of comparison, however, it is also of interest to

compute the credit-weighted average score of all previous non-blind scores. This score may reflect other

unobserved attributes or behavior of the student that is reflected in all subjects of study. An example, again,

is a bad attitude and discipline problems in school that teachers may “punish,” perhaps unconsciously, by

lowering the student’s non-blind score.

        Table 6 reports results from the estimation of Equation (3) with each of these two controls added,

sequentially, to the regressions of each of the nine subjects. Since not all students have lagged

matriculation scores, the samples used in Table 6 are slightly smaller than those used in Table 3. Therefore,

Column 1 in Table 6 reports, for the purpose of comparison, the results of the estimation of the basic

regression (a specification that does not include the aforementioned ability measures) using the new

samples. The table reports only the estimated coefficient of the interaction between the non-blind score and

the male indicators.

        The estimates in Column 1 of Table 6 are almost identical to those presented in Table 2-3,

indicating that the sample of students with lagged scores is a close representative of the full sample used in

Tables 2–3. Column 2 reports the estimates when the mean of the lagged blind scores is added to the

regression to control for ability. Column 3 presents the results when the average lagged non-blind scores

are used to control for ability. The estimates in the table depict an interesting pattern: adding the mean

blind score leads to negligible changes in the male bias estimates but adding the mean of the non-blind

lagged scores does lead in some subjects to a significant reduction of the male bias estimates. In biology,


of pupils as supporting their initial impressions of those pupils or as supporting their stereotypes about groups to

                                                                 15
for example, when the ability measure is based on the blind score, the estimated coefficient of the

interaction between the non-blind score and the male indicators is –0.101, as against–0.059 when ability is

measured by the mean of the non-blind scores. Both estimates are lower than the estimate obtained (–

0.122) when neither of the two ability measures is included. Similar dramatic changes are found in

chemistry and literature, but in the six other subjects the anti-male bias estimates are basically unchanged

when the proxy for ability is added as a control to the basic regression.

        Columns 4–5 in Table 6 report again the results of adding ability measures as a control. This time,

however, they were computed distinctly for the nine subjects, excluding in each case the lagged scores

from exams in that specific subject. The estimates in Columns 4–5 closely resemble those in Columns 2–3.

The overall results in Table 6 reinforce the interpretation that the negative sign on the interaction between

the non-blind and the male indicators does not reflect the omission of unobserved student attributes, in

particular cognitive ability or non-cognitive characteristics such as behavioral problems reflected in the

non-blind scores.



5.3     Variation of the Male Bias in the Non-Blind Score with Student Ability

An interesting question is whether the negative male bias occurs across the entire distribution of students’

ability or focuses mainly on some segment of the ability distribution. To address this question, I again

measured students’ ability by the credit-weighted average (blind) score in all previous matriculation exams

and divided the distribution of this variable into quartiles. I then estimated the basic model for each of

these quartiles separately. The estimates of the interaction of the non-blind score and the male indicators

are shown in Table 7 for all nine subjects and all four quartiles. The pattern that emerges from the table is

that the negative male effect on the non-blind score is reflected at all levels of student ability. In some

subjects (biology, chemistry, computer science, history), the effect was strongest at the lower quartile; in

others (bible studies, English, literature), it was strongest at the third or fourth quartiles. In all subjects

except chemistry, however, the sign of the bias in all quartiles was negative and significantly different from

zero. On the basis of this evidence, we may safely conclude that the negative male bias in the non-blind


which these pupils belong.
                                                      16
score is evident for students at all levels of ability as measured by their previous performance on

matriculation exams.



5.4      Effects of Other Interactions with the Non-Blind Score

The estimates presented above may reflect the effect of interactions between the non-blind test variable and

other variables that correlate with gender. To assess this possibility, Equation (2) was augmented by adding

the interaction terms of the non-blind score indicator with the following dichotomous indicators of

students’ socio-demographic characteristics: recent immigrant, father with more years of schooling than

the school mean, mother with more years of schooling than the school mean, more siblings than the school

mean, and ethnic origin. Table 8 presents the results after all these additional interactions were included in

Equation (2). First, it should be noted that the inclusion of the nine additional interactions along with the

non-blind score indicator did not change the estimated coefficient for the interaction between gender and

non-blind test. The coefficient in the math equation, for example, changed from –0.086 to –0.087; in

English the change was from –0.180 to –0.176. Second, one of the newly added interactions, that between

the non-blind test and immigration status, was positive and significant. The other interactions elicited no

systematic pattern in terms of sign or significance level.



5.5      Does the Male Bias Reflect Statistical Discrimination against Boys?

The estimated anti-male bias in the non-blind score may reflect statistical discrimination that may be

motivated by the average superior performance of girls in the state exams. The blind and the non-blind

scores are two sources of information about students’ cognitive ability. If teachers are influenced by the

expected higher performance of girls on the state exams (as shown in these data), male and female students

will receive different scores on their school exams even if they perform at the same level. In this case, then,

the estimated anti-male bias on the non-blind scores may reflect simple statistical discrimination (Cain,

1986).

         Statistical discrimination against male students may also occur even if there are no real differences

in cognitive performance between boys and girls. This will happen if teachers believe that the non-blind

                                                      17
score is a less reliable signal of knowledge for boys than for girls (Aigner and Cain, 1977). Such beliefs

may arise in a school context if, for example, male students are known to cheat, or are perceived of as

cheating, more often than girls on school exams. The question of whether such perceptions are based on

real evidence or are unfounded is irrelevant to the outcome of statistical discrimination.

        Some of the evidence presented above does not support the interpretation of statistical

discrimination. In English, in particular, boys outperformed girls on the state exams by a wide margin but

encountered bias in their school scores. Similar contrasting comparisons were found in some tests in other

subjects as well. In advanced math, for example, boys had a higher blind-score average than girls but

sustained a bias in the school score. It is possible, however, that teachers form their expectations about

gender differentials in true cognitive ability on the basis of overall performance in all subjects and not only

in the subject that they teach. To assess this possibility, I estimated the models separately in two distinct

environments: a sample of schools where boys outperform girls on average and a second sample of schools

where girls do better on average than boys. First, I computed average performance on the basis of

matriculation exams taken by the 2001 cohort while in tenth and eleventh grade. Table 9a presents the

results of Estimation Equation (2) for the two samples of schools based on this measure of average

performance by gender. I also used school-average performance by gender on the basis of all matriculation

exams taken by members of the 2000 graduating class. These results are presented in Table 9b.

        Focusing first on Table 9a, we see clearly that in the sample of schools where girls outperform

boys on average (the upper panel of Table 9a), the coefficients of the interaction between the male and the

non-blind test indicator are negative in all subjects, namely the estimated bias, is against boys. More

interesting results, however, are seen in the lower panel of Table 9a. In this sample, boys had a higher

average external score on 11th grade matriculation exams in most subjects. The most noteworthy result,

however, is that in eight of the nine subjects the bias is against male students, being negative and

significantly different from zero. In five of the nine subjects, the bias estimates are even higher in this

sample than in the sample of schools when girls dominate boys in average performance.




                                                      18
        The outcomes presented in Table 9b generally confirm those in Table 9a. Overall, they do not

support the hypotheses that the anti-male bias in the non-blind score reflects statistical discrimination

against male students.

        Table 9c presents estimates of the gender bias when schools were divided into two samples in each

subject according to the score on twelve graders’ state exams in each subject in 2000. The results resemble

those in Table 9a and 9b: again the male bias estimates were negative and significant in all subjects, even

though the estimate of the male indicator was positive in each of the nine subjects.



5.6     When the External Score Is Also Non-Blind: The Case of Thesis Writing

Students enrolled in the advanced program in any subject (five credit units) are allowed to write a thesis as

a substitute for the matriculation exams in the subject at hand. The grading protocol of the thesis includes a

school score by the subject teacher and a score by an external examiner who grades the thesis. As part of

this protocol, the thesis writer must meet the external examiner and present and discuss the thesis with him

or her. In this case, then, the external state score is also non-blind. Although grading a paper may be

different from grading an exam, insights may be gained by estimating the male bias on the basis of a

sample of thesis writers. I created such a sample by isolating subjects in which a reasonable number of

students wrote theses. Since the sample in each subject was relatively small, I pooled all the thesis writers’

together and introduced controls for each subject in the regression.

        Table 10 presents the results of Estimation Equation (1) based on the sample of thesis writers. The

dependent variable was measured in terms of raw scores in the first column and in terms of standardized

scores in the second column. Similar to the results based on the nine subjects, girls’ theses received much

higher external evaluations than boys’—about 0.16 of a standard deviation in the external evaluation

distribution. However, unlike the results in the other seven subjects, the estimated coefficients of the male

and (own teacher) non-blind score interaction were basically zero when raw scores were used and also

when standardized scores were used instead. Since these outcomes were based on a much smaller sample

than the samples used in the other nine subjects, zero bias against males in the grading of theses may have

been a reflection of sampling variance. Therefore, I used the sample of thesis writers to estimate male bias

                                                     19
in the nine subjects. Because math and English are compulsory, only for them could I find a reasonably

large sample of thesis writers. Columns 3–4 in Table 10 present the basic model of Equation (2) using the

pooled sample of thesis writers who took math and English exams. The male-bias estimates were negative

when both raw scores and standardized scores were used. The estimates were less precise than those in

Table 3 but the size of the estimate in Column 4 of Table 10 (–0.107) fell into the range between math (–

0.086) and English (–0.180) shown in Table 3. This additional evidence, based on a quasi-natural

experiment among thesis writers, strongly suggests that the estimated bias against boys originates in

teachers’ behavior. We address this issue next.



6.      How Can We Explain the Negative Male Bias? Teachers’ vs. Students’ Behavior

Two broad sets of explanations may account for the estimated bias against male students: one relating to

students’ behavior and another to teachers’ behavior. If the latter is the source of the bias, one may

conclude that the bias against male students is a form of discrimination. In this section, I present evidence

suggesting that the bias against male students indeed originates in teachers’ behavior and that students’

behavior is not a contributing factor.



6.1     Does the Male Bias in the School Score Reflect Students’ Behavior?

The basic outcomes presented above about the negative male “bias” in school-level non-blind scores may

be the results of behavioral differences between girls and boys. For example, boys may on average respond

more vigorously than girls to a negative signal and make a relatively greater improvement as a

consequence. A “wake up call” argument of this type implies that boys who receive an unexpectedly low

school score may invest more effort and preparation and, for this reason, improve their performance on the

state exam to a greater degree than girls would. Such pattern may also emerge if boys consider the state

exam more serious or challenging and, therefore, prepare for it more vigorously. Another behavioral

hypothesis that can explain the estimated negative male bias is that there are gender differences in mean

reversion patterns reflected in the “different difference” among boys and among girls between the first

score (the school-level score) and the second score (the state exam, taken three weeks later). However, the

                                                     20
data does not allow distinguishing between the two hypotheses but their joint effect can be tested by

estimating the following non-linear model of mean reversion in the relationship between the school score

and the state score. We define the following variables based on the non-blind score:

              R1i = Maximum [( Si – Ŝ), 0]

              R2i = Minimum [( Si – Ŝ), 0]

where S i is the student non-blind score and Ŝ is the mean score of a reference group on the same exam.

Three reference groups may be considered: class peers, own-gender class peers, and each student’s own

scores on previous exams as well. For the first two groups, I used average respective scores on the same

exam. In the third case, I used the own mean score in all other exams taken in tenth and eleventh

grade. R1i = 0 for students who scored below the reference-group mean; R2i = 0 for students who scored

above the reference-group mean. The estimation equation is:

(4)       Ai = α + β R1i + γ R2i + ε i

where Ai is the blind score on the state test of student i in a given subject. Equation (4) allows the state

score to respond to the school score non-symmetrically. Equation (4) was estimated for each subject,

separately for boys and girls, and the results are shown in Table 11. The table presents point estimates and

not standard-error estimates because all coefficients were highly statistically significant. The results are

shown in three panels—the first from regressions based on class mean as the reference group, the second

based on gender-specific within class means, and the third based on the mean of the student’s own lagged

scores.

          The first interesting comparison is the relative responses of girls and boys to a negative signal as

reflected by a score lower then the mean of the reference group. The first two rows in each panel should be

used for this comparison. When the class mean is used as the reference, girls’ response to a negative signal

exceeds that of boys in five subjects and in two the estimated response coefficients are equal for boys and

girls. The elasticities based on these estimates and the means of R1i and R2i for boys and girls also

follow this pattern. The proportions of male and female students who are below their class mean are



                                                      21
presented in squared brackets. On average, a higher proportion of the male students are below their class

mean in comparison to the same statistic for women though the difference is not very large.

         The comparison elicits a similar pattern when the own-gender mean in class is used as the

referenced group (the first two rows of middle panel in Table 11). However, the response of girls to a score

below their own previous mean (based on the mean of blind scores on previous matriculation exams) is

much larger than that of boys in all subjects except computer science. This suggests that the hypothesis that

boys have a higher mean reversion or a more vigorous response to a negative shock than girls is not

supported by the data in any of the three definitions of reference group. Also note that the proportion of

students who are below their own mean is very similar for girls and boys and in physics it is even higher

among girls.



6.2      More on Student Behavior: Female Anxiety and Stereotype Threat

Another relevant form of differential behavior between female and male students is related to the level of

anxiety under pressure. Recent studies suggest that women may be less effective than men in competitive

environments, even if they are able to perform similarly in non-competitive environments (e.g., Gneezy,

Niederle, and Rustichini, 2003). One may argue that state exams generate more stress and anxiety than

school exams. If teachers expect these factors to have a larger effect on girls than on boys, they may

compensate female students for their expected underachievement on the external test by giving them higher

school scores. First, it should be noted that the scores on the school exam and the state exam are of

identical importance in determining the final matriculation score, since both are equally weighted.11

Therefore, they should cause similar levels of stress and anxiety among students, if they cause any stress at

all. Second, in the foregoing results, girls outperformed boys on state exams in almost every subject and at

almost every level of the curriculum. Third, the evidence that girls underperform in pressure situations or

competitive environments refers only, or mainly, to situations where stereotyping is a real threat or when




11
  Interestingly, in France, school exams are also an integral part of the matriculation system but the final scores are
based solely on the national exams. The school exams are called by a name that has the same meaning as the Hebrew
name of the corresponding exams in Israel.

                                                         22
tasking is against the opposite gender.12 Experiments have shown that girls’ performance is not affected

even in high-stake tests as long as there is no threat of gender stereotyping (e.g., Stangor and Sechrist,

1998). Gneezy, Niederle, and Rustichini (2003) show that the increase in women’s performance in a

competitive environment is limited only when the rivals are men. The state-exam environment, however, is

free of any obvious stereotype threat or overt competition against the other gender because the scoring is

blind. Therefore, there is no reason to expect these factors, even if they are real, to have any gender-

differentiated effect.

         However, a dynamic stereotype threat may be at work in the context of the matriculation exams

even if the current exam environment contains no active contemporaneous threat. For example, if girls

react to previously experienced stereotypical situations, we would expect to find a strong correlation

between blind versus non-blind score differences in exams in previous grades and the respective

differences in exams in twelfth grade. Such a correlation may also be present if girls do suffer more than

boys from high-stake exam anxieties. Some insight about these possible relationships may be gained by

estimating Equation (2) using two samples based on bias experienced by the students in the past—the

sample of students who exhibited a positive difference between blind and non-blind scores on the eleventh-

grade math matriculation exam, and a second sample composed of those whose difference between the

scores was negative. Table 12 reports the results of the estimation of Equation (2) on the basis of these two

12
  The “stereotype threat” theory (Steele, 1997) focuses on the consequences for individuals who contend with
negative stereotypes related to their intellectual abilities. Stereotype threat is the psychological burden imposed by
stereotype-based suspicions of inferiority in achievement. Stereotype threat has been shown to undermine academic
achievement in two ways: by interfering with performance in mental tasks and, over time, by encouraging students to
protect their self-esteem by disengaging from the threatened domain. Wanting not to perform badly, another possible
result of stereotype threat, has been shown in experiments to impair performance in difficult cognitive tasks, either by
simply distracting the performer or by eliciting a self-protective withholding of effort (Spencer, Steele, and Quinn
(1979). The social-psychology literature on stereotypes and discrimination suggests that students may react to a
stereotyped situation in a variety of ways but that two ways are the most common. The first is avoidance of the
stereotype situation. Female math majors, for example, may “dress down”—wear less markedly feminine clothing—
in math classes than in humanities classes (Hewitt, 1996). This suggests that in situations where women feel at risk of
confirming a negative gender stereotype, they take steps to avoid projecting stereotypically feminine traits, thereby
reducing the risk of being viewed through the lens of stereotype and being treated accordingly (Aronson, Quinn, and
Spencer, 1998) The second is confirmation of the stereotype, e.g., to perform below actual ability in a test that
involves a stereotype threat. Such underachievement may result, for example, from anxiety and evaluation
apprehension (Aronson, Quinn, and Spencer, 1998). In the context of this paper, students’ own perceptions of a
stereotyped situation may be based on experience. For example, students who on a previous exam had a school score
that was lower than the external blind score may blame some of the discrepancy on stereotype discrimination.
According to the theories presented above, such students may respond in such a way as to refute the stereotype and


                                                          23
samples. Column 1 presents, for comparison, the results based on the sample of students who had math

matriculation scores in both eleventh and twelfth grades. Column 2 presents results for students who had a

positive difference between the two scores in eleventh grade, and Column 3 shows results for students who

had a negative difference. The two respective estimated coefficients, –0.103 and –0.120, both precisely

estimated, are not very far apart. Therefore, they do not support, in this limited sample and within the

specific context, the “stereotype threat” or the “anxiety” hypotheses as an explanation of the anti-male bias.



6.3     Does the Male Bias Reflect a Steeper Learning Curve among Male Students?

In Section 5.2, we considered the effect of students’ ability on the difference between blind and the non-

blind scores and found that it had very little effect. However, another concept of ability, perhaps more

behavioral in nature that may be relevant for male-bias outcomes is the ability of students to improve their

performance between their junior and senior years in high school. Male students may have a higher

positive slope in their learning curve than female students. If the school non-blind scores on senior-year

matriculation exams are somewhat influenced by student performance in the junior year, a gap for male

students between the senior year blind and non-blind scores will emerge. To test this hypothesis, I

computed two measures of average improvement between the junior and senior years, one based on blind

scores and the other based on non-blind scores. I then re-estimated the basic model while adding these

controls of average improvement one at a time. Table 13 presents the results. Column 1 shows the

estimates without these controls for the sample for which these controls could be computed. The estimates

in Column 1 are very similar to those reported in Tables 2–3. The estimates in Columns 2 and 3 are not

very different from each other and from those in Column 1. Therefore, they do not support the

interpretation that male bias occurs because male students have a steeper learning curve that is discounted

somewhat by their teachers.



6.4     Is the Male Bias the Result of Teachers’ Behavior?



make an effort to do better on the next exam. Alternately, they may succumb to the stereotype and do worse on the
second external exam than on the first, thus ostensibly confirming the stereotype.

                                                       24
If it is teachers’ behavior that accounts mostly for the bias against male students, then the extent of this

discrimination may vary among teachers or in accordance with teachers’ characteristics, e.g., gender, age,

years on the job, and, perhaps, marital status and number of children. Evidence of such variability may also

be viewed as refuting the possibility that the male bias results from students’ behavior because there is no

reason to expect students’ behavior to vary in a pattern consistent with the relationship between teachers’

characteristics and the extent of the bias against male students. Below I report results that allow the male

bias to vary commensurate with the aforementioned characteristics of their teachers. Data that link students

to their classroom teachers are available only for a subsample of schools and students and in only some

subjects. Therefore, I re-estimate and report below the results of an estimation of the basic model (without

interactions with teachers’ characteristics) with the subsamples for five subjects: English, math, physics,

biology, and chemistry. In view of the size of the sample, the samples in biology and chemistry were

pooled.

          Table 14 presents the estimates of male-bias coefficients by teachers’ characteristics. Four

characteristics were considered: gender, age, years of teaching experience, and number of children. The

effect of each characteristic on the male-bias coefficient was examined sequentially and independently. For

each characteristic the sample was divided into two: for gender by male and female and for the other

characteristics by classroom teacher’s being above or below the mean in the sample. The mean age was

forty-six years, mean experience was twenty years, and mean number of children was one.

          Column 1 in Table 14 presents the estimates from the sample of schools for which information on

teachers’ characteristics was available. Note that these estimates are not very different from those in Table

3, which were based on the full sample. For example, the two respective math estimates are identical (–

0.086), in English they are –0.169 and –0.180, in biology and chemistry –0. 097 and –0.090, and in physics

–0.054 and –0.130.

          Table 14 shows large variation by teachers’ characteristics and a pattern that varies from subject to

subject. Starting with teacher’s gender, in math only one-third of teachers in the sample were male but they

accounted for all the bias in math; no male bias was observed among the sample of female math teachers.

In physics, two-thirds of teachers were male and the bias was twice as strong among female teachers than

                                                      25
among male teachers. In biology and chemistry, most teachers were women and the bias, again, was due

mostly to the behavior of female teachers. Large and significant variations in male-bias estimates were also

observed when the samples were stratified by teacher age. In English and physics, the male bias was

evident mainly among young teachers while in math it originated mainly among older teachers. The

variation in male-bias estimates by teachers’ years of experience resembled the results by teacher’s age.

Finally, the male bias did not vary commensurate with number of children a teacher had except in physics,

where the bias was non-zero only among teachers with children. These patterns suggest that there is

something about teachers that elicits a bias against male students; no sensible explanation link students’

behavior to this pattern of variation in the bias against male students on the basis of teachers’

characteristics.



6.5     Does the Male Bias Result from Higher Achievement Variance among Boys?

Boys have, on average, a higher variance and a lower or equal mean score than girls in all subjects. This is

reflected in the distribution of their matriculation test scores, in both the blind and the non-blind versions.

The gender disparity in variance is highest in literature and chemistry and lowest in computer science and

physics. Only in English and history do girls have higher variance than boys, and even here the difference

is marginal. Table 15 presents the evidence. This pattern of higher performance variance among boys may

shed some light on the origin of the anti-male bias estimated above, through its interaction with the

Ministry of Education rules—described in Section 3 of this paper—that “sanction” schools and teachers for

large gaps between blind and non-blind scores. One possible interactive mechanism is that teachers, who

are probably aware of the gender-related variance disparities, may intentionally downward-bias the non-

blind scores of boys in order to reduce the likelihood of overstepping the permissible range of difference

between the scores and invoking the Ministry of Education sanctions. This mechanism may be more

“operative” in an environment of large variance disparities.

        Table 16 presents evidence when the sample was divided according to whether the performance

variance of boys was higher or lower than that of girls. The data restrictions used to measure performance

variance led to a smaller sample than that used in Tables 2–3; therefore, Column 1 in the table presents the

                                                      26
estimated coefficients of male bias as obtained from the full sample before stratification by performance

variance. The estimates in Column 1 are not very different from those in Tables 2–3, confirming that there

were no sampling differences in the estimation.

        The first stratification was based on a variance computed from the distribution of scores in all

subjects; the results are reported in Columns 2–3 of the table. This stratification divided schools on the

basis of the overall variance of boys versus girls. Comparison of the estimates in Columns 2 and 3 does not

elicit a clear pattern. In some subjects (e.g., biology and literature), the estimates were indeed much higher

in the sample of schools that had higher variance among boys but in the other subjects the estimates were

lower than those obtained from the sample in which girls had the higher variance.

        I also stratified the sample uniquely for each subject according to the performance variance of boys

and girls in that subject. The outcomes based on these stratifications are presented in Columns 5–6. When I

compared the estimates in Column 4 with those in Column 5, again I found no systematic differences in the

male-bias estimates obtained from samples of schools in which the performance variance of boys was

lower or higher than that of girls. Actually, in the sample in subjects where male variance was much higher

than female variance (chemistry and English), the bias against boys was smallest. Thus, the evidence does

not seem to support higher variance among boys as an explanation for the downward bias in the non-blind

scores of male students relative to their blind scores, a form of statistical discrimination.



7.      Conclusions

Recent convincing evidence suggests that women face discrimination in the labor market in terms of both

employment opportunities and wages (e.g., Goldin and Rouse, 2001). However, the question of whether

discrimination against women is also partly responsible for the observed gender differences in human-

capital investment and occupational choice has not been directly addressed.13 This paper confronted one


13
   The empirical literature on gender discrimination has focused mainly on disparities in labor-market outcomes
between males and females, foremost in earnings and hiring, given differences in observable productivity-altering
characteristics. However, gender differences in productivity-altering characteristics, such as the form of human
capital and occupational choice, have not been studied in this context of gender-biased practices (England, 1982).
This lack of attention is surprising in view of the persistence of substantial male–female differences in educational
and occupational choices and the expression of considerable concern about the low proportion of female scientists
and engineers in the United States and Europe.

                                                        27
important alleged form of discrimination against women that may cause some of the skewed gender pattern

in productivity-enhancing investments: discrimination against girls in school by their teachers. This

discrimination, it is argued, emanates from a stereotyping of cognitive ability that causes female students to

under-perform in, and to shy away from, math and science subjects in secondary and post-secondary

schooling—a state of affairs that also affects occupational choice, of course. Women continue to avoid

college majors and occupations that entail moderate amounts of coursework in mathematics, even though

they match or surpass men’s performance in high-school math and science courses (AAUW, 1999).14

Gender-related differences in career choices also persist, especially in the fields of physical science,

mathematics, and engineering, where women hold only about 10 percent of jobs.15 In 1995, women

constituted about 46 percent of the U.S. labor force but only 22 percent of scientists and engineers in the

labor force. 16 In the U.K., only 6 percent of engineers in the labor force are women.17

         The evidence presented in this study does not confirm the commonly held belief that

schoolteachers discriminate against female students. On the contrary: on the basis of a natural experiment

that compared two evaluations of student performance—a blind score and a non-blind score—the bias

estimated was clearly against boys. This direction of the bias was replicated in all nine subjects of study, in

humanities and science subjects alike, at various level of curriculum of study, among underperforming and

best-performing students, in schools where girls outperform boys on average, and in schools where boys

outperform girls on average. The bias against boys persisted when other interactions with the non-blind

score were allowed, e.g., interactions with parental schooling and other student characteristics. When

students’ ability was added as a control or as an interaction with the bias against male students, the average

bias did not disappear and was revealed at all levels of cognitive ability. The anti-male bias among teachers

widened the gap between male and female students because the latter, on average, outperformed the former

in almost all subjects.

14
   In their initial college years, women are 2.5 times more likely than men to leave fields of mathematics, engineering,
and physical sciences (Crocker, Major, and Steele, 1997). Girls in the U.S. also have lower enrollment rates than boys
in advanced high-school science and math courses (Madigan, 1997).
15
   See, for example, Eccles (1994).
16
   National Science Foundation, 1998.



                                                          28
        The anti-male bias may reflect differential behavior between male and female students, e.g., in a

short-term response to a disappointing score and longer-term learning curves. It may also reflect statistical

discrimination against male students that emanates from the superior performance of female students in

almost every subject or from higher variance of performance of boys in every subject. The data do not

support these two potential sources of the bias. On the other hand, variation of the estimated bias against

male students in accordance with teachers’ characteristics such as gender, age, and teaching experience

strengthens the interpretation of the male bias as a form of discrimination resulting from teachers’

behavior.

        The magnitude of the bias against male students is relatively large and may harm students first by

causing their final scores on some matriculation exams to fall below the passing mark and, thereby, by

disqualifying them for a matriculation certificate. This may bar students from post-secondary schooling, at

least temporarily, implying lower schooling attainment. Second, since admission to most university

departments in Israel is based solely on the average score on the matriculation exams, the bias against boys

lowers their average matriculation score and, by so doing, may reduce boys’ prospects of admission to their

preferred fields of study. Both effects have negative future labor-market consequences.




17
   For additional related evidence, see the 2003 report of the Equal Opportunity Commission. In U.K higher-education
institutions in 2000/01, for example, the male/female student ratio was 1.6 in physical and mathematical sciences, 4.1
in computer science, and 5.4 in engineering and technology.

                                                         29
References
American Association of University Women (AAUW) (1992), “How Schools Short-Change Girls” (USA:
       AAUW Educational Foundation).
American Association of University Women (AAUW) (1999), “Gender Gaps: Where Schools Still Fail our
       Children” (New York: Marlowe & Company).
Aigner, Dennis J., and Glen C. Cain (1977), “Statistical Theories of Discrimination in the Labor Industrial
       and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 30 (2), January, 175–87.
Angrist, Joshua D., and Victor Lavy (2002), “Achievement Awards for High School Matriculation:
       Evidence from Randomized Trials,” NBER Working Paper 9389, December.
Aronson J., D. Quinn, and S. J. Spencer (1998), “Stereotyping Threat and the Academic Underperformance
        of Minorities and Women,” in Swim, J. K., and C. Stanger (eds.), Prejudice, Academic Press.
Ben-Zvi Mayer, R. Hertz-Lazarovitz, and M. Sefer (1995), “Teachers and Pre-Service Teachers: On
        Classifying Boys and Girls as Distinguished Students,” in N. Segen (ed.), Finding Gender Equality
        (Jerusalem: Ministry of Education, Culture and Sports), pp. 96–105 (Hebrew).
Bernard, M. E. (1979). “Does Sex Role Behavior Influence the Way Teachers Evaluate Students?
        Journal of Educational Psychology, 71, pp. 553–562.
Blank, Rebecca (1991), “The Effects of Double-Blind versus Single-Blind Refereeing: Experimental
        Evidence from the American Economic Review,” American Economic Review, December,
        81 (5), pp. 1041–1067.
Cain, Glen C. (1986), “The Economic Analysis of Labor Market Discrimination: a Survey,” in Orley
        Ashenfelter and Richard Layard (eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics (Amsterdam: North
        Holland), pp. 693–786.
Carr, M., D. Jessup, and D. Fuller, (1999), “Gender Differences in First-Grade Mathematics
        Strategy Use: Parent and Teacher Contributions,” Journal for Research in Mathematics
        Education, 30(1), pp. 20–46.
Crocker, J., B. Major, and C. Steele (1998), “Social Stigma,” in D. Gilbert, S. T. Fiske, and G. Lindzey
        (eds.), Handbook of Social Psychology (Boston: McGraw Hill, 4th ed.), pp. 504– 553).
Deaux, Kay, and Marianne LaFrance (1998), “Gender,” The Handbook of Social Psychology
        (McGraw-Hill), vol. II, chap. 17.
Dovidio, J. F., J. C. Brigham, B. T. Johnson, and S. L. Gaertner (1996), “Stereotyping, Prejudice, and
        Discrimination: Another Look,” N. Macrae, C. Stangor, and M. Hewstone (eds.), Stereotypes and
        Stereotyping (New York: Guilford), pp. 276–319.
Dusek, J. B., and G. Joseph (1983), “The Bases of Teacher Expectancies: a Meta-Analysis,” Journal of
        Educational Psychology, 75, 327–346.
Eccles, J. S., J. E. Jacobs, and R. E. Harold (1990), “Gender Role Stereotypes, Expectancy Effects,
        and Parents’ Socialization of Gender Differences,” Journal of Social Issues, 46, pp. 183– 201.
Equal Opportunity Commission (2003), “Facts about Women and Men in Great Britain 2003,” January,
        www.eoc.org.uk>.
England, Paula (1982), “The Failure of Human Capital Theory to Explain Occupational Sex
        Segregation,” Journal of Human Resources, Summer, 17 (3), pp. 358–370.
Fennema, E. (1990), “Teachers’ Attributions and Beliefs about Girls, Boys, and Mathematics,”
        Educational Studies in Mathematics, 21(1), pp. 55–69.
Fennema, E., and L. E. Hart (1994), “Gender and the JRME,” Journal for Research in Mathematics
        Education 25(6): pp. 648–659
Fiske, T. Susan (1998), “Stereotyping, Prejudice, and Discrimination,” The Handbook of Social
        Psychology (McGraw-Hill), vol. II, chap. 25.
Glick, P., K. Wilk, and M. Perrault (1995), “Images of Occupations: Components of Gender and Status in
        Occupational Stereotypes,” Sex Roles, 25(5/6), pp. 351–378.

                                                   30
Gneezy Y., M. Niederle, and A. Rustichini (2003), “Performance in Competitive Environments: Gender
        Differences,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August, pp. 1049-1074.
Goldin, Claudia, and Cecilia Rouse (2000), “Orchestrating Impartiality: The Impact of ‘Blind’
        Auditions on Female Musicians,” American Economic Review, 90 (4), September, pp. 715–
        742.
Hallinan, M. T., and A. B. Sorensen (1987), “Ability Grouping and Sex Differences in Mathematics
        Achievement,” Sociology of Education 60 (April), pp. 63–72.
Hilderbrand, G. M. (1996), “Redefining Achievement,” P. F. Murphy and C. V. Gipps (eds.), Equity
        in he Classroom (London and Washington, D.C.: Falmer Press and UNESCO), pp. 149– 171.
Hyde, J., and S. Jaffee, “Perspectives from Social and Feminist Psychology,” Educational
        Researcher, 27 (5), pp. 14–16.
Jacob A. Brian and Steven D. Levitt (2003) “Rotten Apples: An Investigation of the Prevalence and
        Predictors of Teachers Cheating”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, August, 843-877.
Jacobs, J. E., and J. E. Eccles (1992), “The Influence of Parent Stereotypes on Parent and Child Ability
        Beliefs in Three Domains,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 63, pp. 932–944.
Madigan, T. (1997), Science Proficiency and Course Taking in High School: The Relationship of Science
        Course-Taking Patterns to Increases in Science Proficiency Between 8th and 12th Grades, National
        Center for Education Statistics, NCES 97-838. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Education.
Madon, S., L. Jussin, S. Keiper, J. Eccles, A. Smith, and P. Palumbo (1998), “The Accuracy and Power of
        Sex, Social Class, and Ethnic Stereotypes: A Naturalistic Study in Person Perception,” Personality
        and Social Psychology Bulletin, pp. 1304–1318.
Middleton, J., and P., Spanias (1999), “Motivation for Achievements in Mathematics: Findings,
       Generalizations, and Criticisms of the Research” Journal of Research in Mathematics
       Education, 30 (1), 65-88.
Lavy, Victor (2004), “Performance Pay and Teachers’ Effort, Productivity and Grading Ethics,” NBER
       Working Paper No. 10622.
Liang, Kung-Yee, and Scott L. Zeger (1986), “Longitudinal Data Analysis Using Generalized Linear
       Models,” Biometrika 73, pp. 13–22.
National Center for Educational Statistics (1997), The Condition of Education 1997 (NCES 97-388).
       Washington, D.C..: Author.
National Science Foundation (1998), “Women, Minorities, and Persons with Disabilities in Science
        and Engineering: 1994. Arlington, VA (available on-line at <     www.nsf.gov/sbe/srs/nsf99338>).
Spencer, S. J., C. M. Steele, and D. M. Quinn (1999), “Stereotype Threat and Women’s Math
        Performance,” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 35, pp. 4–28.
Stangor, C., and G. B. Sechrist (1998), “Conceptualizing the Determinants of Academic Choice and
        Task Performance Across Social Groups,” Swim, J. K. and C. Stanger (eds.), Prejudice
        (Academic Press).
Steele, C. M. (1997), “A Threat in the Air: How Stereotypes Shape Intellectual Identity and
       Performance,” American Psychologist, 52, pp. 613–629.
Rabin, Matthew, and Joel L. Schrag (1999), “First Impressions Matter: A Model of Confirmatory Bias,”
       The Quarterly Journal of Economics, February, pp. 37–82.
Rebhorn, Leslie S., and D. D. Miles (1999), “High-Stakes Testing: Barrier to Gifted Girls in
       Mathematics and Science?” School Science and Mathematics, 99 (6), pp. 313–318.
Rowsey, R. E. (1997). “The Effects of Teachers and Schooling on the Vocational Choice of
       University Research Scientists,” School Science and Mathematics, 72, pp. 20–26.
Tiedemann, J. (2000), “Parents’ Gender Stereotypes and Teachers’ Beliefs as Predictors of Children’
       Concept of Their Mathematical Ability in Elementary School,” Journal of Educational Psychology,
       92 (1), pp. 144–151.

                                                   31
                                     M a th S c o re s - A ll                                                  M a th S c o re s - M a le s                                                     M a th S c o re s - F e m a le s
                                            Inte rm e d i a te 3                                                         Inte rm e d ia te 3                                                             Inte rm e d ia te 3




                                                                                             .03
                .03




                                                                                                                                                                               .03
                                                                                               .02
                  .02




                                                                                                                                                                                 .02
             Density




                                                                                          Density




                                                                                                                                                                            Density
Figure 1




                                                                                        .01
           .01




                                                                                                                                                                          .01
                0




                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                             0
                        0   20              40                 60   80            100                0   20              40                 60    80                100                0   20             40                60     80                 100
                                                 S c o re s                                                                   S c o re s                                                                       S c o re s
                             N o n -B lin d S c o re                 B lin d S c o re                     N o n -B lin d S c o re                  B lin d S c o re                         N o n -B lind Sc o re                   B li n d S c o re



                                     M a th S c o re s - A ll                                                  M a th S c o re s - M a le s                                                     M a th S c o re s - F e m a le s
                                               A d va nc e 3                                                                A d va nc e 3                                                                   A d va nc e 3




                                                                                             .03
                .03




                                                                                                                                                                               .03
                                                                                               .02
                  .02




                                                                                                                                                                                 .02
             Density




                                                                                          Density




                                                                                                                                                                            Density
Figure 2




                                                                                        .01
           .01




                                                                                                                                                                          .01
                0




                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                             0
                        0   20              40                 60   80            100                0   20              40                 60    80                100                0   20             40                60     80                 100
                                                  S c o re s                                                                   S c o re s                                                                      S c o re s
                             N o n -B lin d S c o re                 B lin d S c o re                     N o n -B lin d S c o re                  B lin d S c o re                         N o n -B lind Sc o re                   B li n d S c o re




                                   E n g lis h S c o re s - A ll                                              E n g lis h S c o re s - M a le s                                             E n g lis h S c o re s - F e m a le s
                                                 B a s ic 1                                                                   B a s ic 1                                                                       B a s ic 1
                                                                                             .03
                .03




                                                                                                                                                                               .03
                                                                                               .02
                  .02




                                                                                                                                                                                 .02
             Density




                                                                                          Density




                                                                                                                                                                            Density
Figure 3
                                                                                        .01
           .01




                                                                                                                                                                          .01
                0




                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                             0




                        0   20              40                 60   80            100                0   20              40                 60    80                100                0   20             40                60     80                 100
                                                  S c o re s                                                                   S c o re s                                                                      S c o re s
                             N o n -B lin d S c o re                 B lin d S c o re                     N o n -B lin d S c o re                  B lin d S c o re                         N o n -B lind Sc o re                       B li n d S c o re



                                   E n g lis h S c o re s - A ll                                              E n g lis h S c o re s - M a le s                                             E n g lis h S c o re s - F e m a le s
                                             Inte rm e d i a te                                                           Inte rm e d ia te                                                                Inte rm e d ia te
                                                                                             .03
                .03




                                                                                                                                                                               .03
                                                                                               .02
                  .02




                                                                                                                                                                                 .02
             Density




                                                                                          Density




                                                                                                                                                                            Density
Figure 4
                                                                                        .01
           .01




                                                                                                                                                                          .01
                0




                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                             0




                        0   20              40                 60   80            100                0   20              40                 60    80                100                0   20             40                60     80                 100
                                                  S c o re s                                                                   S c o re s                                                                      S c o re s
                             N o n -B lin d S c o re                 B lin d S c o re                     N o n -B lin d S c o re                      B lin d S c o re                     N o n -B lind Sc o re                       B li n d S c o re
                                 B io lo g y S c o re s - A ll                                                  B io lo g y S c o r e s - M a le s                                         B io lo g y S c o r e s - F e m a le s
                                             A d va nc e 4                                                                    A d va nc e 4                                                                 A d va nc e 4




                                                                                               .03




                                                                                                                                                                              .03
               .03




                                                                                         .01 .02




                                                                                                                                                                          .01 .02
           .01 .02
            Density




                                                                                          Density




                                                                                                                                                                           Density
Figure 5




                                                                                                                                                                              0
               0




                                                                                               0
                      0   20               40                 60     80            100                 0   20               40                 60    80             100              0   20               40                 60   80                 100
                                                 S c o re s                                                                       S c o re s                                                                    S c o re s
                           N o n - B lin d S c o re                   B lin d S c o re                      N o n -B lin d S c o r e                  B lin d S c o r e                    N o n -B lind S c o re                      B li n d S c o re




                               L ite r a tu r e S c o r e s - A ll                                          L ite ra tu r e S c o r e s - M a le s                                       L ite r a tu re S c o re s - F e m a le s
                                                B a s ic 1                                                                       B a s ic 1                                                                    B a s ic 1




                                                                                               .03




                                                                                                                                                                              .03
               .03




                                                                                         .01 .02




                                                                                                                                                                          .01 .02
           .01 .02




Figure 6
            Density




                                                                                          Density




                                                                                                                                                                           Density
                                                                                                                                                                              0
               0




                                                                                               0
                      0   20               40                 60     80            100                 0   20               40                 60    80             100              0   20               40                 60   80                 100
                                                 S c o re s                                                                       S c o re s                                                                    S c o re s
                           N o n - B lin d S c o re                   B lin d S c o re                      N o n -B lin d S c o r e                  B lin d S c o r e                    N o n -B lind S c o re                   B li n d S c o re




                                P h y s ic s S c o r e s - A ll                                                 P h y s ic s S c o re s - M a le s                                        P h y s ic s S c o r e s - F e m a le s
                                             A d va nc e 4                                                                    A d va nc e 4                                                                 A d va nc e 4
                                                                                         .01 .02 .03




                                                                                                                                                                              .03
               .03




                                                                                                                                                                          .01 .02
           .01 .02




                                                                                          Density
            Density




                                                                                                                                                                           Density
Figure 7




                                                                                                                                                                              0
               0




                                                                                               0




                      0   20               40                 60     80            100                 0   20               40                 60    80             100              0   20               40                 60   80                 100
                                                 S c o re s                                                                       S c o re s                                                                    S c o re s
                           N o n - B lin d S c o re                   B lin d S c o re                      N o n -B lin d S c o r e                  B lin d S c o r e                    N o n -B lind S c o re                   B li n d S c o re




                               C h e m is try S c o re s - A ll                                            C h e m is tr y S c o re s - M a le s                                         C h e m is try S c o r e s - F e m a le s
                                                A d va nc e                                                                      A d va nc e                                                                   A d va nc e
                                                                                              .03




                                                                                                                                                                              .03
               .03




                                                                                         .01 .02




                                                                                                                                                                          .01 .02
           .01 .02




                                                                                          Density
            Density




                                                                                                                                                                           Density
Figure 8


                                                                                                                                                                              0
               0




                                                                                              0




                      0   20               40                 60     80            100                 0   20               40                 60    80             100              0   20              40                  60   80                 100
                                                 S c o re s                                                                       S c o re s                                                                    S c o re s
                           N o n - B lin d S c o re                   B lin d S c o re                      N o n -B lin d S c o r e                  B lin d S c o r e                    N o n -B lind S c o re                   B li n d S c o re
          Table 1: Means and Standard Deviations of National and School Score Exams During Senior Year

                                               Number of           Mean school          Mean national               T test for the
     Subject             Level of test
                                              observations            score                score                difference in means
          (1)                 (2)                  (3)                 (4)                   (5)                          (6)

Bible studies         Basic                       26,450                 75.0                  63.6                     27.8
                                                                        (15.4)                (21.0)
Biology               Advanced 1                   5,274                 83.4                  83.1                      0.6
                                                                        (11.2)                (14.9)
                      Advanced 2                   5,277                 82.9                  77.0                     18.9
                                                                        (11.4)                (13.5)
                      Advanced 3                   5,276                 82.7                  74.8                     15.4
                                                                        (11.6)                (15.4)
                      Advanced 4                   5,101                 85.0                  86.1                      3.2
                                                                        (10.8)                 (9.9)
                      Advanced 5                   5,079                 85.0                  79.8                     11.8
                                                                        (10.8)                (12.8)
Chemistry             Basic                         964                  84.9                  76.5                      7.5
                                                                        (12.2)                (17.2)
                      Advanced                     3,616                 85.7                  78.4                     14.1
                                                                        (11.3)                (14.5)
Comp. Science         Advanced                     3,546                 83.5                  73.8                     14.2
                                                                        (13.7)                (17.7)
English               Basic 1                      8,130                 77.2                  80.1                      8.0
                                                                        (14.1)                (15.5)
                      Basic 2                      8,986                 73.1                  64.9                     18.1
                                                                        (14.2)                (20.4)
                      Intermediate                11,466                 74.1                  65.4                     27.3
                                                                        (10.9)                (14.7)
                      Advanced                    13,843                 82.4                  75.1                     27.5
                                                                        (10.7)                (13.8)
History               Basic                       19,647                 77.0                  69.1                     20.1
                                                                        (15.1)                (17.2)
Literature            Basic                       32,908                 76.1                  69.9                     25.6
                                                                        (14.3)                (15.8)
                      Advanced                     3,097                 82.1                  75.7                     20.0
                                                                        (11.3)                (10.7)
Math                  Basic 1                     16,647                 71.1                  67.5                      6.2
                                                                        (20.5)                (29.2)
                      Basic 2                     11,862                 88.6                  91.2                      7.2
                                                                        (18.1)                (19.1)
                      Intermediate 1               7,346                 80.8                  80.7                      0.3
                                                                        (15.5)                (21.1)
                      Intermediate 2               4,490                 80.9                  75.2                      8.6
                                                                        (15.1)                (18.7)
                      Advanced 1                   3,983                 87.2                  81.3                     12.1
                                                                        (13.1)                (20.2)
                      Advanced 2                   2,197                 85.9                  84.4                      2.3
                                                                        (12.8)                (15.7)
Physics               Advanced 1                   4,854                 84.0                  78.2                     11.6
                                                                        (13.2)                (20.0)
                      Advanced 2                   1,916                 86.2                  82.8                      4.1
                                                                        (13.2)                (16.4)
                      Advanced 3                   4,927                 84.7                  79.4                     10.3
                                                                        (13.5)                (19.9)
                      Advanced 4                   3,023                 89.6                  88.1                      3.6
                                                                         (9.8)                (10.2)
Notes: Dependent variables are standardized scores. The T statistic in column (6) reflects estimated standard errors that are corrected
for clustering by school.
                                                Table 2: Estimated Gender Bias in the Non-Blind Scores by Subject

                                Bible studies      Biology      Chemistry        Comp. science         English        History       Literature       Math         Physics
                                     (1)             (2)           (3)               (4)                 (5)            (6)             (7)           (8)           (9)

Constant                            0.107            0.269         0.096              0.097              0.041          0.051          0.214         0.045         -0.012
                                   (0.029)          (0.030)       (0.044)            (0.052)            (0.020)        (0.030)        (0.022)       (0.023)        (0.035)

Male                               -0.243           -0.139        -0.122             -0.037              0.114         -0.117         -0.475        -0.105         -0.015
                                   (0.019)          (0.022)       (0.040)            (0.042)            (0.014)        (0.021)        (0.018)       (0.015)        (0.035)

Non-blind score                     0.037           -0.059        -0.025              0.004              0.048          0.025          0.024         0.020          0.041
                                   (0.017)          (0.022)       (0.036)            (0.047)            (0.018)        (0.025)        (0.015)       (0.015)        (0.033)

Male x (non-blind score)           -0.083           -0.125        -0.058             -0.122             -0.180         -0.075         -0.053        -0.086         -0.130
                                   (0.013)          (0.023)       (0.033)            (0.042)            (0.013)        (0.016)        (0.014)       (0.012)        (0.024)

Number of observations             58,676           52,888         9,562              8,006             84,850         41,758         75,568        109,928        29,992

Number of schools                    325             190            196                237                359           248            328            363            242
Notes: Dependent variables are standardized scores. Standard errors are corrected for school level clustering and are presented in parentheses. The number of observations is
twice the number of exam takers, since the datasets are stacked (for each student there are two observations per exam code, one for the school score and one for the external
score).
        Table 3: Estimated Gender Bias in the Non-Blind Scores by Subject With Included Controls for Student's Characteristics and Lagged Outcomes

                                Bible studies         Biology         Chemistry        Comp. science            English          History       Literature       Math           Physics
                                     (1)                (2)              (3)               (4)                    (5)              (6)             (7)           (8)             (9)

Male                                -0.233             -0.057            -0.061             -0.059                0.117          -0.081          -0.483         -0.072           0.092
                                    (0.015)            (0.020)           (0.032)            (0.040)              (0.014)         (0.018)         (0.015)        (0.014)         (0.028)

Non-blind score                      0.037             -0.059            -0.025              0.004                0.048           0.025           0.024          0.020           0.041
                                    (0.017)            (0.022)           (0.036)            (0.047)              (0.018)         (0.025)         (0.015)        (0.015)         (0.033)

Male x (non-blind score)            -0.083             -0.125            -0.058             -0.122               -0.180          -0.075          -0.053         -0.086          -0.130
                                    (0.013)            (0.023)           (0.033)            (0.042)              (0.013)         (0.016)         (0.014)        (0.012)         (0.024)

Number of observations              58,676             52,888            9,562               8,006               84,850           41,758         75,568        109,928          29,992

Number of schools                     325                190              196                 237                 359              248            328            363              242
Notes: Dependent variables are standardized scores. Standard errors are corrected for school level clustering and are presented in parentheses. The regressions include as controls
students' lagged outcomes and background characteristics: father and mother schooling, number of siblings and 6 dummies as indicators of ethnic origin (Asia/Africa, America/Europe,
Israel, Soviet Union Republics, Ethiopia and a category for students with missing data on ethnic origin). The number of observations is twice the number of exam takers, since the datasets
are stacked (see note in Table 2).
  Table 4: Estimated 12th Grade Gender Bias in the Non-Blind Scores, While Controlling for the 11th
                                   Grade Math Non-Blind Score

                                                                              (1)               (2)              (3)

Male                                                                        -0.093           -0.048            -0.048
                                                                            (0.022)          (0.020)           (0.020)

Non-blind score                                                              0.346            0.274             0.264
                                                                            (0.557)          (0.544)           (0.542)

Male x (non-blind score)                                                    -0.118           -0.104            -0.103
                                                                            (0.021)          (0.021)           (0.021)

Non-blind score in 11th grade                                                  -              0.362             0.367
                                                                                             (0.016)           (0.021)

Non-blind score x (non-blind score in 11th grade)                              -              0.094             0.080
                                                                                             (0.017)           (0.020)

Male x (non-blind score in 11th grade)                                         -                -              -0.010
                                                                                                               (0.023)

Male x (non-blind score) x (non-blind score in 11th grade)                     -                -               0.029
                                                                                                               (0.022)

Number of observations                                                      23,170           23,170            23,170

Number of schools                                                             270              270              270
Notes: Standard errors are corrected for school level clustering and are presented in parentheses. The regressions include
as controls all the level variables used in all the interactions (father and mother schooling, number of siblings and 6
dummies as indicators of ethnic origin), the number of matriculation credits achieved in 11th grade, average score in 11th
grade.
 Table 5: Estimated Gender Bias in the Non-Blind Scores, Using Only Exams for Which the Blind and Non-Blind
                                        Score Distributions are Identical

                                Biology      Biology       English      English      English      Literature      Math        Math
                                  (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)            (6)          (7)         (8)

Male                             -0.089       -0.029        0.074        0.179        0.160        -0.489        -0.099       0.181
                                 (0.026)      (0.027)      (0.025)      (0.023)      (0.019)       (0.015)       (0.038)     (0.047)

Non-blind score                  -0.105       -0.101       -0.004        0.043        0.084         0.027        -0.016      -0.029
                                 (0.031)      (0.035)      (0.024)      (0.026)      (0.024)       (0.016)       (0.044)     (0.050)

Male x (non-blind score)         -0.162       -0.216       -0.078       -0.224       -0.272        -0.057        -0.062      -0.147
                                 (0.037)      (0.037)      (0.021)      (0.022)      (0.018)       (0.015)       (0.034)     (0.048)

Number of observations           10,202       10,158       16,260       22,932       27,686         65,816        8,980       4,394

Number of schools                 178           177          338          334          306           317           167         127
Notes: Dependent variables are standardized scores. Standard errors are corrected for school level clustering and are presented in
parentheses. The regressions include as controls students' lagged outcomes and background characteristics: father and mother
schooling, number of siblings and 6 dummies as indicators of ethnic origin (Asia/Africa, America/Europe, Israel, Soviet Union
Republics, Ethiopia and a category for students with missing data on ethnic origin). The number of observations is twice the number of
exam takers, since the datasets are stacked (see note in Table 2).
                                  Table 6: Estimated Gender Bias in the Non-Blind Scores While Controlling for Student's Ability

                                                                                                                 Controlling for average lagged score in all
                        The basic model                  Controlling for average lagged score in all subjects
                                                                                                                 subjects but of that of the relevant subject

                                                            Using blind score           Using non-blind score   Using blind score        Using non-blind score

Bible studies                -0.087                                -0.091                        -0.084              -0.099                       -0.084
  n=29,195                   (0.013)                               (0.012)                       (0.012)             (0.012)                      (0.012)

Biology                      -0.122                                -0.101                        -0.059              -0.099                       -0.043
  n=26,362                   (0.025)                               (0.025)                       (0.025)             (0.026)                      (0.026)

Chemistry                    -0.055                                -0.051                        -0.017              -0.053                       -0.019
  n=4,780                    (0.033)                               (0.033)                       (0.031)             (0.033)                      (0.031)

Comp. Science                -0.126                                -0.127                        -0.110              -0.127                       -0.098
  n=3,949                    (0.042)                               (0.043)                       (0.043)             (0.043)                      (0.044)

English                      -0.183                                -0.182                        -0.168              -0.179                       -0.148
  n=41,450                   (0.013)                               (0.013)                       (0.013)             (0.013)                      (0.013)

History                      -0.071                                -0.079                        -0.063              -0.084                       -0.066
  n=20,821                   (0.016)                               (0.016)                       (0.017)             (0.016)                      (0.016)

Literature                   -0.054                                -0.054                        -0.038              -0.055                       -0.033
  n=37,605                   (0.014)                               (0.014)                       (0.014)             (0.014)                      (0.014)

Math                         -0.085                                -0.086                        -0.073              -0.089                       -0.067
  n=54,286                   (0.012)                               (0.012)                       (0.012)             (0.012)                      (0.012)

Physics                      -0.131                                -0.130                        -0.101              -0.132                       -0.078
  n=14,965                   (0.023)                               (0.023)                       (0.024)             (0.024)                      (0.024)

Notes: Standard errors are corrected for school level clustering and are presented in parentheses.
                                Table 7: Estimated Gender Bias in the Non-Blind Scores by Quartiles of the Ability Distribution

                                  Bible studies      Biology        Chemistry       Comp. science         English        History       Literature       Math         Physics
                                       (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)                 (5)            (6)             (7)           (8)           (9)

1st quartile                         -0.064           -0.138          -0.120             -0.211            -0.111         -0.153          0.073        -0.081         -0.145
                                     (0.025)          (0.042)         (0.060)            (0.117)           (0.023)        (0.036)        (0.026)       (0.026)        (0.074)

2nd quartile                         -0.070           -0.109          -0.029             -0.142            -0.196         -0.045         -0.059        -0.107         -0.190
                                     (0.023)          (0.033)         (0.062)            (0.079)           (0.021)        (0.028)        (0.021)       (0.018)        (0.050)

3rd quartile                         -0.094           -0.075          -0.097             -0.047            -0.211         -0.059         -0.112        -0.094         -0.122
                                     (0.020)          (0.035)         (0.048)            (0.055)           (0.018)        (0.024)        (0.018)       (0.019)        (0.037)

4th quartile                         -0.104           -0.077           0.005             -0.080            -0.182         -0.055         -0.098        -0.068         -0.044
                                     (0.017)          (0.033)         (0.042)            (0.043)           (0.019)        (0.019)        (0.016)       (0.015)        (0.033)

Number of observations               58,676           52,888           9,562             8,006             84,850         41,758         75,568        109,928        29,992

Notes: Standard errors are corrected for school level clustering and are presented in parentheses. The regressions include as controls all the level variables used in all the
interactions (father and mother schooling, number of siblings and 6 dummies as indicators of ethnic origin), the number of matriculation credits achieved in 11th grade, average
score in 11th grade. The quartiles of ability are derived from the distribution of the average blind scores in exams taken in 10th and 11th grade.
                                                Table 8: Estimated Gender Bias in the Non-Blind Scores Versus Other Biases

                                          Bible studies       Biology       Chemistry        Comp. science         English         History       Literature       Math          Physics
                                               (1)              (2)            (3)               (4)                 (5)             (6)             (7)           (8)            (9)
Non-blind score

        x Male                               -0.081            -0.130         -0.069              -0.123            -0.176         -0.071          -0.053         -0.087         -0.127
                                             (0.013)           (0.023)        (0.032)             (0.042)           (0.013)        (0.016)         (0.014)        (0.012)        (0.024)

        x Recent immigrant                   -0.089             0.202          0.440              -0.080             0.377          0.051          -0.032          0.146          0.163
                                             (0.072)           (0.052)        (0.165)             (0.031)           (0.044)        (0.096)         (0.059)        (0.047)        (0.099)

        x Father's schooling                 -0.040             0.026          0.004              -0.018            -0.040         -0.046          -0.012         -0.024          0.015
                                             (0.016)           (0.022)        (0.031)             (0.034)           (0.015)        (0.018)         (0.014)        (0.014)        (0.026)

        x Mother's schooling                 -0.028             0.002          0.026               0.011            -0.027          0.010          -0.016         -0.003         -0.054
                                             (0.015)           (0.022)        (0.033)             (0.040)           (0.016)        (0.019)         (0.014)        (0.014)        (0.025)

        x Number of sibblings                 0.036             0.013          0.061               0.011             0.012         -0.029          -0.001         -0.017         -0.050
                                             (0.014)           (0.020)        (0.048)             (0.040)           (0.014)        (0.021)         (0.012)        (0.013)        (0.032)

        x Ethnic origin:

              America-Europe                  0.209            -0.235          0.437               0.482             0.007         -0.465           0.494         -0.189          0.980
                                             (0.186)           (0.046)        (0.345)             (0.064)           (0.327)        (0.207)         (0.244)        (0.281)        (0.105)

              Asia-Africa                     0.272            -0.281          0.380               0.482             0.028         -0.334          -0.463         -0.193          0.980
                                             (0.185)           (0.042)        (0.353)             (0.070)           (0.330)        (0.209)         (0.243)        (0.285)        (0.106)

Notes: Standard errors are corrected for school level clustering and are presented in parentheses. The regressions include as controls all the level variables used in all the interactions
(father and mother schooling, number of siblings and 6 dummies as indicators of ethnic origin), the number of matriculation credits achieved in 11th grade, average score in 11th grade.
              Table 9a: Estimated Gender Bias in the Non-Blind Scores by Gender Average Performance in 10th-11th Grade Matriculation Exams

                                       Bible studies       Biology       Chemistry        Comp. science         English        History       Literature        Math         Physics
                                            (1)              (2)            (3)               (4)                 (5)            (6)             (7)            (8)           (9)

                                                                                        Schools where girls are better than boys
Mean score in 10-11th grades
Girls                                      77.87            82.24           85.47              86.58             72.91          79.18           77.97          77.50          88.19

Boys                                       75.50            78.02           81.96              82.16             69.40          76.72           76.04          74.34          84.49

Male x (non-blind score)                  -0.091            -0.128         -0.084             -0.131             -0.179         -0.065         -0.052         -0.084         -0.141
                                          (0.016)           (0.028)        (0.044)            (0.047)            (0.016)        (0.018)        (0.018)        (0.013)        (0.024)

Number of observations                     37,436           39,864          6,122              5,450             58,236         28,844         46,276         77,952         22,570

Number of schools                           163              126             107                121               212            141             175            214            150

                                                                                        Schools where boys are better than girls
Mean score in 10-11th grades
Girls                                      73.60            79.14           82.73              78.30             69.34          75.25           73.97          73.67          82.41

Boys                                       75.87            82.08           85.38              83.53             72.51          77.17           76.28          76.05          85.23

Male x (non-blind score)                  -0.079            -0.123         -0.014             -0.128             -0.197         -0.090         -0.060         -0.117         -0.172
                                          (0.021)           (0.042)        (0.049)            (0.060)            (0.022)        (0.034)        (0.024)        (0.022)        (0.054)

Number of observations                     20,644           12,340          3,286              1,958             25,422         12,776         29,018         30,826          6,452

Number of schools                           125               53             70                  54               118             78             134            119            47
Notes:The performance is measured using 11th grade scores of the same students that are included in the sample. Dependent variables are standardized scores. Standard errors are
corrected for school level clustering and are presented in parentheses. The regressions include as controls students' lagged outcomes and background characteristics: father and mother
schooling, number of siblings and 6 dummies as indicators of ethnic origin (Asia/Africa, America/Europe, Israel, Soviet Union Republics, Ethiopia and a category for students with
missing data on ethnic origin).
                         Table 9b: Estimated Gender Bias in the Non-Blind Scores by Gender Average Performance of the 2000 Cohort

                                  Bible studies       Biology       Chemistry        Comp. science         English        History       Literature        Math         Physics
                                       (1)              (2)            (3)               (4)                 (5)            (6)             (7)            (8)           (9)

                                                                                    Schools where girls are better than boys

Male                                  -0.248           -0.080          -0.047              0.018             0.124         -0.102         -0.503         -0.065          0.085
                                      (0.016)          (0.020)         (0.034)            (0.043)           (0.015)        (0.023)        (0.019)        (0.015)        (0.029)

Male x (non-blind score)              -0.078           -0.112          -0.092             -0.206            -0.191         -0.062         -0.049         -0.097         -0.137
                                      (0.014)          (0.024)         (0.037)            (0.047)           (0.014)        (0.022)        (0.016)        (0.012)        (0.028)

Number of observations                43,988           45,130          6,860              4,788             67,836         23,928         53,518         88,676         22,152

Number of schools                       194              149            117                107                248           114             199            244            143

                                                                                    Schools where boys are better than girls

Male                                  -0.192            0.058          -0.087              0.013             0.120         -0.083         -0.423         -0.067          0.086
                                      (0.038)          (0.059)         (0.077)            (0.086)           (0.034)        (0.043)        (0.026)        (0.027)        (0.064)

Male x (non-blind score)              -0.131           -0.186           0.028             -0.066            -0.148         -0.087         -0.085         -0.079         -0.109
                                      (0.027)          (0.075)         (0.080)            (0.084)           (0.032)        (0.035)        (0.029)        (0.029)        (0.051)

Number of observations                12,226            6,004          2,162              1,788             13,374         8,224          19,754         17,948          6,074

Number of schools                       81               27              49                 41                72             51             96             78             48
Notes:The performance is measured using 12th grade scores of students who graduated the same school as those included in the sample in 2000. Dependent variables are
standardized scores. Standard errors are corrected for school level clustering and are presented in parentheses. The regressions include as controls students' lagged outcomes and
background characteristics: father and mother schooling, number of siblings and 6 dummies as indicators of ethnic origin (Asia/Africa, America/Europe, Israel, Soviet Union
Republics, Ethiopia and a category for students with missing data on ethnic origin).
                Table 9c: Estimated Gender Bias in the Non-Blind Scores by Gender Average Performance in 12th Grade Blind Tests in 2000

                                  Bible studies       Biology       Chemistry        Comp. science         English        History       Literature        Math         Physics
                                       (1)              (2)            (3)               (4)                 (5)            (6)             (7)            (8)           (9)

                                                                                    Schools where girls are better than boys

Male                                  -0.231           -0.067         -0.027               0.003             0.131         -0.093         -0.481         -0.083          0.047
                                      (0.016)          (0.021)        (0.037)             (0.053)           (0.032)        (0.028)        (0.016)        (0.021)        (0.031)

Male x (non-blind score)              -0.093           -0.122         -0.082              -0.169            -0.148         -0.060         -0.059         -0.080         -0.130
                                      (0.014)          (0.026)        (0.044)             (0.055)           (0.028)        (0.023)        (0.015)        (0.017)        (0.032)

Number of observations                46,928           38,496          5,766              4,024             15,156         19,540         71,848         47,732         15,040

Number of schools                      203               121             92                 83                79             93             272            162            99

                                                                                    Schools where boys are better than girls

Male                                  -0.255           -0.064         -0.113               0.067             0.124         -0.104         -0.507         -0.056          0.147
                                      (0.040)          (0.047)        (0.062)             (0.062)           (0.015)        (0.030)        (0.094)        (0.018)        (0.047)

Male x (non-blind score)              -0.074           -0.116         -0.032              -0.167            -0.196         -0.080         -0.081         -0.105         -0.135
                                      (0.031)          (0.049)        (0.054)             (0.066)           (0.015)        (0.030)        (0.093)        (0.015)        (0.038)

Number of observations                 9,286           12,638          3,256              2,566             66,054         12,612          1,424         58,892         13,186

Number of schools                       72               55              74                 66               241             72             23             160            92
Notes:The performance is measured using 12th grade blind tests scores of students who graduated the same school as those included in the sample in 2000. Dependent variables are
standardized scores. Standard errors are corrected for school level clustering and are presented in parentheses. The regressions include as controls students' lagged outcomes and
background characteristics: father and mother schooling, number of siblings and 6 dummies as indicators of ethnic origin (Asia/Africa, America/Europe, Israel, Soviet Union
Republics, Ethiopia and a category for students with missing data on ethnic origin).
  Table 10: Estimated Gender Bias in the Non-Blind Scores Based on Thesis Writers: When the External Score is Also Non-
                                                          Blind

                                                 Grade in thesis                       Grade in math and English exams

                                        Raw                   Standardized               Raw                Standardized

Intercept                              88.238                       0.051               77.218                  0.043
                                       (1.083)                     (0.069)              (1.368)                (0.090)

Male                                   -1.713                      -0.156                0.834                  0.032
                                       (0.829)                     (0.084)              (1.172)                (0.062)

Non-blind score                         3.684                       0.008                4.234                  0.082
                                       (0.860)                     (0.103)              (0.682)                (0.047)

Male x non-blind score                  0.803                      -0.024                1.492                 -0.107
                                       (1.017)                     (0.123)              (0.976)                (0.060)

Number of students                                   1,118                                          2,442

Number of schools                                      76                                            75
                  Table 11: Estimated Mean-Reversion Pattern Differences by Gender, While Using Three Different Reference Groups

                                Bible studies        Biology        Chemistry        Comp. science          English       History       Literature        Math        Physics
                                     (1)               (2)             (3)               (4)                  (5)           (6)             (7)            (8)          (9)

                                                                           Refernce: class mean

Girls below mean                     0.799             0.589           0.780               0.716              0.729         0.871          0.804          0.850         0.726
                                    [0.423]           [0.404]         [0.406]             [0.395]            [0.450]       [0.422]        [0.356]        [0.396]       [0.390]
Boys below mean                      0.790             0.579           0.739               0.765              0.655         0.832          0.866          0.799         0.604
                                    [0.556]           [0.552]         [0.497]             [0.455]            [0.484]       [0.508]        [0.597]        [0.464]       [0.442]

Girls above mean                     0.577            0.410            0.564               0.450             0.641         0.448           0.490          0.366         0.447
Boys above mean                      0.451            0.412            0.678               0.311             0.576         0.335           0.384          0.314         0.556

                                                                      Refernce: class mean by gender

Girls below mean                     0.813            0.583            0.785               0.731             0.736         0.863           0.774          0.840         0.744
Boys below mean                      0.803            0.598            0.787               0.788             0.662         0.845           0.916          0.806         0.613

Girls above mean                     0.512            0.406            0.549               0.456             0.633         0.434           0.468          0.342         0.449
Boys above mean                      0.534            0.439            0.636               0.304             0.585         0.378           0.480          0.364         0.541

                                                                            Refernce: own mean

Girls below mean                     0.636             0.442           0.671               0.602              0.644         0.623          0.648          0.660         0.565
                                    [0.440]           [0.439]         [0.498]             [0.474]            [0.495]       [0.492]        [0.386]        [0.498]       [0.563]
Boys below mean                      0.584             0.404           0.605               0.713              0.544         0.557          0.605          0.613         0.511
                                    [0.575]           [0.450]         [0.509]             [0.522]            [0.503]       [0.543]        [0.625]        [0.530]       [0.518]

Girls above mean                    -0.289             -0.109         -0.346              -0.130             0.034         -0.398         -0.255         -0.143        -0.334
Boys above mean                     -0.340            -0.026*         -0.265              -0.162             0.039         -0.328         -0.343         -0.123        -0.257

Notes: Standard errors are corrected for school level clustering but are not presented in the table, since all the estimates are significantly different from zero (except those
which are marked by *). The proportion of students in each group is presented in squared brackets. The class mean is based on all students in own class, who tested in the
same exam. The own mean is based on all blind scores of exams taken in 10th and 11th grade.
             Table 12: Estimated 12th Grade Math Gender Bias in the Non-Blind Score:
    Dividing the Sample According to the 11th Grade Difference in the Blind and Non-blind Score

                                          All students                        Students whom their 11th grade

                                                                        blind score >                    blind score <
                                                                       non-blind score                  non-blind score

Male                                          -0.093                         -0.128                          -0.058
                                              (0.022)                        (0.030)                         (0.025)

Non-blind score                                0.346                         -0.476                           1.131
                                              (0.557)                        (0.050)                         (0.047)

Male x non-blind score                        -0.118                         -0.103                          -0.120
                                              (0.021)                        (0.025)                         (0.031)

Number of students                            23,170                         13,008                          10,162

Number of schools                               270                           256                              222

Note: Standard errors are corrected for school level clustering and are presented in parenthesis. The regressions
include as controls all the level variables used in all the interactions (father and mother schooling, number of siblings, 6
dummies as indicators of ethnic origin), the number of matriculation credit units achieved in 11th grade, average score
in 11th garde matriculation exams.
Table 13: Estimated Gender Bias in the Non-Blind Scores, While Controlling for Learning Curve Differences by
                                                  Gender


                          The basic model                                      Controlling for average improvement


                                                                      Using blind score               Using non-blind score

Bible studies                  -0.087                                       -0.100                            -0.076
  n=29,195                     (0.013)                                      (0.013)                           (0.013)

Biology                        -0.122                                       -0.123                            -0.122
  n=26,362                     (0.025)                                      (0.025)                           (0.025)

Chemistry                      -0.055                                       -0.069                            -0.054
  n=4,780                      (0.033)                                      (0.032)                           (0.033)

Comp. Science                  -0.126                                       -0.137                            -0.107
  n=3,949                      (0.042)                                      (0.042)                           (0.042)

English                        -0.183                                       -0.183                            -0.180
  n=41,450                     (0.013)                                      (0.013)                           (0.013)

History                        -0.071                                       -0.077                            -0.067
  n=20,821                     (0.016)                                      (0.016)                           (0.016)

Literature                     -0.054                                       -0.060                            -0.045
  n=37,605                     (0.014)                                      (0.015)                           (0.014)

Math                           -0.085                                       -0.087                            -0.072
  n=54,286                     (0.012)                                      (0.012)                           (0.012)

Physics                        -0.131                                       -0.134                            -0.117
  n=14,965                     (0.023)                                      (0.023)                           (0.023)

Notes: Standard errors are corrected for school level clustering and are presented in parentheses.
                Table 14: Estimates of the Gender Bias in the Non-Blind Scores, by Teacher Characteristics


                                   Gender:                  Age (years):          Experience (years):              Children:
Subject
            The whole
                              Male      Female            < 46       > 46           < 20       > 20            0           >1
             sample

Math         -0.086           -0.186    -0.037           -0.038     -0.135         -0.008     -0.107         -0.070      -0.104
             (0.030)          (0.048)   (0.034)          (0.045)    (0.041)        (0.067)    (0.034)        (0.036)     (0.046)

Obs.          9,174           3,006      6,168           4,698       4,476          2,730     6,444          3,856        5,318
Schools        40              28         38              37          36             28        38             32           36

English      -0.169           -0.136    -0.167           -0.223     -0.116         -0.190     -0.158         -0.170      -0.169
             (0.038)          (0.166)   (0.035)          (0.034)    (0.060)        (0.087)    (0.042)        (0.049)     (0.049)

Obs.          6,834            558       6,276           3,478       3,356          2,136     4,698          2,540        4,294
Schools        38              11         38              31          33             25        36             28           34

Physics      -0.054           -0.061    -0.136           -0.145      0.025         -0.143     -0.040         -0.008      -0.104
             (0.049)          (0.065)   (0.074)          (0.057)    (0.074)        (0.064)    (0.064)        (0.074)     (0.060)

Obs.          7,338           5,216      2,122           3,162       4,176          2,054     5,284          3,764        3,574
Schools        84              56         28              32          52             20        64             44           40

Biology &    -0.097           -0.008    -0.104           -0.080     -0.111         -0.165     -0.061         -0.109      -0.089
chemistry    (0.033)          (0.099)   (0.035)          (0.054)    (0.041)        (0.045)    (0.043)        (0.045)     (0.045)

Obs.         20,254           2,130     18,124           8,364      11,890          7,268     12,986         7,800       12,454
Schools       120               20       108              57          80             40         93            56           76
     Table 15: Standard Deviation of the Blind and Non-blind Score Distribution, By Gender

                                            Blind score                  Non-blind score

                                   Girls                  Boys      Girls              Boys

Bible studies                       20.2                   21.5      14.7               15.7
                                   (66.8)                 (61.4)    (77.7)             (72.5)

Biology                             13.8                   14.6      10.7               11.8
                                   (80.8)                 (79.7)    (84.8)             (81.6)

Chemistry                           14.6                   16.0      10.9               12.4
                                   (78.8)                 (76.8)    (86.4)             (84.2)

Comp. Science                      18.90                   18.9      13.8               14.9
                                   (72.7)                 (73.0)    (85.0)             (83.0)

English                             17.3                   16.9      12.9               12.8
                                   (70.3)                 (72.2)    (77.5)             (76.9)

History                             17.7                   17.5      14.9               15.8
                                   (69.7)                 (67.5)    (78.4)             (75.5)

Literature                          13.4                   16.7.     12.7               14.4
                                   (73.9)                 (66.0)    (80.2)             (72.2)

Math                                23.9                   25.0      17.8               19.2
                                   (79.5)                 (77.3)    (82.1)             (79.1)

Physics                             18.0                   18.4      11.8               13.2
                                   (81.0)                 (81.2)    (86.9)             (85.2)
Notes: The average score is presented in parentheses.
       Table 16: Estimated Gender Bias in the Non-Blind Scores Using Sratified Samples According to the Gender Differences in the Variance in Test Scores

                            The basic model                      School level variance in all the subjects                            School level variance in the relevant subject

                                                         Var(boys) > Var(girls)              Var(boys) < Var(girls)             Var(boys) > Var(girls)              Var(boys) < Var(girls)

Bible studies                     -0.093                          -0.088                             -0.103                              -0.069                             -0.128
                                  (0.013)                         (0.016)                            (0.020)                             (0.016)                            (0.019)
                                  28,061                          20,489                              7,572                              16,874                             11,187
Biology                           -0.113                          -0.128                             -0.052                              -0.118                             -0.111
                                  (0.025)                         (0.029)                            (0.045)                             (0.033)                            (0.037)
                                  24,980                          20,426                              4,554                              14,582                             10,398
Chemistry                         -0.093                          -0.078                             -0.190                              -0.045                             -0.172
                                  (0.040)                         (0.043)                            (0.083)                             (0.043)                            (0.068)
                                  2,947                           2,569                                378                               1,813                               1,134
Comp. Science                     -0.183                          -0.177                             -0.261                              -0.211                             -0.161
                                  (0.053)                         (0.056)                            (0.137)                             (0.072)                            (0.058)
                                  1,558                           1,436                                122                               1,021                                537
English                           -0.185                          -0.194                             -0.163                              -0.146                             -0.207
                                  (0.013)                         (0.016)                            (0.022)                             (0.020)                            (0.017)
                                  41,357                          29,741                             11,616                              14,766                             26,591
History                           -0.076                          -0.073                             -0.089                              -0.025                             -0.122
                                  (0.016)                         (0.018)                            (0.033)                             (0.023)                            (0.019)
                                  19,923                          15,946                              3,977                              9,355                              10,568
Literature                        -0.067                          -0.077                             -0.042                              -0.059                             -0.113
                                  (0.014)                         (0.017)                            (0.026)                             (0.016)                            (0.028)
                                  36,556                          27,006                              9,550                              30,870                              5,686
Math                              -0.096                          -0.087                             -0.121                              -0.089                             -0.104
                                  (0.011)                         (0.013)                            (0.023)                             (0.015)                            (0.017)
                                  53,461                          39,905                             13,556                              32,492                             20,969
Physics                           -0.158                          -0.136                             -0.257                              -0.135                             -0.186
                                  (0.024)                         (0.027)                            (0.049)                             (0.036)                            (0.031)
                                  11,561                          9,507                               2,054                              6,769                               4,792
Notes: Number of students in italics. School level variance is based on all blind scores in a specific school. The sample is limited to those schools which have more than 10 students (of the
same gender) with a blind score in the relevant subject.
