NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MONETARY POLICY: DOMESTIC TARGETS
AND INTERNATIONAL CONSTRAINTS

Jacob A. Frenkel

Working Paper No. 1067

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

January 1983

For presentation at the AEA meetings, December 28, 1982, New York,
NY. J.A. Frenkel is indebted to the National Science Foundation,
grant SES—7818O AOl for financial support. The research reported
here is part of the NBER's research programs in International
Studies and Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are
those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research. Forthcoming in the American Economic Review,
May 1983.

NBER Working Paper /1O67
January 1983

Monetary Policy: Domestic Targets and International Constraints

AB S TRACT

This paper argues that macroeconomic policies for open economies differ, in
fundamentally important ways, from the corresponding policies for closed economies.
The openness of the economy imposes constraints on the effectiveness and proper
conduct of macroeconomic policies and it also provides policy makers with infor-

mation which may be usefully exploited in the design of policy. The discussion
in this paper focuses on the dependence of monetary policy on the constraints

and the information that are provided by the external sector. Section I sunarizes
briefly the characteristics of the international constraints on monetary policy.
Section II deals with intervention in the foreign—exchange market and its relation

to monetary policy. In this context the distinction between sterilized and non—
sterilized interventions is drawn and the implications of the various forms of

intarventions for the effectiveness of monetary policy are examined. Finally,
Section III addresses the question of the role that exchange rates should play

in the design of monetary policy. It is argued that data from the market for
foreign exchange in combination with data on interest rates can provide the
monetary authorities with useful information on money market conditions and
thereby can contribute to the improved conduct of monetary policy.

Jacob A. Frenkel
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, Il 60637
(312) 962—8253

Macroeconomic policies for open economies differ, in fundamentally important ways, from the corresponding policies for closed economies. The openness
of the economy imposes constraints on the effectiveness and proper conduct of
macroeconomic policies and it also provides policy makers with information which

may be usefully exploited in the design of policy. The discussion in this paper
focuses on the dependence of monetary policy on the constraints and the infor-

mation that are provided by the external sector. Section I summarizes briefly
the characteristics of the international constraints on monetary policy. Section
II deals with intervention in the foreign—exchange market and its relation to

monetary policy. In this context the distinction between sterilized and non—
sterilized interventions is drawn and the implications of the various forms of

interventions for the effectiveness of monetary policy.areexamined Finally,
Section III addresses the question of the role that exchange rates should play

in the design of monetary policy. It is argued that data from the market for
foreign exchange in combination with data on interest rates can provide the
monetary authorities with useful information on money market conditions and
thereby can contribute to the improved conduct of monetary policy.

I. The International Constraints
The open economy is linked to the rest of the world primarily through
three key linkages: through international trade in goods and services; through
international mobility of capital; and through international exchanges of
national monies (see Frenkel and Michael Mussa (1981) for a detailed analysis
of the implications of these linkages for macro—economic policies).

International trade links prices in different national economies. While
the evidence on purchasing power parities reveals that this link is not rigid,

1

2

it is evident that a country cannot choose its long—run trend in the inflation
rate independent of the long—run courses of monetary policy and the exchange

rate. This relation thus imposes a severe constraint on monetary policy.
International mobility of capital links interest rates on financial

assets. In addition, by permitting countries to finance current—account imbalances, it provides for a channel through which macroeconomic disturbances

are transmitted internationally. The international mobility of capital limits
the power of monetary policy. Under a fixed exchange rate regime a monetary
expansion in excess of money demand, is likely to have only a limited success

in sustaining the change in the nominal money stock. Any temporary reduction
in the domestic rate of interest will induce capital outflow and a loss of
foreign exchange reserves, and any attempts to sterilize the monetary consequences of the loss of international reserves is unlikely to be viable in

the long—run (more on this in Section II). Under a flexible exchange rate
regime the monetary authority regains control over the nominal money stock
but the international mobility of capital still imposes a severe limitation
on the ability of monetary policy to significantly affect the evolution of

output and employment. A monetary expansion is likely to induce a rapid change
in the exchange rate which leads to prompt adjustment of prices and wages. The
leverage of monetary policy can be somewhat enhanced if it operates in financial
assets that are isolated from world capital markets since, in the short—run,

the link between the rates of return on such assets with the world rates of
interest is not as tight.

The international exchange of national monies and the requirement of

monetary equilibrium also impose a severe limitation on the effectiveness of
monetary policy. As stated before, under a fixed exchange rate regime the
authorities lose control over the nominal money stock while under a flexible rate
regime the requirement of monetary equilibrium ensures that in the long—run

3

changes in the nominal money stock lead to a proportionate change in all

nominal prices and wages. Because of the rapid change in the exchange rate,
the constraint on monetary policy that is implied by the homogeneity postulate is likely to be manifested much more promptly in an open economy with
flexible exchange rates than in a closed economy.

An additional consideration constraining the conduct of monetary policy
follows from the dynamic linkage between current exchange rates and expectations

of future exchange rates (see Mussa (1976,1979)). This dynamic linkage implies
that the effect of monetary policy on the exchange rate, and thereby on other
economic variables, depends on its effect on expectations concerning future

policies. These expectations, in turn, are influenced by the past and by the
current course of policy, and it is likely that the mere recognition of this

dynamic linkage will influence the conduct of policy. For the government, being
aware that the effectiveness of any particular policy measure depends on the way
by which it influences the public's perception of the implications of the measure

for the future conduct of policy, is likely to be more constrained in employing
the instrument of monetary policy.

In suriary, the openness of the economy imposes constraints on monetary

policy. These constraints are reflected in either a reduced ability to influence
the instruments of monetary policy (like the nominal money supply under fixed
exchange rates), or in a reduced ability to influence the targets of tnonetary

policy (like the level of real output), or in an increased prudence in the use
of monetary policy because of the potentially undesirable effects on expectations.
The constraints on the conduct of monetary policy depend on the exchange—

rate regime. Therefore, the question of the country's choice of the optimal set
of constraints on monetary policy can be answered in terms of the analysis of the

choice of the optimal exchange rate regime. Such analysis reveals that the
optimal exchange rate regime depends on the nature and the origin of shocks that

4

affect the economy. Generally, the higher is the variance of real shocks which
affect the supply of goods, the larger becomes the desirability of increased

fixity of exchange rates. The rationale for the implication is that the balance
of payments serves as a shock absorber which mitigates the effect of real shocks

on consumption. The importance of this factor diminishes the larger is the degree
of international capital mobility.

On the other hand, the desirability of

exchange—rate flexibility increases the larger are the variances of shocks to

excess supply of money, to foreign prices and to deviations from purchasing
power parities (see Frenkel and Joshua Aizenman).

II. Exchange—Market Intervention
The analysis of the international constraints on monetary policy is closely
related to the analysis of the questions of whether the authorities can sterilize
the monetary implications of the balance of payments and the monetary implications

of interventions in the market for foreign exchange. Specifically, with respect
to intervention, the difficulties in analysing that question start with definitions since exchange—market intervention means different things to different

people (see Henry Wallich). Some,especially in the United states interpret
foreign exchange intervention to mean sterilized intervention, that is intervention
which is not allowed to affect the monetary base and thus amounts to an exchange

of domestic for foreign bonds. Others, especially in Europe interpret foreign
intervention to mean nonsterilized intervention. Thus, for the Europeans an
intervention alters the course of monetary policy, while for the Americans it does
not.

The distinction between the two concepts of intervention is fundamental and
the exchange rate effects of the two forms of intervention may be very different

depending on the relative degree of substitution among assets. In principle,
sterilized intervention may affect the exchange rate by portfolio—balance effects

5

(see Polly R. Allen and Peter B. Kenen, William Branson, and Dale Henderson),

and by signaling to the public the government's intentions concerning future

policies, thereby changing expectations, (see Mussa (1981)). To the extent
that sterilized intervention is effective in managing exchange rates, the constraint on the conduct of monetary policy would not be severe since the undesirable exchange rate effects of monetary policy could be offset by policies

which alter appropriately the composition of assets. In practice, however, the
evidence suggests that nonsterilized intervention which alters the monetary
base has a strong effect on the exchange rate while an equivalent sterilized

intervention has very little effect (see Maurice Obstfeld). These findings are
relevant for both the theory of exchange rate determination and the practice of

exchange rate and monetary policies. As to the theory, they shed doubts on the
usefulness of the portfolio—balance model. As to the practice, they demonstrate
that the distinction between the two forms of intervention is critical if the
authorities mean to intervene effectively, and that it may be inappropriate to

assume that the open—economy constraints on monetary policy can be easily overcome by sterilization policies.

The preceding discussion defined interventions in terms of transactions

involving specific pairs of assets. In evaluating these transactions it might
be useful to explore the broader spectrum of possible policies. Figure 1 summarizes the various patrerns of domestic and foreign monetary policies and foreign

exchange interventions. These policies are divided into three groups as follows:
I :

Domestic nonsterilized foreign exchange intervention

1*: Foreign nonsterilized foreign exchange intervention
II :

Domestic monetary policy

11*: Foreign monetary policy
III :

Domestic sterilized foreign exchange intervention

111*: Foreign sterilized foreign exchange. intervention

6

This classification is based on the types of assets that are being exchanged.
Thus, when the authorities exchange domestic money (M) for domestic bonds (B),
the transaction is refered to as domestic monetary policy (as in II), while
when the authorities exchange domestic bonds (B) for foreign bonds (B*), the
transaction is being ref ered to as domestic sterilized foreign exchange inter-

vention (as in III). Some have characterized pure foreign. exchange intervention as an exchange of domestic money (M) for foreign money (M*) rather than

the exchange of domestic money for foreign bonds. To complete the spectrum
this type of exchange is indicated in Figure 1 by I' and I'*, respectively.

This general classification highlights two principles. First, it shows
that the differences between the various policies depend on the different charac-

teristics of the various assets that are being exchanged. These different characteristics are at the foundation of the portfolio—balance model. Second,it shows
that domestic and foreign variables enter symmetrically into the picture. Thus,

for example, a given exchange between M and B* can be effected through the
policies of the home country or through a combination of policies of the foreign

country. This symmetry suggests that there is room (and possibly a role) for
international coordination of exchange rate policies. It also illustrates the

"(n—i) problem" of the international monetary system: in a world of n currencies
there are (n—i) exchange rates and only (n—i) monetary authorities need to

intervene in order to attain a set of exchange rates. To ensure consistency the
international monetary system needs to specify the allocation of the remaining
degree of freedom (see Robert Nundell).

By and large the evidence on the effectiveness of sterilized intervention
has been based on a comparison between patterns I and III within a single—country

framework. It is possible that some of the findings emerging from the single—
country studies may be modified once the foreign countries' behavior is taken

into account. But, until presented with such evidence, it is reasonable to

*
I,
-———--——I

_I
I

B

M

I

L

III

II

I

Figure 1:

Patterns of domestic and foreign monetary policies
and foreign exchange interventions.

7

conclude that it is very difficult to conduct effectively independent monetary
and exchange rate policies.

III. Exchange Rates and Monetary Policy
The recent volatility of exchange rates and the large divergence from
purchasing power parities have given rise to various proposals concerning rules

for intervention in the foreign—exchange market. Some of these proposals are
variants of a PPP rule according to which the authort1es are expected to
intervene so as to ensure that the path of the exchange rate conforms to the

path of the relative price levels. In view of the discussion in Section II,
these proposals, if effective, amount to guidelines for the conduct of monetary
policy.

There are at least four difficulties with a PPP rule. First, there are
intrinsic differences between the characteristics of exchange rates and the price

of national outputs. These differences, which result from the much stronger
dependence of exchange rates (and other asset prices) on expectations, suggest
that the fact that exchange rates have moved more than the price level is not
sufficient evidence that exchange—rate volatility has been excessive.
Second, the prices of national outputs do not adjust fully to shocks in

the short run and thus, intervention in the foreign exchange market to ensure

purchasing power parity would be a mistake. When commodity prices are slow
to adjust to current and expected economic conditions, it may be desirable to
allow for "excessive" adjustment in some other prices.

Third, there are continuous changes in real economic conditions that require
adjustment in the equilibrium relative prices of different national outputs.

Under these circumstances what seem to be divergences from purchasing power
parities may really reflect equilibrating changes.

8

Fourth, if there is short—run stickiness of prices of domestic goods in
terms of national monies, then rapid exchange—rate adjustments, which are capable

of changing the relative prices of different national outputs, are a desirable

response to changing real economic conditions. An intervention rule which links
changes in exchange rates rigidly to changes in domestic and foreign prices in
accord with purchasing power parity ignores the occasional need for equilibrating
changes in relative prices.

While it might be tempting to "solve" the problem of divergences from PPP
by adopting a rigid PPP rule, this would be a mistaken policy course.

What should be the role of the exchange rate in the design of monetary policy?
Generally, given that monetary and exchange—rate policies should not be viewed as
two independent instruments, consideration of the external value of the currency

should play a relatively minor role in the design of monetary policy. The major
consideration that should guide the monetary authority is that of achieving price
stability.

While this prescription may seem to represent a revival of the "benign
neglect" attitude the opposite is the case. In the past, one of the major arguments for the "benign neglect" attitude in the U.S. was that the U.S. economy was
relatively closed and the foreign trade sector was relatively unimportant.
The typical statistic which was used to justify this position was the low

share of imports in GNP. This argument was inappropriate in the past and
is even less appropriate under present circumstances. The U.S. has always
been an open economy. The relevant measure of openness to international
trade in goods and services is not the share of actual trade in GNP but rather
the share of tradeable commodities in GNP (i.e., of potential trade) which is

by far larger than that of actual trade. Furthermore, as stated in Section I,
one of the main linkages of the U.S. to the world economy is operating through

9

world capital markets with which the U.S. is clearly well integrated. The
same principle applies to the measures of openness of most countries.

The prescription is based on the notions that the economy is open, that
the external value of the currency is important, that the restoration of price
stability is an important policy goal, and that policy which views the exchange
rate as an independent target or, even worse, as an independent instrument, is

likely to result in unstable prices. Furthermore, if monetary policy succeeds
in achIeving price stability, it might be useful to allow for fluctuations of
the exchange rate which provide for a partial insulation from misguided foreign
monetary policies.
Even when monetary policy is not guided by exchange rate targets it might
attempt to offset disturbances arising from shifts in the demand for money.
Such shifts in demand may be especially pronounced under a regime of flexible

exchange rates. A policy which accommodates such demand shifts by offsetting
supply shifts, would reduce the need for costly adjustments of exchange rates

and national price levels. The difficulty with implementing this policy is in
identifying when a shift in money demand has occurred. As is obvious, the nominal
rate of interest is not a reliable indicator of money market conditions. The
more relevant indicators are the components of the nominal rate of interest ——

the

real rate of interest and the expected rate of inflation ——

but these com-

ponents are unobservable.

Here the exchange rate may be useful as an indicator for monetary policy
especially when frequent changes in inflationary expectations make nominal

interest rates an unreliable indicator of fluctuations in money demand. Accordingly, a combination of a high nominal—interest—rate differential and a
depreciation of the currency, that seems to have prevailed in the U.S. during
most of the 1970's may have indicated a rise in inflationary expectations, which

10

should obviously not have been fueled by an increase in the supply of money.
On the other hand, a combinat.ion of a high nominal interest—rate differential

and an appreciation of the currency that seems to have prevailed since the latter
part of 1979, may indicate a rise in the demand for money, which should be
accommodated by an expansionary monetary policy (this argument draws on Frenkel
and Mussa (1980,1981) and Frenkel (1981)).

This prescription that is based on the relation between exchange rates
and interest rates can also shed light on the recent controversy concerning the

proper conduct of U.S. monetary policy in view of the high rates of interest

that have prevailed since 1980. The relatively tight monetary policy which
accompanied the high nominal rate of interest in the U.S. was justified on the
grounds that the high nominal rate of interest was primarily due to high infla-

tionary expectations. As a counter argument it was argued that the prime reason
for the high nominal rate of interest was the high real rate rather than infla-

tionary expectations. Obviously, the two alternative prescriptions call for
fundamentally different monetary policies. To combat inflationary expectations
monetary policy had to be tight but to combat high real rates of interest a case
could be made for a more relaxed monetary policy.

Hera again the relation between the exchange rate and the rate of interest
can provide the monetary authority with information that can be helpful in solving

the "signalextraction"problem. By and large, since the latter part of 1979,
the high nominal rate of interest in the U.S. has been accompanied by an appre-

ciation of the dollar. This suggests that the important factor underlying the
evolution of the nominal rate of interest in the U.S. has been the evoluation of

the real rate of interest rather than inflationary expectations. Under such
circumstances the U.S. monetary policy could have afforded to be more relaxed
while paying even more attention to the underlying reasons for the high real

11

interest rates. Several factors have contributed to the rise in real interest

rates. First, there have been large current and prospective budget deficits in
the United States and in the rest of the world.

Second, stagflation. lowered the hedging quality of bonds. With a weak
economy and high inflation, the real interest rate on bonds declines. For bonds
to be more attractive to bondholders, they must bear a higher real yield.
Third, high real interest rates represent a rise in the risk premium,
attributable to several factors:

(a) the projected rise in future budget

deficits creates uncertainty about how these deficits will be financed; (b)
the volatility of monetary policy since late 1979 may have induced a rise in
the risk premium; and (c) the fragility of the world financial system, the
sequence of banking crises, the increased perception of sovereign risk and
increased sensitivity to large exposures, and the increased reluctance to
extend additional credit have all contributed to the rise in the risk premium

and in real interest rates. This rise in risk has been reflected in the increased spread between high— and low—quality bonds.

Fourth, it has been argued that changes in the laws dealing with the
treatment of depreciation and in those dealing with bankruptcies have also
contributed to the rise in real interest rates.

This perspective suggests that monetary policy can use the information
provided by the foreign exchange market to identify the source of variations

in nominal rates of interest. Thus, the external sector while imposing severe
constraints on monetary policy, is also providing it with useful information.

12

REFERENCE S

Polly R. Allen and Peter B. Kenen, Asset Markets, Exchange Rates and Economic
Integration, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1980.
William H. Branson, "Assets Markets and Relative Prices in Exchange Rate
Determination", Sozialwissenschaftliche Annalen No. 1, (1979): 69—89.
Jacob A. Frenkel, "Flexible Exchange Rates, Prices, and the Role of 'News':

Lessons from the 1970's", Journal of Political Economy, August 1981,
89, 665—705.

____________ and Joshua Aizeninan, "Aspects of the Optimal Management of
Exchange Rates", Journal of International Economy, November 1982.

_______________ and Michael L. Mussa, "The Efficiency of Foreign Exchange Markets
and Measures of Turbulence", American Economic Review, May 1980, 70, 374—81.

_______________ and Michael L. Mussa, "Monetary and Fiscal Policies in an Open—
Economy", American Economic Review, May 1981.
Dale Henderson,

'Modeling the Interdependence of National Money and Capital

Markets", American Economic Review, May 1977, 67, No. 2, 190—99.

Robert A. Mundell, International Economics, New York: Macmillan, 1968.
Michael L. Mussa, "The Exchange Rate, the Balance of Payments and Monetary and
Fiscal Policy Under a Regime of Controlled Financing", Scandanavian Journal
of Economics, May 1976, 78, No. 2, 229—48. Reprinted in Frenkel, Jacob A.
and Johnson, Harry G. (eds), The Economics of Exchange Rates: Selected
Studies, Reading, Mass: Addison—Wesley, 1978.
________________

Empirical

Regularities in the Behavior of Exchange Rates and

Theories of the Foreign Exchange Market", vol. 11 of the Carnegie—Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, a supplementary series to the Journal of
Monetary Economy 1979, 9—57.

13

REFERENCES (continued)

Michael L. Mussa, "The Role of Official Intervention" Group of Thirty, New York,
Occasional Papers, No. 6, 1981.

Maurice Obstfeld, "Exchange Rates, Inflation and the Sterilization Problem:
Germany, 1975—1981", European Economic Review, 1983, forthcoming.

Henry C. Wallich, "Exchange—Market Intervention: Issues and Views", The
Journal of Commerce, August 12—13, 1982.

