                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 DETECTING MEDICARE ABUSE

                                             David Becker
                                            Daniel Kessler
                                            Mark McClellan

                                         Working Paper 10677
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10677


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2004




We would like to thank the Center for Social Innovation at the Stanford Graduate School of Business, and
the National Institutes on Aging through the NBER, for financial support. David Cutler, Richard Kusserow,
Steve Levitt, and seminar participants at the GAO Medicare Management Conference, Hoover Institution,
Northwestern University, the University of Pennsylvania, and the NBER summer institute provided numerous
helpful comments. The views expressed in this paper do not necessarily represent those of the US
Government or any other of the authors’ institutions. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by David Becker, Daniel Kessler, and Mark McClellan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Detecting Medicare Abuse
David Becker, Daniel Kessler, and Mark McClellan
NBER Working Paper No. 10677
August 2004
JEL No. I1, K0, K4, L5

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper identifies which types of patients and hospitals have abusive Medicare billings that are

responsive to law enforcement. For a 20 percent random sample of elderly Medicare beneficiaries

hospitalized from 1994-98 with one or more of six illnesses that are prone to abuse, we obtain

longitudinal claims data linked with Social Security death records, hospital characteristics, and

state/year-level anti-fraud enforcement efforts. We show that increased enforcement leads certain

types of types of patients and hospitals to have lower billings, without adverse consequences for

patients' health outcomes.

David Becker
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
dbecker@econ.berkely.edu

Daniel Kessler
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
fkessler@stanford.edu

Mark McClellan
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
7500 Security Boulevard
Baltimore, MD 21244-1850
and NBER
1. INTRODUCTION

           Anecdotal evidence suggests that there is significant fraud and abuse in the Medicare and

Medicaid programs. Asymmetries of information about the health conditions of and the medical

treatment received by beneficiaries, combined with the programs’ interest in offering wide

access to patients and prompt compensation to providers, make health insurance claims

reimbursement a breeding ground for illicit activity. Sparrow (2000) catalogues an extensive list

of such behavior, including billing for services never provided; billing individually for services

that should have been provided as part of a bundle warranting a single, lower payment;

“upcoding” marginal patients to having had a related but more complex illness or treatment in

order to obtain higher reimbursement; and providing services that were not medically necessary.

Although there are no agreed-upon estimates of the magnitude of the problem,1 the US

Department of Health and Human Services (US HHS) has estimated “improper” Medicare fee-

for-service payments at approximately $12 to $23 billion, or approximately 7 to 14 percent of all

reimbursements.

           There is also anecdotal evidence that health care fraud and abuse are responsive to

enforcement efforts. For example, hospitals reported fewer cases of “complex” versus “simple”

pneumonia cases among Medicare beneficiaries in 1998 than they did in 1997 and 1996, where

complex cases receive a higher reimbursement (Birch 2000). This occurred contemporaneously

with the 1997 investigation by the New York Times and the US Government into

Columbia/HCA’s coding practices for this illness, and the release of Government guidelines for

hospital coding compliance programs.

           Yet, despite these facts, little research has used observational data to investigate how the

cost and quality of medical care responds to enforcement. Most existing work uses audit data to
1
    See, e.g., GAO (2000a) which makes this point.


                                                                                                          3
identify the aggregate amount of abuse, or the characteristics of hospitals or patients associated

with abuse. This omission is important for several reasons. First, the existing literature’s focus

on audit data, which are costly to obtain (both in financial and political terms),2 has severely

limited its scope; methods that can guide enforcement based on observational data only offer an

important practical advantage. Second, from a policy perspective, optimal targeting of

enforcement requires estimates of the effects on cost and quality of the interaction between

enforcement and patient or hospital characteristics, not estimates of the correlation between

characteristics and the level of abusive billings. Third, from the perspective of economic theory,

estimates of how enforcement affects the care for different types of patients, and the care

supplied at different types of organizations, are at least as important as estimates of the effect of

patient and provider characteristics on the level of fraud and abuse. For example, if managers of

nonprofit hospitals value their reputation for supplying “socially responsible” medical care more

than do managers of for-profit hospitals, then the response to enforcement of fraud and abuse at

nonprofits could be greater than the response at for-profits, regardless of the overall level of

fraud and abuse at nonprofits versus for-profits.

        This paper seeks to fill this gap. We match longitudinal data on the health expenditures,

days in the hospital, and outcomes of a 20 percent random sample of Medicare beneficiaries

from 1994-1998 with illnesses that are particularly prone to fraud and abuse; data on the

characteristics of all U.S. general acute care hospitals; and data on states’ Medicaid anti-fraud

enforcement expenditures. We estimate the effects of enforcement on levels of and differences

between types of patients and hospitals in treatment intensity and health outcomes. We conclude

that increased enforcement leads to declines in abusive treatment either if expenditures decline in


2
 See, for example, the discussion in GAO (1996) of the effect of political pressure from Congress and interest
groups on IRS’s decision to postpone its intensive random Taxpayer Compliance Measurement Program audits.


                                                                                                                 4
response to enforcement, with no accompanying increase in the rate of adverse health outcomes,

or if the rate of adverse outcomes declines in response to enforcement, with no accompanying

increase in expenditures.3

         We seek to distinguish the effects of enforcement on purely financial behavior from its

effects on medical treatment decisions, because the latter may have far greater social costs.

Financial misconduct involves only a transfer of resources from the government to private

parties (and therefore a deadweight loss equal to the cost of public funds), whereas enforcement-

induced changes in treatment involve the allocation of real resources. Furthermore,

enforcement-induced declines in the intensity of medical care that has minimal outcome benefits

save patients the substantial nonfinancial costs of invasive treatment, and enforcement-induced

improvements in the quality of care provide patients with longer lives and better health. To

distinguish between these two effects, we first estimate the effects of enforcement on health

outcomes such as mortality and readmission with complications. Then, we estimate the effect of

enforcement on the total days in the acute care hospital, to provide at least a coarse nonfinancial

measure of the real resources used to treat a given episode of illness.

         Our analysis has four important limitations that we discuss in detail below. First, because

we do not observe whether services were actually provided, we cannot distinguish between

activity meeting the legal definition of fraud (which may or may not include the actual delivery

of health care) and that meeting the legal definition of abuse (which generally involves the

delivery of unnecessary care). For convenience, we describe our work as testing for abusive


         3
           In models of the effects of enforcement on differences between types of patients and hospitals, we
conclude that increased enforcement leads to greater declines in abusive treatment for a given type of patient or
hospital either if expenditures for that type of patient or hospital decline by more in response to enforcement than do
the expenditures of the complementary type, with no accompanying differential increase in the rate of adverse health
outcomes, or if the rate of adverse outcomes for that type of patient or hospital declines by more in response to
enforcement than does the rate of the complementary type, with no accompanying differential increase in
expenditures.


                                                                                                                     5
behavior. Second, we assume that Medicaid enforcement affects the extent of Medicare abuse,

based on the administrative overlap between the agencies responsible for policing the Medicaid

and Medicare programs. Third, we classify treatment behavior as abusive if it has no significant

measured consequences for patient health. If we neglect to measure important health benefits of

a given form of treatment – for example, the rapidity and/or completeness of recovery

attributable to rehabilitation in a skilled nursing facility – then we may classify hospitals that

supply such treatment as abusive even though they are providing valuable services to their

patients.

        Fourth, we make two assumptions in order to ensure that our estimates of the

responsiveness of billings to enforcement are lower bounds for the true effects. First, we assume

that states with high levels of abuse invest at least as much in enforcement as do states with low

levels of abuse, and that states target enforcement towards those types of patients or hospitals

with more severe abuse problems. This enables us to sign any bias due to the endogeneity of

enforcement. Second, we assume that unobservably sicker patients are at least as likely to

choose high-billing types of hospitals in high enforcement states versus low enforcement states.

This enables us to sign any bias due to unobserved patient heterogeneity across hospitals.

        This paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides some background on corruption,

fraud, and abuse and a review of the empirical literature. Section 3 presents our models. This

section describes how we identify the effects of fraud control expenditures and hospital and

patient characteristics on upcoding, treatment intensity and health outcomes. Section 4 discusses

our data sources. Section 5 presents our results and section 6 concludes by discussing the

implications of our findings.




                                                                                                     6
2. CORRUPTION, FRAUD, AND ABUSE: BACKGROUND

        Commentators have long acknowledged theoretically that corruption can have substantial

effects on social welfare (e.g., Rose-Ackerman 1975, Shleifer and Vishny 1993). Existing

empirical work on the effects of corruption (reviewed in Duggan and Levitt 2000) spans a wide

range of topics, including studies of tax compliance and tax evasion,4 of the extent and

determinants of bid rigging in public contracting (e.g., Porter and Zona 1993), of the effects of

government influence-peddling on firms’ stock prices and macroeconomic outcomes (e.g.,

Fisman 2000, Mauro 1995), and of teacher cheating on standardized testing of secondary school

students (Jacob and Levitt 2001).

        But despite the importance of corruption in health care, due to the prevalence of third-

party payment systems and the sheer size of the sector, little empirical research has investigated

how enforcement affects the cost and quality of medical care. Most of the investigation into the

extent and determinants of health care fraud and abuse has been based on audit studies done by

the Office of the Inspector General of US HHS (HHS OIG). One arm of this work, discussed in

the introduction, estimates the magnitude of improper Medicare fee-for-service payments (HHS

OIG 2001). In these studies, medical review personnel from the Health Care Financing

Administration’s (HCFA)5 Medicare contractors compare all of the claims from a stratified

random cross-section of 600 beneficiaries to the beneficiaries’ medical records. The studies

conclude that improper payments – which include payments for noncovered services, services

billed without documentation, coding errors, and medically unnecessary services -- ranged from

$23.2 billion in 1996 to $11.9 billion in 2000, or 14 percent to 6.8 percent of Medicare fee-for-


4
  Dubin, Graetz, and Wilde (1990) and Engel, Galetovic, and Raddatz (2001) estimate the correlation between
enforcement efforts and tax revenues to identify the magnitude of tax evasion; Andreoni, Erard, and Feinstein 1998
provide a comprehensive review of this literature.
5
  Now called the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS).


                                                                                                                     7
service payments. As HHS and many analysts have observed, these estimates may be either an

overstatement or an understatement of the total amount of fraud and abuse. The total volume of

improper payments likely includes waste and errors that are neither fraudulent nor abusive; and,

because the estimates are obtained by comparing bills submitted to HCFA with retrospective

review of patient records, they exclude any fraudulent or abusive billings substantiated by

medical records, even if the medical records were themselves inaccurate or deceptive.6 Psaty et

al. (1999) extend the HHS OIG approach by comparing Medicare bills to information collected

from both medical records and patient interviews. Based on this information, they conclude that

37.5 percent of all heart failure cases reflect incorrect diagnoses, so that fraudulent and abusive

coding of heart failure alone cost Medicare as much as $933 million in 1993.

         A second set of audit studies seeks to identify the determinants of fraud and abuse, in

particular to identify observable characteristics of providers or claims associated with fraudulent

or abusive behavior. HHS OIG (1998c) compares audits of a sample of claims from 50 hospitals

considered to be likely abusers with audits of claims from a random sample of 20 hospitals. It

reports both the 10 diagnosis-related groups (DRGs) with the highest rates of upcoding –

classification of marginal patients as having had a related but more complex condition or

treatment than was actually the case to obtain greater reimbursement -- and the characteristics of

hospitals and patient populations associated with upcoding. Swedlow et al. (1992) apply a

similar methodology to calculate rates of inappropriate use of MRI among physicians who self-

refer for imaging versus physicians who independently refer.

         6
           However, the HHS OIG estimates likely understate the total amount of fraud and abuse. The
proportionately low levels of expenditures to investigate fraud and abuse are consistent with high equilibrium levels
of such behavior. Medicare “benefit integrity” funding, which finances fraud control units and the handling of
beneficiary complaints of fraud, was just $78 million in FY2000, or 0.03 percent of total program spending.
Similarly, spending on Medicaid fraud Control Units amounted to approximately 0.07 percent of total Medicaid
spending in FY2000. (Sparrow 2000, p. 73)



                                                                                                                    8
       A handful of studies seek to use observational data to identify types of hospitals or

physicians that behave abusively. Hillman et al. (1990) and GAO (1994) show that physicians

who have a financial interest in imaging facilities are more likely to order imaging services than

physicians who do not. HHS OIG (1998b, 1999abc) explain how to identify hospitals with

atypically high rates of billing for certain high-reimbursement DRGs that are thought to be prone

to upcoding. Silverman and Skinner (2001) extend this approach, investigating whether for-

profit hospitals and the area density of for-profit hospitals is correlated with upcoding of patients

with certain illnesses. They find that for-profit hospitals are more likely to engage in upcoding

behavior than most non-profit hospitals, but that the upcoding behavior of non-profits more

closely resembles the behavior of for-profits in markets in which for-profits account for a high

share of patient discharges.

       Previous empirical research shows the tradeoffs between existing uses of audit-based and

observational data. By construction, the audit studies provide consistent estimates of the

magnitude of and types of claims and providers associated with improper billing. But because of

the high cost of medical record reviews, the audit studies’ small samples limit the power with

which they can identify precisely the types of patients, illnesses, and providers prone to abuse.

Studies using observational data, on the other hand, use very large samples to identify precisely

differences in billing behavior by individual hospital or hospital type. But because observational

data contains information only on total billings (or some variant thereof, such as the patient’s

probability of being coded into a high-reimbursement DRG), reported correlations between

patient or provider characteristics and billings could be due to differences in fraud or abuse, or to

differences in valid billings across provider types. Distinguishing fraud or abuse from valid

differences in billings across providers requires the additional assumption that there are no




                                                                                                     9
differences across providers in their characteristics or the unobserved characteristics of their

patients that affect valid billings – an assumption that is likely to be incorrect (e.g., Kessler and

McClellan (2001)). And, existing studies on observational data do not investigate the

consequences of allegedly abusive treatment for patient health outcomes; without information on

outcomes, classification of a pattern of treatment as abusive is necessarily speculative. Finally,

these studies do not provide any evidence on a key policy question of interest – how different

types of doctors or hospitals would respond to increased enforcement.



3. EMPIRICAL MODELS

          We examine the impact of Medicaid fraud control expenditures that are determined at the

state level, individual patient characteristics, and the characteristics of hospital of initial

admission on upcoding, hospital expenditures, length of stay, and health outcomes using

longitudinal data on cohorts of elderly Medicare recipients who were hospitalized with one or

more of six types of illness between 1994 and 1998. We use variation in state-level Medicaid

enforcement to identify the responsiveness of Medicare abuse to enforcement because of

extensive administrative overlap between the agencies responsible for policing the Medicaid and

Medicare programs (see HHS OIG 2000). State Medicaid agencies are required to report all

suspected incidences of provider fraud to their state’s Medicaid Fraud Control Units (MFCUs)

through a unified sub-system (Surveillance and Utilization Review Sub-system) of their

Medicaid Management Information Systems.7 The MFCUs have developed uniform procedures

to coordinate their efforts with HHS OIG through the National Association of Medicaid Fraud

Control Units (Jost and Davies 2000, p. 369).



7
    MFCUs were created as part of the 1978 Medicare/Medicaid Anti-Fraud and Abuse Amendments.


                                                                                                        10
        More importantly, HHS OIG formally oversees the state MFCUs as well as Medicare

fraud enforcement efforts. HHS OIG’s authority to conduct coordinated investigations of fraud

and abuse across programs has been strengthened by laws passed both during and after our study

period. The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 established a National

Health Care Fraud and Abuse Control Program under the joint direction of the Attorney General

and the Secretary of HHS, acting through HHS OIG. And, The Ticket to Work and Work

Incentives Improvement Act of 1999 allows state MFCUs in certain circumstances to investigate

fraud in the Medicare program if the case is “primarily related to Medicaid.”

        In 3-digit zip code k during year t =1, …, T, the observational units in our analysis of the

effects of fraud control expenditures on upcoding, expenditures, length of stay, and outcomes

consist of individuals i = 1, …, Nkt who are initially admitted to hospital j with a new occurrence

of a given type of illness. Each patient has a vector of characteristics Xit: four age indicator

variables (70-74 years, 75-79 years, 80-89 years, and 90-99 years; omitted group is 65-69 years),

gender, and black/non-black race; a set of interaction effects between age, gender, and race; and

an indicator variable denoting whether the patient had been admitted to the hospital in the 365

days prior to the onset of the study illness, to capture the overall status of the patient’s health

upon admission to the hospital. Each patient also has a vector of indicator variables Zjt that

describes the characteristics of their hospital of initial admission (e.g., for-profit ownership and

size). In all model specifications we include year-fixed-effects that are allowed to vary by size

of metropolitan area. We also include patient-diagnosis-group fixed effects that we allow to vary

by patient-3-digit zip-code, to control for patients’ initial health conditions and heterogeneity

across geographic areas in treatment patterns. We group patients into 72 diagnosis groups based

on their ICD-9 code on admission (in practice, the vast majority of patients with a given type of




                                                                                                       11
illness will be classified into a small subset of these groups). Finally, depending on their state of

residence and year of admission, each patient is subject to a given level of enforcement, as

measured by ln(Medicaid fraud control unit expenditures per general medical, non-federal

hospital) or ln(Medicaid fraud control unit expenditures per Medicare beneficiary), Pkt.

       We measure four types of outcomes. The binary variable Cit is set equal to 1 if the

individual is coded into the highest-paid DRG of the set of DRGs into which a patient with a

particular illness could be coded, 0 otherwise. The individual incurs total Medicare bills of Yit,

(where Y is total expenditures in the year after and including the admission to the hospital for the

study illness) in connection with total days in the acute care hospital Lit (where L includes the all

days in the hospital in the year after and including the day of initial hospitalization). We identify

separately inpatient acute, inpatient nonacute (largely skilled nursing), outpatient, and home

health/hospice utilization. The patient has health outcome Oit, where O = 1 denotes an adverse

health outcome in the 365 days following the initial hospital admission, 0 otherwise.

       We estimate linear versions of the model suggested by our theory, which are of the form:

          Cit
       ln(Yit)
       ln(Lit) = αkDit + σtMk + Xitφ + Zjtγ + Pktβ + εikt                                    (1)
          Oit

And

          Cit
       ln(Yit)
       ln(Lit) = αkDit + σtMk + Xitφ + Zjtγ + Pktβ + Xit*Pktδ + Zjt*Pktθ + εikt              (2)
          Oit

where αk is a 3-digit zip-code fixed-effect; Dit is a 71-dimensional vector of indicator variables

denoting individual i’s diagnosis; σt is a time fixed effect; Mk is a six-dimensional vector of




                                                                                                     12
indicator variables denoting the size of individual i’s MSA (including one group for individuals

who do not live in an MSA); and εikt is an error term, where E(εikt|…) = 0.

       The coefficients of interest are β, δ, and θ which reflect the responsiveness and the

difference in responsiveness by patient and hospital type to enforcement of billings or health

outcomes. We define hospitals with characteristic Z1 as providing abusive treatment that is more

responsive to enforcement if θ1 < 0 in models of Y and/or C, and θ1 ≤ 0 in models of O – that is,

billings of hospitals of type Z1 = 1 compared to hospitals of type Z1 = 0 are significantly more

negatively responsive to state Medicaid fraud control expenditures, and the enforcement-induced

reduction in treatment associated with that decrease in billings (if any) has no significant adverse

consequences for patient health outcomes. Similar tests can be constructed to investigate

whether certain types of patients receive abusive treatment that is more responsive to

enforcement, and whether the quality of care improves by more at certain types of hospitals, with

no accompanying increase in expenditures.

       We make two assumptions in order to ensure that our estimates of the responsiveness of

billings to enforcement are lower bounds (in absolute value) for the true effects. First, we

assume that states with high levels of abuse invest at least as much in enforcement as do states

with low levels of abuse, and that states target enforcement towards those types of patients or

hospitals with more severe abuse problems. Suppose state s at time t had a high level of abuse,

either among all hospitals or among a particular type of hospital (e.g., hospitals of type Z1 = 1

submit more abusive bills than do hospitals of type Z1 = 0). If this led state s to invest more in

enforcement in aggregate – the most likely type of simultaneity bias – then estimates of $ from

equation (1) would be biased upward, i.e. downward in absolute value. Similarly, if hospitals’




                                                                                                     13
behavior led state s to target hospitals of type Z1 = 1 because they were abusive, then estimates

of θ1 would be biased upward, i.e. downward in absolute value, for the same reason.

       Second, we assume that unobservably sicker patients are at least as likely to choose high-

billing types of hospitals in high enforcement states versus low enforcement states. If high

levels of enforcement mitigate both adverse cost and adverse quality consequences of abuse, then

unobservably sicker patients would be more willing to choose high-billing hospitals in high

enforcement states, and estimates of θ1 would be biased upward, i.e. downward in absolute

value. But if high levels of enforcement lead to reductions in intensive treatment that patients

value, and sicker patients value enforcement-induced reductions in intensive treatment more than

do healthy patients, then unobservably sicker patients would be less willing to choose high-

billing hospitals in high-enforcement states, and estimates of θ1 would be biased downward, i.e.

upward in absolute value.



4. DATA

       We examine the response of abusive behavior to enforcement in patients with a new

occurrence of one or more of six illnesses identified by HCFA contractors (HHS OIG 1998c) as

being particularly vulnerable to fraud and abuse: respiratory infections and pneumonia (DRG

79, 80, 89, 90); chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and generalized respiratory

disorders (DRG 87, 88, 96, 97, 99, 100, 101, 102); circulatory system disorders (DRG 132, 133,

138, 139, 140, 141, 142, 144, 145); kidney disorders/renal failure (DRG 326, 331, 332); diabetes

and nutritional/metabolic disorders (DRG 182, 294, 296, 297); and cerebrovascular

disorders/stroke (DRG 12, 14, 15, 16, 17). We define a patient as having had a new occurrence

of illness in a given year if that patient was admitted with one of the group of DRGs associated



                                                                                                    14
with that illness without having been admitted under any of DRGs in the group in the previous

12 months. Additionally, we excluded patients who were in HMOs (because claims data are not

available for Medicare HMO patients from our study period), patients suffering from end-stage

renal disease, and nonelderly patients.

         We use data for the years 1994-1998 from three principal sources. First, we use the 20

percent Medicare Provider Analysis and Review (MEDPAR) file to construct total Medicare

payments (including patients’ deductibles and copayments) in the year after initial admission for

a new occurrence of illness. We calculate acute hospital length of stay and acute inpatient,

nonacute (primarly skilled nursing) inpatient, outpatient, and home health/hospice expenditures.8

Expenditures include all reimbursements (including copayments and deductibles not paid by

Medicare) from insurance claims for all hospitalizations in the year following each patient’s

initial admission.9 We also tabulate whether each patient received acute hospital care in the 365

days prior to admission for his study illness, as a measure of the patient’s health status on entry

to the study cohort. We measure the occurrence of complications with a variable indicating

whether the patient was readmitted within one year with a DRG in the same illness group.10

Data on patient demographic characteristics were obtained from the Health Care Financing

Administration’s HISKEW enrollment files, with death dates based on death reports validated by




8
  For patients with no nonacute care, outpatient, or home health/hospice expenditures in the year after admission, we
set the logarithm of the respective variable to 0. Future work could estimate the models of ln(expenditures) with
Tobit or could estimate separately the determinants of zero/nonzero expenditures and ln(expenditures) conditional
on expenditures > 0.
9
  Because Medicare’s diagnosis-related group (DRG) payment system for hospitals appears to compensate hospitals
on a fixed-price basis per admission for treatment, and Medicare does not bargain with individual hospitals,
enforcement might appear to be irrelevant to Medicare patients’ hospital expenditures. However, the intensity of
treatment of most health problems varies enormously, and the DRG system contains important elements of cost
sharing (e.g., McClellan 1997). Thus, for most health problems, hospitals and physicians that provide more
intensive treatment can receive considerable additional payments.
10
   We exclude readmissions within 30 days, which may represent a continuation of the initial course of treatment.


                                                                                                                  15
the Social Security Administration. We used these death dates to create a one-year mortality

indicator variable.

         Our second principal data source is the comprehensive information on U.S. hospital

characteristics provided by the annual American Hospital Association (AHA) Survey. We

restrict our sample to nonfederal hospitals that ever reported providing general medical or

surgical services. From the survey we obtain information on hospital ownership type, size,

teaching status, system membership, and other characteristics that might affect the incentives of

the hospital and its managers. We classify hospitals into three ownership categories (nonprofit,

for-profit, and public (the omitted group)) and two size categories (small (<100 beds) and large

(the omitted group)). We classify hospitals as teaching hospitals if they report at least twenty

full-time residents. We also represent whether the hospital is a member of a multihospital system

with an indicator reflecting system membership (see Madison (2001) for details on the

construction of our system variable). Finally, we measure whether the hospital participates in a

physician-hospital organization (PHO),11 and whether the hospital provides skilled nursing

care,12 home health and hospice services,13 or any outpatient services. Integration by hospitals

into related markets such as skilled nursing care may create opportunities both for enhanced cost-

effectiveness (e.g., Robinson 1996) and for abuse of the Medicare reimbursement system (e.g.,

Banks et al. 2001), so the effect of the interaction between ownership structure and enforcement

is theoretically indeterminate. Data on hospital characteristics are matched to individual patients

based on the hospital to which the patient was initially admitted.

11
   A physician-hospital organization is a joint venture between the hospital and members of the medical staff that
may act as a unified agent in managed care contracting, own a managed care plan, own and operate ambulatory care
centers or ancillary services projects, or provide administrative services to physician members.
12
   Skilled nursing care is defined as nonacute services provided under the supervision of a licensed registered nurse
on a 24-hour basis.
13
   Home health services include any health-related services provided at the patient’s residence; hospice is defined as
any program providing palliative care for terminally ill patients in either an inpatient setting or at the patient’s
residence.


                                                                                                                    16
       Finally, we match our patient level data with state MFCU expenditures, as reported in

HHS OIG (1995, 1997, 1998a, 2000). These expenditures serve as a proxy for overall anti-fraud

enforcement efforts at the state level. The MFCU program matches state funding of the units

with federal funding at a ratio of 3-to-1. As of 1997, 47 states participated in the program.

There was substantial variation in spending per beneficiary from state to state, and most states

invested well below the cap on matching funds (0.25 percent of program costs). We construct

the measures of enforcement used in analysis by dividing total fraud control expenditures paid by

the Federal government by the number of general medical, nonfederal hospitals and by the

number of Medicare beneficiaries in the state. Appendix table 1 reports each state’s average

MFCU expenditures per hospital and per beneficiary for the 1994-98 period in 1995 constant

dollars. For purposes of calculating the logarithm of enforcement expenditures in the regression

models below, we recode states with no expenditures as having $1 in enforcement on a per

hospital basis and $0.10 in enforcement on a per patient basis.

       Table 1 provides descriptive statistics for patients in each of the six illness groups for the

study years 1994-1998. The table underscores the seriousness of illness suffered by our study

patients. Study patients had Medicare hospital expenditures in the year after the onset of illness

of $13,807 (circulatory disorders) to $17,301 (cerebrovascular disorders and stroke) (1995

constant dollars). One-year mortality rates ranged from 15.8 percent (circulatory disorders) to

37.9 percent (pneumonia and respiratory infections). Slightly less than half of patients had an

acute care hospital admission in the year prior to their study illness. The table also shows the

tremendous variation in intensity of treatment received by a patient with a given illness. Even

patients with relatively well-defined illnesses such as cerebrovascular disorders and stroke

experienced tremendous variation in their hospital utilization. The distribution of patients across




                                                                                                   17
hospital types, such as for-profit versus nonprofit hospitals, roughly resembles the distribution of

hospital beds in the US (e.g., Hansmann, Kessler, and McClellan 2002).



5. RESULTS

       Table 2 presents estimates and standard errors of β from equation (1), the effects on

billings, length of stay, and outcomes of state anti-fraud enforcement efforts, holding constant

the characteristics of individuals and their hospitals of initial admission. The standard errors in

Table 2 and all subsequent tables are based on an estimator of the variance-covariance matrix

that is consistent in the presence of heteroscedasticity and of any correlation or grouping of

regression errors within states over time. According to the table, enforcement generally has an

economically and statistically insignificant estimated total effect on hospital utilization and

health outcomes. For example, a one percent increase in Medicare fraud control unit

expenditures per hospital leads to an statistically insignificant .04 percent increase in acute care

hospital expenditures (coefficients in Table 2 and all subsequent tables are multiplied by 100 for

ease of interpretation). However, if state/years with high levels of abuse invest more in

enforcement, then estimates of β will be biased upward, i.e. toward zero. Because this is the

likely direction of any bias from endogeneity, our results provide neither a useful estimate of the

marginal payoff of an enforcement dollar nor a powerful rejection of a null effect.

       Tables 3 and 4 present estimates and standard errors of β, δ, and θ from equation (2), the

effects on billings, length of stay, and outcomes of state anti-fraud enforcement efforts by type of

patient and hospital, holding all else constant. Table 3 presents estimates of the effect of fraud

control unit expenditures per hospital; table 4 presents estimates of the effect of fraud control

unit expenditures per beneficiary. The top panels of the tables highlight the differential



                                                                                                       18
responsiveness to enforcement of the Medicare utilization of certain types of patients. Increased

enforcement has greater negative effects on the acute and especially the nonacute expenditures of

young (age < 80) male patients. In models that measure enforcement on a per hospital basis

(table 3), a 1 percent increase in enforcement leads to an approximately .92 percent

(=.465+.285+.165) decrease in the acute inpatient expenditures of a young male patient without a

prior year’s hospital admission, relative to the expenditures of an older, more infirm female

patient. A 1 percent increase in enforcement leads to a significantly greater (5.55 percent =

.833+3.002+1.712) relative decline in nonacute inpatient expenditures for the same population.

Increased enforcement also has greater negative effects on the home health/hospice expenditures

of black versus non-black patients.

       There is little systematic evidence of relative increases in rates of adverse health

outcomes from these enforcement-induced reductions in care. Although the greater

enforcement-induced decline in acute expenditures for healthier patients is accompanied by a

greater increase in relative mortality rates in one specification (table 4), younger male patients

show a statistically significantly greater decline in readmission rates in response to enforcement

in both specifications (tables 3 and 4).

       Taken together, these findings are consistent with the hypothesis that greater

enforcement-induced reductions in expenditures occur in patient populations for whom

additional treatment would be of more marginal benefit. Younger male elderly patients are more

likely to have a living spouse (US Department of Commerce 1999), and healthier patients are

easier to rehabilitate at home. Thus, healthier young male patients may be more able to

substitute informal for formal inpatient care.




                                                                                                     19
        The bottom panels of the tables highlight the differential responsiveness to enforcement

of different types of hospitals. In both specifications, increased enforcement leads to statistically

significantly greater declines in acute expenditures for patients who are initially admitted to a

for-profit hospital, compared to patients initially admitted to a public hospital. Increased

enforcement also leads to statistically significantly greater declines in acute expenditures for

patients who are initially admitted to a nonprofit hospital, compared to patients initially admitted

to a public hospital. The for-profit/public gap in the responsiveness of acute expenditures is

statistically significantly greater than the nonprofit/public gap, i.e., increased enforcement leads

to statistically significantly greater declines in acute expenditures for patients initially admitted

to for-profit versus nonprofit hospitals (T-statistics on the for-profit/nonprofit difference in

responsiveness, not reported in the tables, are 2.01 and 2.96 for tables 3 and 4 respectively). For

patients initially admitted to a for-profit hospital, this takes the form of upcoding, i.e., initially

admitting patients into the highest-reimbursement DRG in their illness group. Increases in

enforcement lead patients initially admitted to a for-profit versus a public hospital to be

statistically significantly less likely to be coded in the highest-reimbursement DRG.

        Increased enforcement leads to statistically significantly greater declines in nonacute

expenditures for patients initially admitted to both for-profit (in one specification) and nonprofit

(in both specifications) hospitals, compared to patients initially admitted to public hospitals. The

for-profit/public gap in nonacute care responsiveness is not statistically distinguishable from the

nonprofit/public gap at conventional levels of significance (T-statistics on the for-profit/nonprofit

difference in responsiveness, not reported in the tables, are .28 and .75 for tables 3 and 4

respectively).




                                                                                                         20
       Enforcement affects the financial behavior of for-profit and nonprofit hospitals more than

it affects our (coarse) nonfinancial measure of treatment intensity. In neither for-profits nor

nonprofits are enforcement-induced differential decreases in acute expenditures accompanied by

enforcement-induced decreases in length-of-stay; in one specification, increases in enforcement

lead to increases in the length-of-stay for patients initially admitted to a for-profit versus a public

hospital. There is also no evidence of harm to patient health of these enforcement-induced

reductions in expenditures. In one specification (table 4), increases in enforcement lead to

decreases in relative readmission rates for patients initially admitted to both for-profit and

nonprofit hospitals.

       Other hospital ownership characteristics are also associated with significant, systematic

differences in responsiveness to enforcement. First, the care of patients initially admitted to a

hospital that participates in a PHO is more responsive to enforcement than the care of patients

initially admitted to a hospital that does not. Increases in enforcement lead to greater decreases

in acute expenditures, acute length-of-stay, nonacute expenditures, and (in one specification)

outpatient expenditures for patients initially admitted to a PHO hospital. In one specification,

increases in enforcement lead to greater decreases in upcoding in PHO hospitals; in the other

specification, increases in enforcement lead to greater decreases in readmission rates in PHO

hospitals. These empirical findings are consistent with the concern that PHOs may provide a

vehicle for hospitals to disguise illegal compensation to physicians for referrals (see, e.g.,

Blumstein 1996a and the work cited there).

       Second, in one specification, increases in enforcement lead to statistically significantly

greater decreases in nonacute expenditures for patients who are initially admitted to a hospital

that owns a skilled nursing facility (SNF), compared to patients initially admitted to a hospital




                                                                                                     21
that does not. This is consistent with the fact that the vast majority of nonacute expenditures are

for SNF admissions, and with widespread concern over wasteful use of SNF and other post-acute

care in the 1990s (MEDPAC 2001).14

        Third, increases in enforcement lead to significantly greater increases in outpatient

expenditures and significantly greater decreases in home health expenditures (in one

specification) for patients initially admitted to hospitals that have integrated into markets for

related services, compared to stand-alone hospitals. In particular, increases in enforcement lead

to greater increases in outpatient expenditures for patients initially admitted to a hospital that

owns an outpatient or (in one specification) a home health/hospice facility, and to greater

decreases in home health expenditures (in one specification) for patients initially admitted to a

hospital that owns an outpatient or skilled nursing facility. At least for outpatient and home

health/hospice, different forms of integration have similar effects on hospitals’ responsiveness to

enforcement. In addition, these results are consistent with the hypothesis that enforcement alters

the setting in which patients receive care, such as rehabilitation, that can be provided on an in-

hospital or at-home basis.

        Finally, hospital size, teaching, and system status affect responsiveness to enforcement.

Small, non-teaching hospitals’ patients’ nonacute care expenditures decline by more in response

to enforcement, but large hospitals’ patients’ acute care and home health/hospice expenditures

decline by more in response to enforcement. System and independent hospitals’ patients’

expenditures are similarly responsive to enforcement, but system hospitals’ patients’ length of

stay declines by more in response to enforcement, consistent with the hypothesis that subjecting

one member of a hospital system to scrutiny affects the behavior of other members of the system.

14
  Indeed, in response to these concerns, Congress completely changed the reimbursement system for post-acute care
as part of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997, adopting a (more high-powered) prospective payment system for SNF
and other post-acute care.


                                                                                                              22
        The elasticities reported in tables 3 and 4 imply very large differences in responsiveness

to enforcement by patient and hospital type. For example, based on the estimates in table 3, a 1

percent or $173 increase in Medicaid enforcement expenditures per hospital (based on a sample

average of $17,313) translates into a .267 percent or $31 decrease in the relative acute care

expenditures for each patient initially admitted to a hospital that participates in a PHO (based on

a sample average of $11,580). The differential effects of enforcement on patients by age,

gender, and illness, and for patients initially admitted to for-profit or nonprofit versus public

hospitals, are even larger.

        There is some limited evidence of adverse outcome consequences of enforcement-

induced reductions in treatment. We estimated models analogous to (2) separately for patients

with each of the six study illnesses. Results not presented in the tables show, for example, that

for patients with circulatory disorders, enforcement-induced declines in the relative intensity of

acute care provided after initial admission to a hospital that participates in a PHO are

accompanied by statistically significant increases in the relative mortality rate. However, for

other illnesses, enforcement-induced reductions in treatment are accompanied by improvements

in outcomes. For patients with COPD and generalized respiratory disorders, enforcement-

induced declines in the relative intensity of acute care provided after initial admission to a

hospital that participates in a PHO are accompanied by statistically significant decreases in the

relative mortality rate.



6. CONCLUSION

        Anecdotal evidence suggests that fraud and abuse in health care reimbursement systems

are both widespread and responsive to law enforcement efforts. Understanding how the care




                                                                                                     23
provided to different types of patients, and the care supplied by different types of hospitals,

responds to enforcement is important both to develop efficient fraud control policies and to test

between competing economic theories of organizations. Despite this, little research has used

observational data for this purpose.

       This paper seeks to fill this gap by identifying the types of patients (hospitals) who

receive (supply) abusive medical treatment that is most responsive to enforcement. For a 20

percent random sample of elderly Medicare beneficiaries hospitalized between 1994 and 1998

with one or more of six illnesses -- respiratory infections and pneumonia, COPD and generalized

respiratory disorders, circulatory system disorders, kidney disorders and renal failure, diabetes

and nutritional/metabolic disorders, and cerebrovascular disorders and stroke – we obtain

longitudinal claims data linked with Social Security death records, hospital characteristics, and

state/year-level anti-fraud enforcement efforts. We conclude that increased enforcement leads to

greater declines in the abusive treatment of a given type of patient or hospital either if the

expenditures of that type of patient or hospital decline by more in response to enforcement than

do the expenditures of the complementary type, with no accompanying differential increase in

the rate of adverse health outcomes, or if the rate of adverse outcomes of that type of patient or

hospital declines by more in response to enforcement than does the rate of the complementary

type, with no accompanying differential increase in expenditures.

       We find significant differences in the effects of enforcement across types of patients and

hospitals. Healthy young male patients’ acute care expenditures decline by more in response to

states’ anti-fraud enforcement efforts, as compared to the expenditures of their more infirm,

older, female counterparts. Patients initially admitted to certain types of hospitals also

systematically receive enforcement-sensitive treatment: the expenditures of patients initially




                                                                                                     24
admitted to both for-profit and nonprofit hospitals are more responsive to enforcement than those

of patients admitted to public hospitals; the expenditures of patients initially admitted to

hospitals that participate in a PHO are more responsive to enforcement than those of patients

admitted to hospitals that do not; and the nonacute expenditures of patients initially admitted to

hospitals that own a SNF are more responsive to enforcement than those of patients admitted to

hospitals that do not. In the case of for-profit and nonprofit hospitals, enforcement affects

financial measures of treatment intensity more than it affects nonfinancial measures; but in the

case of PHO hospitals, enforcement has significant effects on both financial and nonfinancial

measures. None of the effects of enforcement on treatment are accompanied by systematic or

substantial effects on patient health outcomes.

       These results are unlikely to be due to endogeneity of enforcement or unobserved patient

heterogeneity across states or hospitals. As long as hospital types more prone to abuse receive

more attention from law enforcement, the endogeneity of enforcement would tend to bias the

magnitudes of the estimated differential responsiveness to enforcement toward zero. Along

these lines, there is no obvious process that would bias the results by patient type, i.e., that would

lead to unobserved changes in the composition of male versus female patients in high-

enforcement versus low-enforcement states. Unobserved patient heterogeneity is also unlikely to

explain our estimated enforcement/hospital-characteristic interaction effects. Estimated

enforcement/patient-characteristic interaction effects suggest that increased enforcement leads to

greater declines in treatment intensity for observably healthier patients. If anything, this would

suggest that the unobservably healthy -- rather than the unobservably sick -- would be less

willing to choose high-billing hospitals in high-enforcement states. But patient selection of this

form would tend to bias estimates of the effect of interest toward zero as well.




                                                                                                     25
       Our results by hospital type support the theoretical concerns expressed by many

commentators. Although the acute expenditures of patients initially admitted to a for-profit

hospital decline by more in response to enforcement than the acute treatment of patients initially

admitted to a nonprofit hospital, the nonacute expenditures of for-profits’ patients do not.

However, both the acute and nonacute expenditures of the patients from for-profits and

nonprofits are significantly more responsive to enforcement than are the expenditures of patients

from public hospitals. Taken with other work by two of us and by others on the effects of

hospital organizational form on medical productivity (Kessler and McClellan 2002; Hansmann,

Kessler, and McClellan 2002), this supports a mixed view of for-profits (and to a lesser extent

nonprofits), as being more responsive to incentives in both socially constructive and socially

harmful ways. Expenditures that decline in response to enforcement are only one among many

margins of behavior on which hospitals might operate.

       The observed negative interaction effect on expenditures of enforcement and hospital

participation in a PHO is consistent with the enhanced moral hazard inherent in such

arrangements. Indeed, the objective of the vast body of law and regulation prohibiting kickbacks

and self-referrals in the Medicare and Medicaid programs is to control such behavior (Jost and

Davies 2001, chapters 3 and 4). Our results confirm empirically several commentators’

hypothesis that widespread tolerance of questionable but technically legal behavior has led to

cynical disregard for the spirit of these laws in practice (e.g., Blumstein 1996b). Because many

forms of organization that are both efficient and common practice would be prohibited by a strict

reading of the original fraud and abuse statutes, courts, administrative agencies, and Congress

have adopted numerous exceptions and safe harbors to the statutes, thereby providing potential

opportunities for evasion. For example, rental of hospital space and equipment to physician-




                                                                                                  26
owned radiology groups in exchange for a percentage of gross receipts is a commonly accepted

practice, even though this amounts to exactly what the law supposedly prohibits – payment for

referrals (Hall 1988).

       The negative differential effect of enforcement on the level of nonacute expenditures for

patients initially admitted to a hospital that owns a SNF also may be due to moral hazard on the

part of hospitals. However, this finding should be interpreted with caution because of the limited

scope of the measures of health outcomes that we observe. The consequences of intensive

skilled nursing care – most notably, faster and more complete rehabilitation – may not be

captured fully by our very coarse measures of outcomes, which would lead us to classify such

expenditures as abusive even if they were socially constructive.

       More generally, the incompleteness of our measures of health outcomes substantially

limits the welfare implications of our results; further study using more clinically detailed, audit-

based data could at least begin to address these limitations. Audit data could also be used to

validate our findings by investigating whether the characteristics of hospitals and patients

identified here are actually more prone to abuse. If these findings are valid, then they could be

used to target intensive audits on well-defined types of hospitals and patients, which might

improve both the efficiency and the equity of both public and private-sector efforts to detect

illicit behavior by health care providers. Additional analysis of observational data could explore

in greater detail the mechanisms through which the potentially abusive behavior identified here

might occur.




                                                                                                    27
REFERENCES

Andreoni, James, Brian Erard, and Jonathan Feinstein, “Tax Compliance,” Journal of Economic
   Literature XXXVI (June 1998), 818-860.

Banks, Dwayne, Elliott Parker, and Jeanne Wendel, “Strategic Interaction Among Hospitals and
Nursing Facilities: The Efficiency Effects of Payment Systems and Vertical Integration,” Health
Economics 10 (2001), 119-134.
Birch, Kristi, “Hospitals Report Fewer Cases of Complex Pneumonia,”
   http://www.hcia.com/findings/000420_complexpneumonia.htm, April 24, 2000 (visited on
   9/16/02).

Blumstein, James F., “The Fraud and Abuse Statute in an Evolving Health Care Marketplace:
   Life in the Health Care Speakeasy,” American Journal of Law and Medicine 22:2 (1996a),
   205-232.

_____, “Rationalizing the Fraud and Abuse Statute,” Health Affairs 15:4 (1996b), 118-128.

Compliance Monitor, “OIG Finds Possible Stroke Upcoding,” Vol. 2, No. 31, (August 4, 1999),
  HC Pro: Marblehead, MA.

Dubin, Jeffrey A., Michael J. Graetz, and Louis L. Wilde, “The Effect of Audit Rates on the
   Federal Individual Income Tax, 1977-1986” National Tax Journal 43:4 (1990), 395-409.

Duggan, Mark and Steven D. Levitt, “Winning Isn’t Everything: Corruption in Sumo
   Wrestling,” NBER Working Paper 7798, July 2000.

Engel, Eduardo, Alexander Galetovic, and Claudio E. Raddatz, “A Note on Enforcement
   Spending and VAT Revenues,” Review of Economics and Statistics (2001), 384-7.

Fisman, Ray, “Estimating the Value of Political Connections,” American Economic Review,
   forthcoming.

Gottlieb, Martin, Kurt Eichenwald, and Josh Barbanel, “Health Care’s Giant: Powerhouse Under
   Scrutiny – A Special Report,” New York Times (March 28, 1997), A1.

Hansmann, Henry, Daniel Kessler, and Mark McClellan, “Ownership Form and Trapped Capital
   in the Hospital Industry,” in Edward Glaeser, ed., The Governance of Not-for-Profit Firms,
   University of Chicago Press, forthcoming.

Hall, Mark, “Making Sense of Referral Fee Statutes,” Journal of Health, Politics, Policy and
   Law 13:4 (1988), 623-34.

Hillman, B.J., C.A. Joseph, M.R. Mabry, J.H. Sunshine, S.D. Kennedy, M. Noether, “Frequency
    and Costs of Diagnostic Imaging in Office Practice – a Comparison of Self-Referring and



                                                                                               28
   Radiologist-Referring Physicians,” New England Journal of Medicine 323:23 (1990), 1604-
   8.

Jacob, Brian A. and Steven D. Levitt, “Rotten Apples: An Investigation of the Predictors of
   Teacher Cheating,” draft, 2001.

Jost, Timothy S. and Sharon Davies, Medicare and Medicaid Fraud and Abuse, 2001-02 Edition
    (Columbus, OH: West Group, 2000).

Kessler, Daniel P. and Mark B. McClellan, “The Effects of Hospital Ownership on Medical
Productivity,” RAND Journal of Economics Vol. 33 (2002) 488-506.

Madison, Kristin M., “The Relationship Between Multihospital System Membership and
  Treatments, Costs, and Outcomes of Medicare Patients with Acute Myocardial Infarction,”
  PhD. Thesis, Stanford University, 2001.

Mashaw, Jerry L. and Theodore R. Marmor, “Conceptualizing, Estimating and Reforming Fraud,
  Waste, and Abuse in Healthcare Spending,” Yale Journal on Regulation, Vol. 11 (1994),
  455-494.

Mauro, Paolo, “Corruption and Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CX (1995) 681-712.

McClellan, Mark B., “Hospital Reimbursement Incentives: An Empirical Approach,” Journal of
  Economics and Management Strategy VI (1997), 91-128.

MEDPAC, “Report to the Congress: Medicare Payment Policy – Chapter 6,” (2001).

Porter, Robert H. and J. Douglas Zona, “Detection of Bid Rigging in Procurement Auctions,”
   Journal of Political Economy CI (1993), 518-538.

Psaty, Bruce M. et al, “The Potential Costs of Upcoding for Heart Failure in the United States,”
   The American Journal of Cardiology, Vol. 84 (1999), 108-109.

Robinson, James C., “Administered Pricing and Vertical Integration in the Hospital Industry,”
Journal of Law and Economics Vol. 39 (1996), 357-376.

Rose-Ackerman, Susan, “The Economics of Corruption,” Journal of Public Economics 4 (1975),
   187-203.

Shleifer, Andrei and Robert W. Vishny, “Corruption,” Quarterly Journal of Economics CVIII
   (1993), 599-617.

Silverman, Elaine and Jonathan Skinner, “Are For-Profit Hospitals Really Different? Medicare
    Upcoding and Market Structure,” NBER Working Paper 8133, February 2001.




                                                                                                29
Sparrow, Malcolm K., License to Steal: How Fraud Bleeds America’s Health Care System
   (Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 2000).

Swedlow, A., G. Johnson, N. Smithline, and A. Milstein, “Increased Costs and Rates of Use in
  the California Workers’ Compensation System as a Result of Self-Referral By Physicians,”
  New England Journal of Medicine 327:21 (November 19, 1992), 1502-6.

US Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, “Unpublished Tables – Marital Status and
   Living Arrangements: March 1998,” (1999) www.census.gov/prod/99pubs/p20-514u.pdf,
   accessed May 20, 2004.

US Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Inspector General, “Annual Report:
   State Medicaid Fraud Control Units,” (August 1995, March 1997, March 1998a, June 2000).

_____, “Improper Fiscal Year 2000 Medicare Fee-For-Service Payments,” (February 2001), A-
   17-99-019999.

_____, “Medicare Payments for DRG 014: Specific Cerebrovascular Disorders Except Transient
   Ischemic Attack,” (July 1999a), OEI-03-99-00240.

_____, “Medicare Payments for DRG 296: Nutritional and Miscellaneous Metabolic Disorders,”
   (April 1999b), OEI-03-98-00490.

_____, “Medicare Payments for DRG 475: Respiratory System Diagnosis With Ventilator
   Support,” (December 1998b), OEI-03-98-00560.

_____, “Medicare Payments for Septicemia,” (March 1999c), OEI-03-98-00370.

_____, “Using Software to Detect Upcoding of Hospital Bills,” (August 1998c), OEI-01-97-
   00010.

US General Accounting Office, “Efforts to Measure Medicare Fraud,” (February 2000a),
   GAO/AIMD-00-69R.

_____, “Medicare Improper Payments: While Enhancements Hold Promise for Measuring
   Potential fraud and Abuse, Challenges Remain” (September 2000b), GAO/AIMD/OSI-00-
   281.

_____, “Medicare: Referrals to Physician-Owned Imaging Facilities Warrant HCFA’s Scrutiny,”
   (October 1994), GAO/HEHS-95-2.

_____, “Tax Administration: Alternative Strategies to Obtain Compliance Data,” (April 1996),
   GAO/GGD-96-89.




                                                                                               30
                       Table 1: Descriptive Statistics for Patients with Illnesses Prone to Abusive Medicare Billing
                                                                                                                         Diabetes/
                                                            Pneumonia/       COPD/general      Circulatory    Kidney     Metabolic    Cerebrovasc
                                                           resp infections   resp infections    disorders    disorders    disord     disorder/stroke
Characteristics of Patients
1-Year Acute Inpatient Expenditures (1995 $)                  $11,982           $11,801         $11,461      $12,831     $10,711        $11,751
  (standard deviation)                                        (13,031)          (13,883)        (14,260)     (14,720)    (12,977)       (12,735)
1-Year Nonacute Inpatient Expenditures (1995 $)                $2,731            $1,967          $1,520       $2,929      $2,750         $4,703
  (standard deviation)                                         (7,186)           (6,275)         (5,429)      (7,811)     (7,182)        (9,701)
1-Year Outpatient Expenditures (1995 $)                         $794              $745            $826        $1,129       $879           $847
  (standard deviation)                                         (1,846)           (1,606)         (1,770)      (2,489)     (1,946)        (1,999)
1-Year Home Health and Hospice Expenditures (1995 $)           $1,573            $1,731          $1,445       $2,590      $2,023         $2,110
  (standard deviation)                                         (4,680)           (4,508)         (4,147)      (6,424)     (5,396)        (5,274)
1-Year Acute Length of stay                                     14.45             13.71           11.21        15.19       13.50          14.58
  (standard deviation)                                         (15.24)           (15.36)         (14.27)      (17.41)     (15.87)        (16.83)
Coded with Highest Reimbursement DRG                            0.271             0.112           0.071        0.696       0.401          0.648
1-Year mortality rate                                           0.379             0.253           0.158        0.317       0.286          0.291
1-Year readmission rate                                         0.137             0.187           0.126        0.077       0.100          0.130
No hospital admission in year prior to illness                  0.534             0.581           0.597        0.394       0.491          0.667
Age < 80                                                        0.480             0.651           0.604        0.571       0.543          0.526
Male                                                            0.446             0.402           0.406        0.595       0.323          0.401
Black                                                           0.074             0.069           0.074        0.119       0.109          0.097

Characteristics of Hospital of Admission
For –profit                                                    0.107             0.105           0.092         0.102       0.102         0.099
Non-profit                                                     0.721             0.730           0.759         0.744       0.733         0.755
Hospital participates in physician/hospital organization       0.611             0.608           0.625         0.625       0.613         0.626
Hospital owns skilled nursing facility                         0.453             0.441           0.428        0.434        0.438         0.447
Hospital owns outpatient facility                              0.851             0.857           0.869         0.874       0.859         0.877
Hospital owns home health/hospice                              0.650             0.644           0.640         0.634       0.641         0.648
Small size (< 100 beds)                                        0.388             0.360           0.332         0.306       0.349         0.304
Teaching hospital                                              0.166             0.163           0.195         0.223       0.185         0.200
System hospital                                                0.567             0.567           0.562         0.583       0.569         0.586
N                                                             383,983           241,245         387,028       25,403      310,019       330,473
           Table 2: Effect of Enforcement on Medicare Hospital Expenditures, Upcoding, and Patient Health Outcomes

                                                  ln(non-                   Ln(home                            Initially     Readmit
                                     ln(acute       acute     Ln(outpat      health/     Ln(acute             admitted to    w/same
                                     hospital     hospital      hospital     hospice     length of              hi pmt        illness       365d
                                    exp 365d)    exp 365d)    exp 365d)     exp 365d)   stay 365d)              DRG            365d        Mortality
             Using ln(Medicaid fraud control expenditures per hospital) to measure enforcement
                                      0.043        -0.392      -0.644**       -0.307       0.090                0.017         -0.039         -0.041
                                     (0.088)      (0.362)      (0.232)     (0.459)       (0.129)      (0.013)                 (0.018)       (0.031)
             Using ln(Medicaid fraud control expenditures per Medicaid beneficiary) to measure enforcement
                                      0.199       -1.213        -1.354      -1.393        0.924        -0.031                 -0.078         -0.107
                                        (0.250)       (1.100)        (0.741)       (1.220)       (0.392)        (0.040)       (0.050)       (0.366)

Notes: Hospital expenditures in 1995 dollars. All coefficients multiplied by 100 for ease of interpretation. Coefficients from expenditure models are elasticities;
coefficients from all other models are in percentage points. Standard errors (in parentheses) are based on an estimator of the variance-covariance matrix that is
consistent in the presence of heteroscedasticity and of any correlation or grouping of regression errors within states over time.




                                                                                                                                                                32
    Table 3: Differential Effects of State Medicaid Fraud Control Unit Expenditures per Hospital on Medicare Hospital
             Expenditures, Upcoding, and Patient Health Outcomes, by Patient and Hospital Characteristics
                                                       ln(non-                   Ln(home                    Initially
                                        ln(acute         acute     Ln(outpat      health/      Ln(acute    admitted to      Readmit
                                        hospital       hospital     hospital    hospice exp    length of     hi pmt         w/same       365d
                                      exp 365d)      exp 365d)    exp 365d)        365d)      stay 365d)      DRG        illness 365d   Mortality
Ln(Medicaid fraud control unit          1.325**        4.795**     -2.467**         1.498       0.982**     0.148**         0.082**      0.014
expenditures per hospital                (0.332)       (1.131)      (0.891)       (1.797)       (0.319)      (0.049)        (0.040)     (0.066)
Interactions between patient characteristics and ln(Medicaid fraud control expenditures per hospital)
No hosp admission in                   -0.465**         -0.833       -1.323        -0.915      -0.485**      0.017        -0.067**        0.043
Prior 365d*enforcement                   (0.155)       (0.716)      (0.955)       (0.734)       (0.131)     (0.019)        (0.028)       (0.042)
age < 80*enforcement                   -0.285**       -3.002**      1.924**       -0.096        -0.375*      0.030         -0.051*       -0.084
                                         (0.097)       (0.578)      (0.429)       (0.560)       (0.181)     (0.020)        (0.028)       (0.044)
male*enforcement                       -0.165**       -1.712**        0.597       -0.375       -0.296**     -0.029*         -0.037       -0.061
                                         (0.097)       (0.365)      (0.348)       (0.399)       (0.112)     (0.021)        (0.036)       (0.054)
black*enforcement                         -0.160         0.487        0.882      -3.735**        -0.247      -0.052          0.047        -0.073
                                         (0.215)       (0.568)      (0.836)       (1.298)       (0.181)     (0.033)        (0.044)       (0.064)
Interactions between hospital characteristics and ln(Medicaid fraud control expenditures per hospital)
Forprofit*enforcement                  -1.458**         -1.899       -1.094        1.450        0.672**      -0.106*       -0.096         -0.133
                                         (0.502)       (1.382)      (1.028)       (1.078)       (0.290)      (0.059)       (0.071)       (0.097)
non-profit*enforcement                 -0.697**       -2.153**       -0.198        0.308          0.217       -0.011       -0.060         -0.004
                                         (0.182)       (0.924)      (0.597)       (0.560)       (0.154)      (0.031)       (0.037)       (0.048)
Particip in phys/hosp                  -0.267**       -1.014**     -0.881**        0.228        -0.195*       -0.030      -0.063**        -0.021
*enforcement                             (0.080)       (0.428)      (0.377)       (0.599)       (0.101)      (0.020)       (0.032)       (0.039)
owns skilled nursing                     -0.096         -0.690       -0.039       -0.745         -0.229       -0.012        0.009         0.062
*high enforcement                        (0.103)       (0.902)      (0.614)       (0.523)       (0.169)      (0.021)       (0.034)       (0.050)
owns outpatient                           -0.114         0.127      1.413**        -1.364         0.000     -0.108**         0.032         0.036
*enforcement                             (0.137)       (0.491)      (0.463)       (0.847)       (0.105)      (0.042)       (0.035)       (0.060)
owns hm health/hospice                     0.086        -0.215      1.036**         0.069         0.055     0.073**          0.043       -0.069*
*enforcement                             (0.130)       (0.413)      (0.504)       (0.332)       (0.157)      (0.023)       (0.048)       (0.038)
small*enforcement                       0.265**       -1.269**        0.283      0.654**       -0.143**      -0.015*      -0.022**      -0.028**
                                         (0.051)       (0.188)      (0.183)       (0.170)       (0.048)      (0.009)       (0.010)       (0.014)
teaching*enforcement                       0.056       1.936*        -1.039        0.034         -0.029     0.077**        -0.027         -0.028
                                         (0.331)       (1.032)      (0.944)       (0.874)       (0.229)      (0.031)       (0.061)       (0.077)
System*enforcement                        -0.010        -0.366        0.423         0.572      -0.400**       -0.123        -0.024         0.033
                                         (0.121)       (0.456)      (0.442)       (0.401)       (0.124)      (0.025)       (0.034)       (0.046)
Notes: See table 2.
                                                                                                                                                    33
Table 4: Differential Effects of State Medicaid Fraud Control Unit Expenditures per Beneficiary on Medicare Hospital
          Expenditures, Upcoding, and Patient Health Outcomes, by Patient and Hospital Characteristics
                                                       ln(non-                  Ln(home                   Initially   Readmit
                                         ln(acute       acute     Ln(outpat       health/   Ln(acute      admitted    w/same
                                         hospital      hospital     hospital     hospice    length of    to hi pmt     illness     365d
                                       exp 365d)     exp 365d)    exp 365d)    exp 365d) stay 365d)          DRG        365d     Mortality
 Ln(Medicaid fraud control unit          2.624**       6.332**     -8.925**        1.540     3.841**         0.154    0.270**     -0.155
 Expenditures per beneficiary             (0.656)      (3.096)      (2.992)      (3.801)     (0.905)       (0.115)    (0.114)    (0.111)
 Interactions between patient characteristics and ln(Medicaid fraud control expenditures per beneficiary)
 No hosp admission in                   -0.787**        2.061        -0.255        0.029    -0.888**         0.058     -0.111*    0.225**
 Prior 365d*enforcement                   (0.313)      (2.215)      (3.355)      (1.492)     (0.307)       (0.047)     (0.062)    (0.101)
 age < 80*enforcement                   -0.825**      -5.922**     4.508**        -0.085    -1.826**        0.056     -0.147**     -0.048
                                          (0.254)      (1.671)      (1.183)      (1.324)     (0.500)       (0.045)     (0.070)    (0.124)
 male*enforcement                        -0.371*      -4.687**     1.978**        -1.160    -0.916**       -0.045       -0.081   -0.269**
                                          (0.216)      (0.874)      (0.846)      (1.076)     (0.269)       (0.050)     (0.078)    (0.125)
 black*enforcement                         -0.227       0.355       4.784*     -12.579**      -0.359      -0.159*        0.117     -0.264
                                          (0.526)      (1.739)      (2.566)      (3.282)     (0.541)       (0.095)     (0.109)    (0.174)
 Interactions between hospital characteristics and ln(Medicaid fraud control expenditures per beneficiary)
 Forprofit*enforcement                  -3.982**       -6.665*       -2.475       3.732       0.779      -0.516**     -0.335*     -0.108
                                          (1.006)      (3.836)      (3.268)      (2.720)     (0.739)       (0.149)    (0.184)     (0.264)
 non-profit*enforcement                 -1.731**       -4.322*        0.893        2.688      0.230         -0.025    -0.203*      -0.015
                                          (0.471)      (2.204)      (2.221)      (1.767)     (0.398)       (0.084)    (0.115)     (0.129)
 Particip in phys/hosp                  -0.598**      -1.670**       -0.157       1.285      -0.522*     -0.166**      -0.095     -0.071
 *enforcement                             (0.273)      (1.033)      (0.964)      (1.537)     (0.307)       (0.057)    (0.076)     (0.103)
 owns skilled nursing                     -0.041      -4.590**       0.971       -2.558*     -0.761*        0.022      0.023       0.166
 *high enforcement                        (0.285)      (2.012)      (1.445)      (1.460)     (0.401)       (0.057)    (0.078)     (0.123)
 owns outpatient                           -0.026       2.040      3.475**      -4.357**      0.172         -0.109      0.000       0.128
 *enforcement                             (0.341)      (1.527)      (1.415)      (1.902)     (0.335)       (0.090)    (0.108)     (0.156)
 owns hm health/hospice                     0.420       1.140         0.730       -0.164      -0.221         0.049      0.143      -0.097
 *enforcement                             (0.317)      (1.282)      (1.127)      (0.983)     (0.389)       (0.057)    (0.100)     (0.100)
 small*enforcement                       2.392**      -6.136**       -0.504     6.189**      -0.910*        -0.096     -0.135     -0.168
                                          (0.557)      (1.960)      (1.840)      (1.656)     (0.519)       (0.092)    (0.098)     (0.174)
 teaching*enforcement                      0.112       6.919**       -2.719       -3.022      0.490         0.058      -0.060       0.061
                                          (0.886)      (2.321)      (2.302)      (2.184)     (0.491)       (0.085)    (0.128)     (0.171)
 System*enforcement                        -0.017       0.330        0.620         1.240    -1.059**         0.004     -0.095       0.055
                                          (0.339)      (1.343)      (1.384)      (1.159)     (0.342)       (0.061)    (0.091)     (0.121)
 Notes: See table 2.
                                                                                                                                             34
                        Appendix Table 1: Average MFCU Expenditures Per Hospital and Per Beneficiary, 1994-98
                            MFCU expenditures      MFCU expenditures                         MFCU expenditures   MFCU expenditures
 State                      per hospital           per beneficiary          State            per hospital        per beneficiary
 Alabama                            $11,000                 $2.16           Montana                  $3,331               $1.85
 Alaska                             $23,415                 $6.44           Nebraska                    $0                  $0
 Arizona                           $17,717                  $2.04           Nevada                   $31,962              $6.13
 Arkansas                           $13,597                 $2.79           New Hampshire            $16,625              $4.51
 California                        $20,726                  $1.53           New Jersey               $20,145              $2.06
 Colorado                           $8,834                  $1.91           New Mexico               $16,364              $2.10
 Connecticut                        $16,393                 $1.47           New York                 $97,364              $6.73
 Delaware                           $80,609                 $5.44           North Carolina           $11,181              $1.18
 District of Columbia                  $0                     $0            North Dakota                $0                  $0
 Florida                            $19,387                 $2.14           Ohio                    $12,417               $1.45
 Georgia                            $13,837                 $1.80           Oklahoma                 $5,478               $1.62
 Hawaii                             $43,103                $10.72           Oregon                   $5,388               $0.69
 Idaho                                 $0                     $0            Pennsylvania             $15,463              $2.27
 Illinois                           $7,817                  $1.06           Rhode Island             $58,740              $4.59
 Indiana                            $10,524                 $2.01           South Carolina           $8,404               $0.95
 Iowa                               $3,484                  $1.31           South Dakota             $4,088               $2.68
 Kansas                             $3,958                  $2.00           Tennessee                 $7,300              $0.64
 Kentucky                           $6,942                  $1.10           Texas                     $5,580              $0.85
 Louisiana                           $7,997                 $1.33           Utah                     $25,008              $5.59
 Maine                              $8,664                  $1.94           Vermont                  $19,749              $2.60
 Maryland                          $24,791                  $2.67           Virginia                 $6,974               $0.95
 Massachusetts                      $21,680                 $2.19           Washington               $10,351              $1.17
 Michigan                           $14,902                 $1.89           West Virginia             $7,396              $1.10
 Minnesota                          $4,748                  $1.32           Wisconsin                 $4,010              $1.02
 Mississippi                         $7,971                 $1.54           Wyoming                  $8,191               $4.07
 Missouri                           $12,646                 $2.30
Notes: Federal Government share only. MFCU expenditures in constant 1995 dollars.




                                                                                                                                     35
