                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              EXCHANGE RATE REGIME DURABILITY AND PERFORMANCE
                  IN DEVELOPING VERSUS ADVANCED ECONOMIES

                                            Aasim Husain
                                             Aska Mody
                                           Kenneth S. Rogoff

                                         Working Paper 10673
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10673


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2004




This paper was prepared for the Carnegie-Rochester Conference (April 2004) and will be published in the
Journal of Monetary Economics, January 2005, Volume 52:1. It draws on the authors’ earlier work with
Robin Brooks and Nienke Oomes (Rogoff et al, 2004), to which contributions from Andrew Berg, Grace
Juhn, Paolo Mauro, and Antonio Spilimbergo are also gratefully acknowledged. The authors are indebted to
Rex Ghosh for providing his dataset and to Young Kim and Eisuke Okada for valuable research assistance.
For many helpful comments, we would like to thank, without implicating, David Backus, Tam Bayoumi,
Michael Bordo, Agustín Carstens, Barry Eichengreen, Inci Otker-Robe, Charles Plosser, Jacques Polak,
Carmen Reinhart, David Robinson, Miguel Savastano, Federico Sturzenegger, Lars Svensson, participants
at the Carnegie-Rochester Conference, and an anonymous referee. The views expressed in this paper are of
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the International Monetary Fund.The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Aasim Husain, Ashoka Mody, and Kenneth S. Rogoff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Exchange Rate Regime Durability and Performance in Developing Versus Advanced Economies
Aasim Husain, Ashoka Mody, and Kenneth S. Rogoff
NBER Working Paper No. 10673
August 2004
JEL No. Aasim Husain, Ashoka Mody, and Kenneth S. Rogoff

                                           ABSTRACT

Drawing on new data and advances in exchange rate regimes’ classification, we find that countries

appear to benefit by having increasingly flexible exchange rate systems as they become richer and

more financially developed. For developing countries with little exposure to international capital

markets, pegs are notable for their durability and relatively low inflation. In contrast, for advanced

economies, floats are distinctly more durable and also appear to be associated with higher growth.

For emerging markets, our results parallel the Baxter and Stockman classic exchange regime

neutrality result, though pegs are the least durable and expose countries to higher risk of crisis.

Aasim M. Husain
Research Department
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, DC 20431

Ashoka Mody
Research Department
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, DC 20431

Kenneth S. Rogoff
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
krogoff@harvard.edu
1.     INTRODUCTION

       This paper offers a distinct new twist to the existing academic and policy literature on

the durability and performance of alternative exchange rate regimes by drawing on new data

and on a new de facto approach to classifying exchange rate regimes (see Reinhart and

Rogoff, 2004).1 Although there are many nuances, overall our results suggest that for

relatively poor countries with little access to international capital markets, pegged exchange

rate regimes work surprisingly well, delivering both relatively low inflation and relatively

high exchange rate regime durability. This finding is in contrast to the growing conventional

policy wisdom that pegs are universally unstable and crisis prone. However, we also find that

as countries become richer and more financially developed, they benefit by moving to more

flexible exchange rate systems. Indeed, for advanced economies, flexible exchange rate

systems are remarkably durable and (controlling for other factors) yield somewhat higher

growth without higher inflation. For emerging markets, the exchange regime does not appear

to have a systematic effect on inflation or growth, although— in line with conventional

wisdom—pegs are distinctly more vulnerable to banking and exchange rate crises.

       Our results also indicate that, in general, exchange rate regimes have been steadily

becoming less durable since the mid-1970s, with emerging markets experiencing the most

instability. An important exception, however, is advanced economies, for which durability


1
  The distinction between stated (de jure) and actual (de facto) policies has received
considerable prominence recently, with contributions from Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger
(2002, 2003) and Reinhart and Rogoff (2004). The IMF itself now publishes regime
descriptions that lean towards the de facto characterization. However, de facto measures vary
considerably, depending on the methodology used to assess regimes.
                                              2



has increased, particularly for flexible rate systems. We also observe a broad trend towards

exchange rate regimes with intermediate levels of inflexibility (in contrast to the once

fashionable bi-polar hypothesis). Extrapolating out our estimated exchange rate regime

transition matrices suggests that pegs, which today account for roughly 40% of all

developing country and emerging market exchange rates, will account for only 25% of all

regimes in 2020, with intermediate regimes taking up the slack.

       In the next section, we discuss alternatives to regime classification and then present

evidence on regime durability for all countries and also for developing and emerging market

economies. We turn to the evidence on regime performance—evaluating performance in

terms of inflation, growth, and crisis outcomes, and differentiating once again between

developing, emerging, and advanced economies. It is important to note that whereas one’s

perspective on regime durability can be quite sensitive to the particular classification system

chosen, our results on regime performance are much less sensitive. Rather, the key factor

underpinning our results is our three-way grouping of countries into developing, emerging,

and advanced. The final section concludes.



2.     REGIME CLASSIFICATION AND DURABILITY

       Any assessment of the impact of a country’s exchange rate regime on its economic

performance must first settle on definitions for alternative regimes. This section makes a case

for using Reinhart and Rogoff’s (2004) “Natural” classification for characterizing true

regimes. It then uses the Natural classification to document the main features of regime

evolution and durability across countries, differentiating between groups of countries with
                                              3



markedly different levels of development and relationship with international capital markets.

Longevity of regimes may be suggestive of stronger sustainability and superior performance.



2.1    Regime classification

       The early debate on exchange rate regimes largely focused on the benefits and costs

associated with fixed versus flexible regimes. In their analysis, Baxter and Stockman (1989)

essentially viewed regimes in industrial countries as either fixed or floating. Subsequent

analysis, and indeed Baxter and Stockman’s own comments on developing countries,

increasingly recognized that countries’ regimes are often neither completely fixed nor fully

flexible. As Williamson (2000) has argued, such “intermediate” regimes could, in principle,

allow countries to reap the benefits of fixed and flexible regimes without incurring some of

their costs. Others, however, have been more skeptical. According to the “bipolar” view,

intermediate regimes are unsustainable over the long run, forcing countries—at least those

with open capital accounts—to choose between freely floating exchange rates or monetary

union with another currency.2

       Beyond the level of disaggregation of regimes is the system by which they are

classified. Until the late 1990s, the only comprehensive classification available was the one

2
  For example, Eichengreen (1994) argued that countries “will be forced to choose between
floating exchange rates on the one hand and monetary unification on the other.” More
recently, Summers (2000) has argued that, for economies with access to international capital
markets, “the choice of appropriate exchange rate regime... increasingly means a move away
from the middle ground of pegged but adjustable fixed exchange rates towards the two corner
regimes.” Fischer (2001) even presented evidence to support his view that “[I]n the last
decade, there has been a hollowing out of the middle of the distribution of exchange rate
regimes in a bipolar direction, with the share of both hard pegs and floating gaining at the
expense of soft pegs.”
                                              4



produced annually by the IMF, on the basis of countries’ announced (or de jure) regimes. In

practice, however, exchange rate regimes often differed from those that had been declared.

For example, devaluations were common in some “pegged” regimes, while many floats

moved within tight bands. Consequently, the de jure classification inaccurately characterized

the de facto regime. Recognizing this problem, the IMF itself moved to a new de facto

classification from 1999 that combined information on the exchange rate and monetary

policy framework and policy intentions with data on actual exchange rate and reserves

movements.3 Other de facto regime classification systems have also been proposed, including

those by Ghosh et al. (1997), who classified regimes on a de facto basis using information on

actual exchange rate movements, and Ghosh, Gulde, and Wolf (2003), who reexamined the

evidence on macroeconomic performance under alternative de jure regimes by checking the

robustness of their results against a hybrid de jure/de facto classification.4 Another

classification system, devised by Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger (2003), discarded the de jure

classification altogether and instead employed purely statistical techniques to exchange rate

and reserves data to determine the de facto flexibility of exchange rate regimes.5


3
 See IMF (1999), Chapter IV, for details. The IMF de facto classification is, in effect, a
hybrid classification system that combines data on actual flexibility with information on the
policy framework. Using historical data and information on countries’ exchange
arrangements, Bubula and Ötker-Robe (2002) have put together a database containing IMF
de facto classifications for virtually all IMF member countries going back to 1990.
4
  The hybrid classification—referred to as the “consensus” classification by Ghosh, Gulde,
and Wolf—discards observations for which the de jure classification does not match a de
facto one based on actual exchange rate movements. Effectively, this procedure narrows the
sample by 35 percent over the 1970-99 period.
5
 The Levy-Yeyati–Sturzenegger dataset, which goes back to 1974, attempts to classify—on
an annual basis—about 180 countries in terms of actual flexibility. However, about one third
                                                                                 (continued)
                                              5



       In setting forth their comprehensive “Natural” classification scheme, Reinhart and

Rogoff (2004) note that the other de facto classification systems, while more appropriate than

the de jure classification, continue to misclassify regimes because they do not take into

account several key features in regimes’ actual operation. Their Natural classification seeks

to address the potential misclassification by separating episodes of macroeconomic instability

that are characterized by very high inflation rates, often reflected in high and frequent

exchange rate depreciation, into a “freely falling” category. Classification of such episodes as

floating, intermediate, or pegged is problematic, since the macroeconomic disturbances could

be incorrectly attributed to the exchange rate regime. Moreover, where a parallel exchange

rate deviates substantially from the official rate, movements in the parallel rate—which

offers a more realistic barometer of the underlying monetary stance, rather than the official

rate—are used to gauge the flexibility of the regime.6 Lastly, to avoid recording a large

number of regime shifts following exchange rate and reserves movements that are, in fact,

related to transient economic or political shocks but do not involve a change in the

underlying regime, the Natural classification employs a rolling five-year horizon to measure

the true flexibility of the regime. This helps distinguish between longer-term “regimes” and

shorter-term “spells” within a regime, such as the widening of a horizontal band or a one-

time devaluation followed by a re-peg.


of the observations in their sample cannot be classified by their algorithm because of missing
data or because the exchange rate was pegged to an undisclosed basket.
6
 Dual or multiple exchange rates were prevalent in the early 1970s, accounting for about one
half of all regimes (Reinhart and Rogoff, 2004). In recent years, however, the proportion of
countries with substantial parallel markets has diminished to less than 10 percent.
                                              6



       Comparison of regime classifications across the de jure and Natural classifications

highlights the pitfalls of using the de jure classification to draw inferences about regime

durability or performance. As Figure 1 illustrates, only about one half of the observations—

where each observation corresponds to a given country’s regime in a particular year—were

classified the same way by both the de jure and the Natural classifications. Among so-called

“free floats,” only 20 percent in fact operated as true floats, while 60 percent were either

intermediate or pegged regimes and another 20 percent had freely falling currencies. Hence,

the wide divergence between the regimes countries say they have and those they actually

operate potentially suggests considerable variation also in the relationship between stated and

actual regimes, on the one hand, and economic performance, on the other.

       Viewed through the Natural classification, the global distribution of exchange rate

regimes has evolved relatively gradually. Although the collapse of the Bretton Woods system

saw a sharp decline in the proportion of pegged regimes, forming the basis of the Baxter and

Stockman (1989) analysis, the change fell well short of a dichotomous shift from a world of

pegs to one of floats (Figure 2). A significant proportion of non-pegged regimes were in

operation during the Bretton Woods era, and pegged regimes have by no means disappeared

in the post-Bretton Woods period. Rather, they continue to account for a sizable portion of all

regimes, and their prevalence has actually increased over the past decade. Also, while true

free floats have been around only since the early 1970s, they remain relatively rare.

       Since the interaction of the exchange rate regime with the performance of the

economy is likely to be shaped by the economy’s institutional and financial maturity and its

openness to capital flows, it is helpful to distinguish between different types of countries in

order to assess this interaction. In particular, countries with a mature economic and financial
                                               7



structure are likely to respond differently to a particular type of exchange rate arrangement

than are developing countries. Similarly, among developing countries, those that are exposed

to large capital flows may well perform differently under certain regimes than countries that

are relatively closed to flows of foreign capital. For the purposes of this analysis, countries

are divided into three groups—advanced, emerging market, and developing. Advanced

countries are selected using the World Bank definition for upper income countries, following

Ghosh, Gulde, and Wolf (2003). In dividing the remainder, the analytical distinction of

relevance is their degree of exposure to international capital markets. The emerging markets

group is defined using the Morgan Stanley Capital International (MSCI) classification, which

designates a country as an emerging market according to a number of factors related to

international capital market access—GDP per capita, local government regulations,

perceived investment risk, foreign ownership limits and capital controls, and other factors.7

All remaining countries are designated “developing.” The appendix provides a list of

countries in each group.

       Division of the world into these three groups yields additional insights into the

distribution and evolution of exchange rate regimes:

•      As Figure 2 shows, the collapse of Bretton Woods indeed marked a major change in

       the distribution of regimes among advanced economies. During the 1980s and 1990s,


7
  To distinguish between emerging and developing economies, exposure to international
capital can be determined either in a de jure sense (the extent of formal capital controls in
place) or in a de facto sense (the actual exposure a country faces). In the spirit of this paper, a
de facto definition was appropriate, an approach also followed by Prasad, Rogoff, Wei, and
Kose (2003). See http://www.msci.com/equity/index.html for more information on the MSCI
classification of emerging markets.
                                             8



       however, pegs regained popularity, although free floats and intermediate regimes

       remained in place in about one half of all advanced economies at the turn of the

       century.

•      By contrast, the Bretton Woods collapse was much less of a watershed event for

       emerging markets and developing countries, at least as far as their exchange rate

       regimes were concerned. Both groups of countries saw a gradual decline in the share

       of pegs in all regimes during the 1970s and 1980s, but not an abrupt shift.

•      The prediction of the bipolar hypothesis—that intermediate regimes would tend to

       give way to regimes at either polar end of flexibility—is not evident in the data,

       especially among the emerging markets group, where bipolar proponents had

       considered the hypothesis most applicable. Rather, intermediate regimes have

       constituted the bulk of all regimes in emerging markets for the past two decades, and

       very few emerging markets had moved to true hard pegs or free floats even by 2001.



2.2    Regime durability

       If the evolution of exchange rate regimes has varied across different country groups,

then the durability of alternative regimes has presumably also varied significantly. Figure 3

illustrates the number of exchange rate regime transitions in each country group since the

1940s. As can be expected, major global and regional events have influenced the frequency

of transitions. The Bretton Woods system collapsed on account of the pressures built up in a

relatively rigid system of exchange rate regimes and was followed by a sharp increase in

transitions to more flexible arrangements in advanced economies and a fair number of

developing countries. The debt crisis of the 1980s and the transformation of the economies of
                                               9



central and eastern Europe and the Former Soviet Union in the early 1990s were also

accompanied by a relatively high frequency of emerging market and developing country

regime transitions, especially into and subsequently out of the freely falling category. In the

latter half of the 1990s, as several large emerging markets faced external financing crises, the

frequency of exchange rate regime transitions among the emerging market group rose once

again. And in 1999, a major transition occurred among advanced economies with the

adoption of monetary union in the euro area.

       Once transitions related to these global events and into and out of the freely falling

category are distinguished, it turns out the frequency of changes in countries’ exchange rate

regimes today is remarkably similar to fifty years ago. As Figure 2 illustrates, the average

number of countries transitioning to a different regime (excluding transitions into and out of

the freely falling category) in any given year since the collapse of the Bretton Woods system

was about the same as during the Bretton Woods period. And in the 1990s, fewer low income

developing countries transitioned toward more flexible regimes than to less flexible regimes,

although the bulk of the transitions for this group were into and out of the freely falling

category.

       Calculations of regime durability reveal interesting variation across country groups,

across regime types, and over time (Table 1). The durability of regimes, measured as the

average number of years a country maintains its Natural classification regime before

transitioning to another regime or to a freely falling episode, has been somewhat shorter in

emerging markets (about 10 years) than in advanced economies (14 years) and developing

countries (16 years). Since 1975, regime durability in emerging markets has declined further

to about 8½ years on average, possibly because of their increased exposure to volatile
                                               10



international capital flows and their inability to efficiently intermediate them. Advanced

economies, on the other hand, have seen their exchange rate regimes become more durable

since the mid-1970s, as the build up of imbalances of the sort that existed toward the end of

the Bretton Woods period have largely been avoided.

       Contrary to the notion that pegs are less durable than other regimes because they

require increased macroeconomic policy discipline, Table 1 suggests that pegs have, on

average, been more durable than other regimes, both during the Bretton-Woods era and

afterward.8 Among emerging markets, however, pegs have been less durable than other

regimes. Since 1975, pegged regimes in emerging markets have lasted, on average, less than

8½ years, while the average intermediate and floating regime has persisted for 16½ and 11

years, respectively. This is consistent with the view that exposure to foreign capital flows

makes it is more difficult to sustain a peg if the domestic financial system is not sufficiently

mature to efficiently intermediate those flows. While pegs have been much more durable in

developing countries (both in relation to emerging markets and compared to other regimes in

developing countries), their longevity has declined quite sharply since 1975, perhaps

suggesting that sustaining pegs has become more difficult even in developing countries with

limited exposure to international capital markets.



8
  This conclusion contrasts with the results obtained by Klein and Marion (1997),
Eichengreen and others (1998), and Duttagupta and Ötker-Robe (2003), among others, who
find the longevity of pegs to be much shorter. This is mainly because the Natural
classification attempts to identify longer-term regimes rather than short-term “spells,” which
are analyzed in the other studies. Masson (2001), on the other hand, obtains very similar
results to ours for regime transition rates and duration using the Ghosh et al. (1997)
classification.
                                               11



        The duration of intermediate regimes in advanced economies has been shorter than

that of other regimes, especially since 1975. This may be because they have been used as a

temporary device during a longer-term transition from one polar extreme of flexibility to the

other, as in the euro area in the 1980s and 1990s. In emerging markets, by contrast,

intermediate regimes have tended to persist for longer—and have, perhaps, been easier to

sustain—than other regimes.

        Free floats have proven extremely durable in advanced countries, but fragile in

developing countries and emerging markets. Advanced economies that have adopted freely

floating exchange rates have, almost without exception, stuck with them, possibly because

they have conferred important advantages. Free floats in emerging markets, on the other

hand, have been extremely rare, and their low average durability (relative to advanced

country floats) suggests a lingering temptation to “manage” the exchange rate.9 Lastly, on the

few occasions they have been adopted, free floats have proven much less durable in

developing countries. Since 1975, eight developing countries have transitioned out of a freely

floating regime; of these, six moved to freely falling episodes. This suggests that a truly free

float arrangement may carry disadvantages for countries with a relatively less developed

financial and institutional infrastructure.

        If historical regime transition rates persist, and absent major political shifts toward

currency unions, the number of pegged regimes in emerging markets and developing


9
  The only emerging market countries to move to a freely floating exchange rate since 1975
have been Malaysia (1998), Indonesia (1999), Korea (1999), and South Africa (1995). Of
these, Malaysia transitioned to a peg during the following year, while the others maintained a
float through 2001.
                                               12



countries is likely to decline further. As Figure 3 illustrates, over one half of all developing

countries and emerging markets had rigid regimes in 1975. By 2001, this ratio had declined

to under 40 percent. With the same rates of regime transition, pegs would constitute only

about one third of all regimes by 2020. As developing countries become increasingly

integrated into global financial markets, however, the durability of alternative exchange rate

regimes in those countries may well resemble average regime durability rates seen among

emerging markets during the 1980s and 1990s. In that case, the proportion of pegged regimes

among developing countries will decline even more, and the proportion of pegs in all

developing country and emerging market regimes will ease to less than one fourth.10



3.     REGIME PERFORMANCE

       An important prediction from economic theory is that exchange rate pegs act as a

disciplining device, allowing policy makers in countries with a high inflation propensity to

import credibility and, hence, lower inflation from abroad (Giavazzi and Giovannini, 1989;

and Dornbusch, 2001). As a policy prescription, nominal exchange rate rigidity—or an

exchange rate anchor—came back into favor in the late 1980s and early 1990s, especially in

Latin America, where exchange-rate based stabilizations were viewed as particularly helpful


10
  It turns out that assuming that emerging market transition rates over the next two decades
will be similar to advanced country transition rates over the past two decades does not
meaningfully change the estimated distribution of developing country and emerging market
regimes in 2020 depicted in Figure 3. Over the longer term, of course, political economy
considerations may guide regime choice in some countries. For example, some countries may
choose to join currency unions in the not so distant future. Prospects for regime transitions of
that nature cannot be assessed on the basis of historical regime durability, however, and are
clearly beyond the scope of this analysis.
                                               13



following a history of high inflation (Edwards, 2001). In this line of reasoning, the harder the

peg, the more effective it is in enhancing credibility (Edwards and Magendzo, 2003a).

          The proposition that pegs provide an inflation advantage is far from universally held,

however. As exposure to international capital flows increases, a larger fraction of the

monetary aggregates needs to be backed to maintain the peg. Hence, emerging markets are

less likely to be able to import credibility than other developing countries where interaction

with international capital markets is more limited. Tornell and Velasco (2000) raise the

possibility that the inflationary gains from fixed regimes are illusory. No exchange rate

system, they argue, can ultimately act as a substitute for sound macroeconomic policies. Far

from exerting discipline, fixed exchange rate regimes may create an incentive for

governments with short time horizons to cheat, delivering temporarily higher growth through

larger deficits, with the full inflationary cost of such policies borne following the eventual

collapse of the peg.

          The theoretical implications of exchange rate regimes for economic growth and

volatility are similarly murky, with various opposing claims.11 In favor of pegs, Dornbusch

(2001) argues that lower inflation associated with rigid exchange rate regimes would reduce

interest rates and uncertainty, spurring investment and growth.12 Also, where a country ties

its currency tightly to that of another through a currency board arrangement, transactions


11
     For a useful summary, see Bailliu, Lafrance, and Perrault, 2002.
12
   Such a beneficial outcome may have prevailed in the post-convertibility Bretton-Woods
period from 1959-1971 when inflation and exchange rate volatility were low and growth was
relatively strong (Bordo, 2003). However, it is not clear whether this was the consequence of
the rigidity in exchange rate regimes or a generally favorable economic environment.
                                              14



costs may be lowered, increasing trade between the two countries. Frankel and Rose (2002)

find that such expansion of trade is not offset by diversion away from other trade partners

and, hence, by increasing the openness of the economy, this form of exchange rate rigidity

also raises output growth. An argument in favor of exchange rate flexibility is the possibility

of rapid resource reallocation following real shocks where short-run price rigidity is

significant (Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger, 2003). Broda (2001) finds evidence that terms of

trade shocks are amplified in countries that have more rigid exchange rate regimes. Edwards

and Levy-Yeyati (2003) take that empirical analysis one step further and conclude that the

inability of rigid regimes to absorb such shocks translates, in practice, into lower growth.

Similarly, Calvo (1999) argues that the need to defend a peg following a negative external

shock may result in high real interest rates and also stifle growth.

       While flexible exchange rate regimes may, in principle, dampen real shocks to the

economy, could the very flexibility of the exchange rate introduce a new element of

volatility? As noted above, a robust finding is that nominal exchange rate volatility is

associated with high real exchange rate volatility. Rogoff (1999) argues that such variability

does not, in practice, have significant effects on output and consumption in advanced

economies but may be harmful in developing countries. However, even if the higher

volatility has harmful effects, pegged regimes may not be the appropriate policy response

since the volatility may only apparently be contained and have real (adverse) effects on

private investment due to the greater uncertainty over regime sustainability.

       Indeed, just as the inflation-reducing benefits of exchange rate rigidity were being

emphasized in the early 1990s, a fundamental reevaluation of the policy prescription was

underway following the early crises associated with rigid regimes (for early recognition of
                                              15



this concern, see, for example, Eichengreen, 1994; and Obstfeld and Rogoff, 1995). Obstfeld

and Rogoff noted in 1995, following the collapse of the British pound in September 1992 and

of the Mexican peso in December 1994, that: “Many recent efforts to peg exchange rates

within narrow ranges have ended in spectacular debacles.” They went on to conclude: “These

events are not unprecedented but their ferocity and scope have called into question the

viability of fixed rates among sovereign nations in today’s world of highly developed global

capital markets.” The subsequent fall of tightly managed regimes in East Asia (1997), Russia

(1998), Brazil (1999), and Argentina (2002), has served as a continuing warning against

pegged regimes, especially in emerging markets subject to volatile capital flows. Pegged

exchange rates—or those with limited flexibility—invite speculative activity against the

exchange rate and lead to abandonment of the peg, currency overshooting, and large output

costs (Larrain and Velasco, 2001). Pegged regimes may also be subject to a higher incidence

of banking crises. Under pegs, the exchange rate may become progressively overvalued,

weakening the financial system; without (or with only limited) lender of last resort

capabilities, authorities may be unable to deal with domestic financial distress.



3.1    Inflation, growth, and volatility under alternative regimes

       Conflicting policy objectives and large macroeconomic imbalances will lead to poor

economic performance irrespective of the exchange rate regime. For the purposes of this

discussion, there are at least two sets of conditions under which the exchange rate regime

may have no independent influence on macroeconomic outcomes through the prevailing

severity of economic distortions. First, the prevalence of dual (or multiple) rates—and,

hence, potentially a large differential in official and “parallel” market exchange rates—is, as
                                               16



in Reinhart and Rogoff (2004), a consideration in determining the operative regime as well as

a factor influencing economic outcomes. Second, Reinhart and Rogoff (2004) isolate

countries with annual inflation rates above 40 percent into a separate “freely falling”

category, with the implication that the macroeconomic imbalances in such conditions

overwhelm the possible effects of the exchange rate regime.

       The evidence suggests that dual exchange rates are associated with significantly

worse economic performance. Over the period 1970–99, the average per capita income

growth rate in countries with dual exchange rates was about 0.6 percent per year; in contrast,

countries with unified rates grew at three times the pace, at about 1.8 percent per year

(Table 2). Similarly, annual inflation in countries with dual exchange rates was about

175 percent, while under unified rates it was about 22 percent. These performance

differences primarily reflect instances of large departures from official rates—the differences

in median performance are less egregious. With increasingly integrated capital markets, large

gaps in official and parallel rates have become untenable and the move to unified exchange

rates has been almost universal.

       By construction, “freely falling” regimes perform significantly worse than other

regimes on all counts: they have higher inflation and also lower growth rates and higher

volatility (Tables 3, 4, and 5). With the worldwide decline in inflation, the incidence of freely

falling regimes is on the decline (Rogoff, 2003). However, for retrospective analyses, since

freely falling episodes are typically classified under other systems as freely floating, their

identification as a separate category in the Natural classification can make a significant

difference to the relative rankings of regimes. For example, according to the de jure

classification (the last column in Table 3), pegs have much lower inflation than floating
                                               17



regimes. Under the Natural classification (the bottom row of Table 3), however, freely

floating regimes have, on average, lower inflation than exchange rate pegs. This reversal

occurs because, as noted, many freely falling episodes are in the floating regime category

according to the de jure classification. When other influences on inflation are controlled for

(see below), the advantage of pegged and intermediate regimes over the floating regime

reappears even in the Natural classification; however, not distinguishing the freely falling

category renders that advantage much larger.

       The performance of intermediate regimes is not especially different from that of other

regimes. This is consistent with the longevity of these regimes, as documented above. If this

comparison had revealed consistently poorer performance under intermediate regimes, there

would have been greater basis for expecting a shift to the polar extremes of pegs and floats.

       Finally, as documented by Mussa (1986), Baxter and Stockman (1989), and Flood

and Rose (1995), real exchange rates are more variable, the greater the flexibility of the

regime (Table 6). Exchange rate volatility is considerably higher under managed floating and

freely floating regimes than under pegged and limited flexibility regimes. This reflects the

fact that real rates tend, at least in the short-run, to move closely with nominal rates. Notably,

more flexibility under the de jure classification is not associated with greater variability of

the real exchange rate since regimes that are declared flexible are often tightly managed.



3.2    Regimes and crisis probabilities

       In the 1990s, several economies with rigid exchange rate regimes were victims of

severe economic crises. A concern thus arose, not just for the prospects of the economies

directly subject to the crises, but also for the possible “contagion” of crises across countries
                                             18



with similar economic features following a general loss of investor confidence. The

occurrence of crises has, therefore, acquired greater prominence in the policy discussions on

the choice of exchange rate regimes. Despite the policy interest, few systematic studies have

examined the links between crises and exchange rate regimes.

       The evidence presented below suggests that popular perception in this regard has

some statistical basis. While the evidence on currency crises is mixed, the frequency of

banking and “twin” crises (where banking and currency turbulence comes together) has been

higher under more rigid regimes but mainly for emerging markets and particularly so in the

1990s. Emerging markets are more exposed to international capital flows than are other

developing economies; but compared to advanced industrialized economies, emerging

markets have fragile financial sectors.13

       The banking crisis variable is taken from Demirguc-Kunt and Detragiache (1998).

They define a banking crisis to have occurred when any one of the following four conditions

held: (a) non-performing loans exceeded 10 percent of banking system assets; (b) a bailout

cost 2 percent or more of GDP; (c) large scale nationalization occurred; or (d) other

emergency measures, such bank holidays, deposit freezes, and special guarantees had to be

undertaken. The currency or balance-of-payments crisis variable is taken from Berg,

Borensztein, and Pattillo (2004), who define a crisis as having occurred when the weighted

average of one-month changes in exchange rate and reserves is more than three (country-

specific) standard deviations above the country average.

13
  Any definition of emerging markets is likely to include and exclude countries on the
margin in ways that are more or less appropriate. Extensive robustness tests were undertaken
and only the most robust results are highlighted in the text.
                                               19



       Consider, first, the frequency of banking crises.14 More rigid regimes had a higher

likelihood of banking crises, especially in the 1990s. For all countries, for the period from

1980-1997, the probability of a banking crisis in a given year varied between about 3 and

4.5 percent with no clear variation across exchange rate regimes (Table 7). However, the

highest probabilities of a banking crisis occurred in the emerging market economies, where

the evidence also suggests that the probability of a crisis increased with the rigidity of the

exchange rate regime. Moreover, the association between rigidity and probability of banking

crises in emerging markets became stronger in the 1990s.

       The finding that banking crises are more likely under rigid regimes is in contrast to

that of Ghosh, Gulde, and Wolf (2003), who conclude that, if anything, floating regimes are

the most likely to experience banking crises. The difference in findings is the consequence of

their use of the de jure classification, which has many more countries classified as “floating”

than does the Natural classification. As shown in Figure 1, many of these de jure “floaters”

are classified under the Natural Classification as “freely falling;” other “floaters” did not

actually float and so were de facto under more rigid regime categories. As a consequence,

using the de jure classification leads to an overstatement of the likelihood of banking crises

under floating regimes and an understatement of crisis probabilities under more rigid

regimes.



14
   Crisis probabilities were obtained as the ratio of crises episodes under a particular regime
divided by the number of regime-years. Each crisis was treated as a single episode even if it
lasted for multiple years. The estimates presented drop the year of the crisis itself as well as
the years immediately preceding and following the regime change to minimize the influence
of the regime transition on occurrence of crises.
                                               20



       Currency crises over the years 1970 to 2000 tended to occur more frequently in

intermediate regimes. The evidence for the 1990s is less clear-cut and suggests that among

emerging markets pegged regimes had more frequent currency crises. An alternative measure

of currency crises, using different thresholds for exchange rate depreciation and loss in

reserves (Bordo, Eichengreen, Klingebiel, and Soledad-Martinez, 2001) shows that, for

emerging markets, pegs and limited flexibility had significantly higher risk of currency crisis

than managed or freely floating regimes.15

       Finally, “twin crises,” when banking and currency crises coincide, have been almost

uniquely an emerging market phenomenon: they have never occurred in the group of

countries classified as “developing” and rarely in advanced economies. Moreover, the

incidence of twin crises in emerging markets is highest under pegged regimes and falls as

regime flexibility increases. Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999) have noted that twin crises have

particularly high costs. Such crises typically start with domestic financial distress, which

accelerates when a currency crisis also sets in, leading to a “vicious cycle.” Costs are high in

terms of the bailout costs of the financial sector as well as in terms of reserves lost. Larrain

and Velasco (2001) provide a theoretical discussion of why currency boards may be

particularly prone to twin crises. Rigid regimes may promote excessive risk-taking during

periods of “booms” in capital inflows, when the expectation of an exchange rate guarantee

reduces the incentive to hedge foreign currency exposure. The sudden withdrawal of flows

leaves the domestic financial sector susceptible to severe distress. At the same time, the


15
   Bubula and Ötker-Robe (2003) continue to find vulnerability in the intermediate regimes
in the 1990s but they do not distinguish emerging markets.
                                              21



commitment to an exchange rate target limits lender of last resort operations. If depositors

withdraw domestic currency from domestic banks to buy the foreign reserve currency at the

central bank, under a fixed exchange rate, the panic withdrawal can lead to a self-fulfilling

crisis as foreign currency reserves are depleted. Argentina’s massive collapse is a cautionary

tale of how some of these forces can contribute to the unraveling of even a hard peg.



3.3    Econometric analysis

       While the previous section reported correlations, this section takes the more

demanding step of attempting to isolate, over the period 1970 to 1999, the association

between exchange rate regimes and the performance measures of interest, after controlling

for other variables that may also influence performance.16 But even after such controls are

included, reverse causality, or “endogeneity,” remains a concern in such analyses: in other

words, the observed relationships may reflect the influence of the performance variable on

the choice of the regime rather than the other way around. This problem cannot be fully

resolved but is mitigated by the relatively long duration of the typical regime under the

Natural classification, implying that temporary changes in performance do not influence the

16
   In addition to variables that are conventionally used to explain the different dimensions of
performance (discussed below), two further sets of controls are used throughout. First,
common shocks across countries (such as spikes in oil prices or changes in the volatility of
G-3 currencies), influence all economies beyond the effect channeled through observed
variables. These are controlled for through the use of time dummies. Second, while an
increasing number of country control variables can be added, certain unobserved or difficult
to measure country characteristics may reflect important dimensions of institutions and
policy credibility. These, in turn, are likely to be correlated with exchange rate regimes; to
control for these unobserved characteristics, country dummies are included. The implication
of this approach is that regime performance is judged by changes that occur within a country
rather than across countries.
                                               22



choice of regime. The problem is also mitigated by using as an explanatory variable the

regime prevailing in the previous one or two years and the results presented are unchanged

when that is done.17

       Much of the data are taken from Ghosh, Gulde, and Wolf (2003), including the de

jure classification of exchange rate regimes, the three measures of economic performance

(inflation, growth, growth volatility), and the control (or explanatory) variables used in the

regression analysis. Each variable is covered at an annual frequency from 1970 to 1999 for

up to 158 countries. The control variables are drawn from the literature and are thought to

provide a suitable explanation of the variations in the performance measures. Table 8

provides a detailed description of the data. It lists each variable, provides a brief description,

and notes which of the subsequent regressions feature these variables. Using these data has

the advantage that the evaluation of performance under the Natural classification can be

directly compared to a well-respected baseline that assesses performance across the de jure

regimes.

       Our focus in this discussion is on the coefficients on “dummy,” or categorical,

variables representing the exchange rate regime. The dummy variable takes the value 1 if the

exchange rate regime prevails in a country in a particular year; otherwise, it is assigned a

value of zero. The coefficients presented in figures are to be interpreted as measures of

performance (relative to the excluded pegged regime) and conditional upon the other

included variables in the regression.

17
  Moreover, it is difficult to identify country characteristics that consistently predict
exchange rate regimes. Since regimes are strongly persistent, they are likely to be the best
predictors of expected regimes.
                                              23



       Table 9 evaluates inflation performance across all countries, advanced countries,

emerging markets, and developing countries. Three different specifications are presented:

(1) the estimates with country fixed effects; (2) the same specification but without fixed

effects; and (3) a specification with fixed effects but with the regime variables lagged by two

years. The lagging of the exchange rate regime variables increases the likelihood, though

does not ensure, that the results reflect the influence of regimes on performance rather than

the other way around. Table 10 is analogous, except that it examines growth performance.

The different specifications show that the qualitative direction of the key results presented

hold up with considerable consistency.

       To summarize, these results suggest that the performance of alternative exchange rate

regimes, and hence the choice of the appropriate regime, depends importantly on the maturity

of member countries’ economies and their institutions. Developing economies that have

limited interactions with international capital markets appear to benefit from policies that

imply strong commitment to stable exchange rate and monetary policies. The harder end of

the commitment in exchange rate regimes—either fixed or close to fixed exchange rates—

delivers lower inflation without sacrificing economic growth. Alternatively, more flexible

regimes are associated with higher inflation but no evident gain in growth. The inflation

result is highly robust to various changes in specification and almost always shows the

pattern of increasing inflation with the degree of flexibility, as shown in Table 9.18 This



18
   For example, dropping “small” countries with populations less than 1 million and using an
even finer differentiation of exchange rate regimes does not change the basic thrust and
significance of these results.
                                               24



evidence complements the finding that relatively poor and small countries benefit in the form

of enhanced trade from currency unions (Rose, 2004, and Thom and Walsh, 2002).

       For emerging markets—those developing countries that have significant exposure to

international capital markets—inflation tends also to be lower in regimes with harder

commitment to exchange rate stability relative to floating regimes, though the difference is

smaller than for developing economies (and not always statistically significant). Hence, there

may be some value to commitment. However, as noted in Table 7, the evidence also suggests

that where commitments are very hard, i.e., with pegged or nearly pegged regimes, the

likelihood of financial crises is high, reflecting the inability to adapt to changed

circumstances, the incentives of entrepreneurs and financial agents to undertake risky

activities on the presumption that exchange rates will not change, and speculative pressures

from investors who seek to test the commitment (Rogoff et al. 2004).19 Thus, commitment

may deliver macroeconomic stability in the form of slightly lower inflation, on average, but

those gains may unravel in periodic crises.

       Finally, our results seem to suggest that more flexible regimes may be associated with

somewhat lower inflation and higher growth in advanced economies. The regression with the
19
   Recall that emerging markets were distinguished from other developing countries by their
exposure to international capital. Since there are no well-defined or generally accepted
thresholds of exposure to international capital, the cut-off between high and low exposure
can be arbitrary and was dealt with by dropping and adding countries on the margin to check
the robustness of the results. For example, in checking for the robustness of results presented,
India and China (considered to have relatively closed capital accounts) were dropped from
the emerging markets sample but the results were unchanged. Countries added to the list
included those that are not on the MSCI index but do appear on other international emerging
market indices and also such countries as Bahrain, Lebanon, and Tunisia that are not on any
list but are thought of as relatively open to international capital markets. Again, the results
were robust.
                                               25



two-year lagged regime dummies, for example, shows a smooth increase in growth rates as

the degree of flexibility increases. It is unclear what theoretical model delivers such a

statistical result. Moreover, for both inflation and growth, the estimated differences across

regimes are often not statistically significant and tend not to be robust across specifications.20

Nevertheless, the results do point to potential benefits to floating for advanced economies,

and merit further study.

       How do our results compare with those from other studies? Using data for the post-

Bretton Woods era for over 100 countries, the analysis by Ghosh et al. (1997) and Ghosh,

Gulde, and Wolf (2003) also found that inflation under fixed exchange rate regimes was

significantly lower than under intermediate or freely floating arrangements, due to greater

confidence in the currency (a credibility effect) and lower money growth (a discipline effect),

and that the benefit of pegged exchange rate regimes in terms of inflation performance was

fairly robust to the endogeneity of regime choice. They did not, however, distinguish

between groups of countries as we have to identify that this effect applies mainly to relatively

low-income developing countries. Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger (2002) used their own de

facto classification of regimes and found, for a similar sample, that flexible exchange rates




20
   The results change with inclusion or exclusion of specific countries but generally show a
positive coefficient on the floating regime. The results presented drop Kuwait, which
experienced very rapid growth following the end of the Gulf War in 1992 and also had a
floating regime at that time. Inclusion of Kuwait leads to a higher and less plausible
advantage for floating rate regimes. Restricting the sample to OECD economies gives the
same qualitative result, with the floating advantage being smaller but statistically significant.
The results also remain when we drop countries belonging to the European Monetary Union.
                                              26



are associated with higher growth in developing countries (including emerging markets); no

similar association existed among industrial countries.21



4.     CONCLUSIONS

       Our analysis suggests that the popular notion that pegged exchange rates are

problematic everywhere is misplaced. We find, on the one hand, that fixed regimes in poorer

developing countries with little access to international capital are associated with lower

inflation and higher durability. For emerging markets, on the other hand, our results are more

in line with the earlier Baxter-Stockman finding of the absence of any robust relation

between economic performance and exchange rate regime. However, emerging markets do

appear to experience crises more frequently under pegged regimes. And for advanced

economies, we present evidence suggesting that flexible rates may offer significantly greater

durability and slightly higher growth, without generating higher inflation. Naturally,

exchange rate regimes are a sufficiently broad sweeping and complex topic that much further

research is needed to cement these findings and to understand their microeconomic

underpinnings. But, going forward, we would argue that further studies need to rely on more

sophisticated de facto classifications of exchange rate regimes, such as the “Natural

classification” we have used. In particular, exchange rate regime performance should be

based on classifications that not only look at actual exchange rate behavior but also focus on

market-based, rather than official, exchange rates.


21
  Several missing and inconclusive observations in the Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger
(2003) classification raise concerns about their conclusions.
                                            27



REFERENCES


Bailliu, J., Lafrance, R., Perrault, J-F., 2002. Does Exchange Rate Policy Matter for Growth?

       Bank of Canada Working Paper 2002–17.

Baxter, M., Stockman, A., 1989. Business Cycles and the Exchange-Rate Regime: Some

       International Evidence. Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 23 (May), pp. 377–400.

Berg, A. G., Borensztein, E.R., Pattillo, C.A., 2004. Assessing Early Warning Systems: How

       Have They Worked in Practice? IMF Working Paper No. 04/52 (Washington:

       International Monetary Fund).

Bordo, M. D., 2003. Exchange Rate Regime Choice in Historical Perspective. NBER

       Working Paper 9654 (Cambridge, Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic

       Research).

Bordo, M. D., Eichengreen, B., Klingebiel, D., Soledad-Martinez, M., 2001. Financial

       Crises: Lessons from the Last 120 Years. Economic Policy: A European Forum, No.

       32, pp. 51–82.

Broda, C., 2001. Coping with Terms-of-Trade Shocks: Pegs versus Floats. American

       Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, Vol. 91, No. 2 (May), pp. 376–80.

Bubula, A., Ötker-Robe, I., 2002. The Evolution of Exchange Rate Regimes since 1990:

       Evidence from De Facto Policies. IMF Working Paper 02/155 (Washington:

       International Monetary Fund).

Bubula, A., Ötker-Robe, I., 2003. Are Pegged and Intermediate Exchange Rate Regimes

       More Crisis Prone? IMF Working Paper 03/223 (Washington: International Monetary

       Fund).
                                           28



Calvo, G. A., 1999. Fixed Versus Flexible Exchange Rates: Preliminaries of a Turn-of-

       Millennium Rematch. Unpublished manuscript.

Demirigüç-Kunt, A., Detragiache, E., 1998. The Determinants of Banking Crises in

       Developing and Developed Countries. IMF Staff Papers Vol. 25, No. 1 (Washington:

       International Monetary Fund).

Dooley, M., Folkerts-Landau, D., Garber, P., 2004. The Revived Bretton Woods System: The

       Effects of Periphery Intervention and Reserve Management on Interest Rates and

       Exchange Rates in Center Countries. NBER Working Paper No. 10332 (Cambridge,

       Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic Research).

Dornbusch, R., 2001. Fewer Monies, Better Monies. NBER Working Paper 8324

       (Cambridge, Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic Research).

Duttagupta, R., Ötker-Robe, I., 2003. Exits from Pegged Regimes: An Empirical Analysis.

       IMF Working Paper 03/147 (Washington: International Monetary Fund).

Edwards, S., 2001. Exchange Rate Regimes, Capital Flows and Crisis Prevention. NBER

       Working Paper 8529 (Cambridge, Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic

       Research).

Edwards, S., Levy-Yeyati, E., 2003. Flexible Exchange Rates as Shock Absorbers. NBER

       Working Paper No. 9867 (Cambridge, Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic

       Research).

Edwards, S., Magendzo, I., 2003a. A Currency of One’s Own? An Empirical Investigation on

       Dollarization and Independent Currency Unions. NBER Working Paper 9514

       (Cambridge, Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic Research).
                                              29



Eichengreen, B., 1994. International Monetary Arrangements for the 21st Century

       (Washington: Brookings Institution).

Eichengreen, B., Masson, P., Bredenkamp, H., Johnston, B., Hamann, J., Jadresic, E., Ötker,

       Inci., 1998. Exit Strategies: Policy Options for Countries Seeking Greater Exchange

       Rate Flexibility. IMF Occasional Paper 168 (Washington: International Monetary

       Fund).

Fischer, S., 2001. Exchange Rate Regimes: Is the Bipolar View Correct?, Distinguished

       Lecture on Economics in Government. Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 15,

       No. 2 (Spring), pp. 3–24.

Flood, R. P., Rose, A. K., 1995. Fixing Exchange Rates: A Virtual Quest for Fundamentals,

       Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 36 (August), pp. 3–37.

Frankel, J. A., Rose, A., 2002. An Estimate of the Effect of Common Currencies on Trade

       and Income. Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 117, No. 2 (May), pp. 437–66.

Ghosh, A., Gulde, A-M., Ostry, J., Wolf, H., 1997. Does the Nominal Exchange Rate

       Regime Matter? NBER Working Paper 5874 (Cambridge, Massachusetts: National

       Bureau of Economic Research).

Ghosh, A., Gulde, A-M., Wolf, H. C., 2003. Exchange Rate Regimes: Choices and

       Consequences (Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press).

Giavazzi, F., Giovannini, A., 1989. Limiting Exchange Rate Flexibility: The European

       Monetary System (Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press).

Kaminsky, G., Reinhart, C., 1999. The Twin Crises: The Causes of Banking and Balance of

       Payments Problems. American Economic Review, Vol. 89 (June), pp. 473–500.
                                             30



Klein, M. W., Marion, N. P., 1997. Explaining the Duration of Exchange-Rate Pegs. Journal

       of Development Economics, Vol. 54, No. 2 (December), pp. 387–404.

Larraín, F., and Velasco, A., 2001. Exchange-Rate Policy in Emerging Market Economies:

       The Case for Floating. Essays in International Economics, No. 224 (Princeton, New

       Jersey: Princeton University).

Levy-Yeyati, E., Sturzenegger, F., 2002. Classifying Exchange Rate Regimes: Deeds versus

       Words. Universidad Torcuato Di Tella. Available via the Internet at:

       www.utdt.edu/~fsturzen.

Levy-Yeyati, E., Sturzenegger, F., 2003. To Float or to Fix: Evidence on the Impact of

       Exchange Rate Regimes on Growth. American Economic Review, Vol. 93, No. 4

       (September), pp. 1173–93.

Masson, P. R.., 2001. Exchange Rate Regime Transitions. Journal of Development

       Economics, Vol. 64, No. 2 (April), pp. 571–86.

Mussa, M., 1986. Nominal Exchange Rate Regimes and the Behavior of Real Exchange

       Rates: Evidence and Implications. Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public

       Policy, Vol. 25 (Fall), pp.117–214.

Obstfeld, M., Rogoff, K., 1995. Mirage of Fixed Exchange Rates. Journal of Economic

       Perspectives, Vol. 9 (Fall), pp. 73–96.

Prasad, E., Rogoff, K., Wei, S-J. Kose, M. A., 2003. Effects of Financial Globalization on

       Developing Countries: Some Empirical Evidence, IMF Occasional Paper 220

       (Washington: International Monetary Fund).
                                            31



Reinhart, C. M. Rogoff, K., 2004. The Modern History of Exchange Rate Arrangements: A

       Reinterpretation. Quarterly Journal of Economics (forthcoming), available via the

       Internet: http://www.puaf.umd.edu/faculty/papers/reinhart/papers.htm.

Rogoff, K., 1999. Perspectives on Exchange Rate Regimes. International Capital Flows, ed.

       by Martin Feldstein, pp. 441–53 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).

Rogoff, K., Husain, A. M., Mody, A., Brooks, R. J., Oomes, N., 2003. Evolution and

       Performance of Exchange Rate Regimes. IMF Working Paper No. 03/243

       (Washington: International Monetary Fund).

Rose, A., 2004. A Meta-Analysis of the Effect of Common Currencies on International

       Trade. NBER Working Paper No. 10373 (Cambridge, Massachusetts: National

       Bureau of Economic Research).

Summers, L. H., 2000. International Financial Crises: Causes, Prevention, and Cures.

       American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, Vol. 90 (May),

       pp. 1–16.

Thom, R., and Walsh, B., 2002. The Effects of a Currency Union on Trade: Lessons from the

       Irish Experience. European Economic Review, Vol. 46, No. 6,

       pp. 1111–23.

Tornell, A., Velasco, A., 2000. Fixed versus Flexible Exchange Rates: Which Provides More

       Fiscal Discipline?

Williamson, J., 2000. Exchange Rate Regimes for Emerging Markets: Reviving the

       Intermediate Option (Washington: Institute for International Economics).
                                                    32


   Fig. 1. Natural Classification Regimes by De Jure Category, 1973–99 (In percent of annual observations)




     De jure hard peg




    De jure other peg
                                                                                              De facto hard peg
                                                                                              De facto other peg
                                                                                              Limited flexibility
                                                                                              Managed floating
                                                                                              Freely floating
  De jure intermediate                                                                        Freely falling




         De jure float




                         0      20            40            60            80           100


Sources: Reinhart and Rogoff (2004); Ghosh, Gulde, and Wolf (2003); and authors’ estimates.
                                                                33


               Fig. 2. Natural Classification Regime Distribution (In percent of annual observations)

                                                            All Countries
  100



   80



   60



   40



   20



    0
     1940        45        50    55        60          65          70        75    80       85        90       95       2000


                                                   Advanced Countries
  100



   80



   60



   40



   20



    0
     1940        45        50    55        60          65          70        75    80       85        90       95       2000


                                                       Emerging Markets
  100



   80



   60



   40



   20



    0
     1940        45        50    55        60          65          70        75    80       85        90       95       2000


                                                   Developing Countries
  100



   80



   60



   40



   20



    0

   1940
     1940
            45   45
                      50    55
                           50
                                  60
                                 55
                                          65
                                           60
                                                  70   65
                                                              75   70
                                                                        80    85
                                                                             75    80
                                                                                     90      95
                                                                                            85
                                                                                                     2000
                                                                                                      90       95       2000



    Hard peg      Other peg      Limited flexibility        Managed floating       Freely floating     Freely falling

Sources: Reinhart and Rogoff (2004); and authors’ estimates.
                                                         34


                      Fig. 3. Natural Classification Regime Transitions (Number of transitions)

                                                  Advanced Countries
  16


  14


  12


  10


      8


      6


      4


      2


      0
          1940   45      50      55        60       65     70      75      80      85       90        95   2000

                                                  Emerging Markets
  7


  6


  5


  4


  3


  2


  1


  0
      1940       45     50      55         60      65     70      75      80       85      90     95       2000

                                                 Developing Countries
  25



  20



  15



  10



      5



      0
          1940   45      50      55        60       65     70      75      80      85       90        95   2000


                  To/from freely falling        To more flexible regime     To less flexible regime

Sources: Reinhart and Rogoff (2004); and authors’ estimates.
                                                      35


 Fig. 4. Exchange Rate Regimes in Developing Countries and Emerging Markets (In percent of total regimes)


                           1975                                                  2001




                           2020                                                  2020*




                              Pegs      Intermediates       Floats      Freely Falling

* Assumes developing country regime transition rates equal to those for emerging markets.

Note: Future regime distributions calculated on the basis of transition probabilities during 1975-2001, and
assuming no new transitions to freely falling category.

Source: Authors’ estimates.
                                                       36


Table 1. Regime Durability
(Average duration of regime, in years)
                                         All regimes          Pegs           Intermediate            Floats
1940–2001
 All countries                              14.3              28.3               16.1                 14.4
 Advanced economies                         14.3              19.5               18.4                 89.0
 Emerging markets                           10.3              15.0               15.0                 11.0
 Developing countries                       16.3              40.9               15.5                 5.5

1975–2001
 All countries                              11.4              23.2               18.4                 14.3
 Advanced economies                         19.4              46.0               26.8                 88.0
 Emerging markets                            8.6               8.4               16.5                 11.0
 Developing countries                       10.7              27.3               16.2                 5.5


Note: Regime durability is measured as the average number of years until a regime transition occurs, based
on Natural classification data. Pegs include both "soft" and "hard" pegs, and transitions from one type of
peg to another are not considered regime changes for these calculations. Similarly, transitions between
different types of intermediate regimes (limited flexibility and managed floats) are not counted as regime
changes. Estimated duration of all regimes includes duration of freely falling episodes.

Sources: Reinhart and Rogoff (2003) and authors' estimates.
                                                  37



Table 2. Average Annual Inflation and Real Per Capita GDP Growth:
Comparison of Dual (or Multiple) and Unified Exchange Rate Systems, 1970–99
(In percent)

                                      Average Annual Inflation Average Per Capita GDP
               Regime
                                               Rate                    Growth

Unified exchange rate                          22.0                     1.8
                                               (7.7)                   (2.1)
Dual (or multiple) exchange rates             175.6                     0.6
                                              (15.1)                   (1.4)

Note: Figures in parentheses are medians.
Source: Authors' estimates.
                                                          38



Table 3. Average Annual Inflation Rates Across Exchange Rate Regimes, 1970–99
(In percent)

                                                          Natural Classification
                                             Limited      Managed       Freely     Freely
                                     Peg                                                     Unknown   Total
                                            Flexibility   Floating     Floating    Falling

                 Pegged             17.9        9.6         14.2         24.5      391.7      12.4     33.9
                                    (6.8)      (7.9)       (10.4)       (23.2)     (39.9)     (6.5)    (7.9)
IMF De Jure      Intermediate       11.2       13.0         16.7          9.2      147.6       25.7     36.0
Classification                      (3.5)      (9.1)       (15.1)        (3.8)     (66.1)     (15.9)   (10.8)
                 Floating           20.3       10.1        11.3           8.1      408.9      445.6    138.5
                                   (11.5)      (7.5)       (8.4)         (4.5)     (68.6)     (22.2)   (10.8)
                 Total              17.1       11.1         14.2          9.9      305.3      55.5     49.7
                                    (6.5)      (8.3)       (10.8)        (4.8)     (57.0)     (7.6)    (8.7)

Note: Figures in parentheses are medians.
Source: Authors' estimates.
                                                          39



Table 4. Average Annual Real Per Capita GDP Growth Across Exchange Rate Regimes, 1970–99
(In percent)

                                                          Natural Classification
                                             Limited      Managed       Freely     Freely
                                     Peg                                                     Unknown   Total
                                            Flexibility   Floating     Floating    Falling
                 Pegged              2.0       2.6           1.6          -3.2      -1.1       1.0      1.6
                                    (2.0)     (2.6)         (1.6)        (0.5)     (-0.7)     (0.6)    (1.6)

IMF De Jure      Intermediate        2.8       2.6           1.9          2.7        0.0       2.7      2.1
Classification                      (2.4)     (2.9)         (2.1)        (2.2)      (0.4)     (2.7)    (2.3)
                 Floating            3.6       1.7           1.6          2.2       -3.1       -1.6     0.6
                                    (2.9)     (1.8)         (2.2)        (2.3)     (-1.2)     (-0.3)   (1.7)
                 Total               2.1       2.4           1.7          1.8       -1.3       0.8      1.5
                                    (2.2)     (2.6)         (2.0)        (2.0)     (-0.6)     (0.6)    (1.8)

Note: Figures in parentheses are medians.
Source: Authors' estimates.
                                                          40



Table 5. Average Annual Growth Volatility Across Exchange Rate Regimes, 1970–99
(In percent)

                                                          Natural Classification
                                             Limited      Managed       Freely     Freely
                                     Peg                                                     Unknown   Total
                                            Flexibility   Floating     Floating    Falling
                 Pegged              4.0       3.8           3.6          5.7        4.3       4.3      4.0
                                    (2.7)     (2.3)         (2.6)        (3.3)      (3.4)     (2.9)    (2.7)

IMF De Jure      Intermediate        1.6       2.0           2.6          3.3        3.8       6.1      2.6
Classification                      (1.2)     (1.6)         (1.8)        (1.7)      (3.4)     (2.5)    (1.8)

                 Floating            3.1       2.4           4.1          1.9        6.4       4.9      3.8
                                    (1.8)     (1.5)         (1.9)        (1.1)      (4.6)     (2.9)    (1.9)
                 Total               3.7       2.8           3.5          2.7        4.7       4.5      3.7
                                    (2.4)     (1.8)         (2.3)        (1.3)      (3.7)     (2.9)    (2.4)

Note: Figures in parentheses are medians.
Source: Authors' estimates.
                                                               41



Table 6. Real Exchange Rate Volatility Across Exchange Rate Regimes, 1970–2002

                                                               Natural Classification
                                                  Limited      Managed       Freely         Freely
                                      Peg                                                                 Unknown   Total
                                                 Flexibility   Floating     Floating        Falling
                 Pegged               6.3           8.9           25.1          7.0           53.6          6.6     12.7
IMF De Jure
                 Intermediate         3.2           4.8           10.5          30.6          42.3         28.4     12.1
Classification
                 Floating             10.5          5.2           11.6          8.4           17.3         14.8     10.4
                 Total                5.6           6.1           17.9          13.7          37.0          9.2     12.0

Note: Volatility is measured as the three-year centered standard deviation of the annual real effective
exchange rate (IFS, line RECZF). Nicaragua is excluded from this table because its exchange rate
has been extremely volatile, and its inclusion unduly influences the averages.
Source: Authors' estimates.
                                                             42




Table 7. Probability of Crises During Specific Regimes Using the Natural Exchange Rate Regime Classification
(In percent)

                           Bank Crisis (1980–97)                              Bank Crisis (1990–97)
                            Limited Managed      Freely                        Limited Managed      Freely
                   Peg     Flexibility Floating Floating             Peg      Flexibility Floating Floating
All                3.4         4.7         4.5         3.9            3.1         7.1         3.0          3.8

Advanced           0.0         2.7         2.3         4.1            0.0         6.5         0.0          4.2

Emerging           11.4        7.5         7.0         0.0           15.4         8.0         3.8          0.0

Developing         2.8         7.0         3.6           -            2.6         7.1         4.5           -

                  Balance of Payments Crisis (1970–2000)             Balance of Payments Crisis (1990–2000)
                            Limited Managed        Freely                      Limited Managed        Freely
                   Peg     Flexibility Floating Floating             Peg      Flexibility Floating Floating
All                4.1         4.1         9.2         4.6            4.7         5.2         9.2          4.3

Advanced           3.3         3.9         7.1         4.9            3.6         5.8         8.6          4.9

Emerging           4.6         5.6         10.0        0.0            8.8         6.1         6.9          0.0

Developing         5.2         2.0         9.7           -            0.0         2.8         15.4          -

                           Twin Crisis (1980–97)                              Twin Crisis (1990–97)
                            Limited Managed      Freely                        Limited Managed      Freely
                   Peg     Flexibility Floating Floating             Peg      Flexibility Floating Floating
All                1.6         1.4         0.8         0.0            3.2         2.6         0.0          0.0

Advanced           0.0         0.7         0.0         0.0            0.0         2.2         0.0          0.0

Emerging           7.7         3.0         1.8         0.0           15.4         4.0         0.0          0.0

Developing         0.0         0.0         0.0           -            0.0         0.0         0.0           -

Note: Probabilities are calculated by dividing the number of occurrences of a crisis under a particular regime
by the total number of regime years. Each crisis is counted only once and hence, if it persists over multiple years,
the subsequent years are not taken into account for this calculation. Additionally, the years an exchange rate
regime transition takes place (i.e., the year preceding, the year during, and the year following the transition) are
excluded from this computation. A dash (-) indicates that no crisis data were available for developing countries
under freely floating exchange rate regimes.
Source: Authors' estimates.
Table 8. Variable Description


                                                Variable                                                      Description
IMF de jure regime dummies      Pegged (de jure)                Pegged regimes
                                Intermediate (de jure)          Intermediate regimes
                                Floating (de jure)              Floating regimes

Natural regime dummies          Pegged (natural)                Pegged regimes (fine classification 1~4)
                                Limited flexibility (natural)   Limited flexibility regimes (fine classification 5~9)
                                Managed floating (natural)      Managed floating regimes (fine classification 10~12)
                                Freely floating (natural)       Freely floating regimes (fine classification 13)
                                Freely falling (natural)        Freely falling regimes (fine classification 14)

Dependent Variable                                                                                        Control Variables
Inflation (scaled consumer      Money growth                    Broad money growth
  price inflation; p/(1+p))     Real GDP growth                 Real GDP growth
                                Trade openness                  Exports plus imports of goods and services (percent of GDP)




                                                                                                                                                          - 43 -
                                Central bank turnover rate      Central bank governor turnover rate (per 5 years)
                                Terms of trade growth           Terms of trade growth
                                Government balance              Central government balance (percent of GDP)

Per capita real GDP growth      Investment ratio                Gross fixed investment (percent of GDP)
                                Trade openness                  Exports plus imports of goods and services (percent of GDP)
                                Terms of trade growth           Terms of trade growth, 3 year backward average
                                Average years of schooling      Average number of years of schooling of total population age 25 and older (per 5 years)
                                Tax ratio                       General government revenue (percent of GDP), 3 year backward average
                                Government balance              Central government balance (percent of GDP), 3 year backward average
                                Initial income/U.S. income      Ratio of per capita GDP to U.S. per capita GDP in 1970 (international prices)
                                Population growth               Population growth, 3 year backward average
                                Population size                 Population (logarithm)


                                                                                                           Crisis Variables
                                Bank crisis                     From Demirguc-Kunt and Detragiache (1997)
                                Balance of payments crisis      From Berg, Borensztein and Pattillo (2004)
Table 9. Inflation Performance Across Country Groups
                                                  Advanced Countries                                        Emerging Markets                                       Developing Countries
                                                                      Country fixed                                             Country fixed                                          Country fixed
                                  Country fixed      No country      effects with two-     Country fixed       No country      effects with two-   Country fixed       No country     effects with two-
                                     effects        fixed effects       year lagged           effects         fixed effects       year lagged         effects         fixed effects      year lagged
                                                                     regime variables                                          regime variables                                       regime variables

Limited flexibility                   -0.006             0.007             -0.005               -0.027            -0.029             -0.020             0.025              0.020              0.027
                                      (-1.38)          (2.10)**            (-1.31)             (-1.45)           (-1.86)*            (-1.28)           (1.57)            (2.34)**           (1.96)**
Managed floating                      -0.011             0.007             -0.009               -0.027             0.006              0.023             0.022              0.023              0.037
                                     (-1.71)*            (1.42)            (-1.33)             (-1.40)            (0.41)              (1.64)           (1.27)           (2.85)***          (2.86)***
Freely floating                       -0.015            -0.020             -0.013               -0.012            -0.010              0.059             0.104              0.091              0.065
                                    (-2.28)**        (-4.81)***           (-1.89)*             (-0.36)            (-0.42)           (2.16)**         (3.83)***          (3.87)***         (2.65)***
Freely falling                         0.225             0.302              0.141                0.234             0.322              0.244             0.232              0.288              0.149
                                    (5.90)***         (7.10)***          (5.60)***           (7.61)***         (13.18)***          (9.04)***        (10.80)***         (16.73)***          (7.50)***
Money growth                           0.698             0.285              0.085               -0.032            -0.097             -0.011             0.010              0.015              0.011
                                     (2.44)**        (17.12)***          (5.14)***             (-0.31)            (-1.02)            (-0.10)           (1.14)              (0.97)             (1.14)
Real GDP growth                       -0.084            -0.114              0.354               -1.498            -2.025             -1.656            -0.442             -0.874             -0.640
                                      (-0.46)           (-0.47)          (3.15)***            (-2.13)**        (-2.90)***          (-2.12)**          (-1.58)            (-1.82)*           (-1.69)*




                                                                                                                                                                                                          - 44 -
Trade openness                         0.000            -0.006             -0.024               -0.008            -0.008             -0.003            -0.032             -0.012             -0.033
                                      (0.01)          (-2.04)**          (-2.28)**             (-1.20)            (-1.04)            (-0.99)        (-2.70)***            (-1.59)         (-2.87)***
Central bank turnover rate             0.009             0.020             -0.014                0.094             0.152              0.148             0.044              0.022              0.063
                                      (0.69)           (2.10)**            (-1.28)           (2.60)***          (4.76)***          (4.32)***         (3.44)***            (1.66)*          (4.39)***
Terms of trade growth                  0.013             0.027              0.003               -0.031            -0.035             -0.037            -0.001             -0.008             -0.009
                                      (1.10)            (1.86)*             (0.25)             (-0.79)            (-0.83)            (-0.87)          (-0.06)             (-0.45)            (-0.49)
Government balance                    -0.038            -0.116             -0.033               -0.557            -0.175             -0.677            -0.210             -0.221             -0.324
                                      (-0.51)         (-2.02)**            (-0.56)           (-3.74)***           (-1.64)         (-4.75)***        (-2.77)***          (-2.57)**         (-3.63)***
Constant                              -0.018             0.072             -0.446                0.370             0.445              0.249             0.336              0.069              0.341
                                      (-0.31)         (6.27)***         (-9.22)***              (1.01)            (1.35)              (0.62)         (3.63)***           (2.49)**           (2.30)**

Observations                           673               673                673                 617               617                617               1401               1401              1401
R-squared                              0.82              0.73               0.84                0.73              0.68               0.71              0.67               0.44              0.57

Note: Figures in parentheses are t-statistics; * significant at 10 percent; ** significant at 5 percent; *** significant at 1 percent.
Kuwait has been dropped as discussed in the text.
Table 10. Growth Performance Across Country Groups
                                                         Advanced Countries                                                Emerging Markets                                     Developing Countries

                                                                            Country fixed                                                    Country fixed                                          Country fixed
                                       Country fixed     No country fixed effects with two-            Country fixed      No country fixed effects with two-    Country fixed    No country fixed effects with two-
                                          effects            effects      year lagged regime              effects             effects      year lagged regime      effects           effects      year lagged regime
                                                                               variables                                                        variables                                              variables


Limited flexibility                          0.004              0.003                  0.010                0.003                0.004           -0.007             -0.005              0.014              0.006
                                            (1.04)              (1.11)               (2.09)**               (0.34)              (0.57)           (-0.56)            (-0.71)         (3.54)***             (0.79)
Managed floating                             0.008              0.004                  0.013                0.020                0.010            0.002             -0.008              0.010             -0.005
                                           (1.65)*             (1.29)                (2.47)**               (1.52)              (1.12)            (0.19)            (-1.28)           (2.42)**           (-0.86)
Freely floating                              0.021              0.020                  0.018                -0.025              -0.015           -0.020             -0.017             -0.006              0.002
                                         (2.67)***           (2.92)***               (2.13)**              (-0.88)             (-0.85)           (-0.47)            (-1.03)            (-0.43)            (0.15)
Freely falling                              -0.005             -0.006                  0.020                -0.045              -0.035           -0.023             -0.032             -0.019             -0.002
                                           (-0.27)             (-0.28)                (1.79)*            (-3.96)***          (-4.06)***          (-1.24)         (-4.29)***         (-3.21)***           (-0.31)
Investment ratio                            -0.180             -0.092                 -0.230                -0.048               0.062           -0.037             -0.033              0.039             -0.025
                                         (-2.74)***           (-1.90)*             (-3.78)***              (-0.51)              (0.76)           (-0.37)            (-0.79)            (1.41)            (-0.58)
Trade openness                               0.037              0.015                  0.043                -0.006              -0.006           -0.013              0.009              0.016              0.006
                                          (2.51)**           (6.15)***              (2.99)***              (-0.19)             (-0.32)           (-0.35)             (0.73)           (2.39)**            (0.43)
Terms of trade growth                        0.056              0.011                  0.060                0.011               0.001             0.036             -0.004              0.019            -0.006
                                            (1.64)              (0.36)                (1.77)*               (0.32)              (0.03)            (0.93)            (-0.21)            (0.98)            (-0.31)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       - 45 -
Average years of schooling                   0.000             -0.001                  0.000                0.017                0.005            0.015             -0.010              0.001            -0.014
                                           (-0.02)             (-0.88)                 (0.02)               (1.22)              (1.33)           (1.06)           (-2.02)**            (0.77)          (-2.71)***
Tax ratio                                    0.029              0.007                 -0.010                -0.047              -0.010           -0.029             -0.011             -0.028             -0.013
                                            (0.84)              (0.39)                (-0.30)              (-1.02)             (-0.30)           (-0.65)            (-0.84)         (-2.78)***           (-0.94)
Government balance                          -0.102             -0.065                 -0.117                -0.277              -0.086           -0.233              0.070              0.046              0.073
                                          (-2.21)**          (-2.08)**             (-2.62)***            (-3.37)***            (-1.34)         (-2.75)***           (1.77)*             (1.62)           (1.78)*
Initial income/U.S. income                   0.041             -0.021                  0.043                -0.285              -0.059           -0.191             -0.022             -0.034              0.015
                                           (1.87)*           (-2.50)**               (2.00)**             (-2.00)**           (-2.30)**         (-1.67)*            (-0.41)         (-3.11)***            (0.27)
Population growth                            0.123              0.016                  0.386                -0.196              0.144            -0.255             -0.679             -0.432             -0.680
                                            (0.23)              (0.07)                 (0.73)              (-0.35)              (0.41)           (-0.44)           (-1.95)*          (-2.08)**          (-1.88)*
Population size                             -0.133             -0.001                 -0.140                0.029                0.003            0.034             -0.020              0.002             -0.003
                                         (-3.08)***            (-0.70)             (-3.12)***               (0.94)              (0.89)            (0.90)            (-0.84)            (0.83)            (-0.11)
Constant                                    -0.176              0.072                 -0.173                -0.032              -0.003           -0.074              0.101              0.030              0.070
                                          (-1.98)**          (3.18)***               (-1.96)*              (-0.27)             (-0.12)           (-0.55)             (1.20)           (2.27)**            (0.76)

Observations                                605                 605                   596                   529                  529              520               1228              1228               1209
R-squared                                   0.38                0.32                  0.41                  0.30                 0.20             0.23              0.25              0.15               0.23

Note: Figures in parentheses are t-statistics; * significant at 10 percent; ** significant at 5 percent; *** significant at 1 percent.
Kuwait has been dropped as discussed in the text.
