                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    PRESCHOOL, DAY CARE, AND AFTERSCHOOL CARE:
                              WHO’S MINDING THE KIDS

                                               David Blau
                                               Janet Currie

                                          Working Paper 10670
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10670


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2004




We would like to thank Ilya Berger, Stephanie Riegg and Jwahong Min for excellent research assistance, and
Jeanne Brooks-Gunn and participants in the Handbook on the Economics of Education Conference of March
2003 for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by David Blau and Janet Currie. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Preschool, Day Care, and Afterschool Care: Who’s Minding the Kids?
David Blau and Janet Currie
NBER Working Paper No. 10670
August 2004
JEL No. I21, I28, I38
                                        ABSTRACT

The majority of children in the U.S. and many other high-income nations are now cared for many
hours per week by people who are neither their parents nor their school teachers. The role of such
preschool and out of school care is potentially two-fold: First, child care makes it feasible for parents
to be employed. Second, early intervention programs and after school programs aim to enhance child
development, particularly among disadvantaged children. Corresponding to this distinction, the
literature has two branches. The first focuses on the market for child care and analyzes factors
affecting the supply, demand, and quality of care. The second focuses on child outcomes and asks
whether certain types of programs can ameliorate the effects of early disadvantage. The primary goal
of this review is to bring the two literatures together in order to suggest ways that both may be
enhanced. Accordingly, we provide an overview of the number of children being cared for in
different sorts of arrangements; describe theory and evidence about the nature of the private child
care market; and discuss theory and evidence about government intervention in the market for child
care. Our summary suggests that additional research is necessary to highlight the ways that
government programs and market provided child care interact with each other.

David Blau
Department of Economics
Gardner Hall
University of North Carolina
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3305

Janet Currie
Economics Department
UCLA
405 Hilgard Avenue
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
currie@ucla.edu
Outline:

    1. Introduction

    2. Who’s Minding the Kids?

    3. The Market For Child Care

        A: Demand for Child Care

        1. Theory
        2. Evidence

        B: Supply of Child Care
        1. The Quantity of Child Care Supplied
        2. The Supply of Quality in Child Care Centers

        C: The Effect of Child Care Quality on Children

4. Governmental Intervention in the Child Care Market

        A: Rationale

        B: Subsidies

        C: Regulations


5. Publicly Provided Child Care

        A: Model Early Intervention Programs

        B: Head Start

        C: Early Head Start

        D: State Programs

        E: Programs for School Aged Children


6. Unanswered Questions

List of Tables and Figures:

Table 1: Characteristics of Households with Children 0-4 by Type of Child Care Arrangement

Table 2: Characteristics of Households with Children 5-14 by Type of Child Care Arrangement



                                                  2
Table 3: Trends in Child Care Arrangements and Expenditures

Table 4: Distribution of Children Ages 5-14 by Use of Self Care and Mother’s Employment Status, 1999

Table 5: Studies of the Effects of the Price of Child Care on Employment of Mothers

Table 6: Characteristics of Day Care Centers and Regulated Family Day Care Homes, 1990

Table 7: The Distribution of Child Care Quality in Day Care Centers

Table 8: Studies of the Effects of Child Care Inputs on Quality and on Child Outcomes

Table 9: Summary of the History, Goals, and Provisions of Major Federal Child Care Programs
Table 10: Characteristics of State Child Care and Development Fund Plans

Table 11: Federal and State Expenditures and Children Served by Major Child Care Subsidy Programs

Table 12: Incidence of Child Care Subsidy Receipt and Characteristics of Recipients, 1999

Table 13: Studies of the Effect of Child Care Subsidies on Employment

Table 14: Selected State Child Care Regulations

Table 15: Studies of the Effects of Regulations on Child Care Use

Table 16: Model Early Childhood Programs with Randomized Designs

Table 17: Large Scale Public Early Childhood Programs

Table 18: State Spending on Pre-Kindergarten Initiatives

Table 19: Studies of the Effects of Self-Care on Child Outcomes

Table 20: Studies of the Effects of After school Programs on Child Outcomes

Table 21: Studies of the Effects of Positive Youth Development Programs on Child Outcomes


Figure 1: Effects of Non-Linear Subsidies on Hours of Work




                                                   3
1. Introduction:

        For good or ill, the majority of children in the U.S. and many other high-income nations are now

cared for many hours per week by adults other than their parents and school teachers. The role of such

pre-school and out of school care is potentially two-fold: First, child care can make it feasible for both

parents or the only parent in a single-parent family to be employed. This role has become increasingly

important in an era of welfare reform, in which able bodied mothers are expected to work regardless of

the age of their children. Second, early intervention programs and after school programs can enhance

child development, particularly among disadvantaged children. Consistent with this distinction, child

care is typically provided by the private market, while early intervention programs are generally publicly

provided.

        Corresponding to this distinction, there are two branches of literature to be summarized in this

chapter. The first focuses on the market for child care and analyzes factors affecting the supply, demand

and quality of care. The second focuses on child outcomes, and asks whether certain types of programs

can ameliorate the effects of early disadvantage. However, child care and early intervention are

intrinsically linked: The quality of child care is likely to affect child development, and programs such as

Head Start which seek to enhance child development also provide child care. Moreover, National

Research Council and Institute of medicine (2003) estimates that in the U.S., one third of the costs of

child care for children under age six is paid for by government subsidies. The primary goal of this

review is to bring the two literatures together in order to suggest ways that both may be enhanced. Our

summary suggests that additional research is necessary to highlight the ways that government programs

and market provided child care interact with each other.

        Section 2 provides an overview of the number of children being cared for in different sorts of

arrangements. Section 3 describes theory and evidence about the nature of the child care market. Section

4 discusses theory and evidence on government intervention in the market for child care, while section 5

discusses direct government provision of services. Section 6 offers conclusions and suggestions for

further research. This review follows the literature in focusing on the United States . As Waldfogel

(2001) emphasizes, there are dramatic differences between OECD countries in the extent to which child



                                                     1
care policies are publicly supported. Exploring the effects of child care policy in other countries would be

an interesting topic for future research.



2. Who is Minding the Kids?

        The dramatic increase in female labor force participation is one of the most important

developments in the postwar U.S. economy. This increase has been greatest among married women with

children. For example, in 1950 11.9% of married women with children under six were in the labor force,

compared to 62.8% in 2000. Never married, separated, and divorced mothers also increased their labor

force participation dramatically, with the most rapid growth in the last three decades. In 2000, 65.3% of

single women with children under 6 were in the work force (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2001), and

the National Institutes for Child Health and Development (NICHD) Early Child Care Study found that

most infants were placed in some sort of non-maternal care by four months of age (NICHD Early

Childcare Research Network, 1997). In a recent press release calling attention to the “record”

participation rates of women with young children, the Census bureau noted that “The large increase in

labor force participation rates by mothers since 1976 is an important reason why child-care issues have

been so visible in recent years” (U.S. Census Bureau, October 24, 2000.)

        However, child care is also increasingly utilized by families with stay-at-home parents. Tables 1

and 2 present tabulations of the type of child care used by children aged 0-4 and 5-14 in 1999,

disaggregated by the mother’s employment status. Table 1 shows that almost a third of 0 to 4 year old

children with mothers who are not employed are in non-parental child care, compared to three quarters of

children of employed mothers (lower panel, first row). The former group spends an average of 16 to 20

hours per week in the primary mode of non-parental care, and 20-27 percent also spend a further 7 to 11

hours in a secondary mode of non-parental care. This is a substantial amount of time, although much less

than the 32 to 35 hours per week that children of employed mothers spend in their primary non-parental

care arrangement. It is striking that a large fraction of care is not paid for, particularly in families in

which the mother is not employed. For the latter group, about half of non-relative and center care is

unpaid, compared to 10-20 percent for employed mothers. Families with a non-employed mother are also



                                                       2
more likely to receive government assistance in paying for child care.

         Table 1 also shows that there are distinct demographic patterns in the use of child care modes.

Relative to white non-Hispanic mothers, black mothers are more likely to use care from relatives, or child

care centers, and less likely to use non-relative care. Hispanic mothers are most likely to use relative

care, and least likely to use centers, a pattern that has been noted previously (c.f. Fuller et al. 1996;

Hofferth et al., 1991). The use of center-based care is distinctly U-shaped with respect to income, with

both poor and rich families more likely to use such care than middle income households, and families on

public assistance being more likely to use such care than other families. There are also pronounced

regional differences, though urban and rural families tend to have fairly similar patterns of mode choice.

For example, mothers in the South are more likely to use center-based care than those in the rest of the

country.i Not surprisingly, younger children are more likely to be cared for by parents than older

children, as are children of married mothers.

         Table 2 indicates that 63% of school age children of employed mothers regularly spend time in

some form of non-school, non-parental care, compared to 31 percent of children of non-employed

mothers. Children of employed mothers spend an average of 22 to 30 hours a week in such

arrangements. Considering that most children spend about 30 hours a week in school, it is evident that

what they do during this non-school care time is likely to be important to their development. In contrast

to younger children, school-age children spend relatively little time in non-relative care, and greater

amounts of time in organized activities. Two thirds to three quarters of these activities involve a

monetary payment, so it is not surprising that white children are more likely to be involved than black

and especially Hispanic children, or that poorer children are less likely to have organized activities than

richer ones.

         The vast increase in maternal employment has generated a large literature on the effects of

maternal employment on child outcomes (c.f. Baum, 2002; Belsky and Eggebeen, 1991; Blau and

Grossberg, 1992; Desai, Chase-Lansdale and Michael, 1989; Greenstein, 1993; Han, Waldfogel, and
i
 Blau (2001) notes that mothers in the South are substantially more likely to be employed full time than are mothers
in other regions.




                                                         3
Brooks-Gunn, 2001; Neidell, 2000; Parcel and Menaghan, 1990, 1994; Ruhm, 2000; Waldfogel et al.,

2002). This literature has produced little conclusive evidence of a negative effect of maternal

employment on children. Although OLS estimates often shownegative effects of employment in the first

year, these effects are not generally robust to attempts to deal with the endogeneity of employment. The

small or negligible effects may be because the increased income earned by employed mothers offsets the

effect of reduced time spent with their children. However, time use studies indicate that except for very

young children, maternal employment has only modest effects on the amount of time mothers spend with

their children, and tends to increase the amount of time that fathers spend with their children in two-

parent households. Mothers apparently reduce both leisure time and housework in order to maintain their

time inputs into child raising (National Research Council and Institute of Medicine, 2003).

         The most consistent evidence of negative effects of maternal employment comes from families in

which some or all of the following are true: the mother returns to work when the child is less than one

year old; young children spend very long hours in care; the mother’s employment does not raise family

income (as in some households where families have been forced off welfare); there is a single parent with

few family members to draw on so that time spent in employment cannot be compensated by drawing on

the time of other family members either for child care or for housework; and/or the work itself is very

stressful and reduces the resources the mother brings to parenting. Some studies of shift-work, for

example, suggest that it may have this effect. Adolescents may also suffer more negative effects of

maternal employment than younger children, particularly if they are left unsupervised. (National

Research Council and Institute of Medicine, 2003).

         Table 3 focuses on trends in the use of child care by employed mothers. Perhaps surprisingly, the

percentage of preschool children in organized facilities shows no clear trend between 1985 and 1999,

although the number of children reporting relative care as their primary arrangement increases.ii The


ii
 A CPS supplement in June 1977 collected data on child care used by children of employed mothers. There were
4.37 million children under age 5 at that time, and their distribution of modes of care was father:14.4%; relative
(including grandparent): 30.9%; babysitter in the child’s home: 7.0%; family day care home: 22.4%; day care
center/preschool: 13.0%; mother while working: 11.4% (Casper, 1997). Thus, the major increase in use of centers
occurred between 1977 and 1985.




                                                         4
fraction of families who report paying for child care increased over time, from 33.7% in 1985 to 43% in

1999, although the average amount paid fell in real terms. Since the percentage of income paid for child

care increased over the same period, Table 3 suggests that more low-income families are paying for child

care.

        Table 4 addresses the issue of so-called “latch-key” children, who spend some part of the day

without any adult supervision. In 1999, 10.5% of children age 5 to 14 of employed mothers were in

unsupervised self-care for part of the day, compared to 3.2% of children of non-employed mothers.

Most of these children were in relative care as their primary child care arrangement. This suggests that

employed mothers who rely on care from relatives are often unable to schedule activities so that all of the

child's time can be supervised. As one might expect, the fraction of children who are unsupervised rises

sharply with age: among 9 year old children of employed mothers, 8.1% are sometimes unsupervised

(5.2/(5.2+59.1))compared to 18.1% among 11 year olds (11.5/(11.5+51.9)) and 44.9% of 14 year olds

(32.3/(32.3+39.7)). The probability of being unsupervised is higher for single parents, and also rises with

income. It is also lower for Hispanics and Blacks than for Whites.

        There is evidence that unsupervised children are at increased risk of truancy, poor grades, and

risk-taking behaviors such as substance abuse (Dwyer et al., 1990). Juvenile crime rates triple in the after

school hours between 3 and 6 in the afternoon when children are most likely to be left unattended, and

children are most likely to be victims of violent crimes committed by non-family members in these hours

(Fox and Neuman, 1997; U.S. Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, 1996). These facts

suggest that lack of supervision is a serious problem, at least for some children—an issue we revisit in

Section 6.

        In summary, large numbers of children spend many hours each week in some form of non-

parental, non-school child care. While children of employed mothers are most likely to be in child care, a

significant share of children with non-employed mothers are also in child care. Many children spend time

in more than one mode of non-parental care, and routinely spend time unsupervised, suggesting that it is

difficult for some parents to patch together enough child care to completely cover the necessary hours.




                                                     5
3. The Market for Child Care

A. Demand for Child Care

1. Theory

        A simple one-person static labor supply model augmented with assumptions about child care

provides a useful starting point for analyzing demand for child care . The mother is the agent in the

model, making decisions about care for her children. Suppose that child care is homogeneous in quality

and commands a market price of p dollars per hour of care per child, taken as given by the mother.iii

There is no informal unpaid care available and the mother cannot care for her children while she works,

so paid child care is required for every hour the mother works. By assumption, the mother cares for her

children during all hours in which she is not working. There are no fixed costs of work, and the wage rate

w is the same for each hour of work. For simplicity, suppose there is only one child who needs care. The

mother’s budget constraint is c = y + (w-p)h, where c is consumption expenditure other than child care, y

is nonwage income, and h is hours of work. The time constraint is h + l = 1, where l is hours of leisure,

and the utility function is u(c, l). The monetary cost of child care reduces the net wage rate (w-p). A

higher price of child care increases the likelihood that the net market wage is below the reservation wage,

thereby reducing the likelihood of employment.

        Some families have access to care by a relative, including the father or another family member, at

no monetary cost. But not all families with access to such care use it, because it has an opportunity cost:

the relative sacrifices leisure or earnings in order to provide care. The quality of such care compared to

the quality of market care is also likely to influence the use of informal care, but consideration of quality

is taken up below and ignored here. If the mother pools income with the relative or has preferences over

the relative’s leisure hours, then the mother will behave as if unpaid child care has an opportunity cost. To

illustrate in the simplest possible setting, take as given that the relative who is the potential unpaid child

care provider is not employed.iv Let H represent hours of paid child care purchased in the market and U
iii
   Homogeneous quality means that we can ignore the effect of child care on child outcomes for now. This
assumption will be relaxed below.
iv
 See Blau and Robins (1988) for a model in which the relative’s employment status is a choice variable. This
extension does not change the qualitative implications of the analysis.



                                                        6
hours of unpaid child care. Maintaining the assumption that the mother is the care giver during all hours

in which she is not employed, we have h = H + U, and h ≥ H, U ≥ 0. The budget constraint is c = y + wh -

pH. The utility function is u(c, l, lr), where lr is leisure hours of the relative. The time constraints are l + h

= 1 for the mother, and lr + U = 1 for the relative. If U and H are both positive, then the shadow price of

an hour of relative care is the marginal utility of the relative’s leisure. In this case relative care is used for

the number of hours U* for which the marginal rate of substitution between consumption and leisure of

the relative equals the market price of care: ulr/uc=p; and paid care is used for the remaining H* = h - U*

hours for which child care is required.

        In order to examine work incentives in this model, classify outcomes as follows:


        Outcome           Mother Employed            Unpaid Care Used          Paid Care Used
        1                        no                         no                        no
        2                        yes                        yes                       no
        3                        yes                        yes                       yes
        4                        yes                        no                        yes

A higher price of child care increases the cost of using paid care, but does not affect the cost of unpaid

relative care, because no money changes hands for such care. A higher price therefore decreases the

probability of choosing outcomes 3 and 4, and increases the probability of choosing outcomes 1 and 2. In

addition to providing a work disincentive for the mother (outcome 1 is more likely) a higher price also

provides an incentive to use unpaid care conditional on working (outcome 2 is more likely).

        If the quality of paid child care is variable and if the quality of care affects child outcomes, then

the mother will be concerned about the quality of care she purchases. The simplest case to consider is uni-

dimensional quality: quality is a single “thing.” The price of an hour of child care is p = α + βq, where q

is the quality of care and α and β are parameters determined in the market. This hedonic price function is

determined by the market supply of and demand for quality (a linear price function is not essential to the

argument). The mother cares about the quality of child care because it affects her child’s development

outcome, d. Let the child development production function be d = d(lqm, hq), where qm is the quality of

the care provided by the mother. The effect of purchased child care on development depends on its

quantity (h) and quality (q). For simplicity, no distinction is made between the mother’s leisure and her




                                                        7
time input to child development, and assume also for simplicity that no unpaid care is available. Relaxing

these assumptions does not change the main implications of this model. The utility function is u(c, l, d)

and the budget constraint is c = y + (w – [α + βq])h.

         Blau ( 2003b) demonstrates the following results in this model. A higher price of child care

resulting from an increase in either α or β decreases the incentive to be employed. An increase in α has a

bigger negative effect on employment than an equivalent increase in β. So, if the goal of a subsidy

program is to facilitate employment, this is best accomplished by an “α-subsidy” unconditional on

quality. In a quality-quantity model such as this one, the substitution effect of a change in price on the

level of quality demanded is ambiguous, and this holds for changes in both α and β. But it can be shown
that (1) if the substitution effects ∂ q/ ∂ α| u and ∂ q/ ∂ β| u are both negative, then ∂ q/ ∂ β| u is larger in

absolute value than ∂ q/ ∂ α| u ; and (2) if ∂ q/ ∂ α| u >0 then either ∂ q/ ∂ β| u is positive but smaller than

∂ q/ ∂ α| u , or ∂ q/ ∂ β| u <0. Thus an increase in β has a bigger negative effect or a smaller positive effect

on the level of quality demanded than an increase in α. So if the goal of a subsidy is to improve the

quality of child care, a “β-subsidy” that provides a more generous subsidy for higher-quality care is more

effective than an α-subsidy. There is a clear tradeoff in subsidy policy between the goals of increasing

employment and improving the quality of child care.



2. Evidence

         Table 5 summarizes results from 20 studies that estimated the effect of the price of purchased

child care on the employment of mothers.v Estimated price elasticities reported in the studies range from

.06 to -3.60. The studies differ in the data sources used and in sample composition by marital status, age

of children, and income. Sample composition does not explain much of the variation in the elasticity


v
 Reviews of this literature can be found in Anderson and Levine (2000), Blau ( 2003b), Connelly (1991), and Ross
(1998). Chaplin et al. (1999) review the literature on the effect of the price of child care on child care mode choice.
Some studies are not included in the table because the elasticity of employment with respect to the price of child
care was not estimated or reported. Some of the latter studies estimated an hours of work (or a marginal rate of
substitution) equation instead of an employment equation (Averett, Peters, and Waldman, 1997; Heckman, 1974;
Michalopolous, Robins, and Garfinkel, 1992). Others did not report enough information to determine the method of
estimation or the elasticity (Connelly, 1990; Kimmel, 1995).




                                                          8
estimates; the range of estimates is large within studies using the same sample composition. Differences

in the data sources also do not appear to account for much variation in the estimates, since there is

substantial variation in estimates from studies using the same source of data. Hence specification and

estimation issues most likely play an important role in producing variation in the estimates.

        The dozen studies listed in the upper panel of the table use very similar methods. These studies

estimate a binomial discrete choice model of employment by probit or logit. The price of child care is

measured by the fitted value from an hourly child care expenditure equation estimated by linear

regression on the subsample of families in which the mother was employed and paid for child care. The

expenditure equation is corrected for selectivity on employment and paying for care using either a

standard two stage approach (Heckman, 1979) or a reduced form bivariate probit model of employment

and paying for care, following Maddala (1983) and Tunali (1986). For identification, some variables that

are included in the child care expenditure equation are excluded from the employment probit in which the

fitted value from the expenditure equation appears as a regressor. Also, some variables that are included

in the probit selection equations are excluded from the child care price equation in order to help identify

the selection effects. A selectivity-corrected wage equation is used to generate a fitted value for the wage

rate, which is included in the employment model.vi

        Blau ( 2003b) discusses two problems with this approach. First, it does not account for the

existence of an unpaid child care option. In the theoretical model described above, the price of child care

affects the employment decision through its effect on the utility of the employment-child care options in

which paid child care is used, compared to the utility of not being employed and the utility of being

employed and using unpaid care only. A multinomial choice model accounts for these various choices,

but the standard binomial model used in these studies does not. As a result, the price effect estimated in a

vi
 Exceptions to this general approach among the eleven studies include the following. Baum (2002) specifies the
employment equation as a discrete-time monthly hazard model of return to work following birth of a child. Blau and
Robins (1991) estimate the employment probit jointly with equations for the presence of a preschool age child and
use of non-relative care. Connelly and Kimmel (2000) estimate an ordered probit model for full-time employment,
part-time employment, and non-employment. GAO (1994) used weekly child care expenditure. Ribar (1992)
estimates the employment equation jointly with equations for hours of paid and unpaid care. Hotz and Kilburn
(1997) estimate the binary employment equation jointly with equations for use and hours of paid child care, child
care price and the wage rate.




                                                       9
binomial employment model is a biased estimate of the true effect of the price of child care on

employment.

        The second problem is how to measure the price of child care. The studies listed in the upper

panel of Table 5 use the fitted value from a selection-corrected child care expenditure equation estimated

on the subsample of employed mothers who use paid care. This approach provides a price measure for all

sample cases, not just those who used paid care, and one that is more likely to be exogenous than

observed expenditure for mothers who pay for care. The effect of price on employment is identified by

exclusion restrictions. Researchers have typically used child care regulations, average wages of child care

workers, and other factors that vary across geographic locations as identifying variables, under the

assumption that such variables affect household behavior only insofar as they affect the price of child

care. Some studies have also used less defensible identifying variables such as the number of children by

age.

        If the unobserved factors that influence employment and child care behavior are correlated with

the unobserved determinants of the price of care, then estimating a reduced form price equation on a

sample of mothers who are employed and pay for care yields biased estimates. Most researchers have

specified reduced form employment and pay-for-care equations that are used to correct the child care

price equation for selection effects in a two-stage estimation. However, if quality of care is a choice

variable for the family, then there are no justifiable exclusion restrictions to identify the selection effects:

after substituting for quality the price function is a reduced form, so it contains all of the exogenous

variables in the model. Hence the only basis for identification of a child care price equation using

consumer expenditure data in a manner consistent with economic theory would be functional form or

covariance restrictions (i.e., assume that the unobserved factors that influence employment and child care

behavior are uncorrelated with the unobserved determinants of the price of care).

        The estimated elasticity of employment with respect to the price of child care ranges from .04 to -

1.26 in the studies listed in the upper panel of Table 5. Without a detailed examination of specification

and estimation differences, it is difficult to explain why these estimates are so varied. Some of this

variation may be due to the two problems discussed here: ignoring unpaid child care, and inappropriate



                                                      10
exclusion restrictions to identify the child care price equation. Different identification restrictions are used

in each study, possibly leading to different degrees of bias. Different data sources containing different

proportions of mothers who use paid care are used in each study, and the bias caused by ignoring unpaid

child care is likely to depend on this proportion.

        The eight studies listed in the lower panel of Table 5 use variants of the multinomial choice

framework discussed above. Of these, three studies—Ribar (1995), Tekin (2002), and Blau and Hagy

(1998)—are most consistent with an underlying framework in which informal care is dealt with

appropriately. Ribar specifies a structural multinomial choice model. Paid child care is not treated as if it

was the best option for all mothers: the price of child care influences behavior by affecting the utility of

the options in which paid care is used, consistent with the theory described above. Tekin specifies a

discrete choice model with outcomes defined by cross-classifying employment status (full-time, part-

time, not employed) with indicators for use of paid child care conditional on employment and receipt of a

child care subsidy conditional on employment and use of paid care. Like the studies in the upper panel,

Ribar and Tekin use consumer expenditure data to measure the price of child care. Blau and Hagy

specify a multinomial choice model with categories defined by cross-classifying binary indicators of

employment and paying for care with an indicator of type of care, accounting appropriately for unpaid

child care. They derive the price of child care from a survey of day care providers.

        These three studies produce estimates of the elasticity of employment with respect to the price of

child care at the lower end of the range (in absolute value) in Table 5: -.09 in Ribar, -.15 in Tekin, and -

.20 in Blau and Hagy. It is risky to generalize from only three studies, but the fact that the studies that

accounted for unpaid child care in ways consistent with the existence of an informal care option produced

small elasticities suggests that the true elasticity may be small.

        . The effect of the price of child care on the intensive labor supply margin is of interest as well.

Several of the studies in Table 5 provide estimates of the effect of the price of child care on hours of work

by the mother, conditional on employment. Blau and Hagy (1998) estimate the price effect on weekly

hours of work separately by the mode of child care used, and find uncompensated elasticities .06, .08, and

-.05, respectively for users of centers, family day care, and other non-parental care. Michalopoulos,



                                                     11
Robins, and Garfinkel (1992) and Baum (2002) also find small elasticities, not significantly different

from zero. On the other hand, Averett, Peters, and Waldman (1997) report an uncompensated labor

supply elasticity with respect to the price of child care of -.78. This large estimate could be a result of

Averett et al.’s use of a kinked budget constraint method, which imposes a substitution effect with a sign

consistent with economic theory whether or not this is consistent with the data (MaCurdy, Green, and

Paarsch, 1990).

         One additional response to a child care price change deserves mention although it is not included

in Table 5. The price of child care may have an impact on welfare participation. Using the standard

approach to measuring price, Connelly and Kimmel (2001) find an elasticity of AFDC participation of .55

with respect to the price of child care from an ordinary probit model, and an elasticity of .28 from a probit

model of AFDC participation estimated jointly with an employment probit. Tekin (2001) uses a

multinomial model of employment, welfare participation, and payment for child care similar to the

approach in Tekin (2002) described above. He estimates the elasticity of TANF enrollment with respect

to the price of child care to be just .098.

         In summary, the best available estimates suggest that the effects of the price of paid child care on

labor force participation, hours of work, and welfare use are small.

B. Supply of Child Care

1. The Quantity of Child Care Supplied

         Since nationally representative data on the supply of child care are unavailable, the quantity of

child care labor typically serves as a proxy for the quantity of child care. Examining trends in child care

labor makes sense in this context because child care is a very labor-intensive activity and the technology

of providing care is unlikely to have changed much over time. This proxy does not allow us to determine

with certainty how much child care is supplied in a given year, but we can be reasonably confident that

trends in child care labor supply will track trends in child care supply.vii
vii
   Changes over time in the mix of child care by type (center, family day care, etc.) could cause divergence between
trends in child care labor supply and child care supply. Day care centers have the highest child-staff ratio and if
more care is provided in centers over time, then a given change in the number of child care workers would be
associated with a different change in the number of children in care over time.




                                                        12
        Consider the following simple conceptual framework developed in Blau (1993, 2001). Assume

that during a given period of time, a person can engage in one of the following three activities: (1) work

for pay in the child care sector, (2) work for pay in another sector of the labor force, or (3) not work for

pay (the “home sector”). She chooses the option that gives her the highest utility, and in sectors (1) and

(2) she also chooses the number of hours of work. Utility in sectors 1 and 2 depends on the wage rate in

the sector, and on the direct satisfaction she gets from working in the sector, measured by observed

covariates and an unobserved disturbance. A multinomial discrete model of the choice among the three

sectors and a regression model of hours of work per week for those employed in child care can be derived

from this framework. The key explanatory variables of interest in both models are wage rates. The

coefficient estimates on the child care wage rate can be used to measure the supply responsiveness of

child care labor: the amount by which the quantity of child care labor supplied increases as a result of an

increase in the child care wage relative to the wage rate available in other employment. Note also that one

must account for selectivity bias in this scenario since the unobserved characteristics that influence a

person’s choice of sectors also likely affect the wage rate that a person could earn as a child care worker

and hours of work in child care.

        Blau (2001) uses pooled data from the Current Population Survey (CPS) for the years 1977-1998

to estimate the model described above. He estimates the total elasticity of supply of child care labor to be

1.15, accounting for both new entrants to the sector and increased hours supplied by workers already in

the child care sector.

         The large increase in demand for child care in recent years should drive up the wages of child

care workers. Blau estimates that there was a 24 percent increase in demand for child care during the

period 1983-1998 and uses a demand elasticity of -.24. The supply elasticity of 1.15 implies that a 24

percent increase in the demand for child care should have caused the child care wage rate to rise by 17

percent. The actual increase in the average child care wage rate was only 8 percent, so some other factors

that affect child care labor supply must account for why the child care wage rate increased by as little as it

did. One possibility is that the supply of child care workers increased as a result of increased immigration

of low-skilled women for whom child care is a relatively attractive employment option. Another



                                                     13
possibility is that day care centers use less labor per child than home-based arrangements, so the increase

over time in the share of child care provided in centers could help explain why child care wages have not

grown as much as expected in response to the enormous increase in labor force participation of mothers.

This argument suggests that an analysis that does not distinguish the between the center and home-based

sectors may be overly simple.



2. The Supply of Quality in Day Care Centers

        The quality dimension of child care is arguably as important as the quantity supplied because in

many cases the alternative to high quality child care is not home care, but lower quality child care.

In this section, we define quality and give some descriptive statistics for measures of quality in U.S. day

care centers. We describe findings from the child care quality literature and analyze the relationship

between child care price and quality.

        Reviews of the literature on child care quality by Hayes, Palmer, and Zaslow (1990), Lamb

(1998), and Love, Schochet, and Meckstroth (1996) note that there are two distinct concepts of quality in

the literature. The first type is variously referred to as “process” quality, “global” quality, and “dynamic

features of care,” while the second is called “structural” quality or “static features of care.” Process

quality characterizes the interactions between children and their caregivers, their environment, and other

children. A child care arrangement is considered high quality according to this concept when




                                                     14
“caregivers encourage children to be actively engaged in a variety of activities;
have frequent, positive interactions with children that include smiling, touching,
holding, and speaking at children’s eye level; promptly respond to children’s
questions or requests; and encourage children to talk about their experience,
feelings, and ideas. Caregivers in high-quality settings also listen attentively, ask
open-ended questions and extend children’s actions and verbalizations with more
complex ideas or materials, interact with children individually and in small
groups instead of exclusively with the group as a whole, use positive guidance
techniques, and encourage appropriate independence.” (Love et al., p. 5).




                                            15
Structural quality refers to characteristics of the child care environment such as the child-staff ratio, group

size, teacher education and training, safety, staff turnover, and program administration. A child care

arrangement is considered to be of high quality according to the structural definition when it meets

standards specified by professional organizations such as the National Association for the Education of

Young Children (NAEYC). The NAEYC and other standards specify maximum child-staff ratios and

group sizes by age of the children in care; curriculum content; minimum staff qualifications for

alternative levels of responsibility; health and safety standards; and standards for other program

characteristics (see Hayes et al., 1990 for details of the NAEYC and other standards).

        The surveys cited above argue that process quality is more closely related to child development

than structural quality. The authors contend that structural features of child care “appear to support and

facilitate more optimal interactions” (Hayes et al., p. 84) and “potentiate high-quality interaction and care

but do not guarantee it” (Lamb, p. 13). For example, caring for children in a smaller group will only lead

to better child development if a smaller group makes it easier for caregivers to provide developmentally

appropriate care. But despite the widespread agreement on the importance of process quality, there are no

nationally-representative data available on process measures. Researchers must rely on structural

measures under the assumption that the two types of quality are related. Complicating matters further, is

the failure of the U.S. child care data collection system to collect quality data on a regular basis. The

most recent nationally representative data on the structural measures of child care quality are from 1990.

Here, we summarize the available information on the quality of child care in the U.S.

        Table 6 summarizes characteristics of centers and regulated family day care homes (see Kisker et

al. 1991 for more details). Average group size is 16 in centers and 7 in family homes. Group size

increases with the age of children in centers, but remains within the range of maximum group size

recommended by the National Association for the Education of Young Children (see Hayes et al., 1990,

p. 333) for each age group. Average child-staff ratios, on the other hand, generally fall on the high end or

outside the NAEYC’s recommended range. The average child-staff ratio of 6.2 for one year olds and 7.3

for two year olds exceed the recommended ranges for these age groups, while the average of 9.9 for 3-5

year old children is at the high end of the NAEYC recommended level. The great majority of children in



                                                     16
centers are 3-5 years old, so the majority of classrooms are (barely) within the range recommended by

the NAEYC.

         Half of the centers in the sample report no staff turnover, and the other half report turnover

averaging 50% annually. Thus some centers appear to be quite stable, while others have a significant

amount of turnover. From the perspective of a child, however, turnover is not exceptionally high. If a

child enrolls in a center on her third birthday and remains in the center for two years, she will be in the

center for the same duration as the average teacher (expected duration equals the inverse of the turnover

rate).

         Teachers in day care centers are well-educated on average, with almost half (47%) having a four-

year degree, 39% with some college, 13% with a high school diploma or GED, and virtually no high

school dropouts (1%). Operators of regulated family day care homes are much less educated, with only

11% having graduated from college, 44% with some college, 34% with a high school diploma or GED,

and 16% high school dropouts. Specialized training in early education, child development, or child care is

also more common among center staff than in family day care homes.

         As indicated above, there are no nationally representative samples of day care centers with

measures of process quality. But two studies with reasonable sample sizes, the Cost, Quality, and

Outcomes Study (CQOS) and the National Child Care Staffing Study (NCCSS) (see the Data Appendix

for further information), measured process quality in site-specific samples of day care centers using the

Early Childhood Environment Rating Scale (ECERS) and its infant-toddler counterpart (ITERS) to assess

quality. These instruments rate each observed classroom on 30-35 items using a scale of 1-7 for each

item. As a guide to the intended interpretation of the scores, ratings of 1, 3, 5, and 7 are designated by the

instrument designers as representing inadequate, minimal, good, and excellent care, respectively (Harms

and Clifford ,1980; Harms, Cryer, and Clifford. 1990). Summary scores are obtained by averaging over

the items.

         Table 7 presents descriptive statistics on quality ratings in day care centers from these two

studies, by site, age of children in the classroom, and the type of center (for-profit or non-profit). The

overall average rating in both studies is just under 4, or about halfway between minimal and good. The



                                                     17
authors of the CQOS report refer to this level of quality as “mediocre” (Helburn, 1995, p. 1). Quality

varies substantially across locations, with the highest-quality sites (California, Connecticut, and Boston)

rated almost a full point above the lowest-quality sites (North Carolina, Atlanta, and Seattle). Classrooms

with preschool age children are almost always rated to be of higher quality than infant-toddler rooms, by a

fairly wide margin in the CQOS data.viii With only a few exceptions, non-profit centers receive higher

average quality ratings than for-profits.ix

        Day care centers (the only type of provider with the necessary data on quality) can be thought of

as cost-minimizing firms facing a quality production function. Since labor is the most important input to

this production function in terms of cost, and little information is available for other inputs such as

materials and rent, the price of teacher labor is the primary focus. If providers choose group size and the

amounts of the different types of labor to minimize the cost of providing child care of the desired level of

quality, given the labor prices and technology the provider faces, the relationship between cost and

quality can be characterized by a standard cost function. The quantity of care is assumed to be determined

by consumer decisions conditional on the quality and price distributions available in the market. The price

per hour of care that a provider can charge depends on the quality of care offered, as determined by the

equilibrium price function in its local market.

        Given the cost function and the price function in its local market, a provider chooses the quality

of care to maximize its utility, where utility of the provider is a function of profit and quality. The relative

weight placed on quality versus profit in the utility function may differ across providers (e.g. between for-

profit and non-profit providers). With estimates of the parameters of the cost function, the price function,

and the relative weight on quality, it is then possible to derive the quality supply function: the relationship

between price and the level of quality offered by providers.


viii
  The ECERS and ITERS instruments are similar but not identical. It is not clear whether quality differences by age
of children in the classroom are real or reflect different scales of the instruments.
ix
 There is little systematic information on process quality in family day care homes. Kontos et al. (1995) studied
about 200 family day care homes and relatives providing child care. They concluded that the majority of providers
were providing care of adequate quality, about one third were providing inadequate quality care, and only 9% were
providing good quality care.




                                                       18
        We begin with estimates of the cost function part of the puzzle. Several studies have estimated

cost equations for day care centers: Powell and Cosgrove (1992), Preston (1993), Mukerjee and Witte

(1993), Mocan (1997), and Blau and Mocan (2002). We focus on results from the latter study because it is

most recent, and because it uses data from the large scale Cost, Quality, and Outcomes Study. Blau and

Mocan (2002) find that the logarithm of total cost is positively related to quality, with a coefficient

estimate of .056 (significantly different from zero at the 5% level). The interpretation of this estimate is

that a one unit increase in quality (for example, a change in the ECERS score from 3 to 4, equal to about a

one standard deviation increase) would raise cost by 5.6 percent. By this metric, raising the quality of a

center from “minimal” (3) to “good” (5) would only raise costs by 11.2 percent. This is a small effect, and

it suggests that with the current structure of teacher wages it is not very costly to raise the quality of child

care in centers. Cost is positively related to wages of teachers of various education levels, with the wage

rate of the least educated workers showing the biggest impact.

        The results for the price function in Blau and Mocan (2002) indicate that the market rewards

higher-quality care with a significantly higher price in three of the four states examined, with elasticities

of .40 in California, .32 in Colorado, .22 in Connecticut, and .13 in North Carolina. Further estimates

indicate that the relative weight on quality in the providers’ utility function is approximately zero for both

for-profit or non-profit centers. This is not a surprising finding for the for-profit centers: they are in

business to make a profit, and presumably care about quality only in so far as it affects their profit. The

finding that non-profits also put no weight on quality is surprising given evidence that non-profits have

higher average quality, but it is very robust.

        Having estimated the cost function, the price function, and the relative weight on quality, Blau

and Mocan use these to calculate the quality supply function. The simulated quality supply function

yields an average price elasticity of .66 among for-profits and .48 among non-profits. These moderately

large elasticities result from the fact that cost is estimated to increase only modestly with increases in

quality, while the market price can be increased fairly substantially as quality increases. Since the major

cost of child care is labor, another policy of interest is a wage subsidy for child care labor. Quality supply

appears to be fairly sensitive to the wage rate, with average elasticities of -.77 to -.80, suggesting that



                                                      19
even small wage subsidies have the potential to substantially improve the quality of care. These results

suggest a puzzle: If raising the quality of child care is relatively inexpensive and well rewarded, then

why is so much privately provided child care of low quality? One possible resolution of this puzzle is

discussed below: parents may not be willing to pay even the small additional amount required to cover the

cost of improved quality. Tthe increase in market price that is observed with increased quality may be

due to public subsidies.



    C. The Effects of Child Care Quality

        Many studies of the effects of structural inputs on “process quality” and of the effects of

childcare inputs and child care quality on child outcomes are reviewed in National Research Council and

Institutes of Medicine (2000b, and 2003), Love et al. (1996), and Lamb (1998). The great majority of

such studies are relatively uninformative by the standards of economic research. For example, many use

small non-randomly selected convenience samples, include few or no measures of family and child

characteristics, and lack measures of child development prior to exposure to the child care arrangement

being studied. A few of the better studies on child care quality are summarized in Table 8. It is important

to note, however, that only a few of these studies consider the possibility that families select child care

arrangements on the basis of unobserved aspects of the home environment, or unobserved characteristics

of the child, which limits the inferences that can be drawn.

        The National Day Care Study (Ruopp et al. 1979) is remarkable for using random assignment of

children within centers to classrooms with different staff-child ratios and teachers with different training

levels. Other studies listed in Table 8, use the CQOS and the NICHD Study of Early Child Care data,

which are large-scale observational studies. These data are described in more detail in the Appendix. An

important limitation of these observational studies is that it is difficult to control for non-random selection

of children into centers.

        Some studies using these data simply compare the developmental outcomes of children according

to whether their child care arrangement is classified as low-quality or high-quality based on inputs. These

studies typically find that high quality care has a positive and statistically significant association with



                                                     20
child cognitive development (Peisner-Feinberg et al. 2001, Early Child Care Research Network (ECCRN)

and Duncan 2002, ECCRN 2000c), behavior (ECCRN 1998b), and peer interactions (ECCRN 2000b).

However, this approach does not provide estimates of the impact of varying each input separately, which

would be useful for policy analysis.

        Other studies examine the effects of inputs separately. Ruopp et al. (1979) report that both low

staff-child ratios and higher teacher training were associated with better child outcomes. Similarly,

Mocan et al. (1995) use data from the CQOS to examine the effect of structural inputs such as staff-child

ratios, wage rates, teacher training, teacher turnover, and group size, and find that all but group size have

an effect on “process”measures of the quality of care. Their study is notable for including a large number

of control variables, relative to other studies. However, Blau (2000) shows using the same data that when

center fixed effects are included in the model, only teacher training has an effect on child care quality.

This finding replicates his earlier analysis of data from the National Child Care Staffing Survey (Blau,

1997). The center fixed effects may be viewed as an attempt to control for fixed characteristics of centers

(such as location) that might attract families of a particular type.

        The Florida Child Care Quality Study was designed to exploit changes in Florida’s child care

regulations that mandated higher staff-child ratios, and more training for staff in day care centers. A

sample of 150 child care centers was selected, and Center directors and children were interviewed before

and after the changes. The study found that the regulations did appear to affect the regulated inputs (for

example, staff-teacher ratios increased), but had no significant impact on measures of process quality.

There were some significant improvements in children’s psychological well-being as measured by their

attachment security. However, there was no comparison group in this study.

        The results from the NICHD Study of Early Child Care (SECC) are potentially more credible that

those of many other studies because of the longitudinal design of the SECC, the inclusion of children in

all types of child care, and the availability of extensive information on non-child care factors. The recent

analysis of these data by ECCRN and Duncan (2002) takes advantage of the richness of the data by

controlling for more home and child characteristics than the other SECC studies, and by also examining

changes in outcomes. The results indicate that a two standard deviation (SD) improvement in child care



                                                     21
quality in early childhood is associated with a one-sixth to one-seventh of a SD increase in cognitive

functioning in a model that controls for cognitive functioning at age 24 months as well as extensive

controls.

        Blau (1999) uses data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY), which is a large

general purpose study which includes women who were 14 to 21 in 1978, and follow-ups of their children

(see the Appendix for further information). He examines the effects of maternally reported group size,

staff-child ratios, and teacher training, as well as of type of care, cost of care, hours per week, and month

per year spent in the arrangement on a series of cognitive and test scores as well as a behavioral problems

index. The models control for a large number of background variables, including measures of the quality

of the home environment. Some models also include family fixed effects, and/or lagged measures of

child development. Blau finds that the effects of child care quality are generally insignificant, and

sometimes wrong-signed. In contrast, measures of the home environment are all statistically significant

and have relatively large effects. It is possible that maternal reports are measured with error, which biases

the estimated effects towards zero.

        The overall message of this section is that there is little convincing evidence that structural child

care inputs affect child outcomes, while there is more evidence that “process quality” has a positive effect

on child development. These findings are rather similar to those in the school quality literature, in which

many studies find that structural inputs such as class size, teacher education and experience, and teacher

pay have little impact on student outcomes, while more intangible teacher characteristics (captured by

teacher fixed effects) are strongly associated with student outcomes (Hanushek, 1992; Hanushek, this

volume). It is interesting to note that French preschool programs, which are generally thought to be of

high quality, employ a different input mix than American programs, with small staff-child ratios, more

highly trained staff, and centrally planned curricula (Boocock, 1995). It may be that part of the difficulty

in making a strong connection between inputs and outputs is that there are different ways to produce care

of a given quality level, so that focusing on levels of a few inputs in isolation yields a misleading picture.



4. Government Intervention in the Child Care Market



                                                     22
A: Rationale

         To this point, we have mostly ignored the role of the government in the child care market. The

government does in fact play an important role, and an economic case for government intervention in the

child care market can be made on several grounds. First, the government may be concerned with equity;

second, the government may want to encourage parents to work; and third, there may be market failures,

such as liquidity constraints, information failures, and externalities.

        The first argument in favor of government intervention in the child care market is on the grounds

of equity, just as the case is sometimes made for government involvement in the public school system.

For example, Bergmann (1996, page 131) argues that high quality child care can be thought of as a “merit

good, something that in our ethical judgement everybody should have, whether or not they are willing or

able to buy it.” Bergmann argues that the usual economic considerations in favor of cash transfers over

in-kind subsidies do not apply to merit goods. The main arguments she advances are that children have

little or no say in how parents spend a cash grant; that society has a responsibility to ensure that children

are well-cared for while the parents work; and that high-quality child care has benefits to children that

parents may not fully account for in their spending decisions. Economic actors who start out with very

unequal endowments (in terms of ability, environment, or opportunities) are likely to end up with very

unequal allocations, even if the outcome is efficient (Inman, 1986). Meyers et al. (2002) discuss

inequalities in access to quality early childhood educational experiences.

        A government that is concerned with equity can compensate for differences in final outcomes,

attempt to equalize initial endowments, or both. In principal, spending on programs of each type can be

increased until the marginal benefit associated with an additional dollar of spending is equalized.

However, to the extent that it is possible, equalizing endowments through intervention in the child care

market may be a superior approach to the problem of unequal allocations than providing compensation

for unequal outcomes later in life, both because it avoids many of the moral hazard problems that arise

when society attempts to compensate those with poor outcomes, and because it may be more cost-

effective.




                                                     23
        For example, Furstenberg, Brooks-Gunn, and Morgan (1987) present evidence that it is important

for children to get "off on the right foot" in school, and that children who started school with

disadvantaged families had worse average performance than other children even if their parents' situation

improved subsequently. To the extent that initiatives such as after-school programs can prevent high

school dropout and juvenile crime, they may be very cost effective approaches to such societal problems.

Earlier intervention is also attractive because of the sheer difficulty of overcoming poor endowments later

in life. Public sector efforts to train low-skilled adult workers have generally found very small returns.

Lalonde's (1995) survey of the training literature points out that most training programs for adult males

and youths have been ineffective (the exception for youths being the costly Job Corps program). And

among poor adult women, the evidence shows rapidly diminishing returns to training investments,

suggesting that it may not be possible to raise earnings much with this kind of intervention.

        A quite different rationale for government intervention in the child care market is to encourage

parents—particularly low income women—to work. There are two main reasons for this type of policy.

First, it may be less costly to taxpayers to require low income women to work and to provide child care

subsidies than it is to support the same women via the welfare system. That is, child care subsidies may

be able to help low-income families be economically self-sufficient. Self-sufficient in this context means

employed and not enrolled in cash-assistance welfare programs. Self-sufficiency may be a desirable goal

for non-economic reasons, but also may be considered desirable if it increases future self-sufficiency by

inculcating a work ethic and generating human capital, thereby saving the government money in the long

run (Robins, 1991). Child care and other subsidies paid to employed low-income parents may cost the

government more today than would cash assistance through TANF. But if the dynamic links suggested

above are important, then these employment-related subsidies could result in increased future wages and

hours worked and lower lifetime subsidies than the alternative of cash assistance both today and in the

future. There is little evidence either for or against the existence of strong enough dynamic links to make

means-tested, employment-conditioned, child care subsidies cost-effective for government.x
x
 There is substantial evidence of positive serial correlation in employment. Whether this is due to “state
dependence” (working today changes preferences or constraints in such a way as to make working in the future
more attractive) or unobserved heterogeneity (working today does not affect the attractiveness of future work; some



                                                       24
        Second, there may be positive externalities associated with employment of low-income mothers.

For example, younger women may be more likely to stay in school and less likely to get pregnant if they

see that work is always required of recipients of public assistance. The children of women who move into

the workforce may gain a positive role model. Third, liquidity constraints could prevent some women

from paying for the child care that they need in order to enhance their own human capital through on-the-

job training. Walker (1996) has argued, however, that difficulties in attaining economic self-sufficiency

are caused by imperfections in the credit market, not the child care market. If the dynamic links suggested

above are important, then a family could borrow against its future earnings in a perfect credit market to

finance the child care needed in order to be employed today and gain the higher future earnings that result

from employment today. Imperfection in the credit market caused by moral hazard and adverse selection

prevent this, but the remedy according to Walker lies in government intervention in the credit market, not

the child care market.

        These potentially positive effects of encouraging maternal employment will be undermined if

sending women to work results in children being cared for in a way that harms their development. For

example, tax payers could end up spending more rather than less, if neglected children are more likely to

engage in future crime. Thus, there is a potential conflict between these two goals of government

intervention in the child care market. Policies that enhance child development will not always encourage

maternal employment, and vice versa.

        A third broad justification for government intervention in the child care market is that there is a

market failure that the government can address. Indeed, several market failures are potentially relevant in

this case, including liquidity constraints, information failures, and externalities. Liquidity constraints may

prevent parents from making optimal investments in the human capital of their children. But the

existence of iquidity constraints alone would only justify financial assistance to certain parents, not direct


people find work more attractive than others in every period) is unclear. See Heckman (1981) for an early discussion
and Hyslop (1999) for recent evidence. Gladden and Taber (2000) analyze the effect of work experience on wage
growth for less-skilled workers. Card and Hyslop (2002) discuss evidence from a Canadian welfare to work
program which suggests that the program increased employment, but that there was little growth in earnings over
time.




                                                       25
government intervention in the provision of child care services. However, information failures are also

likely to be important. There is increasing evidence that parents find it difficult to evaluate the quality of

child care centers and that some parents pay for care of such low quality that it may be harmful to their

children (Cryer and Burchinal, 1995; Helburn and Howes, 1995; U.S. Department of Health and Human

Services, 1998).

         Information failures provide a possible explanation for the poor average quality of child care

available in the United States.xi There is imperfect information in the child care market because

consumers are not perfectly informed about the identity of all potential suppliers, and because the quality

of care offered by any particular supplier identified by a consumer is not fully known. A potential remedy

for this problem is government subsidies to Resource and Referral (R&R) agencies to maintain

comprehensive and accurate lists of suppliers. This may not solve the problem in practice because of very

high turnover and unwillingness to reveal their identity among informal child care providers. The second

information problem is that consumers know less about product quality than does the provider, and

monitoring is costly. This can lead to moral hazard and/or adverse selection. Moral hazard is a plausible

outcome in day care centers (e.g., changing diapers just before pick-up time). Adverse selection of

providers is plausible in the more informal family day care sector: family day care is a very low-wage

occupation, so women with high wage offers in other occupations are less likely to choose to be care

providers. If the outside wage offer is positively correlated with the quality of care provided, then adverse

selection would result. Regulations are often suggested as a solution to the information problem, but

Walker (1991) notes that the monitoring required to enforce regulations may be costlier for the

government than for consumers. He also points out that the conditions under which regulations are

beneficial to consumers may not be satisfied in the child care market.xii We address this issue in more

detail below.
xi
 See Walker (1991), Council of Economic Advisors (1997), Magenheim (1995), Robins (1991), and U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services (2001).
xii
  See Walker (1991, pp. 68-69), which is based on applying Leland’s (1979) model of regulations to the child care
market. The conditions are low price elasticity of demand, quality matters to consumers, the marginal cost of quality
is low, and consumers place a low value on low-quality care.




                                                        26
         Some evidence suggests that parents do not obtain much information about the child care market

before making a choice. Walker (1991) reports that 60-80 percent of child care arrangements made by

low-income parents are located through referrals from friends and relatives or from direct acquaintance

with the provider. A referral may not be a good signal of the developmental appropriateness of child care

if parents are not good judges of the quality of care. Cryer and Burchinal (1995) report a direct

comparison of parent ratings of various aspects of the developmental appropriateness of their child’s day

care center classroom with trained observer ratings of the same aspects, using data from the Cost, Quality,

and Outcomes study. The results show that parents give higher average ratings on every item than do

trained observers, by about one standard deviation on average for preschool age classrooms and by about

two standard deviations on average for infant-toddler rooms. The instrument containing these items is of

demonstrated reliability when administered by trained observers, so this suggests that parents are not

well-informed about the quality of care in the arrangements used by their children.xiii

         Similarly, Mocan (2001) finds that parents use less information than trained observers when

making quality assessments. He finds that parents tend to incorrectly associate some characteristics of

centers (such as clean reception areas) with quality and fail to use other more relevant signals. Parents

who are more educated, and married parents, assess quality in a way more similar to the trained observers.

Mocan finds that the vast majority of parents claimed that they valued the quality attributes measured by

the process-oriented scales, suggesting that parents are not choosing centers on the basis of some entirely

different criteria (such as location). These findings suggest that government may be able to improve

outcomes by developing and publicizing standards, but there is little evidence available about the efficacy

of this type of market intervention. Finally, even altruistic parents may not take full account of the

consequences of the effects of their child raising decisions on those outside the family. For example, a


xiii
  The instrument is the Early Childhood Environment Rating Scale (ECERS) and its counterpart for infants and
toddlers, the Infant-Toddler Environment Rating Scale (ITERS). See Harms and Clifford (1980) and Harms, Cryer,
and Clifford (1990) for discussion of the instruments. Helburn (1995) discusses their reliability in the Cost, Quality,
and Outcomes study. The correlation between parent and observer scores was .21 for infant-toddler rooms and .29
for preschool rooms (Cryer and Burchinal, 1995, p. 206). Thus parents do appear to have some ability to distinguish
among programs of different quality. However, from a child development perspective it is the absolute level of
quality that matters, not relative quality.




                                                         27
child who becomes a welfare mother imposes a tax burden on other citizens, a cost which may not be

considered by the parents when they decide on investments in the child's human capital.

        The evidence about whether parents are willing to pay for better quality (and how much) is

conflicting. On the one hand, Blau and Mocan (2002) find that the price centers can charge rises

appreciably with quality. On the other hand, Blau (2001) reports a small correlation between family

income and quality, and a generally flat price-quality gradient. In their study of consumer-demand

functions for child care quality inputs, Blau and Hagy (1998) also find that parents do not seem to be

willing to pay more for regulated aspects of care such as lower staff-child ratios.

        Externalities provide perhaps the strongest theoretical justification for direct government

involvement in the provision of quality child care. However, even the best justifications in terms of

equity or market failures are moot if it is not actually possible to improve child outcomes through

intervention. Hence, we will return to this question in the next section. In the remainder of this section

we examine two types of government interventions in the private child care market: subsidies and

regulation.



B. Subsidies

Table 9, which is based on Blau ( 2003b) shows the history, goals, and main provisions of the major

child care subsidy programs in the U.S.xiv The oldest program is the Dependent Care Tax Credit, which,

since it is not refundable, does not benefit low income families without tax liabilities. The Exclusion of

Employer-Provided Dependent Care Expenses (EEPDCE) allows expenses paid or incurred by an

employer for dependent care assistance provided to an employee to be excluded from the employee’s

gross taxable earnings. This subsidy is also of little benefit to low-income families.

        The 1988 Family Support Act (FSA) and the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (OBRA) of


xiv
   One significant program not included in Table 9 is military child care. Government expenditure on military child
care was estimated to be $352 million in 2000 (Campbell et al., 2000). This program is not discussed here because it
is not available to civilians. The military child care system was drastically reformed in the 1990s, and the current
military child care system is often taken as a model of how a publicly-run child care program should be organized.
See Campbell et al. (2000), U.S. General Accounting Office (1999b), and Lucas (2001) for information on military
child care.



                                                       28
1990 instituted four different means-tested child care subsidy programs, with different target populations,

eligibility requirements, and subsidy rates. This resulted in a fragmented system in which families had to

switch from one program to another as a result of changes in employment or welfare status which may

have depressed takeup below already low levels (c.f. U.S. Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental

Relations, 1994; U.S. General Accounting Office, 1995; Ross, 1996; Long et al., 1998). The 1996

Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act (PRWORA) consolidated the

programs created by FSA and OBRA into a single block grant called the Child Care and Development

Fund (CCDF). Under the new system, states can allow families that move from welfare to work to

remain in the same subsidy program. Rules governing the types of child care that can be subsidized are

determined by the states, and hence vary widely across states. States have substantial flexibility in

designing their CCDF programs, as shown in Table 10.

        The data in Table 10 show that only nine states set income eligibility at the maximum allowed by

law, 85 percent of State Median Income (SMI). Ten states set the income eligibility limit at less than 50

percent of SMI. States are permitted to waive fees (co-payments) for families with income below the

poverty line, and the fourth column of Table 10 shows that there is substantial variation across states in

use of this provision. Fees are determined in many different ways, including flat rates, percent of cost,

percent of income, and combinations of these. States are required to have sliding scale fee structures, with

fees that rise with family income. The minimum fee shown in the fifth column of the table is the co-

payment required of the lowest-income families, and the maximum fee shown in the sixth column is the

co-payment for the highest-income eligible families. The reimbursement rates listed in the last two

columns represent the amount of the subsidy exclusive of the family co-payment. States that provide

relatively generous reimbursement also tend to have higher income eligibility limits: the correlation

between the figures in columns 2 and 8 is .51, and between the figures in columns 3 and 8 is .25. Federal

guidelines for implementation of the CCDF law require that the subsidy rate be set at the 75th percentile of

the price distribution from a recent local market rate survey. In practice many states use out-of-date

market rate surveys or set the subsidy rate lower than the 75th percentile of the price distribution (Adams,

Schulman, and Ebb, 1998).



                                                    29
        Table 11 summarizes federal and state expenditures on child care subsidies in recent years, and

the numbers of children served by the subsidy programs. A rough figure for total expenditure on child

care subsidies in Fiscal Year 1999 is $13 billion. A meaningful total for the number of children cannot be

computed, because the DCTC lists only the number of families served, and data are not available for

TXX. The CCDF is the biggest program in terms of expenditure, at about $9 billion. Much of the CCDF

funding was transferred from TANF; the CCDF appropriation for 1999 was $5.285 billion.xv

        Table 12 shows data on the incidence of child care subsidy receipt and characteristics of

recipients in 1999, tabulated from the SIPP. The respondents who used non-parental child care were

asked if they received any assistance from a government agency in paying their child care expenses.

Overall, only 2.1% of respondents reported receiving a subsidy. This seems quite low. It is likely that tax-

based subsidies were not reported, and subsidies paid directly to child care providers may have been

under-reported. The highest incidence of subsidy receipt by income, 5.3%, was reported by respondents

with annual income of $5-10,000, and the incidence generally declines with income. Recipients of public

assistance (TANF, Food Stamps, General Assistance) reported a subsidy receipt rate of 11.2%. Among

households with income less than $25,000, subsidy recipients were much more likely to use center care

than non-recipients, and were more likely to pay some out-of-pocket expenses than non-recipients. The

maternal employment rate was much higher among recipients than non-recipients, no doubt reflecting the

fact that most child care subsidies require employment or employment-related activities such as education

and training. On the other hand, average hours worked and wage rates conditional on employment are

similar for recipients and non-recipients. Subsidy recipients have higher education, a lower marriage rate

(among non-recipients of public assistance), fewer adults in the household other than the mother and

father, and more young children than non-recipients.

        If we assume for the moment that all child care is of the same quality, and that the mother must

purchase one hour of child care for every hour that she works, then we can use the simple model outlined

in Section 3 to examine the effects of subsidized child care on maternal employment. A linear child care

xv
 Expenditure on other programs such as Head Start, Title I, and the Child Care Food Program are discussed below.




                                                     30
subsidy of s dollars per hour changes the budget constraint by raising the wage net of child care costs, and

hence increases the probability that the mother works a positive number of hours. The effect on hours of

work is ambiguous, given that there is both an income and a substitution effect. However, most subsidy

programs are highly nonlinear. As Table 11 shows, most states structure CCDF subsidies so that they

decline as income rises, up to some maximum level at which the family is no longer eligible. This is also

true of TXX child care subsidies and the DCTC. This type of structure results in a "notch" in the budget

constraint at the point when the subsidy drops to zero, as shown in Figure 1. Like a linear subsidy, a

nonlinear subsidy creates an incentive to work. But it is even more difficult to determine effects on hours

of work given that women now have incentives to locate on particular portions of the budget constraint.

        By making paid care relatively cheaper, a subsidy will increase the probability that the mother is

employed and that paid care is used. But subsidies for paid child care will also have effects on the use of

unpaid care. Some women who would have worked and used unpaid care will switch to paid care. Thus,

a subsidy to paid care "crowds out" unpaid care. Moreover, a child care subsidy will have income effects

on the purchases of all goods, so that the additional expenditures on child care will be less than the

amount of the subsidy. However, even given these crowd out effects, Blau ( 2003b) shows that a child

care subsidy is usually a less expensive way to increase labor supply than a wage subsidy. The intuition

is that the wage subsidy provides benefits to all working mothers, including the many mothers who use

unpaid care, while the child care subsidy provides benefits only to mothers who use paid care.

        We can go one step further, by relaxing the assumption that all care is of the same quality, and

assuming that higher quality care costs more; that is, p = α+ βq, where q is child care quality, as in the

model in section 3. Most existing child care subsidies affect α but not β, because they are independent of

quality. Others, such as the CCDF, can only be used in child care arrangements that satisfy state licensing

standards or are legally exempt from such standards. These subsidies can be thought of as being subject

to a quality threshold, but they are independent of quality once that threshold is crossed. Thus, they do

not alter the marginal price of quality (ignoring general equilibrium effects). As discussed in Section 3, a

subsidy that is independent of quality (which we can call an α-subsidy) has a bigger positive effect on

employment than a quality specific or β-subsidy. On the other hand, a β-subsidy has a bigger effect on



                                                    31
the quality of care that is chosen. Hence, there is a direct policy tradeoff between those subsidy policies

that are most effective in supporting maternal employment and those that are most effective in improving

child care quality.

        In the remainder of this section we describe evidence on how child care subsidies affect maternal

employment and child care quality. The evidence discussed is from two types of studies: evaluations of

experimental demonstration projects and evaluations of actual child care subsidy programs. Note also that

the literature reviewed above on the effect of the price of child care on employment is relevant as well.

One of the motivations for that literature is to infer how child care price subsidies would affect

employment decisions. Whether inferences about the effects of subsidies drawn from this literature are

useful depends on several factors. If there are substantial costs to taking up a subsidy, either in the form of

time costs required to negotiate the subsidy bureaucracy or psychic costs (“stigma”) of participating in a

means-tested program, then price effects on employment may not be a reliable guide to subsidy effects.

Also, the price effects estimated in this literature are generally assumed to be linear, while most subsidies

are nonlinear. Nonlinearity of a subsidy does not affect the qualitative result that a child care price

subsidy increases the incentive to be employed, but it could affect the magnitude of the employment

effect. Thus estimates of linear price effects could be an unreliable guide to the effects of typical

nonlinear subsidies.

1. Evidence on Subsidies

        Several demonstration programs designed to help low-income families achieve economic

independence included child care subsidies along with other benefits and services. These programs were

evaluated using randomized assignment methods, so the average effects of the programs on outcomes of

interest are estimated without bias by simple comparisons of treatment and control group averages.

However, in each case the child care subsidy was only one of several services provided as part of the

program, so it is not possible to determine how much of the program impacts were due to the child care

subsidy.xvi We discuss one example of a demonstration program in order to illustrate the nature of the
xvi
 A 1989 randomized experiment in Mecklenberg County, North Carolina offered a treatment group of 300 AFDC
mothers guaranteed access to subsidized child care for up to one year within two weeks of taking a full-time job,
while a control group of 302 AFDC mothers had access to subsidized child care only through a long waiting list



                                                       32
evidence from such programs.

             New Hope was a program intended to reduce poverty among the low-income population in

Milwaukee (Bos et al., 1999). It operated from 1994 through 1998 with broad eligibility rules that made

virtually anyone with low income eligible to enroll, regardless of employment and family status. The

program was voluntary and provided an earnings supplement, affordable health insurance, a child care

subsidy, and a full-time community service job if no other employment was available. The program

required full-time employment (30 hours per week) and provided benefits for up to three years.

Participants made their own child care arrangements and were reimbursed for most of the expenses, with

a co-payment that increased with family income. 39% of participants with children used child care at an

average subsidy of $2,376 over two years. An early evaluation based on two years of data from the

program found that among individuals who were not employed at entry to the program, participation in

the program increased employment by seven percentage points, boosted earnings by about $700 per year

(13%), raised income by 12%, and had no impact on welfare participation. The program had no

statistically significant effects on employment and earnings for those who were employed for at least 30

hours per week at entry, although the sample size was small (the point estimate of the earnings impact

was -$571 per year), but reduced AFDC and Food Stamp participation by 7-10% in year two. The

program increased use of formal child care by 7.4% for boys and 12.5% for girls, and resulted in

improved academic performance, study skills, social competence, and behavior among boys but not

girls.xvii

with an average wait of 6-10 months. However, the offer was made by mail with no telephone or personal contacts,
and the take up rate was very low: only 1/6 of the treatment group applied for and received a subsidy. The treatment
had no significant impact on welfare participation or expenditure. See Bowen and Neenan (1993) for details.
xvii
    Other demonstrations and experiments that included child care subsidies were the Teenage Parent Demonstration
(Kisker et al., 1998), New Chance (Quint, Bos, and Polit, 1997), GAIN in California (Riccio et al., 1994), the
National Evaluation of Welfare-to-Work Strategies, formerly known as the JOBS program (Hamilton et al., 1997),
the Minnesota Family Investment Program (Miller et al., 1997), the Florida Family Transition Program (Bloom et
al., 1999), and the Gary, Seattle, and Denver Income Maintenance Experiments. The GAIN demonstration excluded
children under age 6. Granger and Cytron (1999) report that the effects of the Teenage Parent Demonstration and
New Chance (which was also targeted at teenage mothers) on use of center-based child care were smaller than in
New Hope and often statistically insignificant. Robins and Spiegelman (1978) estimate that eligibility for a SIME-
DIME child care subsidy increased use of market child care by 18 percentage points in Seattle and 14 percentage
points in Denver. Results for child care use in the other demonstrations are not available. See Hamilton et al. (2000)
for a summary of the effects of all of the recent demonstration programs.




                                                        33
        Turning now to studies that examine the effect of child care subsidies more directly, we discuss

four studies that have estimated the impact of actual child care subsidies on employment. The studies are

summarized in Table 13. In each of these studies the subsidy recipients are self-selected, and the studies

recognize and attempt to deal with the possibility of selectivity bias.

        Two of these studies evaluate means-tested state subsidies for low-income families funded by

Federal programs prior to the 1996 welfare reform (Berger and Black 1992; Meyers, Heintze, and Wolf

2002). Berger and Black compare the employment of mothers with subsidies to those on a wait list and

find that subsidies increase employment by 8.4 to 25.3 percentage points depending on the assumptions

made about unobservables in the model. Meyers, Heintze, and Wolf use the mother’s knowledge of

subsidy programs to identify the effects of child care subsidies on employment. They find much larger

effects of subsidies—on the order of 52 percentage points increase—but the lack of a convincing

comparison group weakens their results.

        A third study by Gelbach (2002) evaluates the labor supply effects of the implicit child care

subsidy provided by free Kindergarten for five year old children in public school. To identify the effect

of the subsidy, Gelbach exploits variation in quarter of birth of children and the fact that all states impose

a date-of-birth requirement for entry to kindergarten. His instrumental variable estimates indicate that

access to free public school increased the employment probability of single mothers whose youngest child

was age five by five percentage points at the interview date and by four percentage points during calendar

year 1979. Gelbach’s approach is creative and provides credible evidence of the impact of a child care

subsidy on employment of mothers whose youngest child is five years old. However, it is unclear whether

his results can be generalized to children younger than five.

        The fourth study evaluates the impact of subsidies in the post-PRWORA era, using data from the

1999 National Survey of America’s Families. Blau and Tekin (2003) identify the employment effect of

subsidy receipt using county-level dummies as instruments for subsidy receipt. Two stage least squares

(2SLS) estimates show an effect of 32.5 percentage points on employment, a result that is significantly

different from zero. The identification strategy may be problematic if, after controlling for 21 county



                                                     34
characteristics, county-level differences in subsidy receipt are not exogenous. Moreover, as in the

Meyers, Heintze, and Wolf study, there is no natural comparison or control group.

        These results indicate that there are at least some positive effects of subsidies on employment.

But it is also interesting to note that there is a low rate of take-up of child care subsidies. Meyers and

Heintze (1999) asked mothers why they did not receive subsidies from the programs for which they

appeared to be eligible, and the majority response for every type of subsidy program was that they were

not aware of the program. The acceptance rate for mothers who applied averaged 72% across all

programs. Similarly, Fuller et al. (1999) estimate a model of child care subsidy take-up for TANF

mothers using data from San Francisco, San Jose, and Tampa in 1998. Of the women using any non-

maternal child care, only 37 to 44 percent received a subsidy.


C. Regulations

        In addition to providing price subsidies, the government intervenes in the child care market by

imposing regulations on providers. As with many other consumer products and services, the goal of these

regulations is to reduce the risk of harm to children. Potential risks include harm from injury as well as

from disease and developmental impairment (Morgan and Azer, 1997). Regulations stipulate such things

as the educational requirements for child care providers, the maximum number of children per child care

staff member, and the frequency with which facilities are inspected.

        Three aspects of regulations are especially important. First, they are determined by state

governments, not the federal government. The federal government can impose standards that child care

providers must meet in order to be eligible for federal subsidies, but the federal government is not

authorized to regulate child care.xviii Child care regulations therefore differ across states, sometimes

substantially. Second, child care regulations impose minimum standards but do not define or attempt to

enforce “optimal” standards, such as those specified by the National Association for the Education of
xviii
   Federal Interagency Day Care Requirements (FIDCR) were developed in the 1960s to standardize the
requirements for receiving federal funding for child care services. These requirements were eliminated in 1981.
Head Start imposes uniform federal standards that providers must meet in order to qualify for funding, and Title IA
also uses the Head Start standards. Hayes, Palmer, and Zaslow (1990, Appendix B) describe the FIDCR. Head Start
program standards are listed at http://www2.acf.dhhs.gov/programs/hsb/regs/regs/rg_index.htm.




                                                       35
Young Children (Morgan and Azer, 1997). Thus it is possible for a child care provider to comply with all

state regulations but nevertheless receive a low score on quality rating scales. Third, regulations differ for

day care centers and family day care homes, and in most states some providers are legally exempt from

regulation. For example, many states exempt day care centers affiliated with a church or family day care

homes that provide care for only a few children. This means that such providers are not required to

register or obtain a license, though they must comply with some health and safety standards.

        Table 14 summarizes a few of the many child care regulations by state. The regulations are

typically very detailed. For example, in most states the maximum group size (GS) and child-staff ratio

(CSR) standards differ by single year of child age, and staff training requirements differ by type of

position. The regulations shown in the table are a small excerpt from the regulatory structure of each

state, but comparisons across states on the basis of the examples shown in the table are a reasonable guide

to the overall relative standards of different states. The maximum CSR for infants younger than one year

old in day care centers ranges from 3:1 in Kansas, Maryland, and Massachusetts to 6:1 in eight states.

Maximum group size for infants ranges from 6 to 20, and is not regulated at all in 19 of the states. The

maximum CSR for four-year old children in centers ranges from 10:1 in 17 states to 20:1 in 4 states, and

the maximum group size for four year olds ranges from 16 in Mississippi to 36 in Georgia. Thirty two

states have no pre-service child care experience or early education/training requirement for teachers in

day care centers. In these states it is legal to employ a teacher with no education, training, or experience

in child care or early education, though many of these states do impose a non-child-care-specific

education requirement such as a high school diploma. In the other states, pre-service requirements range

from Georgia’s mandate of ten clock hours of training in child care within the year following the date of

hire, to Hawaii’s requirements of a Bachelor’s degree in any field, 12 credits in early childhood

education, and six months experience.

        States inspect child care providers and give them information on how to comply with regulations.

Table 14 includes a summary measure of state enforcement: the average annual number of inspections per

day care center. This varies from a low of 0.5 (every other year) in four states to a high of four per year in

Florida and Tennessee and three or 3.5 in eight other states. Interestingly, most of the states with three or



                                                    36
more annual inspections have no pre-service training requirement for staff, suggesting that frequent

inspections might be viewed as a substitute for a minimum training standard.

        The last two columns of Table 14 show the maximum allowed CSR in family day care homes and

the minimum number of children in a family day care home for which a license is required. In many states

the maximum CSR varies by age; the table shows the maximum for preschool age children. This ranges

from a low of three in Kansas to a high of 12 in four states. About half the states require all family day

care homes to be licensed or registered, while four states exempt those caring for fewer than six children

and four others exempt those caring for fewer than five children.

        An important question is whether child care regulations have any effect on the well-being of

children. In principle, imposing more stringent minimum standards on child care arrangements should

improve child well-being. But this conclusion presumes that: (1) the standards are binding on the existing

practices in child care settings; (2) regulations are enforced; and (3) parents do not “avoid” the regulations

by the child care arrangements they choose. Whether or not the regulations are circumvented will depend

in part on how costly they are to implement and enforce. To the extent that higher quality and safer child

care arrangements are costly to produce, binding child care regulations are likely to increase the price of

child care, causing some parents to be “priced out” of regulated care. As a result of this “crowd-out”

effect, it is unclear whether imposing more stringent standards on regulated child care will actually

increase the quality of care to which children are exposed on average.

        Table 15 summarizes the literature about crowd-out in child care markets. Using data from a

national sample of child care centers, Chipty and Witte (1997) find that a lower required child/staff ratio

for preschool children reduces the probability that child care centers care for preschool rather than school

age children, and vice-versa.xix Blau (2003) uses data from the SIPP and considers a more comprehensive

set of child care regulations. He finds that child care regulation affects the type of child care that is

chosen (though he finds no impact on child care expenditures or hours in care). Currie and Hotz (2001)

use data from the NLSY and find that tougher child care regulations are associated with lower
xix
  See also Fuller, Raudenbush, Wei, and Holloway (1993), Gormley (1991); Lowenberg and Tinnin (1992); Queralt
and Witte (1997); and Rose-Ackerman 1983).




                                                     37
probabilities of using regulated child care services. However, Currie and Hotz also show that regulating

the education of care givers improves the safety of children at these centers. Evidence from some

household surveys indicates that stricter child-staff ratio and training regulations are associated with

lower rates of use of non-parental child care and lower hours of care per week among users (Hotz and

Kilburn, 1997; Hofferth and Chaplin, 1998). However, Ribar (1992) finds no impact of a stricter child-

staff ratio on hours of child care used, and Chipty (1995) finds mixed results on the effects of regulations

on use of child care.

        Evidence on the effects of child care regulations on labor force participation of mothers shows

small negative effects, often insignificantly different from zero (Hotz and Kilburn, 1997; Blau, 1993;

Ribar, 1992). Hotz and Kilburn (1997) and Hofferth and Chaplin (1998) find that tougher regulations are

associated with higher family expenditure per hour of child care among families paying for care. Chipty

(1995) finds that a stricter group size regulation in both family day care and centers raises family

expenditure per hour in both settings, but a stricter child-staff ratio regulation reduces expenditure in both

settings. Imposing a training requirement in a given sector is associated with lower family expenditure in

that sector.

        As discussed above, parents may be uncertain about the quality of care their children will receive

from a particular child care provider. For example, parents may not know exactly how attentive a provider

is to their child or how safe a particular setting is. Informational deficiencies among consumers with

respect to quality are a common concern in markets for many goods and services and the potential for

adverse selection in such markets is well-known. Imposing minimum quality standards, via regulation,

represents one mechanism for solving the informational problems faced by consumers.xx For example,

Klein and Leffler (1981) argue that the maintenance of licensure systems that impose minimum quality

standards on service providers may have beneficial welfare effects in markets for goods and services in

which product quality is difficult to monitor. Imposing standards in such markets can “assure” consumers
xx
  Also see Leland (1979) for more on the role of licensing and imposing minimum quality standards in markets for
goods and services with hard-to-monitor quality attributes. See Lowenstein and Tinnin (1992), Chipty and Witte
(1997) and Hotz and Kilburn (1997, 2000) for more on the application of such arguments to the market for child
care services.




                                                      38
of the quality of the goods and services they receive to the extent that a provider’s investment in meeting

such standards either generates a higher stream of earnings or results in higher costs (fines) to the

provider if these minimum standards are violated.

         Regulations may change the production function for child quality, making it easier to avoid

unintentional injury with a given level of parental effort. As a result, such regulations may increase both

the actual quality of care in the regulated sector and the amount that parents are willing to pay for it.

Chipty and Witte (1997) find, using individual-level data from the National Child Care Survey, that

increasing the number of mandatory inspections increases both the price of child care and the number of

hours that children spend in care. This finding is consistent with the idea that minimum quality standards

may encourage consumers to purchase more child care.

         On the other hand, Blau (2003a) finds that a substantial portion of day care centers fail to comply

with regulations, which limits the usefulness of regulation as a means of providing quality assurance. The

weak association between those structural aspects of quality that can be regulated, such as staff-pupil

ratios and more global measures of quality suggest that it would be very difficult to substantially increase

the quality of child care centers through regulation alone. For example, the estimates presented in Mocan

et al (1995) suggest that to increase the quality of a child care center from average to good through

reductions in staff-pupil ratios would require a reduction in staff-pupil ratios from 5.4 children per staff

member to 1.6.

         Thus, it may be unrealistic to expect regulation to do much more than to weed out centers with

unacceptably low levels of quality. There is evidence from the Head Start program that detailed

government oversight of observable aspects of quality can eliminate poor quality programs. Head Start

centers have consistently been found to be of higher quality on average than other preschool programs

(Resnick and Zill, undated), because in contrast to the private child care market, there are few very low-

quality Head Start programs.xxi
xxi
  However, the quality of Head Start should not be regarded as uniform, either. Zigler and Styfco (1994) argue that
funds are insufficient to allow for proper enforcement of Head Start program standards, which may be one reason
for the variation in quality. Still, it is interesting that the sheer existence of these standards, even with little
enforcement, seems to be associated with a minimum level of quality higher than the minimum observed in the
private sector.




                                                       39
        An interesting alternative approach to the regulation of child care quality, would be to encourage

the use of credentialing services, as suggested by Shapiro’s (1986) model. Xiao (2002) studies a

voluntary quality certification mechanism for child care centers. She presents evidence that relatively few

child care centers bother to get certification although it is inexpensive to do so. She argues that

certification conveys information to parents, but most parents have already gleaned the same information

from other sources. Hence, certification has little effect on demand for child care centers, which explains

why few centers obtain the certification.

        In summary, regulating the child care market by imposing minimum standards on some segments

of the market can be a two-edged sword. While children in child care settings subject to binding

regulation may receive higher quality care, regulation is also likely to drive some children out of the

regulated sector. Thus, the overall effect of regulation is ambiguous, with the potential crowd out effect

balanced against the quality assurance effect. Estimating the magnitudes of these separate effects is

difficult, requiring the imposition of considerable structure on the parental child care choice process and

child quality production functions in order to separately identify these effects. The utility of regulation is

also limited by failure to comply and by the fact that only the most obvious (and not necessarily most

important) aspects of quality can be regulated.



5. Publicly provided child care

        As discussed above, most child care subsidy programs do not attempt to influence the quality of

care, and regulatory policy must balance potential crowd out with quality assurance. In contrast, publicly

provided care is usually explicitly intended to improve the quality of care that children receive in order to

enhance their development. This section provides an overview of the literature on early intervention, and

of the emerging literature on after school programs.



A. Model Early Intervention Programs

         A recent National Research Council (2000a) report on early childhood education and

intervention divides skill development into three areas: cognitive skills, school readiness, and social and



                                                    40
emotional development. Until very recently, the economics literature on this topic has focused primarily

on the development of cognitive skills as measured by test scores, and especially on IQ. The gains in test

scores associated with early intervention are often short-lived, which has cast doubt on the effectiveness

of these programs. However, there is increasing evidence that the absence of obvious behavior problems

and the development of skills such as self-control may be at least as important to future success in life as

formal cognitive skills (Lee et al., 1990; Heckman, Hsse and Rubinstein, 2000). Non-cognitive attributes

-- even in a form as basic as the ability to sit still and pay attention -- may even be necessary for the full

development of formal cognitive skills. Thus, the focus in the early intervention literature has recently

shifted towards trying to measure outcomes such as success in school (i.e. reductions in remedial

education placements and grade repetition) and the earnings of children who participated in early

intervention programs.



        The excellent literature reviews of early childhood education programs in Barnett (1995) and

Karoly (1998) list 16 studies of model programs. Table 16 shows the results of the seven such studies

that followed a randomized methodology. These programs were typically funded at higher levels and run

by more highly trained staff than large-scale, publicly-funded programs. The sample sizes for treatment

and control groups in these model studies are small, often less than 100 children. However, evidence from

these studies can be used to shed light on the issue of whether it is possible to use early intervention to

improve child outcomes. In a randomized trial, children are randomly assigned to treatment and control

groups. The importance of random assignment is that researchers can be reasonably certain that there are

no pre-existing, unobserved, and uncontrolled differences between the treatments and controls on

average. In contrast, when comparison groups are created by some method other than random assignment,

one can never be certain that the differences between the treatments and controls reflect the effects of the

experimental intervention rather than the effects of some other unobserved difference between the groups.

However, even in a randomized trial, problems can arise: Some of the more serious problems mentioned

in Heckman and Smith (1995) include differential attrition from treatment and control groups, the fact

that people randomized to the control group may seek "treatment" outside the experiment, and the fact



                                                      41
that it is often difficult to generalize the results of experiments to differing settings

         For example, the Institute for Developmental Studies program summarized in Table 16 (Deutsch

et al., 1983) started with 503 participants but was able to conduct long-term follow-up at grade 7 on only

97 of them. The 97 who were followed may not be very representative of the initial sample since they are

likely to be from more stable families. Unless attrition is random, it is difficult to draw any inferences

about the long-term outcomes of the whole group from this small subset. Four studies from Table 16

stand out because they used random assignment, are relatively free of attrition, and follow children at

least into middle school. They are the Early Training Project, the Carolina Abecedarian Project, the Perry

Preschool Project, and the Milwaukee Project. (The Infant Health and Development Project also used a

randomized design and had low attrition, but followed children only to age 8. A long-term followup is
                           xxii
currently in the field.)

         The first conclusion that can be drawn from these studies was alluded to above: Only the

Milwaukee Project found any long-term effect on IQ. However, the Early Training, Carolina

Abecedarian, and Perry Preschool Projects all found positive effects on measures of scholastic success,

which strongly suggests that boosting IQ is not the only way to affect this important outcome.

         The Early Training Project was the least intensive intervention of this group. It served four and

five year-olds, and involved weekly home visits during the year in addition to a ten-week part-day

preschool for either two or three summers. It showed dramatic reductions in use of special education by

age 12: 5 percent of the treatment group compared to 29 percent of the controls. Although there were no

statistically significant differences between treatments and controls in achievement test scores, grade

retention, or high school graduation, differences in the latter two outcomes were in the right direction.

For example, 68 percent of the treatment group graduated compared to only 52 percent of the controls.

The lack of statistical significance is likely to be due to the small sample size: 44 treatments and 21

controls.


xxii
     The IHDP data has been extensively analyzed. In addition to the positive effects on IQ and other outcomes at
age 8, analysts have shown using propensity score analysis that the largest effects were for the children who would
otherwise have been least likely to have been in center based care (Hill et al. 2002), and that the largest effects were
for children of the least educated mothers.



                                                         42
        The Carolina Abecedarian Project involved a somewhat larger group of 57 treatments and 54

controls. At birth, children were randomized into a treatment group that received enriched center-based

child care services emphasizing language development for eight hours per day, five days a week, 50

weeks per year, from birth to age five, and a control group that did not receive these services. The

teacher/student ratio ranged from 1:3 to 1:6 depending on the child's age. At school entry, the children

were again randomized into two groups. One received no further intervention, and the other had a

"Home-School Resource Teacher" who provided additional instruction, a liaison between parents and

school, and served as a community resource person for the family (Campbell and Ramey, 1994, 1995).

        At age 15, the Carolina Abecedarian Project found that the children who had received the

preschool intervention had higher scores on achievement tests (especially reading) and reductions in the

incidence of grade retention and special education, regardless of whether or not they had been assigned a

Home-School Resource Teacher once they entered school. Retention in grade and being placed in the

special education "track" are viewed by educators as predictors of dropping out of school. They also

create additional costs to society that must be weighed against the costs of providing the early

intervention. In contrast, the effects of the Home-School Resource Teacher were generally either small or

statistically insignificant. The investigators have now completed a follow-up assessment of the

Abecedarian children at age 21.xxiii Of the original 111 infants, 104 were assessed. At age 21, the

children who received the preschool intervention had higher average tests scores and were twice as likely

to still be in school or to have ever attended a four-year college.

        A recent cost benefit analysis based on follow-ups through age 21 suggested that each dollar

spent on Abecedarian saved tax payers four dollars (Masse and Barnett, 2002). Both the study children

and their mothers had higher earnings, and costs for special education and health care were reduced in the

treatment group relative to the controls.

        The most famous of these interventions is the Perry Preschool Project, which involved 58

children in the treatment group and 65 controls. The intervention involved a half-day preschool every
xxiii
   The following discussion is taken from the Executive Summary of the Carolina Abecedarian Project which is
available at http://www.fpg.unc.edu/verity.




                                                     43
week day plus a weekly 90 minute home visit for eight months of the year, for two years.

Teacher/student ratios were 1 to 6, and all teachers had masters degrees and training in child development

(Schweinhart et al., 1993). The intervention had positive effects on achievement test scores, grades, high

school graduation rates, and earnings, as well as negative effects on crime rates and welfare use (as of age

27). It is estimated that each dollar spent on this program saved up to seven dollars in social costs (see

Karoly et al. 1998 for a more detailed discussion).

        Studies of model early intervention programs do not show universally positive results. In

particular, studies with non-randomized designs frequently find insignificant or even wrong-signed

effects. However, well-designed studies of intensive educational interventions show that it is possible for

intervention to make a positive difference in children's lives.



B. Head Start

        There is a large gap between the model programs for early childhood education and the large-

scale publicly funded interventions that are currently in place. The largest and best known public

program is Head Start, a preschool program for disadvantaged children which aims to improve their skills

so that they can begin schooling on an equal footing with their more advantaged peers. Begun in 1965 as

part of President Johnson's "War on Poverty", Head Start now serves almost 800,000 children in

predominantly part-day programs, about 60% of eligible 3 and 4 year old poor children (U.S.

Administration on Children Youth and Families, 1999). Over time, federal funding has increased from

$96 million in 1965 to $6.2 billion in FY2001.

        These numbers can be compared to those in Table 1, which shows that 21% of three year olds and

36% of 4 year olds had some sort of center based care as their primary arrangement in 1999. This figure

should include Head Start cases, since Head Start is classified as center care in Table 1. However, it is

likely that this number excludes many children who are in Head Start. The Census Bureau currently asks

the SIPP child care questions between April and July, when many part-year Head Start centers are closed.

The 1999 SIPP yields less than 200,000 children in Head Start, far lower than the number indicated by

administrative records. Still, we conclude that the fraction of children served by Head Start is quite large



                                                      44
relative to the total number of children of this age range in any sort of center-based care.

        Head Start is run at the local level, but local operators are subject to federal quality guidelines.

These guidelines specify that Head Start is to provide a wide range of services in addition to providing a

nurturing learning environment. For example, Head Start is required to facilitate and monitor utilization

of preventive medical care by participants, as well as to provide nutritious meals and snacks. This multi-

dimensional aspect of the program has generated controversy, since some observers feel that Head Start

should focus more narrowly on “education”. The program is not an entitlement, but is funded by

appropriation, which means that when funds run out, eligible children cannot be served.

        Head Start provides child care services that are of much better quality than those commonly

available to low income parents, though they are not usually full-day programs. xxiv However, the most

recent available estimates suggest that as of 1995, 28 percent of Head Start parents were employed full

time, and 17 percent were employed part-time (Smith, 2000). These percentages may have become

much higher in recent years due to welfare reform. Head Start parents typically combine Head Start with

relative care, in order to obtain the required number of child care hours.

        The successful model programs discussed in the previous section were funded at higher levels

than a typical publicly funded program. For example, in 1998 it cost $5,021 to keep a child in a part-day

Head Start program for 34 weeks a year, implying that it would cost approximately $10,000 to send a

child for two years. The part-day Perry Preschool intervention cost $12,884 per child (in 1999 dollars) for

a program that lasted eight months a year over two years. Since 20 percent of the children participated

only for one year, the figures imply that the cost per child was approximately $7,000 per year, so that

Head Start costs approximately 71 percent of what Perry Preschool cost (Karoly et al., 1998).

        The Administration for Children, Youth, and Families estimates that it would cost $2,394 to

extend the Head Start program to full-year care, and an additional $1,615 to extend it to full-day/full-year

care. Taking these figures together, it would cost approximately $9000 per child per year to have a child

xxiv
   Tabulations from the CQOS show that among families using for-profit day care centers, 40% of the lowest
income quartile used care with ECERS quality less than or equal to 3, compared to only 9% of the top income
quartile. The distribution of quality by income was much more even among users of non-profit child care.




                                                      45
in a full-year, full-day Head Start program (Bourdette, 1999). The preschool component of the Carolina

Abecedarian intervention (which was full-day) cost about $15,000 per child, per year and this part of the

intervention lasted five years. Children entered the preschool component of the program between 1972

and 1983.xxv Fewell and Scott (1997) report that the IHDP program also cost about $15,000 per year per

child, though 20 percent of the costs were in the form of transportation expenses. These figures suggest

that a full-year, full-day Head Start program would cost roughly 60 percent of what these model programs

cost.

         Since the model programs offered more intensive services with smaller group sizes and more

highly trained personnel, it is reasonable to expect that they would have larger effects than Head Start or

similar public programs. The reviews of early childhood education studies in Barnett (1995) and Karoly

(1998) list 22 studies of the effects of Head Start programs, as well as similar programs funded under

Title 1 of the Federal Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965. (Title 1 provides about $8

billion per year to school districts with disadvantaged students, but makes few stipulations regarding how

the funds can be spent. It is estimated that in FY1999 about $2 billion was spent on services for preschool

age children (U.S. General Accounting Office, 1999a, p. 6)).

         It is surprising that there has never been a large-scale, randomized trial of a typical Head Start

program.xxvi Moreover, few existing studies have attempted to follow children past the elementary grades.

xxv
  Ramey, Campbell and Blair (1998) state that on average the preschool component of the program cost about
$6,000 per year in 1978 dollars, which is approximately $15,000 in 1999 dollars. It is not completely clear that the
CPI is the right deflator to use in making this adjustment, however, since the bulk of child care costs are for labor
and wages of less skilled workers fell over this period. A cost-benefit analysis of the Abecedarian program by
Masse and Barnett (2002) estimates that using a discount rate of 5%, the PDV of the program costs was $34,600,
and the PDV of the benefits was $76,000. The benefits included in the calculation were the treatment-control
differences in participant earnings, earnings of future generations, earnings of the participant’s mother, savings in K-
12 education costs, savings in smoking-related health expenditure, differences in higher education costs (a
“negative” benefit, since the treatments attended college at a higher rate than the controls), and savings in welfare
expenditure.
xxvi
   The Advisory Committee on Head Start Research and Evaluation recently recommended that the Department of
Health and Human Services conduct an evaluation that relies on random assignment of children in sites in which
funds are insufficient to serve all eligible children; that is, if some children are to be denied access to services in any
case, the committee recommends that this be done randomly so that the effects of Head Start can be assessed. This
proposed random-assignment evaluation of Head Start was recently initiated, but results will not be available for
some time. See http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/core/ongoing_research/hs/impact_intro.html. The evaluations are
to focus on the intermediate outcome of school readiness. Longer-term followup of treated children would be very
useful, but raises many practical problems to do with tracking substantial numbers of individuals over long periods



                                                           46
The most recent federally-sponsored study of Head Start is FACES which stands for Family and Child

Experiences Survey (Zill, Resnick and McKey, undated). Unfortunately this study took a short-term

perspective and had no control group. The study focused on documenting improvements in the skills of

Head Start children over the course of a year in the program. The children showed gains in social skills

over the course of a year in Head Start. However, these gains could not be compared to any national

norms, so it is unclear what to make of the finding; after all, surely one would expect all preschool

children to improve their social skills over the course of a year. The cognitive gains of the Head Start

children were assessed by comparing the Head Start children to national norms. These findings were

consistent with those of many other studies that have documented short-term gains to some cognitive

skills, particularly to verbal skills.

           Table 17 provides an overview of selected studies of large-scale publicly funded early childhood

intervention programs, focusing on those which are most recent and prominent and on those which have

made especially careful attempts to control for other factors that might affect outcomes.xxviiThe

Educational Testing Service's Longitudinal Study of Head Start, began by conducting a spring canvas of

all the children in a neighborhood who would be eligible to enter Head Start in the fall (Lee et al., 1990).

The children who actually attended Head Start had lower scores on average than those who did not,

although much of the difference could be accounted for by family characteristics. The children were

followed into second grade, and it was found that Head Start attendance had positive effects on both

verbal test scores and measures of social adjustment such as impulse control. Unfortunately, it was not

possible to follow the children further to see whether these effects were sustained.

           The Chicago Child-Parent Centers is an early intervention that began with an enriched preschool

program, and followed up with an enriched curriculum for school-aged children up to age nine. This

intervention is similar to providing a Head Start-like preschool program and then improving the school

of time.
xxvii
    Mckey et al. (1985) offers a meta-analysis of many of these Head start studies. They argue that while the effects
generally do not reach statistical significance in individual studies, the studies taken together suggest positive effects
on schooling attainment, school attendance, health care utilization, and social development. Here, we take a
different approach by focusing on those studies that we judge to be most methodologically sound.




                                                          47
subsequently attended by the Head Start children. Reynolds (1998) followed a sample of children who

had all participated in the preschool and kindergarten components of the program through 7th grade.

Some participated after kindergarten (the treatments) and some did not (the controls). In addition, some

attended schools in which the extended program was offered for two years, while some attended schools

in which it was offered for three years. Reynolds finds significant reductions in the rates of grade

retention, special education, and delinquency in the treatment group, as well as higher reading scores. He

uses several different statistical methods to control for the possibly unobserved characteristics of the (non-

randomly assigned) treatment and control children.xxviii His results are robust to the use of different

methodologies.

         In other studies of the Chicago Child-Parent Center population, Temple et al. (2000) follow the

children to the end of high school and find that the program reduced the high school dropout rate by 24

percent, and that the size of the effect grows with the time that children spent in the program. Reynolds et

al. (2000) look at several additional outcomes including delinquency, crime, and a skills test and find

beneficial effects of the program on all of the outcomes they examine. They include a simple cost-benefit

analysis which suggests that a dollar spent on the program saved $3.69 in future costs to government.

         The National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, which has followed a nationally representative

group of people who were between the ages of 14 and 21 in 1978, began following the children born to

women in NLSY in 1986. Currie and Thomas (1995) use these data to evaluate Head Start. They attempt

to control for unobserved characteristics of children by comparing siblings who participated in Head Start

to those who did not. The idea is that by using siblings as the controls, any shared characteristics of

family background will be controlled. As discussed above, unobserved characteristics such as the parents'

views on the importance of education are likely to contaminate estimates of program effects if they are


xxviii
       Reynolds (1998) uses three different methods. First, he conducts an analysis of the initial differences in test
scores between the two groups, and finds that most of it can be explained by observable characteristics; that is, there
do not appear to be large pre-existing unobservable differences between the treatments and the controls. Second, he
estimates a model in which selection into the treatment group is controlled for by including the inverse Mill's ratio
from a first-stage selection equation. In this model, it is assumed that the characteristics of each school site affected
selection into the treatment group without having additional direct effects on child outcomes. A third approach is to
compare children in schools which offered the treatment for two years to those in schools that offered it for three.




                                                          48
not accounted for.

        The Currie and Thomas (1995) evaluation is one of very few to have included significant samples

of the 60 percent of Head Start children who are not African-American. The estimates of gains for

African-American children parallel those of studies in which subjects were randomly assigned, which

lends them additional credibility: initial gains in vocabulary and reading test scores "faded out" while the

children were still in elementary grades. For white children, in contrast, there were persistent gains in test

scores, as well as reductions in grade repetition. It is worth emphasizing that the initial gains in test

scores were the same for whites and blacks -- thus, the real difference was not in the initial impact of the

Head Start program but in what happened to the children after they left.

        In conjunction with results from Reynolds' work on the Chicago Parent-Child program and with

evidence that Head Start children often go on to attend poor schools (Lee and Loeb, 1995) these results

suggest that the fade out of Head Start gains among African-American children may be due not to

deficiencies in the Head Start program but to problems of subsequent school quality. Currie and Thomas

(2000) find that black children who attended Head Start go on to attend schools of lower quality than

other black children. However, the same is not true among whites. Moreover, when they stratify by an

indicator of school quality, gaps in test scores between Head Start and other children are very similar for

blacks and whites. Hence, the effects of Head Start may fade out more rapidly among black students at

least in part because black Head Start children are more likely to subsequently attend inferior schools.

        Only two published studies have attempted to follow Head Start children into adulthood. Oden,

Schweinhard, and Weikart (2000) report on an attempt to follow up a group of young adults who

participated in Head Start between 1970 and 1971 in both urban and rural areas in Colorado and Florida.

These children were compared to a group of children who had never participated in any form of early

childhood education program. In order to construct the comparison group, researchers found young

adults who had lived on the same streets, or in the same census tracts as the Head Start children, and who

had initially enrolled in the same elementary school. They recognize that this method of constructing a

comparison group is imperfect, and note that in the final sample, the Head Start children were likely to be

from more disadvantaged backgrounds along a number of dimensions. A statistical analysis of



                                                     49
differences in many different outcomes between the Head Start and no intervention children is presented,

but none of the differences are statistically significant at conventional levels of significance.

        In contrast, Garces, Thomas, and Currie (2002) find that Head Start generates long-term

improvements in important outcomes such as schooling attainment, earnings, and crime reduction. The

data for this study come from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) which began in 1968 with a

survey of 4,802 households containing 18,000 individuals. In 1995, adults in the PSID who were age 30

or younger were asked whether they had ever been enrolled in Head Start or any other preschool or

daycare program. These adults have been followed since childhood, and also answered questions about

labor force participation, earnings, schooling, and criminal activity. There are roughly 4,000 respondents

in the survey for whom both information about preschool and information about these adult outcomes is

available.xxix They find that disadvantaged whites who had been enrolled in Head Start were more likely

to graduate from high school and to have attended college than siblings who did not, while African-

Americans who attended Head Start were significantly less likely to have been booked or charged with a

crime compared to siblings who did not participate in Head Start.

        The existing evidence from both model programs and Head Start studies suggests that the benefits

of early intervention may be greater for more disadvantaged children than for other children, though

again, this needs to be more rigorously demonstrated. For example, in the Carolina Abecedarian project,

researchers found positive effects that were twice as large for children from the poorest and least educated

families as they were for the other children. The Infant Health and Development Project listed in Table

14 found positive effects on math scores only for a group of relatively high birthweight children within

their low birthweight sample. But within this group, the children of the poorest and least educated

mothers gained the most. Currie and Thomas (1999) find that in a sample of Hispanic children in Head

Start, the largest gains in test scores were among children of mothers who had been interviewed in

Spanish, suggesting that at least some of the positive effect of the program is due to increased preschool
xxix
   A possible problem is that the Head Start questions refer to events that took place many years ago. Aware that
survey participants might have problems remembering preschool attendance, the authors compare self-reported
PSID Head Start enrollment rates and the racial composition of enrollments in the PSID with those reported by the
Head Start Bureau. They find no evidence that poor memories contaminate their results.




                                                       50
exposure to "mainstream" language.

        In summary, the evidence in support of favorable long-term effects of public programs is less

conclusive than the evidence showing positive effects of model programs, mostly because there have been

very few well-designed studies of longer-term effects. Thus, the jury is still out on whether Head Start is

cost effective, although Currie (2001) calculates that the short and medium-term benefits of Head Start (in

terms of reducing ills such as grade repetition) pay back 40 to 60% of the cost of the program. Thus, if

Head Start has long-term benefits even a quarter as large as those of some of the model programs, then

the intervention pays for itself.



C. Early Head Start

        The Early Head Start (EHS) program was created in 1994 as part of a Congressional mandate to

address the needs of infants and toddlers within the existing Head Start framework. The 1994 legislation

set aside three percent of the 1995 Head Start budget for the creation of EHS. The proportion of funding

designated for EHS has grown steadily since then, reaching ten percent in 2002 (Raikes and Love, 2002).

In response, EHS has grown from 68 programs in 1995 to 664 programs serving over 55,000 families in

2002. EHS is organized and evaluated according to the same performance standards as the Head Start

Program. However, programs are allowed considerable flexibility and can offer several options,

including: a home-based program with weekly home visits and at least two group socializations per

month for each family; a center-based program which also provides a minimum of two home visits per

year; or a mixed approach. EHS can also contract out child care services to existing providers in the

community. Paulsell et al. (2002) and Buell et al. (2002) find evidence that the involvement of EHS

enhances the quality of child care at these locations.

        Perhaps because of controversy regarding the wisdom of encouraging mothers to place infants in

child care, an evaluation component was built into EHS. Seventeen sites have been chosen to be part of

the national evaluation. At each site, randomly assigned treatments and controls are being tracked. It is

interesting to note that in the relatively short time since the program’s inception, the 17 sites in the

national evaluation have all but abandoned the home-based approach in favor of center-based care.



                                                     51
        The results to date of the national evaluation are reported in Table 17. As of age three, the effects

appear to be very positive. The EHS children have significantly higher scores on several tests of

cognitive development, exhibit less aggressive behavior, and less negative behavior towards parents

during play, and are also better able to devote sustained attention to an object during play. Given the

results suggesting some “fade out” in effects of Head Start, at least for some children, it will be very

important to see how well these gains are maintained over time.



D. State Programs

        Head Start has served as a model for state preschools targeted to low-income children in states

such as California (U.S. General Accounting Office, 1995), and also for new (voluntary) universal

preschool programs in Georgia, Oklahoma,and New York.xxx In many states, the state program has a

contractual arrangement with local Head Start agencies, but may also operate through the public schools.

It is common for state programs to use the Head Start Performance Standards as guidelines for their

program. It is also common for these programs to emphasize the “comprehensive services” mandated by

Head Start—that is parent involvement, health referrals, case workers, and home visits in addition to

educational services.

        Table 18 shows state spending on preschool education at three points in time, by program. Most

states have shown significant growth in their expenditures on these programs between 1987 and 1999.

The Children's Defense Fund (1999) reports that as of the 1998-99 school year, 724,610 children were

participating in state-funded enriched preschool programs. A recent NCES report (2003) finds that in

2000-2001, 822,000 children were served by prekindergarten classes operated by public schools. One

impetus for this growth is the federal Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA), which provides

funding to states to support educational services for children with disabilities. In 1999-2000 five percent

of U.S. preschoolers (588,300) received some IDEA services at a cost of $374 million. In order to be
xxx
    Georgia established a universal voluntary program for 4-year olds in 1995. New York followed in 1997, and
Oklahoma expanded an existing program serving disadvantaged kids into a universal 4-year old program in 1998.
In New York, only 200 out of 700 school districts were participating in 2002, and the continued existence of the
program is in jeopardy due to budget crises.




                                                       52
eligible for these funds, states must make free appropriate public education available to all three to five

year old children with disabilities. The NCES report indicates that 51% of public elementary schools that

provided prekindergarten classes used funds from federal or local programs for children with disabilities.

Twenty five percent reported using Title 1 funds, and 13 percent used Head Start funds (nationally, about

13 percent of Head Start centers are operated by public schools). These figures indicate that while there

is considerable overlap between different types of public programs serving preschool children, the

number of children in state-funded early education initiatives is roughly equal to the 800,000 participants

in Head Start. However, we know very little about the effectiveness of these programs, a problem that

has become more urgent given current federal proposals to allow states to opt out of Head Start and

receive block grants instead.xxxi

        The best available summary of research on these programs is a meta-analysis by Gilliam and

Zigler (2001). They note that by 1998, only 13 of 33 state funded preschool programs providing

classroom-based educational services had completed any formal evaluation of the program’s impact on

children. Of these 13, three did not include any comparison group. The remaining 10 generally chose

comparison groups from either eligible non-attendees or randomly chosen classmates who may or may

not have been eligible.   The evaluation of the New York program selected a control group from the

waiting list for the program, which is perhaps the best non-experimental design of the group. However,

this evaluation is extremely dated (1977).

        The evaluations of these programs yielded results quite similar to those of the non-experimental

evaluations of Head Start discussed above. There generally seem to be positive short-term effects on

measures of social-emotional, cognitive, motor, language, academic and literacy skills, which are

sustained through Kindergarten. Most evaluations followed children only into first grade, but noted some

positive effects in academic and literacy domains. The few studies that followed children beyond first

grade found no positive effects, and an evaluation in Kentucky found negative effects when children from

xxxi
   Error! Main Document Only.The Head Start reauthorization bill introduced by Representatives Castle
and Boehner on May 22, 2003 proposes to allow states to opt out of Head Start and receive a block grant. State
programs would not be subject to the same performance standards as Head Start.




                                                      53
the state program were compared to random classmates.

        In contrast, evaluations that looked beyond test scores, sometimes reported positive effects. For

example, a Florida evaluation that examined actual reported incidents of corporal punishment,

suspensions and expulsions found significant effects as late as fourth grade: eligible nonattendees without

preschool experience were significantly more likely to have been disciplined than participants. Similarly,

most states that examined attendance found significant impacts that persisted beyond school entry. For

example, New York found statistically significant impacts at the fifth and sixth grade when comparing

state preschool attendees to non-attendees drawn from the waiting list for the program, and Maryland

found positive effects at tenth grade when participating children were compared to random classmates.

Several studies also reported that participants had higher scores on school-administered academic

achievement tests, although the effect sizes were small. The Maryland and New York evaluations found

statistically significant positive effects at grades 5, 8, 9, and 10, and in grade 6, respectively. Finally,

every state that evaluated retention in grade found that program participants were significantly less likely

to have been retained than controls.

        In sum, like Head Start, state preschool programs have not been adequately evaluated. However,

the limited available information suggests that while effects on cognitive tests scores may fade out, there

may well be longer-term effects on actual achievement. Sstate preschool programs generally bear a

striking resemblance to Head Start, so that even if money diverted from the federal Head Start program

into block grants for states was spent entirely on preschool programming (rather than for example, on

increases in child care subsidies), it is unlikely that this would have a major impact on the type of

programs available to low income children.



E: Programs for School Aged Children


        Data from the National Survey of America’s Families suggests that in 1997, about seven percent

of children 6-12 were enrolled in some sort of after school programming. Concern about the plight of

“latch key” children has led to increasing interest in after school (and before school) programs for




                                                     54
children of school age. Between 1997 and 2002, the U.S. Department of Education increased funding

for 21st Century Community Learning Centers, which are school-based after school programs, from $40

million to $1 billion. In 2001, 1.2 million elementary and middle school students participated in this

program in 3,600 schools. State governments have also increased their spending on these initiatives.

California recently passed Proposition 49, which increased state funding for before and after school

programs up to $455 million dollars, beginning in 2004. Proponents of the measure argued that up to a

million California children under the age of 15 were left unsupervised after school, and that after school

programs could reduce crime rates by 40 percent or more (California Secretary of State, 2002).

        There are many studies examining correlates of self-care in children (c.f. Belle, 1997; Vandell

and Posner, 1999). Some of the more recent studies are summarized in Table 19. With the exception of

Aizer (2003), none of the studies attempt to deal with heterogeneity between students who take care of

themselves after school and other students. There are many reasons to expect selection bias in simple

comparisons of children who are and are not in self care: If parents are less likely to leave children with

problems alone, then the estimated effects of self-care could be under-estimated. On the other hand, self-

care could be correlated with other characteristics of families that cause negative outcomes.

        Many of these observational studies report behavior problems in children left in self care

(Galambos and Maggs, 1989; Marshall et al. 1997; McHale et al, 2001; Pettit et al. (1997, 1999), Rodman

et al. (1985)). Pettit et al. (1997) also report negative correlations between self care and the test scores of

children in self care in grade 1, though they find no significant effect on grade 2 test scores. On the other

hand, Vandell and Ramanan find that among 3rd to 5th grade children, children in self care are

significantly more likely to be “headstrong” and hyperactive, but have test scores similar to other

children, and are equally likely to report peer conflicts.

        Looking at 8th grade children, Richardson (1989) reports that self-care children are significantly

more likely to use cigarettes, alcohol and marijuana than other children. Using data from the National

Longitudinal Survey of Youth, Aizer examines children 10 to 14, and attempts to control for unobserved

family background characteristics using family fixed effects. Her estimates indicate that children in self-



                                                     55
care are significantly more likely to report that they skip school, use alcohol or drugs, have stolen, or have

hurt someone. Thus, these studies offer some support for the view that self-care can be harmful.

        However, it is considerably more difficult to demonstrate, on the basis of the available evidence,

that formal after school programs are the solution to this problem. The first problem facing the

researcher, is that there is little consensus in the literature about the definition of an after-school program.

Seppanen et al. (1993) offer a coherent definition as well as the first national overview of such programs.

Following them, we define an after school program as one offering “formally organized services for five

to thirteen year olds that occur before and/or after school during the academic year and all day when

school is closed and parents are at work.” We further narrow our attention to school or center-based

programs that operate at least one hour per day and at least three days per week. As Seppanen et al. (page

6) explain, “Such programs augment the school day, and typically also the school calendar, creating a

second tier of services that provide supervision, enrichment, recreation, tutoring, and other opportunities

for school-age youth.”

        Seppanen et al. report several surprising findings. First, they find that before and after school

programs are underutilized nationally–enrollments were at an average of only 59 percent of the capacity

of licensed programs, and only one-third of programs were operating at 75 percent or more of capacity.

Thus, the widespread perception that after school programs are unavailable seems to be incorrect, though

it is of course possible that existing programs are “too expensive”. In the 2000 competition for the 21st

Century Community Learning Centers, 2,252 communities applied for funds that were sufficient to fund

only 310 grantees (National Research Council and Institutes of Medicine, 2003).

        Seppanen et al. also report that 90 percent of the before school enrollments, and 83 percent of the

after-school enrollments are of children in prekindergarten through grade three. Thus, it would appear

that these programs are used primarily as child care for children deemed by their parents to be too young

to be on their own, but that the programs are not used very much for the older children who are apparently

most at risk of negative effects of self care. Moreover, the largest drop off in enrollments occurs between

Kindergarten and grade one. It may be that the generally somewhat longer school day for children in



                                                      56
grade school allows parents to find alternative child care arrangements more easily than they can for

Kindergartners.

         According to Seppanen et al. most after school programs offer the following low-cost, easy to

organize activities: socializing, free time, games and puzzles, reading independently or in small groups,

time for homework, unstructured play time, and construction or building (with sand, Legos, etc.). Less

that 75 percent of programs offered activities such as dramatic play or dressing up, music, storytelling, or

theater. Fewer than half of all programs offered creative writing, sports, field trips, or science activities at

least once a week or more. There was also a great deal of heterogeneity in structural measures of program

quality. The education of care-givers ranges from less than high school through graduate degrees. Staff

turnover averaged 60 percent, although some programs reported no turnover. Child-staff ratios ranged

from four to one to 25 to one.

         The existing evaluations of after school programs, summarized in Table 20, tend to focus on

special after school programs rather than on the more typical programs surveyed in Seppanen et al.xxxii

Two other limitations of the existing studies are almost immediately apparent from Table 20. First, very

few studies have used a randomized treatment and control design. Second, while proponents of after

school programs generally focus on keeping older kids out of trouble, many of the “model” after-school

programs that have been evaluated focus on improving the scholastic outcomes of younger children.

         Two of the better studies of this type are the Howard Street Tutoring Program and the Memphis

City Schools Extended Day Tutoring program. Both used a design in which students with poor reading

test scores were randomly assigned to a treatment group which received tutoring or a control group. In

their evaluation of the Howard Street program, Morris et al. (1990) report significant gains in basal

passage reading, timed word recognition, basal word recognition, and spelling in their sample of second

and third grade children. Ross et al. (1996) also report significant gains in reading scores in the Memphis

City Schools program. However, rather than simply comparing treatments and controls, Ross et al.

xxxii
      Note that some of the studies summarized in Table 19 essentially compare self-care to care in some sort of after-
school program. These include Vandell and Corasoniti 1988; Posner and Vandell, 1994; Marshall et al. 1997; and




                                                         57
conduct comparisons which add treatment children who did not attend the program more than a threshold

amount of the time to the control group. Even with this modification to a standard experimental design,

they find significant effects only for third graders, and not for either second graders or fourth graders.

         One of the after school programs which has received most attention (and is the subject of three of

the evaluations in Table 20) is LA’s Best. This program offers comprehensive after-school tutoring,

cultural enrichment, recreation, computer, and nutrition services to Kindergarten and elementary school

children in 19 of Los Angeles’ poorest schools, and is probably what proponents of California’s

proposition 49 had in mind. Brooks et al. (1995) conducted a study of 146 LA’s Best children over

academic years 1992/93 and 1993/94. Children in the program were compared to a non-randomly

selected group of control students whose parents had agreed to let them participate in the study. The

control group started with significantly higher grades, and also showed differences in family background

characteristics and ethnic composition when compared to the treatments.

         Brooks et al. report that at the end of two years in the program, the LA’s Best children had higher

GPAs in reading and science than the control children, as well as reporting generally more positive

attitudes towards school, higher aspirations, etc. Perhaps notably, treatment children were also more

likely than controls to report that they felt safe after school. However, the estimates discussed by Brooks

et al. and cited in other analyses of after school programs are based on an analysis that deletes “outliers”

from the comparison. From the pattern of results, it appears that the effect of deleting these outliers was

to raise the mean scores of the LA’s Best kids relative to the controls. Alternative estimates reported in

the appendix to Brooks et al. show treatment children with lower GPAs than control children, although

“gains” in GPAs in social studies and in science were still significantly larger for the LA’s Best children

than for the other children. These are the estimates that we have reported in Table 20.

         Huang et al. (2000) offers a much larger study of almost 20,000 children in LA’s Best schools.

The study compares children who participated in the program with schoolmates who did not, and controls

for gender, ethnicity, income, and English proficiency. Relative to non-participants, the LA’s Best


Pettit et al. 1997. We have not repeated these studies in Table 20.


                                                        58
students were more likely to have been redesignated into the English proficient group, had fewer

absences, had better attitudes and were more likely to be in the “high” group on standardized tests rather

than the “low” group. However, no effort was made in this study to control for non-random selection into

the program. Huang et al. (2001) reports increases in the Stanford 9 test scores of children in the LA’s

Best children, but does not compare them to Stanford 9 test scores of other children. This is a potentially

important omission as test scores in the Los Angeles Unified School District have shown overall increases

in recent years. For example, the mean percentile on the Stanford 9 reading, language, and mathematics

tests increased from 27 to 38, 29 to 40, and 36 to 44 for Grade 2 LA Unified School District students

between 1998-99 and 2000-01 (Los Angeles Unified School District, 2001).

        The only study which addresses public concern about keeping older children in school and out of

trouble, is Hahn, Leavitt and Aaron (1994), which evaluates the Quantum Opportunities program. This

program randomly selected ninth grade students with families on public assistance, who were then

randomly assigned to control or treatment status. The program involved after-school educational

activities and community service activities each year for four years. Students received monetary rewards

for completing each portion of the program. Participants in this program were more likely to graduate

from high school or to obtain a GED than controls, and they were more likely to go on to post-secondary

education. They also had significantly fewer children and reported being more hopeful about the future

than other teens. There was no significant difference in the probability that participants had been “in

trouble with police” in the past year, which is interesting in view of the focus of after-school proponents

on crime.

        There are many programs that do not fit our definition of after school programs, but are

sometimes mentioned in this context. Table 21 summarizes some of the more notable of these “positive

youth development” programs, which in contrast to the programs in Table 20, are largely privately

funded. The Tierney, Grossman and Resch (1995) survey of Big Brothers/Big Sisters is notable both for

its rigorous design and for the positive effects, which range from reductions in the probability of hitting

people or initiating drug use, to improved schooling attendance.    Kahne and Bailey’s (1999) study of the



                                                    59
“I Have a Dream” program reports very large increases in the probability of high school graduation in

participating schools after the implementation of the program. Other programs demonstrate positive

effects in terms of reduced probability of teen pregnancy, and reductions in alcohol and tobacco use.

        Taken together, the evidence reviewed in these tables suggests that concern for latch-key children

is well-founded, and that model after school programs and other programs that focus on improving

outcomes for youth can be effective in improving child outcomes. However, it is a leap to argue that the

average available after school program has any effect on child outcomes, since the model programs

appear to be significantly better than the typical program. Moreover, despite the focus on reducing crime

among advocates of after-school programs, few evaluations include any measure of violence or criminal

activity among older children. Finally, more attention should be paid to uncovering the reasons that

parents of older children are not using the available after school programs.




6. Unanswered questions


Rather than summarize the preceding survey, we end this chapter with some unanswered research

questions. First, the preceding discussion highlights the need for additional, rigorous research on the

effects of all types of child care and early intervention programs on children. Existing analyses are often

limited by a weak design (e.g. no control group, or a poorly chosen control group), small sample sizes,

limited followup, and/or attrition. Another major problem is the lack of comprehensive data on child care

quality. Analysts are often in the position of the proverbial three scientists trying to analyze an elephant,

where one has only an ear, the second a tail, and the third a tusk. As states become increasingly active in

the child care market, this problem is likely to become more acute, as it is difficult to collect comparable

data from disparate state systems.

        Second, there has been little research documenting the interactions between the private and the

public sectors of the child care market. For example, there has been no analysis of the extent to which

programs like Head Start “crowd out” private sector provision of child care to low income children, or of



                                                    60
the effects of such crowdout on the care provided to children. Moreover, little is known about the extent

to which child care subsidies are passed through to child care prices. There has also been little systematic

analysis of the takeup of public programs such as child care subsidies, and of the reasons why eligible

families choose alternative child care modes. As a result of these gaps in our knowledge, there is

currently little basis for evaluating the tradeoffs between different types of interventions in the child care

market, such as different types of subsidy programs, regulation, and direct provision of care.

        Finally, there is a pressing need for more information about the child care arrangements of older

children, given increasing public expenditures in this area and the large numbers of children in care.




                                                     61
                                             References

Adams, Gina, K. Snyder and J. Sandefort (2002), “Getting and Retaining Child Care Assistance: How
Policy and Practice Influence Parent’s Experiences”, Report #55 (Urban Institute: Washington D.C.).

Adams, Gina, Karen Schulman, and Nancy Ebb (1998), “Locked Doors: States Struggling to Meet the
Child Care Needs of Low-Income Working Families”, (Children’s Defense Fund: Washington D.C.).

Aizer, Anna (2003), “Home Alone: Child Care and the Behavior of School-Age Children”, Journal of
Public Economics, forthcoming.

American Public Human Services Association (1999), “Child Care at Three: Survey of State Program
Changes”, (American Public Human Services Association: Washington, DC).

American Public Welfare Association (1998), Meeting the Child Care Challenge: State Child Care Status
Survey, (American Public Welfare Association: Washington, DC).

Anderson, Patricia M. and Philip B. Levine (2000), “Child Care and Mothers’ Employment Decisions”, in
Finding Jobs: Work and Welfare Reform, in: Rebecca M. Blank and David Card, eds. (Russell Sage
Foundation: New York) 420-462.

Averett, Susan L., H. Elizabeth Peters, and Donald Waldman (1997), “Tax Credits, Labor Supply, and
Child Care” Review of Economics and Statistics 79 (1): 125-135.

Barnett, Steven (1995), “Long-Term Effects of Early Childhood Programs on Cognitive and School
Outcomes”, The Future of Children 5(3): 25-50.

Baum, Charles L. (2002), “Child Care Costs and Work Decisions of Low-Income Mothers”, Demography
39 (1): 139-164.

Baydar, Nazli, and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn (1991), “Effects of Maternal Employment and Child-Care
Arrangements on Preschoolers' Cognitive and Behavioral Outcomes: Evidence from the Children of the
National Longitudinal Survey”, Developmental Psychology 27 (6): 932-945.

Becker, Gary S., and H. Greg Lewis (1973), “Interaction Between Quantity and Quality of Children”,
Journal of Political Economy 81 (2), part 2: S279-S288.

Belle, D. (1997), “Varieties of Self-Care: A Qualitative Look at Children’s Experiences in the After-
School Hours”, Merrill-Palmer Quarterly 43(3): 478-496.

Belsky, Jay, and David Eggebeen (1991), “Early and Extensive Maternal Employment and Young
Children’s Socioemotional Development: Children of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth”,
Journal of Marriage and the Family 53 (4):1083-1098.

Berger, Mark C., and Dan A. Black (1992), “Child Care Subsidies, Quality of Care, and the Labor Supply
of Low-Income Single Mothers”, Review of Economics and Statistics 74 (4): 635-642.

Benasich, A.A., Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, and B.C. Clewell (1992), “How do Mothers Benefit from Early
Intervention Programs?”, Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology 13: 311-362.

Bergmann, Barbara (1996), Saving Our Children from Poverty: What the United States Can Learn From



                                                 62
France (Russell Sage Foundation: New York).

Blank, Helen and Nicole Oxendine Poersch (2000), State Developments in Child Care and early
Education 1999 (Children’s Defense Fund: Washington D.C.).

Blank, Helen and Nicole Oxendine Poersch (1999), State Child Care and Early Education Developments:
Highlights and Updates for 1998 (Children’s Defense Fund: Washington D.C.).

Blank, Helen and Gina Adams (1997), State Developments in Child Care and Early Education.
(Children’s Defense Fund: Washington D.C.).

Blau, David M (1993), “The Supply of Child Care Labor”, Journal of Labor Economics 11 (2): 324-347.

Blau, David M. (1997), “The Production of Quality in Child Care Centers”, Journal of Human Resources
32 (2): 354-387.

Blau, David M. (1999), “The Effect of Child Care Characteristics on Child Development”, Journal of
Human Resources 34 (4): 786-822.

Blau, David M. (2000), “The Production of Quality in Child Care Centers: Another Look”, Applied
Developmental Science 4 (3):136-148.

Blau, David M. (2001), The Child Care Problem: An Economic Analysis (The Russell Sage Foundation:
New York).

Blau, David M. (2003a), “ Unintended Consequences of Child Care Regulations”, unpublished paper
(University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill).

Blau, David M. (2003b), "Child Care Subsidy Programs", in: Robert Moffitt, ed., Means Tested Social
Programs, (University of Chicago Press for NBER: Chicago).

Blau, David M. (2003c), “Do Child Care Regulations Affect the Child Care and Labor Markets?”, Journal
of Policy Analysis and Management 22 (3): 443-465.

Blau, David M. and Alison P. Hagy (1998), “The Demand for Quality in Child Care”, Journal of Political
Economy 106 (1): 104-146.

Blau, David M. and H. Naci Mocan (2002), “The Supply of Quality in Child Care Centers”, Review of
Economics and Statistics 84 (3):483-496.

Blau, David M. and Philip K. Robins (1988), “Child Care Costs and Family Labor Supply”, Review of
Economics and Statistics 70 (3): 374-381.

Blau, David M. and Philip K. Robins (1991), “Child Care Demand and Labor Supply of Young Mothers
Over Time”, Demography 28 (3), August: 333-352.

Blau, David M. and Erdal Tekin (2003), “The Determinants and Consequences of Child Care Subsidies
for Single Mothers”, unpublished paper (University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill).

Blau, Francine D., and Adam J. Grossberg (1992), “Maternal Labor Supply and Children’s Cognitive
Development”, Review of Economics and Statistics 74: 474-481.



                                                 63
Bloom, Dan, Mary Farrell, James J. Kemple, and Nandita Verma (1999), The Family Transition Program:
Implementation and Three-Year Impacts of Florida’s Initial Time-Limited Welfare Program(New York:
Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation), April.

Boocock, Sarane (1995), “Early Childhood Programs in Other Nations: Goals and Outcomes”, The Future
of Children, Winter: 5 (3) 94-114.

Bos, Johannes M., Aletha C. Huston, Robert C. Granger, Greg J. Duncan, Thomas W. Brock, and Vonnie
C. McCloyd (1999), New Hope for People With Low Incomes: Two-Year Results of a program to Reduce
Poverty and Reform Welfare (New York: Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation), August.

Bourdette, Mary (1999), Personal communication to Isabel Sawhill of the Brookings Institution, June 17,
1999 from Mary Bourdette, the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Legislation, Department of Health and
Human Services.

Bowen, Gary L. and Peter A. Neenan (1993), “Does Subsidized Child Care Availability Promote Welfare
Independence of Mothers on AFDC: An Experimental Analysis”, Research on Social Work Practice 3 (4),
October: 363-384.

Brooks, Pauline E., Cynthia M. Mojica & Robert E. Land (1995), Final Evaluation Report. Longitudinal
Study of LA's BEST After School Education and Enrichment Program (Los Angeles: University of
California, Los Angeles, Center for the Study of Evaluation) Mimeo.

Brophy-Herb, Holly, Rachel Schiffman, Lorraine McKelvey, Mary Cunningham-DeLuca, and Marshelle
Hawver (2001), “Quality Improvement: Lessons Learned from an Infant Mental Health-Based Early Head
Start Program”, Infants and Young Children 14:2, 77-85.

Buell, Martha J., Ilka Pfister, Michael Gamel-McCormick (2002), “Caring for the Caregiver: Early Head
Start/Family Child Care Partnerships”, Infant Mental Health Journal 23:1-2, 213-230.

California Secretary of State (2002), California General Election Official Voter Information Guide,
(Sacramento CA: State of California), fall.

Campbell, Frances A. and Craig T. Ramey (1994), “Effects of Early Intervention on Intellectual and
Academic Achievement: A Follow-up Study of Children from Low-Income Families”, Child
Development, 65, 684-698.

Campbell, Frances A. and Craig T. Ramey (1995), “Cognitive and School Outcomes for High-Risk
African-American Students at Middle Adolescence: Positive Effects of Early Intervention”, American
Educational Research Journal, 32:4, 743-772.

Campbell, Nancy Duff, Judith C. Applebaum, Karen Martinson, Emily Martin (2000), Be All that We
Can Be: Lessons from the Military for Improving Our Nation’s Child Care System (Washington D.C.:
National Women’s Law Center), April.

Card, David and Dean Hyslop (2002), “Estimating the Dynamic Effects of an Earnings Subsidy for
Welfare leavers”, Xerox, Dept. of Economics, Berkeley.

Casper, Lynne M. (1997), Who’s Minding Our Preschoolers? Fall 1994 Update (Washington D.C.: U.S.
Bureau of the Census), Current Population Reports P70-62, , November,



                                                  64
http://www.census.gov/population/www/socdemo/childcare.html.

Catalano, R.F., M.L. Berglund, J.A. Ryan, H.S. Lonczak, and J.D. Hawkins (1999), Positive Youth
Development in the United States: Research Findings on Evaluations of Positive Youth Development
Programs (Seattle Washington: Social Development Research Group, University of Washington School
of Social Work).

Caughy, Maragaret O’Brien, Janet A. Dipietro, and Donna M. Strobino (1994), “Day-Care Participation
as a Protective Factor in the Cognitive Development of Low-Income Children”, Child Development 65
(2), April: 457-471.

Chaplin, Duncan D., Philip K. Robins, Sandra L. Hofferth, Douglas A. Wissoker, and Paul Fronstin
(1999), The Price Elasticity of Child Care Demand: A Sensitivity Analysis ( Washington D.C., The Urban
Institute) working paper.

Children's Defense Fund (1999), Seeds of Success: State Pre-K Initiatives 1998-1999 (Washington D.C.:
Children's Defense Fund).

Chipty, Tasneem and Ann D. Witte (1997), An Empirical Investigation of Firms’ Responses to Minimum
Standards Regulation (Cambridge MA: NBER) Working Paper #6104, July.

Chipty, Tasneem (1995), “Economic Effects of Quality Regulations in the Day Care Industry”, American
Economic Review, 85, May 1995, 419-424.

Chipty, Tasneem, Ann Dryden Witte, Magaly Queralt, and Harriet Griesenger (1998), What Is Happening
to Families Receiving Cash Assistance? A Longitudinal Study of the Early Stages of Welfare
Reform(Columbus Ohio: Department of Economics, Ohio State University), November.

Committee on Ways and Means, U.S. House of Representatives (1998), 1998 Green Book (Washington
D.C.: http://www.access.gpo.gov/congress/wm001.html), May.

Committee on Ways and Means, U.S. House of Representatives (2000), 2000 Green Book, (Washington
D.C., http://www.access.gpo.gov/congress/wm001.html), May.

National Research Council and Institute of Medicine (2002), Community Programs to Promote Youth
Development, Jacquelynne Eccles and Jennifer Appleton Gootman, Eds. (Washington DC: National
Academy Press).

Connelly, Rachel (1990), The Cost of Child Care and Single Mothers: Its Effect on Labor Force
Participation and AFDC Participation, (Brunswick, ME: Bowdoin College), working paper.

Connelly, Rachel (1991), “The Importance of Child Care Costs to Women’s Decision Making”, in The
Economics of Child Care, David Blau (ed.) (New York: Russell Sage Foundation), 87-118.

Connelly, Rachel (1992), “The Effects of Child Care Costs on Married Women’s Labor Force
Participation”, Review of Economics and Statistics 74 (1), February: 83-90.

Connelly, Rachel, and Jean Kimmel (2000), Marital Status and Full-Time/Part-Time Work Status in
Child Care Choices, (Kalamazoo MI: Upjohn Institute) Working Paper 99-58, March,
http://www.upjohninstitute.org/publications/wp/99-58.pdf.




                                                 65
Connelly, Rachel, and Jean Kimmel (2001), The Effect of Child Care Costs on the Labor Force
Participation and Welfare Recipiency of Single Mothers: Implications for Welfare Reform (Kalamazoo
MI: Upjohn Institute) Working Paper 01-69, March, January 2003,
http://www.upjohninstitute.org/publications/wp/01-69.pdf.

Cosden, M. G. Morrison, A.L. Albanese, and S. Macias (2001), “When Homework is Not Homework:
After-School Programs for Homework Assistance”, Educational Psychologits, 36(3), 211-221.

Cost, Quality and Child Outcomes Study Team (1999), “The Children of the Cost, Quality, and Outcomes
Study Go to School, Executive Summary”, www.fpg.unc.edu/~NCEDL/PAGES/eqes.htm.

Council of Economic Advisors (1997) The Economics of Child Care (Washington D.C.: U.S.
Government Printing Office), December.

Cryer, Debbie, and Margaret Burchinal (1995), “Parents as Child Care Consumers”, in Suzanne W.
Helburn (ed.) Cost, Quality, and Child Outcomes in Child Care Centers, Technical Report (Denver CO:
Department of Economics, Center for Research in Economic and Social Policy, University of Colorado at
Denver), June: 203-220.

Cryer, Debby, Ellen S. Peisner-Feinberg, Mary L. Culkin, Leslie Phillipsen, and Jean Rustici (1995),
“Design of Study”, in Suzanne W. Helburn (Ed.) Cost, Quality, and Child Outcomes in Child Care
Centers, Technical Report (Denver CO: Department of Economics, Center for Research in Economic and
Social Policy, University of Colorado at Denver).

Currie, Janet (2001), “Early Childhood Education Programs”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 15 #2,
213-238.

Currie, Janet and Duncan Thomas (1995), “Does Head Start Make a Difference?”, American Economic
Review, 85 (3) 341-364.

Currie, Janet and Duncan Thomas (1999), “Does Head Start Help Hispanic Children?”, Journal of Public
Economics 74 (2) 235-262.

Currie, Janet and Duncan Thomas (2000), “School Quality and the Longer-Term Effects of Head Start”,
Journal of Human Resources 35 (4) 755-774.

Currie, Janet and V. Joseph Hotz (2001) Accidents Will Happen? Unintentional Injury, Maternal
Employment, and Child Care Policy, (Cambridge MA: NBER) Working Paper #8090, .

Desai, Sonalde, P. Lindsay Chase-Lansdale, and Robert T. Michael (1989), “Mother or Market? Effects
of Maternal Employment on the Intellectual Ability of 4-Year-Old Children”, Demography 26 (4): 545-
561.

Deutsch, M. C.P. Deutsch, T.J. Jordan and R. Grallo (1983), ”The IDS Program: An Experiment in Early
and Sustained Enrichment”, in As the Twig is Bent...Lasting Effects of Preschool Programs, Consortium
for Longitudinal Studies, ed. (Hillsdale N.J.: Erlbaum), 377-410.

Dickstein, Susan, Ronald Seifer, Maria Eguia, Regina Kuersten-Hogan, and Karin Dodge Magee (2002),
“Early Head Start MAP: Manualized Assessment of Progress”, Infant Mental Health Journal, 23:1-2, 231-
249.




                                                 66
Dwyer, K.M, J.L. Richardon, K.L. Daley et al. (1990), “Characteristics of Eight Grade students Who
Initiate Self Care in Elementary and Junior High School”, Pediatrics, 86, 1990.

Elliot, D.S. and P.H. Tolan (1999), “Youth Violence: Prevention, Intervention, and Social Policy: An
Overview”, Youth Violence: Prevention, Intervention, and Social Policy, 1, D.J. Flannery and C.R. Huff,
eds. (Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press).

Ewen, Danielle, Helen Blank, Katherine Hart, and Karen Schulman (2001), State Developments in Child
Care, Early Education, and School-Age Child Care 2001 (Washington D.C.: Children's Defense Fund).

Fewell, R.R., & K.G. Scott (1997), “The Cost of Implementing the Intervention”, in Helping low birth
weight, premature babies: The Infant Health and Development Program, R.T. Goss, D. Spiker, & C.W.
Haynes, eds. (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press), 479-502.

Fox, J.A., and S.A. Newman (1997) “After School Crime or After School Programs?”, Report to the U.S.
Attorney General (Washington D.C.: Fight Crime Invest in Kids).

Fronstin, Paul, and Doug Wissoker (1995), The Effects of the Availability of Low-Cost Child Care on the
Labor-Supply of Low-Income Women (Washington D.C.:The Urban Institute), working paper,January.

Fuerst, J.S. and D. Fuerst (1993), “Chicago Experience with an Early Childhood Program: The Special
Case of the Child Parent Center Program”, Urban Education, 28, 69-96.

Fuller, Bruce, Stephen W. Raudenbush, Li-Ming Wei, and Susan D. Holloway (1993), “Can Government
Raise Child Care Quality? The Influence of Family Demand, Poverty, and Policy”, Educational
Evaluation and Policy Analysis 15 (3), Fall: 255-78.

Fuller, Bruce, Sharon L. Kagan, Jan McCarthy, Gretchen Caspary, Darren Lubotsky, and Laura Gascue
(1999), “Who Selects Formal Child Care? The Role of Subsidies as Low-Income Mothers Negotiate
Welfare Reform”, presented at the Society for Research in Child Development Meeting, Albuquerque
NM, April.

Fuller, Bruce, S.D. Holloway, and X.Y. Liang (1996), “Family Selection of Child Care Centers: The
Influence of Household Support, Ethnicity, and Parental Practices”, Child Development, 67 #6, Dec.
1996, 3320-3337.

Furstenberg, Frank; Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, and S. Philip Morgan (1987), Adolescent Mothers in Later Life
(New York: Cambridge).

Galambos, Nancy L. and Jennifer L. Maggs (1991), “Children in Self-Care: Figures, Facts, and Fiction”,
in Jacqueline Lerner and Nancy Galambos (eds.) Employed Mothers and Their Children (New York:
Garland Press) 131-157.

Gamoran, Adam, Robert D. Mare, and Lynne Bethke (1999), “Effects of Nonmaternal Child Care on
Inequality in Cognitive Skills”, Institute for Research on Poverty Discussion Paper no. 1186-99,
University of Wisconsin-Madison.

Garber, H.L. (1988), The Milwaukee Project: Prevention of Mental Retardation in Children at Risk
(Washington D.C.: American Association on Mental Retardation).

Garces, Eliana, Duncan Thomas, and Janet Currie (2002) “Longer-Term Effects of Head Start”, American



                                                 67
Economic Review 92 (4) 999-1012.

Gelbach, Jonah (2002), “Public Schooling for Young Children and Maternal Labor Supply”, American
Economic Review 92 (1), March: 307-322.

Gladden, Tricia, and Christopher Taber (2000), “Wage Progression Among Less Skilled Workers”, in
Finding Jobs: Work and Welfare Reform, Rebecca M. Blank and David Card, eds. (New York: Russell
Sage Foundation), 160-192.

Gilliam, Walter and Edward Zigler (2001), “A Critical Meta-analysis of All Evaluations of State-Funded
Preschool from 1977 to 1998: Implications for Policy, Service Delivery, and Program Evaluation”, Early
Childhood Research Quarterly, #4, 441-473.

Gormley, William T. (1991), “State Regulations and the Availability of Child Care Services”, Journal of
Policy Analysis and Management 10 (1): 78-95.

Granger, Robert C., and Rachel Cytron (1999), “Teenage Parent Programs: A Synthesis of the Long-Term
Effects of the New Chance Demonstration, Ohio’s Learning, Earning, and Parenting program, and the
Teenage Parent Demonstration”, Evaluation Review 23 (2): 107-145.

Gray, S.W., B. Ramsey, and R. Klaus (1983), “From 3 to 20: The Early Training Project”, in As the Twig
is Bent... Lasting Effects of Preschool Programs, Consortium for Longitudinal Studies, ed. (Hillsdale N.J.:
Erlbaum) 171-200.

Greenberg, M.T., C. Domitrovich, and B. Bumbarger (1999), “Preventing Mental Disorders in School-
Age Children: A Review of the Effectiveness of Prevention Programs” (University Park: Pennsylvania
State University, Prevention Research Center).

Greenstein, Theodore N. (1993), “Maternal Employment and Child behavioral Outcomes - A Household
Economics Analysis,” Journal of Family Issues 14 (3), September: 323-354.

Grossman, J.B., M.L. Price, V. Fellerath, L. Jucovy, L. Kotloff, R. Raley, and K. Walker (2002),
“Multiple Choices After School: Findings from the Extended-Service Schools Initiative” (Philadelphia:
Public/Private Ventures).

Hagy, Alison P. (1998), “The Demand for Child Care Quality: An Hedonic Price Theory Approach”,
Journal of Human Resources 33 (3), Summer: 683-710.

Hahn, A., T. Leavitt, and P. Aaron (1994), “Evaluation of the Quantum Opportunities Program. Did the
Program Work? A Report on the Postsecondary Outcomes and Cost-Effectiveness of the QOP 1989-
1993” (Waltham, MA: Brandeis University Heller Graduate School Center for Human Resources).

Hamilton, Gayle, Thomas Brock, Mary Farrell, Daniel Friedlander, and Kristen Harknett (1997), “The
National Evaluation of Welfare-to-Work Strategies. Evaluating Two Welfare-to-Work Approaches: Two-
Year Findings on the Labor Force Attachment and Human Capital Development Programs in Three Sites”
(New York: Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation) December.

Hamilton, Gayle, Stephen Freedman, and Sharon M. McGroder (2000), “Do Mandatory Welfare-to-Work
Programs Affect the Well-Being of Children? A Synthesis of Child Research Conducted as Part of The
National Evaluation of Welfare-to-Work” (New York: Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation),
June.



                                                   68
Han, Wen-Jui, and Jane Waldfogel (2001), “The Effect of Child Care Costs on the Employment of Single
and Married Mothers”, Social Science Quarterly 82 (3): 552-568.

Han, Wen-Jui, Jane Waldfogel, and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn (2001), “Long-Run Effects of Early and
Extensive Maternal Employment on Children’s Achievement and Behavior”, Journal of Marriage and the
Family, 63(2): 336-354.

Hanushek, Eric (1992), “The Tradeoff Between Child Quantity and Quality”, Journal of Political
Economy 100 (1): 84-117.

Hanushek, Eric, Chapter in this volume.

Harms, Thelma, Deborah Cryer, and Richard Clifford (1990), Infant/Toddler Environment Rating Scale
(New York: Teachers College Press).

Harms, Thelma and Richard Clifford (1980), Early Childhood Environment Rating Scale (New York:
Teachers College Press).

Hayes, Cheryl, John Palmer, and Martha Zaslow (1990), Who Cares for America’s Children? Child Care
Policy for the 1990s (Washington D.C.: The National Academy of Sciences Press).

Heckman, James J. (1974), “Effects of Child-Care Programs on Women’s Work Effort”, Journal of
Political Economy 82 (2) Part 2, March/April: S136-S163.

Heckman, James J. (1979), “Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error”, Econometrica 47 (1),
January: 153-162.

Heckman, James J. (1981), “Heterogeneity and State Dependence”, in Sherwin Rosen (ed.) Studies in
Labor Markets (Chicago: University of Chicago Press) 91-139.

Heckman, James J. (1999), “Policies to Foster Human Capital”, University of Chicago xerox.

Heckman, James J., JingJing Hsse and Yona Rubinstein (2000), “The GED is a Mixed Signal: The Effect
of Cognitive and Non-Cognitive Skills on Human Capital and Labor Market Outcomes”, University of
Chicago xerox.

Heckman, James J. and Jeffrey Smith (1995), “Assessing the Case for Social Experiments”, Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 9 #2, Spring, 85-110.

Helburn, Suzanne W. (ed.) (1995), “Cost, Quality, and Child Outcomes in Child Care Centers, Technical
Report (Denver CO: Department of Economics, Center for Research in Economic and Social Policy,
University of Colorado at Denver), June.

Helburn, Susan and Carollee Howes (1996), “Child Care Cost and Quality”, The Future of Children, 6:2,
62-82.

Hill, Jennifer, Jane Waldfogel, and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn (2002), “Differential Effects of High Quality
Child Care”, Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 21(4): 601-627.

Hill, Jennifer, Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, and Jane Waldfogel (undated), “Sustained Effect of High



                                                 69
Participation in an Early Intervention for Low-Birth-Weight Premature Infants”, Developmental
Psychology, in press.

Hofferth, Sandra, L., April Brayfield, Sharon Deich, and Pamela Holcomb (1991), National Child Care
Survey, 1990 (Washington D.C.: Urban Institute), Report 91-5.

Hofferth, Sandra L. and Duncan D. Chaplin (1998) “State Regulations: and Child Care Choice”,
Population Research and Policy Review, 17: 111-140.

Hotz, V. Joseph and Rebecca Kilburn (1997), “Regulating Child Care: The Effects of State Regulations
on Child Care Demand and its Cost”, xerox, Dept. of Economics, UCLA, October 1997.

Hotz, V. Joseph and Rebecca Kilburn (2000), “The Effects of State Regulations on Child Care Prices and
Choices”, xerox, Dept. of Economics, UCLA, March 2000.

Howes, Carollee, Ellen Galinsky, Marybeth Shinn, Leyla Gulcur, Margaret Clements, Annette Sibley,
Martha Abbott-Shim, and Jan McCarthy (1998), The Florida Child Care Quality Improvement Study
(New York: Families and Work Institute).

Howes, Carollee, Michael Olenick, and Tagoush Der-Kiureghian (1987), “After-school Child Care in an
Elementary School: Social Development and Continuity and Complementarity of Programs”, Elementary
School Journal, 88: 93-103.

Huang, Denise, Barry Gribbons, Kyung Sung Kim, Charlotte Lee, Eva L. Baker (2000), “A Decade of
Results: The Impact of LA’s BEST After School Enrichment Program on Subsequent Student
Achievement and Performance”, UCLA Center for the Study of Evaluation, Graduate School of
Education and Information Studies, Mimeo.

Huang, Denise, Shu-jiao Lin, and Tina Henderson (2001), Evaluating the Impact of LA’s BEST on
Students’ Social and Academic Development: Study of 74 LA’s BEST Sites 2001-2002 Phase I
Preliminary Report (Los Angeles CA: UCLA Center for the Study of Evaluation, Graduate School of
Education and Information Studies), Mimeo.

Hyslop, Dean (1999), “State Dependence, Serial Correlation, and Heterogeneity in Intertemporal Labor
Force Participation of Married Women”, Econometrica 67 (6), November: 1255-1294.

Inman, Robert (1986), “Markets, Government, and the 'New' Political Economy”, in Handbook of Public
Economics V. 2, Alan Auerbach and Martin Feldstein, eds. (Amsterdam: North Holland), 647-674.

Johnson, D. and Walker, T. (1991), “A Follow-up Evaluation of the Houston Parent Child Development
Center: School Performance”, Journal of Early Intervention, 15:3, 226-236.

Kahne, Joseph and Kim Bailey (1999), “The Role of Social Capital in Youth Development: The Case of
“I Have a Dream” Programs”, Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 21(3): 321-343.

Karoly, Lynn et al. (1998), “Investing in our Children: What we Know and Don't Know About the Costs
and Benefits of Early Childhood Interventions” (Santa Monica: RAND).

Kimmel, Jean (1995), “The Effectiveness of Child Care Subsidies in Encouraging the Welfare-to-Work
Transition of Low-Income Single Mothers”, American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 85 (2),
May: 271-275.



                                                 70
Kimmel, Jean (1998), “Child Care Costs as a Barrier to Employment for Single and Married Mothers”,
Review of Economics and Statistics 80 (2), May: 287-299.

Kirby, D. and K. Coyle (1997), “Youth Development Programs”, Children and Youth Services Review,
19:5/6, 437-454.

Kisker, E., S. L. Hofferth, D. A. Phillips, and E. Farquhar (1991), A Profile of Child Care Settings: Early
Education and Care in 1990 (Washington D.C.: Mathematica Policy Research), Report prepared for U.S.
Department of Education.

Kisker, Ellen E., Anu Rangarajan, and Kimberly Boller (1998), Moving Into Adulthood: Were the
Impacts of Mandatory Programs for Welfare-Dependent Teenage Parents Sustained After the Programs
Ended? (Princeton NJ: Mathematica Policy Research), February.

Klein, Benjamin and Keith Leffler (1981), “The Role of Market Forces in Assuring Contractual
Performance”, Journal of Political Economy, 89, 1981, 615-641.

Kontos, Susan, Carollee Howes, Marybeth Shinn, and Ellen Galinsky (1995), Quality in Family Child
Care and Relative Care (New York: Teachers College Press).

Korenman, Sanders, Jane E. Miller, and John E. Sjaastad (1995), “Long-term Poverty and Child
Development in the United States: Results from the NLSY”, Child and Youth Services Review 17 (12):
127-155.

Lalonde, Robert (1995), “The Promise of Public Sector Sponsored Training Programs”, Journal of
Economic Perspectives, Spring, 149-168.

Lamb, Michael E. (1998), “Nonparental Child Care: Context, Quality, Correlates, and Consequences”, in
Child Psychology in Practice, I. Sigel and K. Renninger, eds. Handbook of Child Psychology (Fifth ed.),
W. Damon, series ed. (New York: Wiley).

Lee, Valerie and Susanna Loeb (1995), “Where do Head Start Attendees End Up? One Reason Why
Preschool Effects Fade Out”, Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 17:1, 62-82.

Lee, V.E., J. Brooks-Gunn, E. Schnur, and F.R. Liaw (1990), “Are Head Start Effects Sustained? A
Longitudinal Follow-up Comparison of Disadvantaged Children Attending Head Start, No Preschool, and
Other Preschool Programs”, Child Development, 61, 495-507.

Leland, Hayne (1979), “Quacks, Lemons, and Licensing: A Theory of Minimum Quality Standards”,
Journal of Political Economy, 87, 1979, 1328-1346.

Long, Sharon K., Gretchen G. Kirby, Robin Kurka, and Shelley Waters (1998), “Child Care Assistance
Under Welfare Reform: Early Responses by the States”, Assessing the New Federalism Occasional Paper
#15, (Washington D.C.: The Urban Institute).

Los Angeles Unified School District (2001), Rapid Gains Reflected in 2000-2001 Stanford 9 Results (Los
Angeles CA: Office of Communications News Release, LAUSD), August 14.

Love, John M., Peter Z. Schochet, and Alicia L. Meckstroth (1996), Are They in Any Real Danger? What
Research Does - And Doesn’t - Tell Us About Child Care Quality and Children’s Well-Being (Princeton



                                                   71
NJ: Mathematica Policy Research), May.

Lowenberg, A. and T. Tinnin (1992), “Professional versus Consumer Interests in Regulation: The Case of
the U.S. Child Care Industry”, Applied Economics, 24, 1992, 571-580.

Lucas, M.A. (2001), “The Military Child Care Connection”, The Future of Children 11 (1): 129-133.

MaCurdy, Thomas, David Green, and Harry Paarsch (1990), “Assessing Empirical Approaches for
Analyzing Taxes and Labor Supply”, Journal of Human Resources 25 (3), Summer: 415-490.

Maddala, G.S. (1983), Limited and Qualitative Dependent Variables in Econometrics (New York:
Cambridge University Press).

Magenheim, Ellen B. (1995), “Information, Prices, and Competition in the Child Care Market: What Role
Should Government Play?”, in J.M. Pogodzinksi (ed.) Readings in Public Policy (Cambridge MA:
Blackwell).

Marshall, N.L., C. Garcia Coll, F. Marx, K. McCartney, N. Keefe, and J. Ruh (1997), “After School Time
and Children’s Behavioral Adjustment”, Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 43(3), 497-514.

Marx, F., & Seligson M. (1988), The Public School Early Childhood Study: The State Survey (Bank
Street College: New York, NY).

Masse, Leonard N., and W. Steven Barnett (2002), A Benefit Cost Analysis of the Abecedarian Early
Childhood Intervention (New Brunswick NJ: National Institute for Early Education Research, Rutgers
University).

McCarton, Cecilia M. et al. (1997), “Results at Age 8 Years of Early Intervention for Low-Birth-Weight
Premature Infants, The Infant Health and Development Program”, Journal of the American Medical
Association, 277:2, 126-132.

McHale, S.M., A.C. Crouter, and C.J. Tucker (2001), “Free-time Activities in Middle Childhood: Links
with Adjustment in Early Adolescence”, Child Development, 72(6), 1764-1778.

McKey, Ruth et al. (1985), “The Impact of Head Start on Children, Families and Communities: Final
Report of the Head Start Evaluation”, Synthesis and Utilization Project (Washington D.C.: CSR Inc.).

Meyers, Marcia K., and Theresa Heintze (1999), “The Performance of the Child Care Subsidy System:
Target Efficiency, Coverage Adequacy and Equity”, Social Service Review 73 (1), March: 37-64.

Meyers, Marcia K., Theresa Heintze, and Douglas A. Wolf (2002), “Child Care Subsidies and
Employment of Welfare Recipients”, Demography 39 (1), February: 165-180.

Meyers, Marcia, Dan Rosenbaum, Christopher Ruhm, and Jane Waldfogel (2002), Inequality in Early
Childhood Education and Care: What Do We Know? (New York: Russell Sage Foundation) Social
Inequality Series, November 15..

Michalopoulos, Charles, and Philip K. Robins (2000), “Employment and Child Care Choices in the
United States and Canada”, Canadian Journal of Economics, 33(2), 2000: 435-470.

Michalopoulos, Charles, and Philip K. Robins (2002), “Employment and Child Care Choices of Single



                                                 72
Parent Families in the United States and Canada”, Journal of Population Economics, 15 (3):    465-93.

Michalopoulos, Charles, Philip K. Robins, and Irwin Garfinkel (1992), “A Structural Model of Labor
Supply and Child Care Demand”, Journal of Human Resources 27 (1), Winter: 166-203.

Miller, Cynthia, Virginia Knox, Patricia Auspos, Jo Anna Hunter-Means, and Alan Orenstein (1997),
Making Welfare Work and Work Pay: Implementation and 18-Month Impacts of the Minnesota Family
Investment Program (New York: Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation), September.

Mitchell, A. (2001), Education for all Children: The Role of States and the Federal Government in
Promoting Prekindergarten and kindergarten (Washington D.C.: Foundation for Child Development).

Mitchell, A., L. Stoney, and H. Dichter (2001), Financing Child Care in the United States: An Expanded
Catalog of Current Strategies (Kansas City MO: Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation).

Mocan, Naci (1995), “Quality Adjusted Cost Functions for Child Care Centers”, American Economic
review Papers and Proceedings 85 (2): 409-413.

Mocan, Naci (1997), “Cost Functions, Efficiency, and Quality in Child Care Centers”, Journal of Human
Resources, 32, fall, 861-891.

Mocan, Naci (2001), Can Consumers Detect Lemons? Information Asymmetry in the Market for Child
Care (Cambridge MA: NBER) Working Paper #8291, May.

Mocan, Naci, M. Burchinal, J.R. Morris, and S. Helburn (1995), ”Models of Quality in Center Child
Care”, in Cost, Quality and Child Outcomes, S. Helburn (ed) (Denver CO: Center for Research on
Economic and Social Policy, University of Colorado at Denver).

Morgan, Gwen and Sheri Azer (1997), “A Primer of Child Care Licensing 1997: Its Role in Public Policy
(Boston MA: Institute for Leadership and Career Initiatives, Wheelock College).

Morris, Darrell, Beverly Shaw, and Jan Penney (1990), “Helping Low Readers in Grades 2 and 3: An
After-School Volunteer Tutoring Program”, The Elementary School Journal, 91(2):133-150.

Mott, Frank L. (1991), “Developmental Effects of Infant Care: The Mediating Role of Gender and
Health”, Journal of Social Issues 47 (2): 139-158.

Mukerjee, Swati, and Ann Dryden Witte (1993), “Provision of Child Care: Cost Functions for Profit-
Making and Non-Profit Day Care Centers”, Journal of Productivity Analysis 4 (1-2): 145-163.

National Center for Education Statistics (1996), Youth indicators, 1996 (Washington D.C.: National
Center for Education Statistics), Sept.

National Center for Education Statistics (2003), Prekindergarten in U.S. Public Schools: 2000-2001
(Washington D.C.: U.S. Department of Education), NCES 2003-019.

National Research Council and Institutes of Medicine (2000), Early Childhood Intervention: Views from
the Field, Shonkoff, Jack, Deborah Phillips, and Bonnie Keilty, eds. (Washington D.C.: National
Academy Press).

National Research Council and Institutes of Medicine (2000), From Neurons to Neighborhoods: The



                                                  73
Science of Early Childhood Development, Shonkoff, Jack, and Deborah Phillips, eds. (Washington D.C.:
National Academy Press).

National Research Council and Institute of Medicine ( 2003), Working Families and growing Kids:
Caring for Children and, Eugene Smolensky and Jennifer Appleton Gootman, editors (Washington D.C.:
National Academy Press).

Neidell, Matthew (2000), “Early Time Investments in Children's Human Capital Development: Effects of
Time in the First Year on Cognitive and Non-Cognitive Outcomes”, Dept. of Economics UCLA, xerox,
October 2000.

New York State Board of Regents (1993), Background Paper in Support of the Policy Statement on Early
Childhood (New York: State Board of Regents).

NICHD Early Child Care Research Network (1997), “Child Care During the First Year of Life”, Merrill-
Palmer Quarterly, 43, 340-360.

NICHD Early Child Care Research Network (1998), “Early Child Care and Self-Control, Compliance,
and Problem Behavior at Twenty-Four and Thirty-Six Months”, Child Development 69 (4): 1145-1170.

NICHD Early Child Care Research Network (1999), “Child Outcomes When Child Care Center Classes
Meet Recommended Standards for Quality”, American Journal of Public Health, 89, 1072-1077.

NICHD Early Child Care Research Network (2000a), “Characteristics and Quality of Child Care for
Toddlers and Preschoolers”, Applied Developmental Science 4 (3):116-135.

NICHD Early Child Care Research Network (2000b), “Child Care and Children’s Peer Interactions at 24
and 36 Months: The NICHD Study of Early Child Care”, Working paper, University of Pittsburgh,
January.

NICHD Early Child Care Research Network (2000c), “The Relation of Child Care to Cognitive and
Language Development”, Child Development 71 (4): 960-980.

NICHD Early Child Care Research Network (2002), “Child Care and Children’s Development Prior to
School Entry”, American Education Research Journal, 39(1), 133-164.

NICHD Early Child Care Research Network and Greg J. Duncan (2002), “Modeling the Impacts of Child
Care Quality on Children’s Preschool Cognitive Developmen”, presented at Society for Research on
Child Development, Minneapolis, April 2001.

Oden, Sherri, Lawrence Schweinhart, and David Weikart (2000), “Into Adulthood: A Study of the Effects
of Head Start”, (Ypsilanti MI: High/Scope Press).

Olsen, Darcy Ann (1999), Universal Preschool is No Golden Ticket (Washington D.C.: The Cato
Institute), February 9.

Ontai, Lenna L., Sue Hinrichs, Marti Beard, and Brian L. Wilcox (2002), “Improving Child Care Quality
in Early Head Start Programs: A Partnership Model”, Infant Mental Health Journal, 23:1-2, 48-61.

Parcel, Toby and Elizabeth Menaghan (1994), Parent's Jobs and Children's Lives, (New York: Aldine de
Gruyter).



                                                74
Parcel, Toby L., and Elizabeth G. Menaghan (1990), “Maternal Working Conditions and Children's
Verbal Facility: Studying the Intergenerational Transmission of Inequality from Mothers to Young
Children”, Social Psychology Quarterly 53 (2): 132-147.

Paulsell, Diane, Ellen Eliason Kisker, John M. Love, and Helen Raikes (2002), “Understanding
Implementation in Early Head Start Programs: Implications for Policy and Practice”, Infant Mental
Health Journal, 23:1-2, 14-35.

Pettit, G.S., J.E. Bates, K.A. Dodge, D.W. Meese (1999), “The Impact of After-School Peer Contact is
Moderated by Parental Monitoring, Perceived Neighborhood Safety, and Prior Adjustment”, Child
Development, 70, 768-778.

Pettit, G.S., R.D. Laird, J.E. Bates, and K.A. Dodge (1997), “Patterns of After-School Care in Middle
Childhood: Risk Factors and Developmental Outcomes”, Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 43, 515-538.

Peisner-Feinberg, Ellen S., Margaret R. Burchinal, Richard M. Clifford, Mary L. Culkin, Carollee Howes,
Sharon Lynn Kagan, and Noreen Yazejian (2001), “The Relation of Preschool Child-Care Quality to
Children’s Cognitive and Social Development Trajectories Through Second Grade”, Child Development
72 (5): 1534-53.

Phillips, Deborah and Deborah Stipek (1993), “Early Formal Schooling: Are we Promoting Achievement
or Anxiety?”, Applied and Preventive Psychology, 2, 141-150.

Posner, Jill K. and Deborah Lowe Vandell (1994), “Low-Income Children’s After-School Care: Are
There Beneficial Effects of After-School Programs?”, Child Development, 65: 440-456.

Posner, Jill and Deborah Lowe Vandell (1999), “After-School Activities and the Development of Low-
Income Urban Children: A Longitudinal Study”, Developmental Psychology, 35(3) 868-879.

Powell, Irene, and James Cosgrove (1992), “Quality and Cost in Early Childhood Education”, Journal of
Human Resources 27 (3): 472-484.

Powell, Lisa M. (1997), “The Impact of Child Care Costs on the Labour Supply of Married Mothers:
Evidence from Canada”, Canadian Journal of Economics 30 (3): 577-594.


Powell, Lisa M. (2002), “Joint Labor Supply and Child Care Decisions of Married Mothers”, Journal of
Human Resources 37 (1): 106-128.

Preston, Anne (1993), “Efficiency, Quality, and Social Externalities in the Provision of Day Care:
Comparisons of Nonprofit and For-Profit Firms”, Journal of Productivity Analysis 4 (1-2): 165-182.

Queralt, Magaly and Ann Dryden Witte (1997), Effects of Regulations, Consumer Information, and
Subsidies on Child/Staff Ratios at Child Care Centers (Miami FL: Florida International University)
Working Paper No: 97-2.

Quint, Janet C., Johannes M. Bos, and Denise F. Polit (1997), New Chance: Final Report on a
Comprehensive Program for Young Mothers in Poverty and Their Children (New York: Manpower
Demonstration Research Corporation), October.




                                                  75
Raikes, Helen H. and John M. Love (2002), “Early Head Start: A Dynamic New Program for Infants and
Toddlers and Their Families”, Infant Mental Health Journal, 23:1-2, 1-13.

Ramey, Craig, Francis Campbell, and Clancy Blair (1998), “Enhancing the Life Course for High-Risk
Children”, in Jonathon Crane, ed. Social Programs That Work (New York: Russell Sage Foundation),
184-199.

Resnick, Gary and Nicholas Zill (undated), “Is Head Start Providing High-Quality Educational Services?
Unpacking Classroom Processes”, xerox, Westat, Inc.

Reynolds, Arthur (1998), “Extended Early Childhood Intervention and School Achievement: Age
Thirteen Findings from the Chicago Longitudinal Study”, Child Development, 69:1, 231-246.

Reynolds, Arthur et al. (2000), Long Term Benefits of Participation in the Title 1 Chicago Child-Parent
Centers, (Madison WI: University of Wisconsin, Madison), working paper.

Ribar, David (1992), “Child Care and the Labor Supply of Married Women: Reduced Form Evidence”,
Journal of Human Resources 27 (1), Winter: 134-165.

Ribar, David (1995), “A Structural Model of Child Care and the Labor Supply of Married Women”,
Journal of Labor Economics 13 (3), July: 558-597.

Riccio, James, Daniel Friedlander, and Stephen Freedman (1994), GAIN: Benefits, Costs, and Three-
Year-Impacts of a Welfare-to-Work Program (New York: Manpower Demonstration Research
Corporation), September.

Riley, Dave, Jill Steinberg, Chris Todd, Sharon Junge, and Ina McClain (1994), Preventing Problem
Behaviors and Raising Academic Performance in the Nation's Youth: The Impacts of 64 School-Age
Child Care Programs Supported by the Cooperative Extension Service Youth-At-Risk Initiative, (Urbana-
Cahmpaign IL: University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and the University of Wisconsin Center for
Action on the Family).

Richardson, Jean, Kathleen Dwyer, Kimberly McGugan, William B. Hansen, Clyde Dent, C. Anderson
Johnson, Steven Sussman, Bonnie Brannon, and Brian Flay (1989), “Substance Abuse Among Eighth-
Grade Students Who Take Care of Themselves After School”, Pediatrics. 84(3): 556-566.

Robins, Philip K. (1991), “Child Care Policy and Research: An Economist’s Perspective”, in David Blau
(ed.) The Economics of Child Care (New York: Russell Sage Foundation): 11-42.

Robins, Philip K. and Robert Spiegelman (1978), “An Econometric Model of the Demand for Child
Care”, Economic Inquiry 16, Jan.: 83-94.

Robinson, Joann L. and Hiram E. Fitzgerald (2002) “Early Head Start: Investigations, Insights, and
Promise”, Infant Mental Health Journal, 23:1-2, 250-275.

Rodman, Hyman, David J. Pratto, and Rosemary Smith Nelson (1985), “Child Care Arrangements and
Children’s Functioning: A Comparison of Self-Care and Adult Care Children”, Developmental
Psychology, 48: 413-418.

Roth, J., J. Brooks-Gunn, L. Murray, and W. Foster (1998) “Promoting Healthy Adolescents: Synthesis of
Youth Development Program Evaluations”, Journal of Research on Adolescents, 8:4, 423-459.



                                                  76
Roth, Jodie, Lawrence F. Murray, Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, and William H. Foster (1999), “Youth
Development Programs”, in America’s Disconnected Youth, Douglas J. Besharov, ed. (Washington, DC:
Child Welfare League of America Press).

Rose-Ackerman, Susan (1983), “Unintended Consequences: Regulating the Quality of Subsidized Day
Care,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 3 (1): 14-30.

Ross, Christine (1996), State Child Care Assistance Programs for Low-Income Families (Washington
D.C.: Mathematica Policy Research), April.

Ross, Christine (1998), Sustaining Employment Among Low-Income Parents: The Role of Child Care
Costs and Subsidies (Washington D.C.: Mathematica Policy Research), December.

Ross, James G., Pedro J. Saavedra, Gail H. Shur, Franklin Winters, and Robert D. Felner (1992), “The
Effectiveness of an After-School Program for Primary Grade Latchkey Students on Precursors of
Substance Abuse”, Journal of Community Psychology, 20: 22-38.

Ross, Steven M., Tracey Lewis, Lana Smith, and Allan Sterbin (1996), Evaluation of the Extended-Day
Program in Memphis County Schools: Final Report to CRESPAR (Memphis: TN: Center for Research in
Educational Policy, University of Memphis).

Ruhm, Christopher L. (2000), Parental Employment and Child Cognitive Development (Cambridge MA:
National Bureau of Economic Research) Working Paper no. 7666, April.

Ruopp, Richard, Jeffrey Travers, Frederic Glantz, and Craig Coelen (1979), Children at the Center
(Cambridge: Abt Books).

Seppanen, P.S., J.M. Love, D.K. deVries, L. Bernstein, M. Seligson, F. Marx, and E.E. Kisker (1993),
National Study of Before- and After-School Programs (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education).

Schulman, Karen, Helen Blank, Danielle Ewen (2001), A Fragile Foundation: State Child Care
Assistance Policies (Washington D.C.: Children’s Defense Fund).

Schulman, Karen, Helen Blank, Danielle Ewen (1999), Seeds of Success: State PreKindergarten
Initiatives 1998-1999 (Washington D.C.: Children’s Defense Fund).

Schulman, Karen, Helen Blank, Danielle Ewen (1999), Key Facts: Essential Information About Child
Care, Early Education, and School-Age Care (Washington D.C.: Children’s Defense Fund).

Schweinhart, Lawrence J., Helen Barnes, and David Weikart (1993), Significant Benefits: The
High/Scope Perry Preschool Study Through Age 27”, (Ypsilanti, Michigan: High-Scope Educational
Research Foundation), monograph #10.

Shapiro, Carl (1986), “Investment, Moral Hazard, and Occupational Licensing,” Review of Economic
Studies, LIII, 843-862.

Smith, Kristin (2000), Who’s Minding the Kids? Child Care Arrangements, Fall 1995, (Washingotn D.C.:
U.S. Census Bureau, Current Population Reports), P70-70, October,
http://www.census.gov/population/www/socdemo/childcare.html.




                                                  77
Smith, Kristin (2002), Who’s Minding the Kids? Child Care Arrangements, Spring 1997, (Washington
D.C.: U.S. Census Bureau, Current Population Reports), P70,
http://www.census.gov/population/www/socdemo/childcare.html.

Smith, Shelley L., Mary Fairchild, and Scott Groginsky (1997), Early Childhood Care and Education: An
Investment that Works (Washington, DC: National Conference of State Legislatures).


Steinberg, Laurence (1986), “Latchkey Children and Susceptibility to Peer Pressure: An Ecological
Analysis”, Developmental Psychology, 22: 433-439.

Studer, Marlena (1992), “Quality of center Care and Preschool Cognitive Outcomes: Differences by
Family Income”, Sociological Studies of Child Development 5: 49-72.

Tekin, Erdal (2001), “The Responses of Single Mothers to Welfare and Child Care Subsidy Programs
Under the New Welfare Reform Act”, doctoral dissertation, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill.

Tekin, Erdal (2002), “Child Care Subsidies, Wages, and Employment of Single Mothers”, Working
Paper, Georgia State University, May.

Temple, Judy, Arthur Reynolds, and Wendy Miedel (2000), “Can Early Intervention Prevent High School
Dropout?”, Urban Affairs 35:1, March, 31-56.

Tiernay, J.P., Jean Baldwin Grossman, and N. Resch (1995), “Making a Difference: An Impact Study of
Big Brothers/Big Sisters”, (Philadelphia PA: Public/Private Ventures).

Tunali, Insan (1986), “A General Structure for Models of Double-Selection and an Application to a Joint
Earnings/Migration Process with Remigration”, Research in Labor Economics 8, Part B: 235-282.

U.S. Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations (1994), Child Care: The Need for Federal-
State-Local Coordination (Washington D.C.: U.S. Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations)
Report A-128, March.

U.S. Administration for Children and Families (1995), “Federal Child Care Programs in FY1995”,
Washington D.C.,
http://www.acf.dhhs.gov/programs/ccb/research/1995.htm.

U.S. Administration for Children and Families (1998), “HHS Fact Sheet: State Spending Under the Child
Care Block Grant”, Washington D.C., November,
http://www.acf.dhhs.gov/news/press/1998/cc97fund.htm.

U.S. Administration for Children Youth and Families (1999), “Head Start Fact Sheet, 1998”, Washington
D.C.: Head Start Bureau.

U.S. Administration for Children and Families (2000), “New Statistics Show Only Small Percentage of
Eligible Families Receive Child Care Help”, Washington D.C., December 6,
http://www.acf.dhhs.gov/news/press/2000/ccstudy.htm.

U.S. Administration for Children and Families (2001a), ”Final 1998 State Data Tables and Charts ”,
Washington D.C., February 15,
http://www.acf.dhhs.gov/programs/ccb/research/archive/98acf800/index.htm.



                                                 78
U.S. Administration for Children and Families (2001b), “Child Care and Development Fund: Report of
State Plans for the period 10/01/99 to 9/30/01”, Washington D.C.,
http://nccic.org/pubs/CCDFStat.pdf.

U.S. Administration for Children, Youth, and Families (2001), “Building Their Futures: How Early Head
Start Programs are Enhancing the Lives of Infants and Toddlers in Low-Income Families”, Washington,
D.C.: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
http://www.acf.dhhs.gov/programs/core/ongoing_research/ehs/ehs_intro.html.

U.S. Administration for Children, Youth, and Families (2002), “Making a Difference in the Lives of
Infants and Toddlers and Their Families: The Impacts of Early Head Start”, Washington, D.C.: U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services,
http://www.acf.dhhs.gov/programs/core/ongoing_research/ehs/ehs_intro.html.

U.S. Administration for Children and Families (various years), “CCDF Final Allocations and Earmarks”,
Washington D.C.,
http://www.acf.dhhs.gov/programs/ccb/policy1/statlist.htm.

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2001), “Report on the American Workforce”, Washington: Bureau of
Labor Statistics.

U.S. Census Bureau (2000), “Record Share of New Mothers in Labor Force, Census Bureau Reports”,
Washington D.C.: U.S. Census Bureau, Oct. 24.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (1998), “The NICHD Study of Early Child Care”,
Washington: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, April.

U.S. General Accounting Office (1994), “Child Care Subsidies Increase the Likelihood that Low-Income
Mothers Will Work”, Report GAO/HEHS-95-20, Washington D.C., December, http://www.gpo.gov.

U.S. General Accounting Office (1995a), “Early Childhood Centers: Services to Prepare Children for
School Often Limited”, Washington D.C.: Government Printing Office, GAP/HEHS-95-21, March.

U.S. General Accounting Office (1995b), “JOBS Child Care”, Report GAO/HEHS-95-220, Washington
D.C., 1995.

U.S. General Accounting Office (1995c), “Welfare to Work: Child Care Assistance Limited; Welfare
Reform May Expand Needs”, Report GAO/HEHS-95-220, Washington D.C., September,
http://www.gpo.gov.

U.S. General Accounting Office (1998), “Welfare reform: States’ Efforts to Expand Child Care
Programs”, Report GAO/HEHS-98-27, Washington D.C., January,
http://www.gpo.gov.

U.S. General Accounting Office (1999a), “Early Education and Care: Early Childhood Programs and
Services for Low-Income Families”, Report GAO/HEHS-00-11, Washington D.C., November,
http://www.gpo.gov.

U.S. General Accounting Office (1999b), “Child Care: How Do Military and Civilian Center Costs
Compare?”, Report GAO/HEHS-00-7, Washington D.C., October,



                                                 79
http://www.gpo.gov.

U.S. General Accounting Office (2000), “Title I Preschool Education: More Children Served, But
Gauging Effect on Preschool Readiness Difficult”, Report GAO/HEHS-00-171, Washington D.C.,
September,
http://www.gpo.gov.

U.S. Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention (1996), “Juvenile Offenders and Victims: A
National Report”, (Washington D.C.).

Vandell, D. L. and M. A. Corasaniti (1988), “The Relations between Third Graders’ After-School Care
and Social, Academic, and Emotional Functioning”, Child Development, 59: 868-875.

Vandell, Deborah Lowe and Jill K. Posner (1999), “Conceptualization and Measurement of Children’s
After-School Environments”, Ch 6.of Measuring Environment Across the Lifespan: Emerging Methods
and Concepts, S.L. Friedmen and T.D. Wachs, eds. (Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association Press).

Vandell, D.L. and L. Shumow (1999), “After-school Child Care Programs”, Future of Children, 9(2), 64-
80.

Vandell, Deborah Lowe, and Janaki Ramanan (1991), “Children of the National Longitudinal Survey of
Youth: Choices in After-School Care and Child Development”, Developmental Psychology, 27 (4), July:
637-643.

Voyager Expanded Learning (2003), “Voyager Extended-Day Program Results 1999-2000: Lafayette
Elementary School, New Orleans Public Schools”,
http://www.voyagerlearning.com/difference/publications.jsp.

Waldfogel, Jane (2001), “International Policies Towards Parental Leave and Child Care”, The Future of
Children, 11(1), 99-111.

Waldfogel, Jane, Wen-Jui Han, and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn (2002), “Early Maternal Employment and Child
Cognitive Development”, Demography 39 (2): 369-392.

Walker, James (1991), “Public Policy and the Supply of Child Care Services”, in David Blau (ed.), The
Economics of Child Care, (New York: Russell Sage Foundation), 1991.

Walker, James (1996), “Funding Child Rearing: Child Allowance and Parental Leave”, The Future of
Children 6 (2), Summer/Fall: 122-136,
http://www.futureofchildren.org/information2826/information_show.htm?doc_id=73300.

Welsh, M.E., C.A. Russell, I. Williams, E. Reisner, and R.N. White (2002), Promoting Learning and
School Attendance Through After-School Programs: Student Level Changes in Educational Performance
Across TASC’s First Three Years (Washington D.C., Policy Studies Associates).

Whitebook, Marcy, Carollee Howes and Deborah Phillips (1990), “Who Cares? Child Care Teachers and
the Quality of Care in America”, Final Report of the National Care Staffing Study (Oakland, California:
Child Care Employee Project).

Xiao, Mo (2002), “Is Quality Certification Effective: Evidence from the Child Care Market”, (Los



                                                 80
Angeles: Dept. of Economics UCLA).

Zigler, Edward and Sally J. Styfco (1994), “Head Start: Criticisms in a Constructive Context”, American
Psychologist. 49:2, February, 127-132.

Zill, Nicholas, Gar Resnick, and Ruth Hubbell McKey (undated), “What Children Know and Can Do at
the End of Head Start and What it Tells us About the Program's Performance”(Rockville MD: Westat
Inc.).




                                                  81
                                  Appendix: Child Care Data Sources

1. Cost, Quality, and Outcomes (CQOS; Helburn, 1995) collected data from a sample of 400 day care
centers in four states in 1993. Observational measures of quality were recorded, along with rich data on
inputs and costs. Children who were expected to spend another full year at one of the sampled centers and
then enroll in Kindergarten in Fall 1994 were selected to be given developmental assessments. They were
reassessed in Kindergarten and second grade. The sample included 828 children, of whom 757 provided
useable data.

National Child Care Staffing Survey (NCCSS) was conducted in 227 centers in 5 cities in 1988.
Approximately 45 centers were randomly selected from the licensed programs in each city. In each
center, an infant, toddler, and preschool classroom was randomly selected and two teachers from each of
these classrooms were interviewed about their training, education, wages, experience, and background. In
total, 1309 teachers were interviewed. Classrooms were also rated on the ECERS scale, as well as the
ITERS and the Arnett scale of teacher sensitivity.


The National Day Care Study (NDCS; Ruopp et al., 1979) closely monitored a sample of 64 day care
centers and approximately 1,600 of the children they served for about nine months. The children were
given baseline developmental assessments and were assessed again at the end of the nine month period
during which classroom activities and inputs were monitored. The study design included two experiments
in which some children were randomly assigned to classrooms with different staff-child ratios and
teachers with different levels of training.

NICHD Study of Early Childhood Care (SECC; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
1998) has followed a sample of over 1,300 children from their birth in 1991 through the present, closely
monitoring their home and child care environments and their development. The study used hospital birth
records in ten sites in the U.S. during 1991 to select a sample of healthy births to English-speaking
mothers over age 18 who planned to remain in the site during the next year. Families were visited
periodically for assessments of the home environment, and children who were in non-maternal child care
arrangements were visited in their child care arrangement. The quality of the arrangement was measured
using a variety of assessment instruments, and data on child care inputs were recorded by direct
observation. A novel feature of the study was the inclusion and assessment of all types of non-maternal
child care arrangements, not just centers and family day care homes. Child development was assessed at
regular intervals and extensive psycho-social data on the mother and data on the home environment were
collected as well. As children changed child care arrangements, the new arrangements were visited and
observed.


National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY) began with a sample of 12,652 individuals age 14-21
in 1979. Data was collected annually through 1994 and biannually thereafter. Beginning in 1986, the
children of the women in the sample were given developmental assessments every other year. In
addition, mothers are asked a series of questions about the home environment and home inputs to child
development. And extensive data on child care is collected from the mothers as well. The main
disadvantages of the NLSY are that the child care questions are not consistent across survey waves or
children (e.g. some questions are asked only for the youngest child, or for infants), there are no data on
child care quality (because this would require visits to thousands of child care arrangements), and the
child care input data are reported by the mother instead of being recorded by trained observers in visits to
the arrangement. The advantages are the very large random sample of children, the availability of
extensive measures of the home environment and inputs, and the availability of repeated measures of the



                                                    82
inputs and developmental outcomes. Unlike most other studies (with the exception of the NICHD SECC),
the sample is not limited to children in a single mode of child care


The Profile of Child Care Settings (PCS; Kisker et al., 1991) collected information on structural
classroom characteristics from a nationally representative sample of 2,089 day care centers and 583
regulated family day care homes by telephone survey in 1990. Regulated family day care homes are
unlikely to be representative of unregulated day care homes, and the latter are thought to be far more
numerous than the former.

The National Child Care Survey (NCCS; Hofferth et al., 1991) collected information on child care from
a nationally representative sample of 4,392 families with children aged 0-12 in 1990. The 100 primary
sampling units in the NCCS were the same as in the PCS, so the two surveys together provide consumer
and provider information about the same child care markets. Extensive data on child care arrangements
were collected for all children.


          Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) The SIPP consists of a series of national
panels that are interviewed at frequent intervals for a period of 2 ½ to 4 years (depending on the panel)
with sample sizes ranging from 14,000 to 36,700 households. Each panel of the SIPP is interviewed every
4 months to collect data on the “core content” - labor force status, program participation and income
information. In addition, there are topical modules administered at least once to each panel on a variety of
topics like assets and liabilities, health and disability, education and work history, child care, etc.
Information from these topical modules can be merged to the core data.
          The topical module on child care contains information on all child care arrangements for all
children under age 15 in the household for the last reference month prior to the interview. Information is
collected on mode of care, weekly number of hours of care, location of care and cost of child care. There
are specific questions on whether a relative or non-relative provided care, whether the child took care of
herself or whether the child was in school. If the child care arrangement is a facility outside the child’s
home, parents are asked if the facility is licensed and who is in charge of transporting the child to the
facility. Parents are also asked to provide information on whether child care problems adversely affected
them at school or at work. Information is available for the following Panels(waves): 1984(5), 1985(6),
1986(3,6), 1987(3,6), 1988(3,6), 1989(3), 1990(3), 1991(3), 1992(6,9), 1993(3,6,9), 1996(4,10), 2001(4).

National Survey of America’s Families (NSAF; Urban Institute) was conducted by the Urban Institute
in two rounds in 1997 and 1999, with two different samples. It was designed to analyze the consequences
of devolution of responsibility for social programs from the federal government to the states. The survey
was conducted by telephone on a sample derived primarily from random-digit dialing. Residents of 13
states were over-sampled in order to allow detailed within-state analysis, and low-income households
(income less than twice the federal poverty level) were over-sampled as well. The full 1999 NSAF sample
includes 42,360 households, and the 1997 sample includes 44,361 households. There are extensive
questions on child care and other topics.




                                                   83
    Table 1. Characteristics of Households with Children Age 0-4 by Type of Child Care Arrangement, and
                         Distribution of Households Across Child Care Arrangements

                                                                           Primary Child Care Arrangement
                                                            Mother Employed                          Mother Not Employed
                                                                      Non-                                        Non-
                                             Parent        Relative  relative    Center      Parent   Relative   relative                               Center
Hours/week in primary arrang.                  22           32.4       34.4        34.7                 16.7       17.3                                  20.2
% Paid cash                                     0           23.5       90.1        78.9                 10.6       54.5                                  52.2
Amount paid/week                                0           47.6       70.7        79.7                 27.6        59                                   42.6
% of income paid                                0            6.3        6.9         6.9                  5.9        9.4                                   5.7
% receive govt. subsidy                        0.8           1.3        4.6         7.1                  2.7       12.7                                   8.3
Mother’s hours of work/week                   29.2          35.1       37.7        36.2
% with a sec. arr.                            33.1          28.5        30         37.1                 20.5       19.9                                   27.2
Type of sec. Arr.:
   Parent                                      69.2            84            87.9           76.4                           82.1           83.2            76.5
   Relative                                    16.3            6.6            7.1           12.5                           11.3           16.2            11.8
   Non-relative                                 8.8            3.5            0.9            3.8                            4.2             0              8.5
   Center                                       5.6            5.8             4             7.3                            2.5            0.6             3.2
Hours in sec. arrang.                          11.4           14.6            16            16.7                            6.7           10.5             8.8
total # of arrang.:                            1.26           1.38           1.44           1.52                           1.25           1.24            1.33
total hours of care                            25.2           37.3           40.4           42.2                           18.2           19.6            22.9

                                                              Distribution of Children Across Types of Primary Arrangements
All                                            24.9           28.9        20.8        25.4       68.4       14.5        5.5                               11.6
   Age 0                                       33.4           31.2        19.3        16.1       78.7       14.7        4.8                                1.8
   Age 1                                        25            30.5        26.1        18.4       74.3       15.1         7                                 3.6
   Age 2                                       26.4           28.7        21.8         23        71.4       16.9        6.4                                5.3
   Age 3                                        24            31.7        18.9        25.5       63.6       16.2         5                                15.1
  Age 4                                        18.7           23.6         18         39.8        56         9.4        3.8                               30.8
Married                                        29.1           24.1        21.7        25.1       73.1        11         4.7                               11.2
Wid., div., sep.                               15.8           35.4        20.3        28.5       49.7       25.1        7.1                                18
never married                                  13.4           44.6        17.6        24.4       55.6       25.5        8.3                               10.6
White (non-Hisp.)                              26.5           23.7        23.4        26.3        70        12.5        5.7                               11.7
Black (non-Hisp.)                              16.7           36.2        13.4        33.6       46.7       25.4       10.7                               17.2
Hispanic                                       26.2           38.4         20         15.3       76.2        14         1.9                                7.9
Annual income<18(000)                          21.1           36.1        19.2        23.6       64.4       18.8        5.7                               11.1
18-35.999                                      27.6           36.6        16.4        19.4       75.2       12.8        2.5                                9.5
36-53.999                                      28.1           24.6        21.4        25.9       69.6       15.6        6.1                                8.7
54+                                            22.8           24.2        23.8        29.2       65.7       10.2        7.6                               16.5
Income<poverty line                            22.7            36         17.7        23.6       64.8       17.9        5.8                               11.6
Income 1-2 times poverty line                  28.4            38         15.9        17.6        72        15.4        3.1                                9.6
Income 2+ times poverty line                   24.1           24.5        23.1        28.3       68.7       11.7        6.8                               12.8
Income>=poverty line                           25.2           27.9        21.3        25.6        70        13.1        5.4                               11.6
Northeast                                      30.2           27.3        18.2        24.3       67.4       10.7        9.4                               12.5
Midwest                                        27.9           24.2        24.9         23        70.2       15.8        3.9                               10.1
West                                           26.2            33         21.4        19.4       70.1       15.4        5.2                                9.3
South                                          19.2           30.1         19         31.6       66.7       15.2        4.3                               13.8
Non-south                                      27.9           28.3        21.7        22.1       69.2       14.2        6.1                               10.5
Metro                                          25.8           28.9        19.8        25.5       68.5       13.5         6                                 12
Non-metro                                      19.8           28.9        26.7        24.6        68        20.4        2.7                                8.9
Receives pub. asst.                             14             42         16.5        27.5       58.4       19.3        7.4                               14.9
No public asst.                                25.8           27.8        21.2        25.2       70.4       13.6        5.1                               10.9
Mother works full time                         17.5           30.1        24.1        28.3
Part time                                      38.2           26.9        15.7        19.2
Source: Tabulations from wave 10 of the 1996 panel of the Survey of Income and Program Participation (Spring 1999).

Notes: Parent includes the mother while working, the father, and cases in which no regular child care arrangement is used. Most of the parent care cases for
children of non-employed mothers report no regular arrangement, and in these cases information on hours of care etc. is not available. Relative includes
grandparents, siblings, and other relatives. Non-relative includes family day care, nannies, and babysitters. Center includes day care centers, preschools, and
Head Start. Public assistance includes TANF, other cash assistance, and Food Stamps. Figures are weighted by the child’s sample weight.
      Table 2. Characteristics of Households with Children Age 5-14 by Type of Child Care Arrangement
             (excluding school), and Distribution of Households Across Child Care Arrangements

                                                                          Primary Child Care Arrangement
                                                           Mother Employed                          Mother Not Employed
                                                                     Non-      Organized                         Non-    Organized
                                            Parent        Relative  relative    Activity    Parent   Relative   relative  Activity
Hours/week in primary arrang.                12.1          16.4       20.4        15.9                 10.7       11.2      7.3
% Paid cash                                    0            8.1       72.1        73.4                  1.7       47.8     67.9
Amount paid/week                               0           40.1       48.6        44.1                 27.8       37.1     19.8
% of income paid                               0            4.8       13.6         5.4                  9.1         7       2.9
% receive govt. subsidy                       0.5           1.2        3.1          5                   1.2        8.6       3
Mother’s hours of work/week                  33.5           37        38.1        36.5
% with a sec. arr.                           47.5          87.7       77.5        79.9                   82       66.2     82.3
Type of sec. Arr.:
   Parent                                    67.9           66.6           60.2           52.9                       72.6   66.3   51.7
   Relative                                   12            12.2            9.1           18.2                       14.6   22.4   13.6
   Non-relative                               1.8            1.3            0.7             2                         0.6     0     5.4
   Center                                    18.3           19.9            30            26.9                       12.1   11.4   29.2
Hours in sec. arrang.                        14.2           12.2           14.5            9.7                        8.8    8.3    5.1
total # of arrang.:                          1.18           1.63           1.82             2                        1.41   1.62   1.81
total hours of care                          17.9           22.5           29.5           23.2                       13.6    15    10.5

                                                            Distribution of Children AcrossTypes of Primary Arrangements
All                                           37            36.3         9.6        17.1      68.7        18.6       2             10.6
   Age 5                                     29.9           24.5        18.5        27.1      67.4         16       4.4            12.2
   Age 6                                     35.9           27.4        16.2        20.5       71         14.9      1.5            12.6
   Age 7                                     36.5           31.9        11.8        19.8      76.8        11.9      1.7             9.6
   Age 8                                     38.6           31.8         12         17.6      69.9        13.6       2             14.6
   Age 9                                     37.8           33.4        13.5        15.3      74.7         14       1.3             9.9
   Age 10                                    40.7           32.3         9.1        17.9      68.7        17.6      1.9            11.8
   Age 11                                    37.6           37.8         7.9        16.8      67.7        19.6      2.1            10.6
   Age 12                                    38.1           44.5         4.6        12.8      64.6        23.8      2.5             9.1
   Age 13                                    38.7           47.7         2.3        11.4      61.4        30.7      1.1             6.7
   Age 14                                    35.6           49.6         1.8         13       59.7        32.6       1              6.7
Married                                      42.5           31.5         9.1        16.9      70.9        15.4      1.6            12.1
Wid., div., sep.                             24.3           47.6        10.2        17.9      61.6        29.5      3.5             5.4
never married                                22.6           49.4        11.9        16.1      62.3        27.8      3.3             6.6
White (non-Hisp.)                             39            33.4         9.3        18.3      66.5        18.2      1.6            13.7
Black (non-Hisp.)                            31.6           43.1         8.3         17       63.8        26.5      2.4             7.3
Hispanic                                     33.6           41.4        12.6        12.4      77.5        14.3      2.9             5.3
Annual income<18(000)                        34.3           42.1        10.1        13.4      69.7         22       2.6             5.8
18-35.999                                    36.6           39.9         9.7        13.8      73.1        16.4      2.4             8.2
36-53.999                                    40.9           34.9         8.8        15.5      69.9        17.7      0.7            11.8
54+                                          36.1           33.3         9.8        20.8      62.7        17.1       2             18.2
Income<poverty line                          37.3           41.6         8.8        12.3      69.8        21.6      2.5             6.1
Income 1-2 times poverty line                 38             39          9.7        13.3      72.5         18       2.4             7.1
Income 2+ times poverty line                 36.6           34.5         9.7        19.2      65.4        16.5      1.5            16.7
Income>=poverty                               37            35.7         9.7        17.6      68.2        17.1      1.9            12.9
Northeast                                    42.2           32.4         9.8        15.7      65.9        16.1      3.5            14.5
Midwest                                      38.5           35.2        11.5        14.8      63.3        21.6      1.2            13.9
West                                         36.3           37.5         9.9        16.3      69.8        19.5      1.9             8.8
South                                        33.8           38.4          8         19.8      72.7        17.3      1.9             8.2
Non-south                                    38.7           35.2        10.5        15.7      66.7        19.3      1.9            11.8
Metro                                        37.1           35.8         9.7        17.4      69.7        16.9       2             11.3
Non-metro                                    36.5           38.6         9.3        15.6      63.2       27.8        2             7.1
Receives pub. asst.                          25.4           50.8        10.9        12.8      65.5       25.5        3             6.1
No public asst.                              37.9           35.3         9.5        17.4      69.5         17       1.8            11.7
Mother works full time                       32.3            39         10.7        17.9
Part time                                    48.3            30          7.6        14.2
Notes: See Table 1. Organized activity includes centers and institutional before-school and after-school programs.
            Table 3. Trends in Child Care Arrangements and Expenditures


A. Primary Child Care Arrangement Used by Employed Mothers of Children Age 0-4
                            Parent                  Relative               Non-relative         Organized facility
Winter 1985                  23.9                    24.1                     28.2                    23.9
Fall 1988                    22.8                    21.1                     28.9                    27.3
Fall 1990                    22.9                    23.1                     25.1                    28.7
Fall 1991                    28.7                    23.5                     23.3                    24.7
Fall 1993                    22.1                     26                      21.6                     31
Fall 1995                    24.3                    21.4                     28.4                    25.7
Spring 1997                  28.4                    25.8                     22.1                    23.7
Spring 1999                  24.9                    28.9                     20.8                    25.4

B. Total Family Expenditure on Child Care, Employed Mothers with Children Age 0-14
                    % paying anything Weekly expense                       % of income
                                      (1999$), if pay
Winter 1985                  33.7                      90.6                     NA
Fall 1987                    33.3                      94.7                     6.6
Fall 1988                    39.9                      97.2                     6.8
Fall 1990                     38                       87.6                     6.9
Fall 1991                    34.5                      86.4                     7.1
Fall 1993                    35.5                      85.1                     7.3
Fall 1995                    40.5                      92.9                     7.4
Spring 1997                  44.1                      74.7                     7.4
Spring 1999                   43                       75.6                     7.5

Source: Smith (2000, 2002) and tabulations from wave 10 of the1996 Survey of Income and Program Participation
(Spring 1999).




Notes: Parent includes the mother while working, and the father. Relative include grandparents, siblings, and other
relatives. Nonrelative includes family day care, nannies, and babysitters. Organized facility includes day care centers,
preschools, and Head Start. Beginning in 1995, the SIPP child care module was changed to allow “no regular
arrangement” as a response. These cases are classified here as parent care. In 1997 they were 6% of all cases. Figures
are weighted by the child’s sample weight.
     Table 4: Distribution of children ages 5-14 by use of self care and
                     mother’s employment status, 1999

                                           Uses any self care                    Does not use any self-care

                                       Mother            Mother not               Mother             Mother not
                                      employed           employed                employed            employed
Percent in each primary
care arrangement
 Parent                                   11.1                 0.9                   42.1                75.3
 Relative                                 76.9                89.2                   28.4                11.8
 Non-relative                              3                    1                    10.9                 2.1
 Organized Activity                        9                   8.8                   18.6                10.8
Total                                     100                 100                    100                 100

                                       Distribution of children across any self care and mother’s
                                                              employment

All                                       10.5                 3.2                   53.4                32.9
Age 5                                      0.7                 0.3                   56.5                42.6
Age 6                                      1.3                 0.6                   58.2                 40
Age 7                                      1.4                 1.1                   60.2                37.3
Age 8                                      2.8                 1.2                   58.8                37.2
Age 9                                      5.2                 1.5                   59.1                34.1
Age 10                                     8.3                 2.4                   57.7                31.5
Age 11                                    11.5                 4.4                   51.9                32.2
Age 12                                    19.6                 5.5                   47.3                27.6
Age 13                                     25                  7.5                   42.4                25.1
Age 14                                    32.3                  8                    39.7                 20
Married                                    10                  3.2                   52.4                34.4
Wid., div., sep.                          14.3                  3                    56.5                26.1
never married                              7.6                 3.1                   55.7                33.6
White                                     12.3                 3.6                   53.6                30.5
Black                                       9                  2.8                   59.2                 29
Hispanic                                   5.3                  2                    47.3                45.4
Annual income<18(000)                      5.4                 4.3                   35.9                54.4
18-35.999                                  9.2                 2.6                   55.2                 33
36-53.999                                 11.5                  3                     56                 29.5
54+                                       13.6                  3                    60.5                22.8
Income <poverty line                       4.3                 4.5                   33.1                58.1
Income ≥ poverty                           12                  2.9                   58.3                26.9
Northeast                                  8.9                 2.3                   56.9                31.9
Midwest                                   14.6                 4.6                   52.1                28.7
West                                       9.7                 3.5                   49.1                37.6
South                                      9.1                 2.5                   55.6                32.9
Metro                                      10                  2.9                   53.1                 34
Non-metro                                 12.8                 4.5                    55                 27.7
Receives pub. asst.                        4.7                 5.7                   33.5                56.1
No public asst.                           11.2                 2.9                   55.9                 30
Source: Tabulations from wave 10 of the 1996 panel of the Survey of Income and Program Participation (Spring 1999).


Notes: Parent includes the mother while working, the father, and cases in which no regular child care arrangement is used.
Relative include grandparents, siblings, and other relatives. Non-relative includes family day care, nannies, and babysitters.
Non-relative includes family day care, nannies, and babysitters.
Organized activity includes before and after school programs, lessons, clubs, sports, and day care centers.
Public assistance includes TANF, other cash assistance, and Food Stamps.
Figures are weighted by the child’s sample weight.
                      Table 5. Studies of the Effect of the Price of Child Care on Employment of Mothers

Study                    Data         Population            Employment      Price                   Method     Elasticity
Anderson and Levine      SIPP 1990-93 child < 13            binary: LFP     total c.c. expenses per Probit; standard
                                                                                                               Married,<13:-.30
(2000)                                                                      mother’s hours                     Single, <13: -.47
                                                                            worked                             Married, <6: -.46
                                                                                                               Single, <6: -.58
Baum (2002)              NLSY 1988-    Women who gave Month of return total cc. expenditure Discrete time      low income: -.59
                         94            birth 1988-94  to work         per hour worked         logit hazard     Others:      -.02*
                                                      following birth                                          (one year after birth)
Blau and Robins (1991)   NLSY 1982-    child < 6      binary:         total c.c. expenses per Probit; standard .04*
                         86                           employed in     hour of care
                                                      last 4 weeks
Connelly (1992)          SIPP 1984     Married, child<13 binary: LFP        total c.c. expenses per   Probit; standard -0.2
                                                                            mother’s hours
                                                                            worked
Connelly and Kimmel      SIPP 1992-3 child < 6              FT, PT, OLF     expenditure per hour      Ordered probit Married:
(2000)                   (data for 1994)                                    on primary                on FT, PT, OLF FT:-.71, PT: -.08
                                                                            arrangement of                             Single:
                                                                            youngest child                             FT:-1.22, PT: -.37
Connelly and Kimmel      SIPP 1992-3 Single, child < 6      Binary: LFP     exp. per hour on          Probit; standard -1.03
(2003)                   (data for 1994)                                    primary arr. of
                                                                            youngest child
U.S. GAO (1994b)         NCCS 1990     child<13             binary: LFP     total weekly c.c.      Probit; standard Poor:      -.50
                                                                            expenses                                Near poor: -.34
                                                                                                                    Not poor: -.19
Han and Waldfogel        CPS 1991-94   child < 6            binary:        total c.c. expenses per Probit; standard Married: -.30
(2001)                                                      employed       mother’s hours                           Single: -.50
                                                                           worked (from SIPP)
Hotz and Kilburn (1994) NLS72, 1986    child < 6            binary:        total c.c. expenses per probit           -1.26
                                                            employed       hour of care
Kimmel (1998)            SIPP 1987     child < 13           binary: worked total c.c. expenses per Probit; standard Married: -.92
                                                            last month     mother’s hours                           Single: -.22
                                                                           worked
Powell (1997)            Canadian      married; child < 6   binary:        total family work-      Probit; standard -0.38
                         NCCS                               employed       related expenditure
                                                                           per mother’s hours
Ribar (1992)             SIPP 1984     child < 15           employed       total c.c. expenses per probit           -0.74
                                                                           hour of care
Blau and Hagy (1998)             NCCS 1990            child < 6                 employed             quality-adjusted          Multinomial        -0.2
                                                                                                     location-specific         logit
                                                                                                     price from provider
                                                                                                     survey
Blau and Robins (1988)           EOPP 1980            married, child < 14 employed                   average location-         Multinomial        -0.34
                                                                                                     specific weekly c.c.      logit
                                                                                                     expenditure
Fronstin and Wissoker            NCCS 1990            child < 6                 employed             average location-         binary logit       Low-income area: -.45
(1995)                                                                                               specific price from                          High-income area: .06*
                                                                                                     c.c. provider survey
Michalopoulos and                Canadian and         married, child < 5        FT, PT, OLF          expenditure per hour      Multinomial        -0.156
Robins (2000)                    U.S. NCCS                                                           of child care             logit
Michalopoulos and                Canadian and         single, child<5           FT, PT, OLF          expenditure per hour      Multinomial        -0.259
Robins (2002)                    U.S. NCCS                                                           of child care             logit
Powell (2002)                    Canadian             married; child < 6        employed             expenditure on            Multinomial        Center user: -1.40
                                 NCCS                                                                primary arr. of           logit              Non-relative user: -3.60
                                                                                                     youngest child per                           Relative user: -.80
                                                                                                     hour of care
Ribar (1995)                     SIPP 1984            married, child < 15 employed FT,               total c.c. expenses per   structural         -0.09
                                                                          employed PT                hour of care              multinom-ial
Tekin (2002)                     NSAF 1997            single, child<13    employed FT,               total c.c. expenses per   multinomial        full time:-.15
                                                                          employed PT                hour of care              logit              part time: -.07
Notes: Standard = A binomial employment model estimated by probit or logit. The price of child care is usually measured using the fitted value from a model of child care
expenditures per hour estimated on the sample of families with an employed mother who pays for care. These child care price equations are usually corrected for selection. SIPP =
Survey of Income and Program Participation. NLSY = National Longitudinal Survey of Youth. NCCS = National Child Care Survey. CPS = Current Population Survey. NLS72 =
National Longitudinal Survey of the Class of 1972. EOPP = Employment Opportunity Pilot Projects. NSAF = National Survey of America’s Families. FT = Full-time, PT = Part-time,


* Underlying coefficient estimate on the price of care was insignificantly different from zero at the 10% level.
  Table 6. Characteristics of Day Care Centers and Regulated Family Day Care
                                   Homes, 1990

                                                                                            Regulated Family Day
                                                                 Day Care Centers               Care Homes
Average group sizea                                                    16                             7
   infants only                                                         7                             7
   1 year-olds only                                                    10                             7
   2-year olds only                                                    12                             7
   3-5 year olds only                                                  17                             8
Average Child-Staff Ratioa                                              9                             6
   infants only                                                         4                            5.9
   1 year-olds only                                                    6.2                           6.2
   2-year olds only                                                    7.3                           6.2
   3-5 year olds only                                                  9.9                           6.5
Annual Rate of Teacher Turnover                                        25
Percent of centers with any turnover                                   50
Turnover rate in centers with turnover                                 50
Average Percentage of teachers with:
   At least a BA/BS                                                        47                       11
   Some College                                                            39                       44
   High school degree or GED                                               13                       34
   No degree or GED                                                         1                       11
Percentage of teachers who have had:
   CDA Training                                                            25                        6
   Teacher Training                                                        35
   Other education training                                                40
   Child care workshops or courses                                         54                       43
   Child development or psychology courses                                 36                       28
   Nurse or health training                                                26
   Training by a R&R or govt. agency                                        5                        5
   Social Service training                                                  4                        2
   Other training                                                           6

Source: Kisker et al. (1991).
Notes:
a. Excluding programs that serve primarily handicapped children.
b. The training information for center refers only to private, non-religious-sponsored centers.
 Table 7. The Distribution of Child Care Quality in Day Care Centers as Measured by
            the Early Childhood and Infant Toddler Environment Rating

                                                     Mean (and Standard Deviation)
                                                       For-Profit                    Non-Profit
                           All Centers          Preschool   Infant-Toddler    Preschool   Infant-Toddler

Cost, Quality, and Outcomes Study (1993)
All Sites                  3.99 (1.07)         4.07 (0.99)         3.33 (1.02)          4.41 (0.96)         3.57 (1.07)
California                 4.36 (0.96)         4.27 (0.88)         3.86 (0.70)          4.66 (0.97)         3.60 (1.07)
Colorado                   3.94 (0.95)         4.09 (0.85)         3.40 (0.89)          4.25 (0.89)         3.66 (1.04)
Connecticut                4.24 (1.05)         4.46 (1.02)         4.00 (1.07)          4.33 (0.99)         3.85 (1.13)
North Carolina             3.44 (1.08)         3.28 (0.83)         2.54 (0.60)          4.31 (0.95)         3.29 (1.02)

National Child Care Staffing Study (1989)
All Sites                  3.92 (0.99)         3.59 (0.90)         3.43 (0.98)          4.39 (0.97)         4.09 (1.07)
Atlanta                    3.57 (0.96)         3.32 (0.84)         3.04 (0.86)          4.30 (0.87)         3.89 (1.05)
Boston                     4.44 (0.72)         3.66 (0.86)         3.16 (0.57)          4.72 (0.61)         4.51 (0.72)
Detroit                    3.96 (1.24)         4.23 (1.04)         3.86 (1.37)          4.14 (1.40)         3.69 (1.45)
Phoenix                    4.09 (0.90)         3.74 (0.75)         3.84 (0.83)          4.79 (0.89)         4.48 (0.97)
Seattle                    3.62 (0.84)         3.30 (0.86)         3.37 (1.06)          3.99 (0.73)         3.63 (0.96)

Source: Tabulations from the Cost, Quality, and Outcomes Study (CQOS) and the National Child Care Staffing Study
(NCCSS).


Notes: See Cryer et al. (1995) for description of the CQOS, and Whitebook et al. (1990) for description of the NCCSS. Sample
size is 731 classrooms in 401 centers for the CQOS and 665 classrooms in 227 centers for the NCCSS. The public release data
set from the NCCSS does not include the scores on the individual ECERS and ITERS items or the average score. Rather, it
includes two summary measures derived from factor analysis of the underlying items. The figures presented here are the
unweighted average of the two summary measures. This has the same scale as the ECERS and ITERS scores from the CQO but
was derived differently, so comparisons between the CQO and NCCSS should be made with caution.
                                                     Table 8. Studies of the Effects of Child Care Inputs on Quality and on Child Outcomes

Data                         Author                         Design                                    Age of Participation     Sample Size                 Outcomes
National Day Care Study      Ruopp et al. 1979              Children given baseline                   Age 1-5                  64 Centers                  Language receptivity: all T >C (age 3-5)
(NDCS)                                                      developmental assessments and                                      1,600 Children              General knowledge: all T>C (age 3-5)
                                                            evaluated again after nine months.                                 T1= low staff-child ratio   Cooperative behavior: all T>C (age 3-5)
                                                            Random assignment of children                                      T2= high teacher training   Child development: T1>C (age 1-2), T1=C (age3-5)
                                                            to classrooms with diff. staff-child
                                                            ratios and teachers with diff. levels                              Low-income urban.           Larger group sizes associated with poorer
                                                            of training, but day care centers not                                                          outcomes, but group size not randomly assigned.
                                                            randomly chosen.
Cost , Quality, and          Helburn 1995                   Observational data on measures of                                  400 Centers
Outcomes Study (CQOS)                                       quality, inputs, and costs of centers                              Initial: 828 Children
                                                            in four states. Children                                           Final: 757 Children
                                                            who spent at least one full year at the                            T= high quality centers
                                                            sampled centers were given
                                                            developmental assessments in
                                                            Kindergarten and 2nd grade.
                             Peisner-Feinberg et al. 2001   Controls for maternal education,                                   Same as above.              Mental development: T>C
                                                            child gender, ethnicity, and                                                                   Math achievement: T>C
                                                            relationship with teacher, but does                                                            Behavior: T>C
                                                            not control for home environment or
                                                            a baseline assessment.
                             Mocan et al. 1995              Estimates a model of classroom                                     Same as above.              Inputs with significant effects on process quality:
                                                            quality as a function of child care                                                               Staff-child ratio
                                                            inputs. Includes many controls.                                                                   Wage rates for teachers with low education
                                                                                                                                                              Proportion of staff with college degree
                                                                                                                                                              Lead teacher turnover
                                                                                                                                                           Inputs which do not effect quality:
                                                                                                                                                              Group size
                             Blau 2000                      Uses center fixed effects approach to     Age 0-5                  Same as above.              Inputs with significant effects on process quality:
                                                            compare diff. classrooms in the same                                                              Workshop training
                                                            centers as Mocan et al. 1995.                                                                  Inputs which do not affect quality:
                                                                                                                                                              Staff-child ratio
                                                                                                                                                              Wage rates for teachers with low education
                                                                                                                                                              Proportion of staff with college degree
                                                                                                                                                              Lead teacher turnover
                                                                                                                                                              Group size
National Child Care Staffing Blau 1997                      Uses center fixed effects approach to     infants to children of   204 centers,                Similar to Blau (2000) results.
Survey (NCCS)                                               compare diff. classrooms in the same      age 5+                   567 classrooms,
                                                            centers.                                                           1,094 teachers.
Florida Child Care Quality   Howes et al. 1998              Evaluates changes in regulation                                    150 centers in 4 Florida    Significant changes in inputs 1992-1994:
Improvement Study                                           of staff-child ratio & training in                                 counties                       Staff-child ratios up
                                                            Florida. Center directors                                                                         Teacher detachment down
                                                            and teachers in three classrooms                                                                  Complexity of peer and object play up
                                                            were interviewed. Two children                                                                    Attatchment security up
                                                        from each class were randomly                                                             Inputs which did not change 1992-94:
                                                        selected for developmental                                                                   Teacher sensitivity
                                                        assessments. Process conducted                                                               Teacher harshness
                                                        before regulations changed in 1992                                                           Overall classroom quality
                                                        and again in 1994 and 1996.                                                                  Behavior problems
                                                        No comparison group and no way                                                               Cognitive development
                                                        to isolate changes resulting from                                                         Significant changes in inputs 1994-1996:
                                                        regulations. Different children                                                              Teacher responsiveness up
                                                        assessed in each wave.                                                                       Teacher detatchment up
                                                                                                                                                     Attatchment security up
                                                                                                                                                  Inputs which did not change 1994-96:
                                                                                                                                                     Overall classroom quality
                                                                                                                                                     Behavior problems
                                                                                                                                                     Cognitive development
NICHD Study of Early Child U.S. Department of Health    Monitors children from birth in 1991                           1,300 Children
Care (SECC)                and Human Services 1998      until present. Selected healthy births                         English-speaking
                                                        to English-speaking mothers over
                                                        age 18 who planned to remain in the
                                                        state for one year. Families and child
                                                        care facilities of every type were
                                                        visited periodically. The effects of
                                                        child care quality on child
                                                        development analysed in many
                                                        studies by the NICHD Early Child
                                                        Care Research Network (ECCRN).
                                                        See below.
                            Early Child Care Research   Regression model of cognitive          Age 15, 24, 36 months   Same as above.             Cognitive development: T>C
                            Network 2000c               development. Controls for five                                 T=high quality care
                                                        family and child characteristics and
                                                        site dummies in addition to the type,                          Children in non-maternal
                                                        quantity, and quality of child care.                           child care at time of
                                                                                                                       assessment.
                            Early Child Care Research   Models behavior problems. Controls    Age 24, 36 months        Same as above.             Caregiver-reported behavior problems: T1<C (age 24 mo.)
                            Network 1998                for family income, psychological                               T1=high quality care       Mother-reported behavior problems: T1=C (age 24 mo.)
                                                        adjustment of the mother, gender,                              T2=stable care             Non-compliance of children in care: T2<C (age 24 mo.)
                                                        child temperament, quality of home                             arrangement                Problem behavior: T1<C (age 36 mo.)
                                                        environment, character of mother-
                                                        child interactions, and child's                                Children in non-maternal
                                                        security of attachment to mother.                              child care at 24 or 36
                                                                                                                       months.
                            Early Child Care Research   Controls for several family                                    Same as above.           Peer interactions: T>C
                            Network 2000b               characteristics as well as child's                             T=high quality care
                                                        cognitive development, temperament,
                                                        and mother's sensitivity when
                                                        analyzing peer interactions.
                        Early Child Care Research   Models the effects of child care            Age 15, 24, 36 months Same as above.        Inputs with significant effects on quality:
                        Network 2000a               inputs on child care quality.                                                              Group size (age 15, 24 mo.)
                                                    Regression controls for site, but not                                                      Staff-child ratio (age 15, 24 mo.)
                                                    child, family, or center characteristics.                                                  Caregiver education (age 24, 36 mo.)
                                                    Only characteristics of room, teacher,                                                     Caregiver specialized training (age 15 mo.)
                                                    and type of child care.                                                                    Caregiver experience (age 24, 36 mo.)
                        Early Child Care Research   Controls for many home and child            Age 54 months        Same as above.         Cognitive functioning: T>C
                        Network and Duncan 2002     characteristics and estimates change                             T=high quality care
                                                    score models.
National Longitudinal                               Began with sample of 12,652
Survey of Youth 1979                                individuals age 14-21 in 1979. Data
(NLSY79)                                            collected annually until the present.
                                                    Beginning in 1986, children of sample
                                                    women were given developmental
                                                    assessments every other year.
                        Blau 1999                   Analyzes the effect of child care           variable, depends    N=2,503 to 4,031       Inputs with significant effects on development:
                                                    inputs on child development.                on outcome           depending on outcome      Group size (wrong sign)
                                                    Controls for type of care, payment,                                                     Generally, inputs small and not sig.
                                                    time spent in care, and family and                                                      Home environment large and sig.
                                                    child characteristics. Models
                                                    with and w/o family fixed effects.
                                         Table 9. Summary of the History, Goals, and Provisions of Major Federal Child Care Programs

Program         Dependent Care Tax       Exclusion of Employer- Aid to Families with          Transitional Child          At-Risk Child Care          Child Care &               Title XX Social
                Credit                   Provided Dependent     Dependent Children            Care                                                    Development Block          Services Block Grant
                                         Care Expenses          Child Care                                                                            Grant

Acronym         DCTC                     EEPDCE                      AFDC-CC                  TCC                         ARCC                        CCDBG                      TXX-CC
Year Began      1954                     1981                 1988c                     1988                              1990                        1990                1975a
Goal            Subsidize employment- Subsidize employment- Facilitate participation in Help families who                 Help families who need Provide child care       Help low-income
                related dependent care related dependent care the JOBS program          recently left AFDC for            child care in order to  services for low-income families achieve self-
                expenses               expenses                                         work maintain self-               work and are at-risk of families, and improve   sufficiency; prevent
                                                                                        sufficiency                       going on AFDC if child the overall supply and   child neglect.
                                                                                                                          care is not provided.   quality of child care.

Original Form   Tax deduction            Amounts paid or             Open-ended entitlement. Same as AFDC-CC;             Capped entitlement.         Block grant to states. No Capped entitlement;
                                         incurred by an employer     Vouchers, contracts, or limited to 1 year. Sliding   State match required.       state match. 75% of        population-based
                                         for dependent care          reimbursement of        fee for recipients.          Sliding fee for             funds for direct subsidies distribution to states.
                                         assistance provided to an   expenses. No fee for                                 recipients. Income limits   (income<75% of SMI);
                                         employee are excluded       recipients                                           set by states.              25% for quality
                                         from the employee’s                                                                                          improvement and
                                         gross taxable earnings                                                                                       consumer education.


Major Changes   1976: credit replaced    None                        1996: PRWORA consolidated AFDC-CC, TCC, ARCC, and CCDBG into a single program: the Child 1981: converted to block
                deduction.                                           Care and Development Fund (CCDF).                                                        grant.
                1982: subsidy rate and                                                                                                                        1996: States allowed to
                maximum allowable                                                                                                                             transfer up to 10% of
                expenses raised. 1983:                                                                                                                        TANF funds to TXX.
                added to short form
                1040A.
                1988: Required SSN of
                provider.
Current Form    Non-refundable Tax       Same as original            Combination discretionary and entitlement block grant. States must meet maintenance of effort and           Block grant to states that
                Credit                                               matching requirements for some of the entitlement funds. States may transfer up to 30% of their             can be used for many
                                                                     Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) block grant funds into the CCDF. States may also             social services; 15% of
                                                                     use TANF funds directly for child care, without transferring them to CCDF.                                  funds on average used
                                                                                                                                                                                 for child care.
Current                  30% tax credit on                 Up to $5000 per year              Sliding fee scale, but states may waive fees for families below the poverty line. At least 4% of funds                    Child care must meet
Provisions               expenses up to $4,800             excludable. Expenses              must be spent on quality-improvement and consumer education. Child care must meet state licensing                         state regulatory and
                         for 2 children for AGI            excluded from gross               and regulatory standards. Contracts or vouchers. Relative care eligible if provider lives in a separate                   licensing standards
                         ≤10K; subsidy rate falls          income are not eligible           residence.
                         to 20% for AGI>28K.               for the DCTC.
                         Effective 2003, 35%
                         credit on expenses up to
                         $6,000 for 2 children for
                         AGI≤15K



Current Eligibility Both parents (or only                  None, other than being Family income no more than 85% of SMI, but states can (and most do) impose a lower income                                            States choose income
Criteria            parent) employed.                      employed by a firm that eligibility limit. Children < 13. Parents must be in work-related activities.                                                       eligibility. Employment
                                                           offers this benefit.                                                                                                                                        required.


Source: Committee on Ways and Means (1998, 2000); Blau (2001, 2003b).
Notes:
a. Earlier provisions of the Social Security Act provided federal matching funds to the states for social services.
b. Less than two percent of the funds in the food program go to adult care centers.
c. Before explicit child care subsidies were added to the AFDC program in 1988, states could choose to disregard from earnings up to $200/month in child care expenses incurred by employed AFDC recipients in determining AFDC eligibility and
benefit amounts.
                   Table 10. Characteristics of State Child Care and Development Fund Plans


                                  Income           Are
                                 Eligibility   families at
                                as a percent    or Below                                               Reimburse-       Implied
                    Monthly       of State       Poverty                                               ment Rate for    weekly
                 Income Elig- Median           required to Minimum Fee (full- Maximum Family Fee       Preschool Age    reimbur-
      State       ibility Level   Income       Pay a Fee? time rate)          (full-time rate)         Childa           sement rateb
Alabama              $1,504         45%           Some        $2.00 /week             $85/week            $94/week          $94.00
Alaska               $3,694         85%           Some         3% of cost           100% of cost        $800/month         $185.00
Arizona              $1,909         58%           Some      $1.00/day + $.50        $10/day + $5           $20/day         $100.00
                                                              additional c.         additional c.
Arkansas            $1,533         60%            None              0               100% of fee         $14.40/day         $72.00
California          $2,821         75%            None             $0                $10.10 /day        $35.90/day        $287.20
Colorado            $2,139         52%            Some         $6/month         $237/month + $15        $18.18 /day        $90.90
                                                                                 each additional c.
Connecticutc        $3,264         75%            Some           No fee            $326.3 /month         $115/week        $115.00
District of         $2,326         62%           Some              $0                                   $23.55/day        $117.75
Columbia
Delaware            $1,764         44%           None          1% of cost        46% of cost            $81.40/week        $81.40
Florida             $1,706         54%            All       $.80 /day + $.40  $9.60/day + $4.80          $102/week        $102.00
                                                           each additional c. each additional c.
Georgia             $2,817         85%           Some      $5/week + $3 each $52/week + $26 each         $75/week          $75.00
                                                              additional c.      additional c.
Hawaii              $2,874         75%           None              0                $75/month           $375/month         $86.54
Idaho               $1,706         54%           Some          1% of cost          100% of cost         $434/month        $100.15
Illinois            $1,818         45%            All         $4.33 (1 c.)         $134.32 (1 c.)       $23.75 /day        118.75
                                                           $8.67/month (2 c.)   $233.98/month (2 c.)
Indiana             $2,161         58%           None             $0            10% of gross income       $30/day         $150.00

Iowa                $1,793         49%           None              $0               $6/half-day        $9.50/half-day      $95.00

Kansas              $3,114         85%           Some              $0             $243 /month           $2.28/hour          91.2
Kentucky            $1,851         57%           Some              $0             $11.50 (1 c.)          $15/day           $75.00
                                                                               $12.75/day (2+ c.)
Louisiana           $2,420         75%           None               0             100% of cost            $15 /day         $75.00
Maine               $3,957         85%           Some        2% of income        10% of income           $130/week        $130.00
Maryland            $1,870         40%           Some     $4/month + $4 per $161/month + $122           $407 /month        $93.92
                                                              additional c.    each additional c.
Massachusetts       $3,869         85%           Some           $.20/day           $22.80/day             $29/day         $145.00
Michigan            $2,172         55%           Some          $.125/hour          $1.75/hour           $2.50 /hour       $100.00
Minnesota           $3,181         75%           Some              $0              $636/month             $44/day         $220.00
Mississippi         $2,333         85%           Some      $10.00 (1 c.) $20/      $155 (1 c.)           $70/week          $70.00
                                                              month (2 c.)     $165/month (2 c.)
Missouri            $1,482         45%           Some          $1per year           $4.00 /day            $10/day          $50.00
Montana             $1,735         57%           Some              $5                 $243              $16.50 /day        $82.50
Nebraska            $2,105         66%           Some              $0           $187 (1 c.) $334          $16/day          $80.00
                                                                                  /month (2 c.)
Nevada              $2,798         75%           Some     10% of cost of care 100% of cost of care       $100/week        $100.00

New Hampshirec      $1,784         49%           Some              $0            $.50/week per c. +     $16.70 /day        $83.50
                                                                                34% of daily cost of
                                                                                        care
New Jersey          $1,735         37%            All        $9.10/month +         $294.90/month        $21.76/day        $108.80
                                                              $6.80, 2 nd c.      +$156.85, 2 nd c.
New Mexico                    $2,313            83%             Some                  $11                         $191               $346.50/month           $79.96

New York                      $2,338            60%             Some             $1/week                     $90/week                    $30/day            $150.00
North Carolina                $2,719            75%             Some          9% of countable              9% of countable             $368/month            $84.92
                                                                              monthly income               monthly income
North Dakota                  $2,445            85%             Some         10% of cost of care         80% of cost of care            $100/week           $100.00

Ohio                          $2,105            58%              All                  $0                    $172/month                 $100/week            $100.00
Oklahoma                      $1,936            62%             Some                   0                100% of cost of care             $12/day               60
Oregon                        $2,088            55%             Some                 $25                        $612                   $372/month            $85.85
Pennsylvania                  $2,139            57%             Some                $5.00                        $65                   $22.70/day           $113.50
Puerto Rico                   $1,279            85%             None            $5.00 /month                 $48/month                 $160/month            $36.92
Rhode Island                  $2,603            72%             None                   0                         $48                   $100/week            $100.00
South Carolina                $1,446            42%              All               $3/week                    $11/week                  $74/week             $74.00
South Dakota                  $2,140            65%             None             $10/month                20% copayment                $2.00/hour            $80.00
Tennessee                     $2,027            60%             Some        $5 (1c.) $9/week (2            $35 (1 c.) $61               $77/week             $77.00
                                                                                      c.)                  /week (two c.)
Texas                         $1,735            52%             Some         9% (1 c.) 11% (2+         9% (1 c.) 11% (2+ c.)           $20.09/day           $100.45
                                                                            c.) of gross monthly          of gross monthly
                                                                                   income                      income
Utah                          $1,794            56%             Some        $10 (1 c.) $15 (2 c.)      $255 (1 c.) $281 (2 c.)         $17.19/day            $85.95
Vermont                       $2,586            83%             None                  $0                     $17.03/day                $18.92 /day           $94.60
Virginia                      $3,394            85%             Some            10% of gross           10% of gross monthly            $42.69/day           $213.45
                                                                              monthly income                   income
Washington                    $2,024            54%             Some                $10.00               $407                          $23.41/day           $117.05
West Virginia                 $1,735            60%             Some                  $0         $3.75 (1 c.) $4.50 (2                  $17 /day             $85.00
                                                                                                          c.)
Wisconsin                     $1,909                             All        $5 (1 c.) $9/week (2 $63 (1 c.) $78 /week                  $5.10 /hour          $204.00
                                                                                      c.)                (2 c.)
Wyoming                       $1,539            45%              All        $.05 per hour per c.         $.50 per hour per c.           $2.14/hour           $85.60


Notes: c. stands for “child” or “children.”
a. In most states reimbursement rates vary by location. b. Figures in the last column are calculated from figures in the next-to-last column, assuming 8 hours of care per
day, 5 days per week, and 4 and 1/3 weeks per month.
c. Connecticut and new Hampshire did not report information, so figures for these states are from an earlier report. Source: Administration for Children and Families
(2001b).
   Table 11. Federal and State Expenditures and Children Served by Major Child Care Subsidy
                                           Programs

                                      DCTC              EEPDCE              TXX-CC               CCDF
                                          Federal + State Expenditures (billions of current dollars)
FY1999                                2.675               0.995               0.285               9.132
FY1998                                2.649               0.91                                    6.399
FY1997                                2.464               0.862               0.37                4.369
FY1996                                2.663               0.823               0.352
FY1995                                2.518               0.792               0.414                 3.1
                                                         Children Served (millions)
FY1999                                6.182                                                        1.76
FY1998                                 6.12                                                       1.515
FY1997                                5.796                                                       1.248
FY1996                                6.003
FY1995                                5.964                                                       1.445

Notes: See Table 9 for definition of the program acronyms. Expenditures are given in current dollars to facilitate checking with the original
sources. To convert expenditures to 2001 dollars using the Consumer Price Index, multiply dollar figures for 1995-2000 by 1.162, 1.129, 1.103,
1.0865, 1.063, and 1.028, respectively.


Sources:
Dependent Care Tax Credit (DCTC): Committee on Ways and Means (2000, p. 816), except 1999: Internal Revenue Service (2001). Figures in
the lower panel are number of returns filed claiming the credit, not the number of children.



EEPDCE : Office of Management and Budget, Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year 1997. These figures are for the calendar
year. The method used to compute them is unclear, and in budget statements for subsequent years they are different. They are also different in
the Joint Committee on Taxation, JCS-13-99. These are probably the least reliable figures in the table.



Title XX Child Care (TXX-CC): Committee on Ways and Means (2000, p. 600, 634): 15% of $1.9 billion for 1999;13% of $1.775 billion for
2000; Committee on Ways and Means (1998, pp. 714, 720): 14.8 percent of $2.800, $2.381, $2.500 for FY95, 96, 97.



Child Care and Development Fund (CCDF): Expenditure:1997-1999: We computed expenditure figures by summing all federal and state
expenditures on the CCDF, either directly or through transfers to TANF, using data from the Annual TANF Reports to Congress (U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, various years) and reports from the Administration for Children and Families (various years). The
latter source provides allocations to the CCDF for FY2000 and 2001, but there are no data available on transfers from TANF for these years.
Transfers to TANF constituted about half of CCDF spending in FY1999. 1995: U.S. General Accounting Office (1998, p. 4): total funding for the
four programs later consolidated in to the CCDF: AFDC-CC, TCC, ARCC, CCDBG. Children served: 1999: Administration for Children and
Families (2000); 1998: Administration for Children and Families (2001a); 1997: Administration for Children and Families (1998); 1995:
Administration for Children and Families (1995).
           Table 12. Incidence of Child Care Subsidy Receipt and Characteristics of Recipients, 1999

A. Incidence                                          B. Characteristics of Households with Annual Income < 25,000

Annual Household             Proportion with                                     Receives public assistance               Does not receive public
Income ($000)                   Subsidy                                                                                         assistance
All                              0.021                                             Subsidy           No subsidy           Subsidy      No Subsidy
0-4.999                           0.04                Center                        0.45                0.05               0.41            0.05
5.0-9.999                        0.053                Nonrelative                   0.44                 0.1               0.33            0.11
10-14.999                        0.042                Other Nonparent                0.1                0.31                0.2             0.3
15-19.999                        0.029                Pay for care                  0.42                 0.1               0.46            0.14
20-24.999                        0.033                Cost/hour                     2.55                1.76               2.81            3.07
25-29.999                        0.025                Mother employed               0.61                0.28               0.79            0.49

30-34.999                          0.029              Hours worked if                  39                 33                  37                 37
                                                      >0
35-39.999                          0.013              Wage rate                      6.62                6.58               6.71                 7.1
40+                                0.009              Annual earnings if            10,760              7,575              11,053              11,953
                                                      >0
Public assistance status                              Educ.>12                        0.45               0.18                0.52               0.32
Receives PA                        0.112              Married, spouse                 0.12               0.12                0.35               0.51
                                                      present
does not receive PA                0.022              Other adults in                 0.09               0.28                0.17               0.21
                                                      household
                                                      # Kids < 5                      1.09               0.72                0.84                0.68
                                                      Black                           0.34                0.4                0.28                0.21
                                                      Hispanic                        0.23               0.29                0.17                0.24
                                                      White                           0.43               0.25                0.52                 0.5
Sample size                       15,747                                               89                762                  88                3,875

Source: Tabulations from the Survey of Income and Program Participation, Spring 1999.


Notes: Unit of analysis is a child. Figures are weighted by the child’s sample weight. A child is coded as receiving a subsidy if the mother reports that a
government agency helps pay for child care, or one of the child’s arrangements is Head Start. Public assistance includes cash (TANF, General Assistance,
and SSI) and food stamps. Center care includes nursery, preschool, and Head Start. Nonrelative care includes family day care homes, nannies, babysitters,
and other nonrelatives except centers.
                                          Table 13. Studies of the Effect of Child Care Subsidies on Employment

                                                                                                                                             Effect of subsidy receipt on
Study              Data                 Population    Subsidy                      Method                           Identification           employment
Berger and Black   survey of single     single, child Title XX centers only        probit for employment before     Before-after             8.4 to 25.3 pp increase,
(1992)             mothers in           mean age 3.6                               and after subsidy                sub./waitlist comparison depending on whether "waitlist
                   Kentucky; CPS,                                                  receipt/waitlist                                          effect" is included.
                   May 1988
Blau and Tekin     NSAF, 1999           single,       assistance with child care Two stage Least Squares            county dummies             32 pp increase
(2003)                                  child<13      expenses from govt. agency Linear probability model




Gelbach (2002)     1980 U.S. Census     single,       Kindergarten                 2SLS LPM                         eligibility for            4-5 pp increase for both single
                                        youngest                                                                    Kindergarten (quarter of   and married mothers
                                        child age 5                                                                 birth dummies)
Meyers, Heintze,   Survey of California single,       assistance with child care   Probits for non-parental child   knowledge of child care    increase in prob. of subsidy
and Wolf (2002)    AFDC recipients in child<14        expenses from govt. agency   care use & subsidy receipt.      subsidy system             receipt from 0.0 to 0.5: 52 pp
                   4 counties, 1995                   under several subsidy        Predicted value included in      excluded from              increase
                                                      programs                     probit for employment.           employment probit.
                                                 Table 14. Selected State Child Care Regulations
                                                                                                                                            Family Day Care
     State                                                      Day Care Centers                                                                Homes
                                                                            Pre-Service Education,                     Number of                       Minimum
                          Infants                  Four year olds           Experience, and Training                   Annual                          Size for
                   CSR              GS            CSR         GS            Requirement for Teachers                   Inspections          CSR        Licensing
AL                  6                6             20          20                                                            1                6             1
AK                  5                              10                                                                      NA                 8             4
AZ                  5                              15                                                                       1.3               5             1
AR                  6                              15                                                                        3               10             6
CA                  4                              12                       12 sem. hours ECE or rel. field                  1                6             1
CO                  5               10             12          24                                                           0.5               6             2
CT                  4                8             10          20                                                           0.5               6             1
DE                  4                8             15                       60 hours training in ECE and 1                   2                6             1
                                                                            year experience
DC                   4               8             10             20        9 credit hours in ECE and 1 year                  2               5              1
                                                                            experience
FL                   4                             20                       30 clock hours training in ECE                    4              10              1
GA                   6              12             18             36        10 clock hours training within 1                  2               4              3
                                                                            year after hire
HI                   4               6             16                       Bachelor’s degree; 12 credits in                  2               6              1
                                                                            ECE; 6 months experience.
ID                   6                             12                                                                        0.5              6              1
IL                   4              12             10             20        6 credits in ECE                                 1.3             12              4
IN                   4               8             12                                                                        1.5             12              6
IA                   4                             12                                                                         3               6              1
KS                   3               9             12             24        12 credits ECE & 6 mo. exper.                     1               3              1
KY                   5              10             14             28                                                          2              10              4
LA                   6                             16                                                                         2               6              1
ME                   4              12             10             30                                                          1               8              3
MD                   3               6             10             20        6 semester hours in ECE                           1               8              1
MA                   3               7             10             20        HS voc. program in child care                    1.5              6              1
MI                   4                             12                                                                        1.5              6              1
MN                   4               8             10             20        24 college credits in ECE & 2                     1              10              1
                                                                            years experience
MS                   5              10             16             16                                                          3               5              6
MO                   4               8             10                                                                        2.5             10              5
MT                   4                             10                       8 hours ECE training in first year               2.3              6              3
                                                                            of empl.
NE                   4                             12                                                                         2               8              4
NV                   6                             13                       3 hrs. ECE training in first 6 mo.                3               6              5
NH                   4              12             12             24        72 hours of workshops                            1.3              9              1
NJ                   4              20             15             20        15 child-related college credits                 1.3              5              1
NM                   6                             12                                                                         3               6              5
NY                   4               8              8             16                                                         1.5              6              3
NC                   5              10             20             25                                                          1               5              3
ND                   4                             10                                                                         3               7              4
OH                   5              12             12             28                                                         2.5              6              1
OK                   4               8             15             30                                                         3.5              7              1
OR                   4               8             10             20                                                          2              10              4
PA                   4               8             10             20                                                          2               6              4
RI                   4               8             10             20        Bachelor’s degree & meet                          2               4              4
                                                                            standards for RI ECC
SC                   6                             18                                                                        2.5              6              1
SD                   5              20             10             20                                                          2              12              1
TN                   5              10             15             20                                                          4               7              5
TX                   4              10             20             35        8 hours ECE training                              1               6              1
UT                   4               8             15             25                                                          3               6              4
VT                   4               8             10             20        30 hour ECE course in first 6 mo.                 2               6              2
VA                   4                             16                                                                         2               8              6
WA                   4               8             10             20                                                         1.3             12              1
WV                   4                             12                                                                        0.5              6              4
WI                   4               8             13             24        80 hours ECE training                            2.5              8              4
WY                   5                             15                                                                         2               6              3

Sources: The Center for Career Development in Early Care and Education at Wheelock College, 1998; U.S. General Accounting Office (2000a);
www.nccic.org/statepro.html; Joseph Hotz and Rebecca Kilburn.

Notes: Blank cell indicates no regulation. ECE = Early Childhood Education. ECC = Early Childhood Certification.. GS = Group Size. CSR = Child Staff Ratio. NA
indicates the information is not available.
                                              Table 15. Studies on the Effect of Regulations on Child Care Use

Author                  Data                         Design                                    Sample Size                 Outcomes
Chipty and Witte (1997) 1990 Profile of Child Care   PCS data merged to 1990 Census and        945 market-oriented         Lower required child:staff ratios for preschool
                        Setting (PCS)                state and local regulations. Random       centers                     children reduce the probability that child care
                                                     effect probit estimation to account for                               centers care for preschool children rather than
                                                     unobserved market specific                                            school age children, and vice-versa.
                                                     heterogeneity
Blau (2003c)            Survey of Income and         Data from SIPP merged to state-level      17,370 families with at     Child care regulations are associated with
                        Program Participation (SIPP) data on child care regulation.            least one preschool age     lower probabilities of using regulated child
                        and Current Population       Estimates include state fixed effects.    child                       care services, although no impact on price or
                        Survey (CPS)                                                                                       quality of care was found.

Currie and Hotz (2001) NLSY                           NLSY data merged to state-level data 44,369 quarters of child        Regulations are associated with lower
                                                      on child care regulations. Multinomial life, from 3,394 mothers      probabilities of using regulated child care
                                                      logit estimation of choice of child care and 6,290 children.         services.          Regulating education of
                                                      on state child care regulations.                                     caregivers improves child safety.


Hotz and Kilburn        National Longitudinal Survey NLS72 data merged to state-level data                                Stricter child:staff ratio and training
(1997)                  of the High School Class of on child care regulations.                                            regulations are associated with lower rates of
                        1972 (NLS72)                                                                                      use of non-parental child care and lower hours
                                                                                                                          of care per week among users.
                                                                                                                          Effects of child care regulations on labor force
                                                                                                                          participation of mothers shows small negative
                                                                                                                          effects, often insignificantly different from zero
                                                                                                                          Tougher regulations are associated with higher
                                                                                                                          family expenditure per hour of child care
                                                                                                                          among families paying for care.
Hofferth and Chaplin    1990 National Child Care      NCSS data merged to data on county       1,206 children under 6     Stricter child:staff ratio and training
(1998)                  Survey (NCCS)                 and state level demographics and         whose mothers are          regulations are associated with lower rates of
                                                      regulatory requirements.                 working, in training or in use of non-parental child care and lower hours
                                                                                               school.                    of care per week among users.
                                                                                                                          tougher regulations are associated with higher
                                                                                                                          family expenditure per hour of child care
                                                                                                                          among families paying for care.

Ribar (1992)            Survey of Income and         SIPP data merged to data on state-level 3,738 married families        no impact of a stricter child-staff ratio on hours
                        Program Participation (SIPP) regulations.                            with at least one child       of child care used
                                                                                             under the age of 15
Chipty (1995)   1990 National Child Care    NCSS data merged to data on county- family day care : 67      day- mixed results on the effects of regulations on
                Survey (NCCS)               level demographics and state-level       care centers: n.a.        use of child care.
                                            regulatory requirements. OLS                                       stricter group size regulation in both family day
                                            estimation of reduced forms on                                     care and centers raises family expenditure per
                                            equilibrium price, hours and staff/child                           hour in both settings, but a stricter child-staff
                                            ratio for family day care and day-care                             ratio regulation reduces expenditure in both
                                            centers.                                                           settings. Imposing a training requirement in a
                                                                                                               given sector is associated with lower family

Blau (1993)     Current Population Survey   CPS data merged to data on state and    15,195 women between effects of child care regulations on labor force
                (CPS), March Public Use     federal child care subsidy parameters   the ages of 18 and 64,    participation of mothers shows small negative
                Tape for 1977-87            and regulations.                        consisting of 4,305 child effects, often insignificantly different from zero
                                                                                    care workers, 7,180 other
                                                                                    workers and 3,710
                                                                                    nonworkers.
                                               Table 16. Model Early Childhood Programs with Randomized Designs a

Program Nameb                  Program Description           Age of Participation         Sample Sizec            Outcomesd
Carolina Abecedarian           Preschoolers:                 Entry 6 weeks to 3 months    Initial: T=57, C=54     IQ: T>C at age 12, T=C at age 15
(Campbell & Ramey (1994))        full-day child care         Exit: 5 to 8 years           Age 8: T=48, C=42       Achievement tests: T>C at ages 8, 15, 21
(Campbell et al                School age: parent program                                 Age 15: T=48, C=44      Special education: T<C at age 15
 (unpublished))                                                                           Age 21: T=53, C=51      Grade retention: T<C at age 15
                                                                                                                  School dropout: T<C at age 21
                                                                                                                  College attendance: T>C at age 21
                                                                                                                  Employment status: T=C at age 21
                                                                                                                  Average age first child born: T>C at age 21
Houston Parent Child           Home visits                   Entry: 1 to 3 years          Initial: T=97, C=119    Achievement tests: T=C
 Development Center            Full-day child care           Exit: 3 to 5 years           Grades 2 to 5: T=50, C=8Grades: T=C
(Johnson and Walker            Center-based program                                                               Bilingual education: T<C
(1991)) e                        for parents                                                                      Special education: T=C
                                                                                                                  Grade retention: T=C
Infant Health and              Home visits                   Entry: birth (home visits)   Initial: T=377, C=608   IQ: T>C ages 3,5,8
 Development Project           Full-day child care                 1 year (care)          Age 8: T=336, C=538     Behavioral problems: T<C ages 3,5; T=C age 8
(McCarton et al (1997)) f                                    Exit: 3 years                                        Math achievement: T>C age 8
(Hill, Brooks-Gunn and                                                                                            Grade retention: T=C age 8
 Waldfogel (2002, in press)                                                                                       Special education: T=C age 8
                                                                                                                  General health: T=C age 8
Milwaukee Project              Full-day child care           Entry: 3 to 6 months         Initial: T=20, C=20     IQ: T>C at grade 8
(Garber (1988))                Job and academic training     Exit: 5 years                Grade 4,8: T=17, C=18 Achievement tests: T=C
                                 for mothers                                                                      Grades: T=C
                                                                                                                  Special education:T=C
                                                                                                                  Grade retention: T=C
Early Training Project         Home visits                   Entry: 4 to 5 years          Initial: T=44, C=21     IQ: T=C at age 17
(Gray et al (1983))            Summer part-day               Exit: 6 years                Post High School: T=36, Achievement tests: T=C
                                 preschool program                                           C=16                 Special education:T<C, grade 12
                                                                                                                  Grade retention: T=C
                                                                                                                  High school graduation: T=C
High/Scope Perry               Home visits                   Entry: 3 to 4 years          Initial: T=58, C=65     IQ: T>C at ages 5,7; T=C at ages 8,14
Preschool Project              Preschool program             Exit: 5 years                Age 27: T=58, C=63      Achievement tests: T>C at ages 9,14
(Schweinhart et al (1993)) f                                                                                      High school GPA: T>C
                                                                                                                  Special education:T=C, grade 12
                                                                                                                  Grade retention: T=C, grade 12
                                                                                                                  High school graduation: T>C
                                                                                                                  Postsecondary education: T=C age 27
                                                                                                                  Arrests: T<C at age 27
                                                                                                                  Employment: T>C age 19, T=C age 27
                                                                                                                  Monthly earnings: T>C at age 27
                                                                                                                  Receive public assistance: T<C age 27
                                                                                                                  Teen pregnancies: T=C at age 19
Institute for                                 Home visits                               Entry: 4 years                            Initial: T=312, C=191        Special education:T=C
 Developmental Studies                        Part-day preschool program                Exit: 9 years                             Grade 7: T=63, C=34          Grade retention: T=C
(Deutsch et al (1983))                        Parent center school (K-3)


Notes
a
    See Barnett and Karoly et al for more detailed information about studies described in this table.
b
    Programs are grouped such that those enrolling children younger than three years old appear first, followed by those enrolling children after age three.
c
    Throughout the table, 'T' refers to treatment group and 'C' refers to control or comparison group.
d
    Outcomes listed as T>C or C>T were statistically significant at the 5% level.
e
    Most recent published document. See Barnett for description of other studies
f
See Karoly et al. for description of earlier studies.
                                           Table 17. Selected Studies of Large-Scale Public Early Childhood Programs

Program Name               Study Design                         Age of Participation Sample Size                Outcomes
Chicago Child-Parent       Compared former CPC children         Entry: 3 to 4 years Initial: T=684, C=304       Achievement tests: T>C grade 2, T=C grade 8
 Center and Expansion      with non-CPC children from same      Exit: 9 years        Post High School: T=513,   High school graduation: T>C
 Program                   feeder schools                                              C=244
(Fuerst & Fuerst (1993))
Chicago Child-Parent       Compared former CPC children         Entry: 3 to 4 years   T=837, C=444              School dropout: T<C at age 20
 Center and Expansion      with similarly poor children         Exit: 9 years                                   High school completion: T>C at age 20
 Program                   eligible for CPC but it was                                                          Delinquency and crime: T<C at age 17
(Reynolds et al (2000))    not offered in neighborhood                                                          Grade retention: T<C at age 15
(Temple et al (2000))                                                                                           Special education: T<C at age 18
                                                                                                                Proficiency skills test: T>C at ages 14/15
ETS Longitudinal Study     Compared attenders with children     Entry: 4 years        T=333, C=313              Achievement tests: T>C grade 1; T=C in grades 2,3
 of Head Start             who attended other or no             Exit: 5 years
(Lee et al (1990))a        preschools at grade 3

Head Start Family and      Studied gains made by Head Start     Entry: 3 to 4 years   T=1580, no control        Achievement tests: T>C
 Child Experiences          children at age 4 or older          Exit: 4 to 5 years                              Other gains cannot be compared to any control
 Survey
(Zill et al (1998))
Florida and Colorado       Compared attenders (at age 22 in     Entry: 3 to 4 years   T=290, C=332              Achievement tests: T=C (T<C in Colorado)
Head Start                 1988) with those who did not         Exit: 4 to 5 years                              Elementary GPA: T=C (T>C in Florida)
(Oden et al (2000))        attend any early childhood                                                           Middle and high school GPA: T=C
                           education program and lived in the                                                   Special education: T=C
                           same census tract                                                                    High school graduation: T=C (T>C for females)
                                                                                                                Postsecondary education: T=C
                                                                                                                Employed/enrolled at interview: T=C
                                                                                                                Teen parent status: T=C
                                                                                                                Use of public assistance: T=C
                                                                                                                Arrests: T=C (T<C for females)
                                                                                                                Convictions: T=C
NLSCM Head Start           Compared difference between          Entry: 3 to 5 years   T=896, C=911              Achievement tests: T>C (whites only)
(Currie & Thomas           attended and nonattended siblings    Exit: 5 to 6 years    Hispanic study:           Grade retention: T>C (whites only)
 (1995, 1999))             with difference between preschool                          T=182, C=568              Immunization rates: T>C
                           and nonpreschool siblings at                                                         Child height-for-age: T=C
                           various grades                                                                       Achievement tests: T>C (hispanics only)
                                                                                                                Grade retention: T>C (hispanics only)
PSID Head Start            Compared Head Start participants     Entry: 3 to 4 years   T=583, C=3502             Grade retention: T=C
(Garces et al (2002))      to non participants between ages                                                     High school graduation: T=C
                           18 and 31.                                                                           Teen pregnancy T=C
                                                                                                                Welfare T=C
                                                                                                                Arrests T<C
                                                                                                                College T>C
National Evaluation of     17 EHS sites selected to reflect     Entry: 0 to 1 year    Initial: T=1513, C=1488   Mental Development Index: T>C age 2, 3
Early Head Start           program approaches and               Exit: Age 3                                     Low Mental Development Index: T<C age 2, T=C age 3
(Administration on         demographic characteristics of all                                                   Vocabulary production score: T>C age 2
Children, Youth and        EHS programs funded in 1995-96.                                                      Sentence complexity score: T>C age 2
Families (2002))           Random assignment conducted                                                          Percentage combining words: T=C age 2
                           within each site to compare                                                          Vocabulary: T>C age 3
                                       participants with eligible                                                                  Aggressive behavior: T<C age 2, 3
                                       non-participants.                                                                           Emotional Regulation: T=C age 2, 3
                                                                                                                                   Orientation/engagement: T=C age 2, 3
                                                                                                                                   Engagement of parent during play: T=C age 2, T>C age 3
                                                                                                                                   Negativity w/ parent during play: T=C age 2, T<C age 3
                                                                                                                                   Attention to objects during play: T=C age 2, T>C age 3
                                                                                                                                   Child frustration during parent-child task: T=C age 3
                                                                                                                                   Engagement of parent during task: T=C age 3
                                                                                                                                   Persistence during parent-child task: T=C age 3
                                                                                                                                   Low vocabulary score: T<C age 3

Notes: See Barnett and Karoly et al. for more information about the studies described in this table. None of these evaluations were randomized.
T' refers to the treatment, and 'C' refers to the control or comparison group. T>C means that the difference was significant at the 5% level.
a
    Most recent published document. See Barnett for description of other studies
                                               Table 18: State Spending on PreK Initiatives

                                                                               State Spending       State Spending       State Spending
State                  Program                                                    1987-88              1991-92              1998-99
Alabama                Preschool Collaboration Project                                       ―                   ―                $690,000
Alaska                 Comprehensive Preschool                                         $197,000                  ―                      ―
                       Alaska Head Start Program                                     $2,700,000          $5,728,174             $5,489,951
                         (State-Funded Head Start Model)
                                                                    total            $2,897,000          $5,728,174           $5,489,951
Arizona                Early Childhood State Block Grant                                     ―           $1,500,000          $10,013,423
                         (PreK component)
Arkansas               Arkansas Better Chance                                                ―           $5,000,000          $10,000,000
California*            State Preschool Program                                      $35,500,000         $83,335,000         $127,000,000
Colorado               Colorado Preschool Program                                                        $3,204,000          $21,640,000
Connecticut            School Readiness and Child Care Initiative                            ―                   ―           $39,000,000
                       State-Funded Head Start Model                                   $400,000            $400,000           $5,100,000
                                                                    total              $400,000            $400,000          $44,100,000
Delaware               Early Childhood Assistance Program                              $189,000                  ―            $3,600,000
                         (State-Funded Head Start Model)
District of Columbia   Public School Preschool Program                              $12,200,000         $11,483,850          $14,591,000
                       District-Funded Head Start Model                              $1,100,000          $1,556,241           $2,570,000
                                                                    total           $13,300,000         $13,040,091          $17,161,000
Florida                PreK Early Intervention Program                               $1,600,000         $69,000,000          $97,000,000
                       State Migrant PreK Program                                    $2,900,000          $3,064,540           $3,295,172
                       State-Funded Head Start Model                                         ―           $6,000,000                   ―
                                                                    total            $4,500,000         $78,064,540         $100,295,172
Georgia                PreK Program for Four-Year-Olds                                       ―                   ―          $217,000,000
Hawaii                 Preschool Open Doors                                                  ―                   n/a          $2,700,000
                       State-Funded Head Start Model                                   $291,790            $529,700           $3,087,387
                                                                    total              $291,790            $529,700           $5,787,387
Illinois               Early Childhood Block Grant                                  $12,700,000         $71,500,000         $136,000,000
                         (PreK component)
                       State-Funded Head Start Model                                         ―             $500,000                   ―
                                                                    total           $12,700,000         $72,000,000         $136,000,000
Iowa                   Comprehensive Child Development Program                               ―           $4,958,315           $7,633,087
                         ("Shared Visions")
Kansas                 Four-Year-Old At-Risk Children Preschool Program                         ―                    ―        $3,000,000
                       State-Funded Head Start Model                                            ―                    ―        $2,500,000
                                                                  total                                                       $5,500,000
Kentucky               Kentucky Preschool Program                                      $232,123         $30,595,270          $39,700,000
Louisiana              Preschool Block Grant                                         $1,800,000          $3,501,500           $6,650,000
Maine                  Two-Year Kindergarten                                            $27,730                  n/a          $1,300,000
                       State-Funded Head Start Model                                 $1,900,000          $2,407,393           $2,329,000
                       Early Childhood Demonstration Grants                                  ―             $150,000                   ―
                                                                  total              $1,927,730          $2,557,393           $3,629,000
Maryland               Extended Elementary Education Programs (EEEP)                 $3,300,000          $8,948,914          $19,263,000
Massachusetts          Community Parnerships for Children                           $10,300,000          $7,500,000          $78,500,000
                       State-Funded Head Start Model                                 $4,500,000          $6,000,000           $6,900,000
                                                                  total             $14,800,000         $13,500,000          $85,400,000
Michigan               Michigan School Readiness Program                             $2,300,000         $32,917,700          $67,083,000
Minnesota              Learning Readiness                                                    ―                   ―           $10,300,000
                       State-Funded Head Start Model                                 $2,000,000          $6,500,000          $18,400,000
                                                                  total              $2,000,000          $6,500,000          $28,700,000
Missouri*              Missouri Preschool Project                                                                                     ―
Nebraska               Early Childhood Projects                                                 ―                ―              $500,000
New Hampshire          NH Head Start-State Collaboration                                        ―          $201,000             $230,000
                         (State-Funded Head Start Model)
New Jersey             Early Childhood Program Aid                                   $7,900,000                      ―       $70,000,000
                         (PreK component)
                       State Equalization Aid for Four-Year-Old Kindergarten                    ―        $9,500,000                    ―
                             Urban PreK Pilot Program/Good Starts                                                       ―                 $2,500,000                       ―
                             State-Funded Head Start Model                                                              ―                 $1,300,000               $1,400,000
                                                                                     total                      $7,900,000               $13,300,000               $1,400,000
New Mexico                   Child Development Program                                                                  ―                   $145,106               $1,300,000
                             State-Funded Head Start Model                                                              ―                         ―                $5,000,000
                                                                                     total                                                  $145,106               $6,300,000
New York                     Universal PreK                                                                            ―                          ―               $67,000,000
                             Experimental PreK                                                                $27,000,000                $47,000,000              $50,200,000
                                                                                     total                    $27,000,000                $47,000,000             $117,200,000
North Carolina*              Smart Start                                                                               ―                          ―
Ohio                         Public School Preschool                                                              $18,000                $13,386,236              $17,900,000
                             State-Funded Head Start Model                                                             ―                 $19,878,559              $92,562,977
                                                                                     total                        $18,000                $33,264,795             $110,462,977
Oklahoma                     Early Childhood Four-Year-Old Program                                               $832,275                 $2,132,120              $36,500,708
                             Head Start State-Appropriated Funds                                                       ―                          ―                $3,316,918
                               (State-Funded Head Start Model)
                                                                          total                                                           $2,132,120              $39,817,626
Oregon                       Oregon Head Start PreK                                                             $1,100,000                $8,200,000              $16,272,167
                               (State-Funded Head Start Model)
Pennsylvania*                Education Aid for Kindergarten for Four-Year-Olds                                 $1,700,000                         n/a              $5,700,000
Rhode Island*                State-Funded Head Start Model                                                       $365,000                 $1,958,558               $1,965,000
                             Early Childhood Investment Fund                                                           ―                          ―                        ―
                             Legislative Allocations for Special Projects                                              ―                    $200,000                       ―
                                                                          total                                  $365,000                 $2,158,558               $1,965,000
South Carolina               Early Childhood Program                                                          $10,900,000                $15,163,447              $22,356,688
                               (Half-Day Child Development Program)
Tennessee                    Tennessee Early Childhood Education Pilot Program                                         ―                         ―                 $3,100,000
Texas                        Public School PreK                                                               $46,200,000              $181,000,000              $235,000,000
Vermont                      Early Education Initiative                                                          $500,000                $1,414,000                $1,315,000
Virginia                     Virginia Preschool Initiative                                                             ―                         ―                $23,500,000
Washington                   Early Childhood Education & Assistance Program                                    $4,700,000               $17,190,000               $28,897,592
                             Head Start State Match Program                                                      $660,000                  $530,763                  $470,000
                               (State-Funded Head Start Model)
                                                                          total                                 $5,360,000               $17,720,763              $29,367,592
West Virginia                Public School Early Childhood Education                                              $258,574                $1,035,006               $6,232,702
Wisconsin                    Four-Year-Old Kindergarten                                                         $4,300,000                $5,800,000              $19,800,000
                             State-Funded Head Start Model                                                              ―                 $2,250,000               $4,950,000
                                                                          total                                 $4,300,000                $8,050,000              $24,750,000

All States                                                                           total                   $202,600,000              $697,065,392           $1,675,455,100

Source: 1987-88 data from Marx and Seligson (1988).
       1991-92 and 1998-99 from Children's Defense Fund (1999).


Notes: California: The data presented here is for 1997-98.


Missouri: The Missouri Preschool Project was introduced in 1998-99, but the first year of funding (estimated to be $9.2 mill.) was 1999-00.


North Carolina: Total state funding for Smart Start was $140 mill. but the program supports a range of services and it cannot be determined how much of the total was spend on preK.
Pennsylvania: The data presented for the Education Aid for Kindergarten for Four-Year Olds is for 1997-98.
Rhode Island: The Early Childhood Investment Fund provided $5.3 mill. of funding for a range early childhood-related programs including preK, but no funds were used for this
purpose.
                                                                   Table 19. Studies of the Effects of Self-Care on Child Outcomes

Report                      Study Design                                            Definition of Self-Care     Age of Participation   Sample Sizea                 Outcomesb
Aizer (2003)                Uses OLS, family fixed effects, and IV                  Child responds that         Age 10-14              Final: 5,838                 Skipping school: T>C
                            estimation to look at self-care in the                  there is not usually an                            T=1,518 (self-care)          Using alcohol or drugs: T>C
                            the NLSY79 Child-Mother file through 1998.              adult present when they                            C=4,320 (supervised)         Stealing: T>C
                                                                                    return from school.                                                             Hurting Someone: T>C
Galambos & Maggs (1989) c   No random assignment.                                   Same definition as          6th Grade              Final: 112                   Peer involvement: all T>C
                            Students answered a questionnaire to                    Steinberg (1986)                                   T1= Unsup at friends         Problem behavior:T2, T3> T1, C (girls only)
                            determine what category of care they were in.                                                              T2= Unsup at home            Impulse control: T2, T3< T1, C (girls only)
                            No discussion of methodology.                                                                              T3= Unsup "hanging           Ability to cope: T2, T3< T1, C (girls only)
                                                                                                                                       out"
                                                                                                                                       C= Supervised (by
                                                                                                                                       parent or ASP)
Marshall et al. (1997)      Grade 1 through 4 children recruited from 30 Boston     any time spent alone or     1st-4th grade          Final: 181                   self care negative effects for poor children
                            public schools and 8 parochial schools. Data            only with siblings and no
                            collected through face-to-face interviews and           adult.
                            questionnaires with the parent and through
                            observations at the child's after-school setting. OLS
                            regression of the child's behavioral problems on the
                            types of care.
McHale et al. (2001)        a short-term longitudinal study with 2 year interval    Time alone, or with         10 and 12              Final: 198    T1=time        depression: T1>C                               behavior
                            for famlilies who responded to a recruiting letter.     unsupervised peers                                 alone      T2=w peers        problems: T2>C
                            Children's behavior evaluated and reported by the
                            parent through home interviews. Children's time use
                            reported by the children and collected through
                            telephone interviews.

Pettit et al. (1997)        A longitudinal study of children (and families)       time spent alone or with   6th grade                 Initial: 585                 grades T1<C, T2=C
                            recruited at the time of kindergarten preregistration siblings                                             T1=self care in grade 1 or   achievement test scores T1<C, T2=C
                            and observed through grade 7. Data collected                                                               3            T2=self care    significant interactions T1 and poverty, behavior
                            through telephone interviews with children (on after-                                                      in grade 5                   problems in Kindergarten.
                            school time use), mother interview (on parental
                            monitoring) and teacher rating (on children's
                            behavior)
Pettit et al. (1999)        same as Pettit et al. (1997)                          Time spent unsupervised in 7th grade                 Final: 342                   externalizing problems T1>C, greatest effects for
                                                                                  6th grade                                            T1=w peers                   students with low parental monitoring and unsafe
                                                                                                                                       T2=alone                     neighborhoods, T2=C, T3=C
                                                                                                                                       T3=w siblings
Richardson (1989)           Eighth grade students in 169 classrooms in LA           More than 11 hours of       8th Grade              Final: 4,932                 Cigarette use: T>C
                            and 67 classes in San Diego filled out a survey         self-care per week.                                T=1,411 (self-care)          Alcohol use: T>C
                            on their supervision and substance abuse.                                                                  C=3,521                      Marijuana use: T>C
                            Calculated relative risks of substance abuse
                            for those with more than 11hrs of self care
                            vs. those with 0 hrs of self-care
                            (calculated the ratio of the propotion of kids
                            in each group who abused also stratified by
                            covariates).
Rodman et al. (1985)                          Matched kids in self-care with those in                        Children who report that            4th & 7th Grade              Final: 96                        Self-esteem inventory: T=C, 4th & 7th
                                              adult care by age, sex, race, family                           they usually go home                                             4th Grade:                       Personal reaction (self-control): T=C, 4th & 7th
                                              composition, and father's occupation.                          after school and                                                 T=26, C=26                       Behavior problems: T=C, 4th & 7th
                                              Well-matched on these characteristics. Only                    either no one or only a                                          7th Grade:
                                              difference between groups is mother's                          younger sibling at is at                                         T=22, C=22
                                              employment and no difference in parental                       home. Adult care
                                              permission to participate. No random assign.                   children were those who
                                              Used child interviews, tests, and teacher                      reported an adult was at
                                              surveys. T-tests for differences in means.                     home.
Steinberg (1986)                              Uses existing data set on Madison, WI                          Categorization based on             5th-9th Grade                Final: 768                       Susceptibily to peer pressure: T 1=C1 d
                                              school district. ANOVA and ANCOVA                              child's response to                                              T1=177 Unsup at home                  all T>all C (girls)
                                              (controlling for age, SES, famiy structure, and                "where you usually go                                            T2=85 Unsup at friend's               all T=all C (boys)
                                              mother's employment). Survey includes                          after school" and                                                T3=57 Unsup "hanging                  T 1<T2, T3
                                              hypothetical peer pressure situations.                         "are there adults                                                out"
                                                                                                             present."                                                        C1=243 Sup at home
                                                                                                                                                                              C2=48 Sup at
                                                                                                                                                                              neighbor or relative's
                                                                                                                                                                              C3=93 Sup at friend's
                                                                                                                                                                              C4=82 Sup at school
Vandell & Corasaniti (1988)                   Parents of 349 third-graders in a suburban                     Parents filled out survey           3rd Grade                    Final: 150                       Peer ratings: T1=C 2
                                              Dallas school district filled out surveys                      with the 4 choices of                                            T1=54 (self-care)                Grades: T1=C2
                                              describing type of care. Of these, 150 white                   after-school care listed                                         C1=26 (center)                   Standardized test scores:T1=C 2, C1<all T & C
                                              students were deliberately chosen for study.                   along with "other."                                              C2=42 (mother care)              Conduct grades: T1=C 2
                                              Most day-care centers were proprietary.                        Those who reported                                               C3=25 (other adult)              Self-perception: T1=C2
                                              Teacher, parent, peer, and self ratings as well                a combination of types                                                                            Parent ratings: T1=C 2
                                              as standardized test scores and grades                         of care under "other"                                            White suburban.                  Teacher ratings: T1=C 2
                                              analysed with ANOVA, MANOVA, and Duncan                        were categorized in the                                                                           Negative peer ratings: C1>T1, C2
                                              post-hoc. Controls for parents' education and                  type of care used for the                                                                         Academic grades: C1<all T & C
                                              marital status.                                                majority of days/week.
Vandell & Ramanan (1991)                      Used the NLSY79 with data from home visits                     Parents report "primary"            3rd-5th Grade                Final: 390                       Headstrong: T>all C (but T=C w/ family controls)
                                              of NLSY staff. ANOVA then Duncan's post hoc                    after school care                                                T=28 (self-care)                 Hyperactive: T> all C (but T=C w/ family controls)
                                              analyses.                                                      arrangement.                                                     C1=114 (other adult)             Anxious: T= all C
                                                                                                                                                                              C2=248 (mother care)             Peer conflicts: T= all C
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Antisocial: T= all C
                                                                                                                                                                              Overrepresentative               Dependent: T= all C
                                                                                                                                                                              of single-parent                 Harter self-rating, Cognitive: T= all C
                                                                                                                                                                              and low-income.                  Harter self-rating, General: T= all C
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Digit span: T= all C
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Peabody Picture Vocab. Test: T= all C
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Peabody Indiv. Achievement Test: T= all C

a
    Throughout the table, 'T' refers to treatment group and 'C' refers to control or comparison group.
b
    Outcomes listed as T>C or C>T were statistically significant at the 5% level unless otherwise noted.
c
    In Galambos and Maggs (1991).
d
 Steinberg et al. also break the unsupervised group into children whose parents know their whereabouts and those who do not. They find some evidence that those children whose parents know their whereabouts (no matter where they go after school) are less susceptible to peer
pressure.
                                                                   Table 19. Studies of the Effects of Self-Care on Child Outcomes

Report                      Study Design                                            Definition of Self-Care     Age of Participation   Sample Sizea                 Outcomesb
Aizer (2003)                Uses OLS, family fixed effects, and IV                  Child responds that         Age 10-14              Final: 5,838                 Skipping school: T>C
                            estimation to look at self-care in the                  there is not usually an                            T=1,518 (self-care)          Using alcohol or drugs: T>C
                            the NLSY79 Child-Mother file through 1998.              adult present when they                            C=4,320 (supervised)         Stealing: T>C
                                                                                    return from school.                                                             Hurting Someone: T>C
Galambos & Maggs (1989) c   No random assignment.                                   Same definition as          6th Grade              Final: 112                   Peer involvement: all T>C
                            Students answered a questionnaire to                    Steinberg (1986)                                   T1= Unsup at friends         Problem behavior:T2, T3> T1, C (girls only)
                            determine what category of care they were in.                                                              T2= Unsup at home            Impulse control: T2, T3< T1, C (girls only)
                            No discussion of methodology.                                                                              T3= Unsup "hanging           Ability to cope: T2, T3< T1, C (girls only)
                                                                                                                                       out"
                                                                                                                                       C= Supervised (by
                                                                                                                                       parent or ASP)
Marshall et al. (1997)      Grade 1 through 4 children recruited from 30 Boston     any time spent alone or     1st-4th grade          Final: 181                   self care negative effects for poor children
                            public schools and 8 parochial schools. Data            only with siblings and no
                            collected through face-to-face interviews and           adult.
                            questionnaires with the parent and through
                            observations at the child's after-school setting. OLS
                            regression of the child's behavioral problems on the
                            types of care.
McHale et al. (2001)        a short-term longitudinal study with 2 year interval    Time alone, or with         10 and 12              Final: 198    T1=time        depression: T1>C                               behavior
                            for famlilies who responded to a recruiting letter.     unsupervised peers                                 alone      T2=w peers        problems: T2>C
                            Children's behavior evaluated and reported by the
                            parent through home interviews. Children's time use
                            reported by the children and collected through
                            telephone interviews.

Pettit et al. (1997)        A longitudinal study of children (and families)       time spent alone or with   6th grade                 Initial: 585                 grades T1<C, T2=C
                            recruited at the time of kindergarten preregistration siblings                                             T1=self care in grade 1 or   achievement test scores T1<C, T2=C
                            and observed through grade 7. Data collected                                                               3            T2=self care    significant interactions T1 and poverty, behavior
                            through telephone interviews with children (on after-                                                      in grade 5                   problems in Kindergarten.
                            school time use), mother interview (on parental
                            monitoring) and teacher rating (on children's
                            behavior)
Pettit et al. (1999)        same as Pettit et al. (1997)                          Time spent unsupervised in 7th grade                 Final: 342                   externalizing problems T1>C, greatest effects for
                                                                                  6th grade                                            T1=w peers                   students with low parental monitoring and unsafe
                                                                                                                                       T2=alone                     neighborhoods, T2=C, T3=C
                                                                                                                                       T3=w siblings
Richardson (1989)           Eighth grade students in 169 classrooms in LA           More than 11 hours of       8th Grade              Final: 4,932                 Cigarette use: T>C
                            and 67 classes in San Diego filled out a survey         self-care per week.                                T=1,411 (self-care)          Alcohol use: T>C
                            on their supervision and substance abuse.                                                                  C=3,521                      Marijuana use: T>C
                            Calculated relative risks of substance abuse
                            for those with more than 11hrs of self care
                            vs. those with 0 hrs of self-care
                            (calculated the ratio of the propotion of kids
                            in each group who abused also stratified by
                            covariates).
Rodman et al. (1985)                          Matched kids in self-care with those in                        Children who report that            4th & 7th Grade              Final: 96                        Self-esteem inventory: T=C, 4th & 7th
                                              adult care by age, sex, race, family                           they usually go home                                             4th Grade:                       Personal reaction (self-control): T=C, 4th & 7th
                                              composition, and father's occupation.                          after school and                                                 T=26, C=26                       Behavior problems: T=C, 4th & 7th
                                              Well-matched on these characteristics. Only                    either no one or only a                                          7th Grade:
                                              difference between groups is mother's                          younger sibling at is at                                         T=22, C=22
                                              employment and no difference in parental                       home. Adult care
                                              permission to participate. No random assign.                   children were those who
                                              Used child interviews, tests, and teacher                      reported an adult was at
                                              surveys. T-tests for differences in means.                     home.
Steinberg (1986)                              Uses existing data set on Madison, WI                          Categorization based on             5th-9th Grade                Final: 768                       Susceptibily to peer pressure: T 1=C1 d
                                              school district. ANOVA and ANCOVA                              child's response to                                              T1=177 Unsup at home                  all T>all C (girls)
                                              (controlling for age, SES, famiy structure, and                "where you usually go                                            T2=85 Unsup at friend's               all T=all C (boys)
                                              mother's employment). Survey includes                          after school" and                                                T3=57 Unsup "hanging                  T 1<T2, T3
                                              hypothetical peer pressure situations.                         "are there adults                                                out"
                                                                                                             present."                                                        C1=243 Sup at home
                                                                                                                                                                              C2=48 Sup at
                                                                                                                                                                              neighbor or relative's
                                                                                                                                                                              C3=93 Sup at friend's
                                                                                                                                                                              C4=82 Sup at school
Vandell & Corasaniti (1988)                   Parents of 349 third-graders in a suburban                     Parents filled out survey           3rd Grade                    Final: 150                       Peer ratings: T1=C 2
                                              Dallas school district filled out surveys                      with the 4 choices of                                            T1=54 (self-care)                Grades: T1=C2
                                              describing type of care. Of these, 150 white                   after-school care listed                                         C1=26 (center)                   Standardized test scores:T1=C 2, C1<all T & C
                                              students were deliberately chosen for study.                   along with "other."                                              C2=42 (mother care)              Conduct grades: T1=C 2
                                              Most day-care centers were proprietary.                        Those who reported                                               C3=25 (other adult)              Self-perception: T1=C2
                                              Teacher, parent, peer, and self ratings as well                a combination of types                                                                            Parent ratings: T1=C 2
                                              as standardized test scores and grades                         of care under "other"                                            White suburban.                  Teacher ratings: T1=C 2
                                              analysed with ANOVA, MANOVA, and Duncan                        were categorized in the                                                                           Negative peer ratings: C1>T1, C2
                                              post-hoc. Controls for parents' education and                  type of care used for the                                                                         Academic grades: C1<all T & C
                                              marital status.                                                majority of days/week.
Vandell & Ramanan (1991)                      Used the NLSY79 with data from home visits                     Parents report "primary"            3rd-5th Grade                Final: 390                       Headstrong: T>all C (but T=C w/ family controls)
                                              of NLSY staff. ANOVA then Duncan's post hoc                    after school care                                                T=28 (self-care)                 Hyperactive: T> all C (but T=C w/ family controls)
                                              analyses.                                                      arrangement.                                                     C1=114 (other adult)             Anxious: T= all C
                                                                                                                                                                              C2=248 (mother care)             Peer conflicts: T= all C
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Antisocial: T= all C
                                                                                                                                                                              Overrepresentative               Dependent: T= all C
                                                                                                                                                                              of single-parent                 Harter self-rating, Cognitive: T= all C
                                                                                                                                                                              and low-income.                  Harter self-rating, General: T= all C
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Digit span: T= all C
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Peabody Picture Vocab. Test: T= all C
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Peabody Indiv. Achievement Test: T= all C

a
    Throughout the table, 'T' refers to treatment group and 'C' refers to control or comparison group.
b
    Outcomes listed as T>C or C>T were statistically significant at the 5% level unless otherwise noted.
c
    In Galambos and Maggs (1991).
d
 Steinberg et al. also break the unsupervised group into children whose parents know their whereabouts and those who do not. They find some evidence that those children whose parents know their whereabouts (no matter where they go after school) are less susceptible to peer
pressure.
                                                               Table 20. Studies of the Effects of After-School Programs on Child Outcomes
Program Name               Program Description               Study Design                                   Age of Participation Sample Sizea          Outcomesb
Random
Gevirtz Homework Project Homework assistance with a          stratified random assignment of 4th graders to 4th-6th grade       Final: 90              No difference between treatment and control. Dosage
(Cosden et al. 2001)     credentialed teacher after school 3 treatment and control groups, students followed                    T=36                   correlated with achievement.
                         to 4 days per week (no drop-in)     from 4th-6th grades                                                C=54

Howard Street              One-on-one adult reading          Teachers identify the lowest 50 readers        2nd-3rd Grade       Final: 60             Word recognition: T=C
Tutoring Program           tutors work with 20 low           in second and third grade. Then kids are                           T=30, C=30            Basal word recognition: T>C
(Morris et al. 1990)       reading ability second and        ranked according to 3 reading                                                            Basal passages: T>C
                           third graders at a public         and spelling tests. The 2 lowest scoring                           Low SES urban school. Spelling (correct score): T>C
                           school. Operates afterschool      are paired, then the next two, etc.                                                      Spelling (qualitative score): T>C
                           4 days/wk from October-May,       and one of each pair is randomly
                           but students attend only          assigned to participate in the program.
                           2 days/wk for 50 hrs. of total    Study compares students in program to
                           tutoring over the year.           the control group in each of two years
                                                             using the same 3 tests that were
                                                             administered prior to the program.
                                                             No sig differences between control and
                                                             treatment group on tests at pretest.
                                                             Compared mean gains for T and C
                                                             using t-tests.
Memphis City Schools       Goal to improve students'         Matched students on the basis of               Program:            Final: 656             Reading test score: T>C grade 3, T=C grades 2, 4
Extended-Day Tutoring      reading in grades 1-4 with        standardized test scores, then attitude and    1st-4th Grade       T=328, C=328
Program                    group tutoring in the after-      behavior. One student from each pair           Study:
(Ross et al. 1996)         school hours. Focus on            assigned to participate (supposedly            2nd-4th Grade       Title I students
                           reading, with occassional         randomly, although 2 outlier schools
                           writing, computer, and test-      may have assigned students first, then
                           taking skills.                    found a match. These 2 (out of 13) had
                           One hour a day, 3 days/wk.        different mean test scores for T and C and
                                                             were left out of the analysis. Study uses
                                                             standardized test scores to evaluate
                                                             students. ANCOVA and matched-pairs
Quantum Opportunities      After-school educational          Entering 9th gr. students whose families       9th-12th Grade      Initial: 250           High school graduation or GED: T>C
(Hahn, Leavitt & Aaron     activities (250 hrs),             were on public assistance randomly                                 T=125, C=125           Post-secondary attendance: T>C
1994)                      development activities            selected from schools near program                                 Final: 170             Honors/awards: T>C
                           such as mentoring & peer tut.     sites. Then randomly assigned to control                           T=88, C=82             Attending high school: T=C
                           (250 hrs), community svc.         or intervention. Those assigned to the                                                    Dropout of High School: T<C
                           activities (250 hrs) each year    program were then called and encouraged                            All students from      Have Children: T=C (T<C at 10% level)
                           for 4 years. Students recieve     to join. Suveys conducted before and                               families receiving     No. of children: T<C
                           hourly bonuses and stipends       throughout the 4-year program. Final                               public assistance.     In trouble with police in past year: T=C (T<C at 10% level)

                           for completing each part of       evaluation in autumn after completion.                                                    On welfare, AFDC, food stamps: T=C
                           program.                                                                                                                    Do community service in past 6 mo: T>C
                                                                                                                                                       Volunteer mentor/tutor in past 6 mo: T>C
                                                                                                                                                       Start business or self-employed: T=C
                                                                                                                                                       Family life is happy: T=C
                                                                                                                                                       Hopeful about future: T>C
                                                                                                                                                       Depressed about life: T=C
                                                                                                                                                       Bothered about things: T=C
                                                                                                                                                       Lonely: T=C
                                                                                                                                                       Life has been a success: T>C
                                                                                                                                                       Have future plans: T=C
                                                                                                                                                       Need reading/math skill improvements: T=C
                                                                                                                                                       Need training for a good job: T=C
                                                                                                                                                       Need help finding a job: T=C
                                                                                                                                                       Need help with alcohol/drug problem: T<C
Non-random
The ADEPT Project          Comprehensive afterschool          Teachers and social workers chose 60          K-6th Grade     Initial: 836               Self-esteem: all T<C
(Ross et al. 1992)         program focusing on building       kids at each school site who they                             T=540, C=296               Depression: all T=C
                           positive self-esteem and           considered to be latchkey. Families                           T2=self-esteem             Risk-taking: all T=C
                           providing homework assist.         were invited to an orientation and teachers                   building curriculum        Impulsivity: all T=C
                           and activities for social and      then selected 20 to participate based on                      Final: 667                 Sulking: all T=C
                           emotional growth. Kids             "need." Those youths whose parents                            T=443, C=224               Egotism: all T<C
                           participated in 2 hr. sessions     were not interested became the control                                                   Learning: all T=C
                           with free play, creative           group. Quasi-experimental. Use data                           Mostly low-income          Shyness: all T=C
                           dramatics, and hmwk assist.        from parents, teachers, and school                            African-American           Acting: all T=C
                           throughout the school year.        records. ANOVA with gain scores used.                                                    Pressure: T=C, T2<C
                                                                                                                                                       Motivation: T=C, T2>C
                                                                                                                                                       Frustration: T=C, T2<C
                                                                                                                                                       Peer interaction: T=C
                                                                                                                                                       Standardized test scores: T=C, T2>C
Boston After School Study Regular afterschool programs at     Grade 1 through 4 children recruited from 30 1st-4th grade    Final: 181                 Behavior Problems, T<C for "regular attenders"
(Marshall et al. 1999)    public and parochial schools in     Boston public schools and 8 parochial schools.
                          Boston                              Data collected through face-to-face interviews
                                                              and questionnaires with the parent and through
                                                              observations at the child's after-school setting.
                                                              OLS regression of the child's behavioral
                                                              problems on the types of care.

Extended Services School Comprehensive afterschool            Teachers identify the lowest 50 readers       2nd-3rd Grade   Final: 60                  Word recognition: T=C; skip school: T<C
Initiative (Grossman et al. program seeking to promote the                                                                  T=regular attenders
2002)                       well being and positive
                            development of young people in
                            their out of school hours.
Kindergarten After-         After-school program designed     Sociometric interviews and classroom          Kindergarten    Final: 100                 Identified as "friend" by peers: T>C
School Program              to provide a service to working   observations used to asses differences in                     T=30, C=70                 Teacher talk to child, spontaneous: T=C
(Howes et al. 1987)         parents by providing extended     social adjustment between participants in                                                Teacher talk to child, responsive: T>C
                            day care beyond the morning-      the after-school program and non-                             School admissions          Teacher talk to child, social: T=C
                            only kindergarten class. Also     participants at the end of one school year.                   reflect ethnic diversity   Teacher talk to child, information: T=C
                            aims to enhance socio-            Non-random, but T and C groups had                            of U.S.                    Teacher talk to child, directions: T=C
                            emotional development.            similar demographic composition.                                                         Teacher talk to child, praise: T=C
                            Located on school grounds.        Chi-square and F tests of means.                                                         Teacher talk to child, reprimands: T=C
                            Operates 5 days/wk. Children                                                                                               Child talk to teacher, spontaneous: T>C
                            may stay until 3 or 5:30pm.                                                                                                Child talk to teacher, responsive: T=C
                                                                                                                                                       Child talk to teacher, social: T=C
                                                                                                                                                       Child talk to teacher, information: T>C
                                                                                                                                                       Child talk to teacher, demands: T=C
                                                                                                                                           Teacher responsiveness to child, positive: T>C
                                                                                                                                           Teacher responsiveness to child, negative: T=C
                                                                                                                                           Teacher responsiveness to child, unaware: T=C
LA's BEST              Comprehensive after-school         2-year longitudinal study of some               Program:        Initial: 146     The following outcomes did not have significance tests:
(Brooks et al. 1995)   program intended to combat         participants in the 10 longest-running          K-6th Grade     T=80, C=66       GPA math: T=C
                       obstacles to educational           LA's BEST sites. These participants             Study:          Final: 123       Reported effort in math: T=C
                       acheivement. Academic              had attended program for at least 2 yrs,        5th-8th Grade   T=69, C=58       GPA reading: T=C
                       tutoring and instruction,          had complete school records, and                                                 Reported effort in reading: T=C
                       cultural enrichment, recreation,   parental permission.                                                             GPA composition: T=C
                       computer activities, and           No random assignment. Comparison                                                 Reported effort in composition: T=C
                       nutrition for K-6th graders        group formed from kids in same school                                            GPA social studies: T>C
                       after-school until 6pm M-F         whose parents agreed to participate.                                             Reported effort in social studies: T>C
                       in 19 of LA's poorest schools.     Comparison group sig. different in grades                                        GPA science: T>C
                                                          (higher), family characteristics, and                                            Reported effort in science: T>C
                                                          ethnicity. Data collected for 1992-93 and
                                                          1993-94 school years. Compared the                                               The following outcomes were reported as significant (or not)
                                                          improvement in scores of treatment and                                           at the 5% level:
                                                           controls.                                                                       Feel that grown-ups in afterschool life care: T=C
                                                                                                                                           Feel that grown-ups in afterschool life expect you to do well:
                                                                                                                                           T=C
                                                                                                                                           Feel that grown-ups in afterschool life are easy to talk to:
                                                                                                                                           T=C
                                                                                                                                           Feel that grown-ups in afterschool life are helpful: T>C
                                                                                                                                           Include teachers to help with a problem: T>C
                                                                                                                                           Include student aides for help with a problem: T>C
                                                                                                                                           Positive attitude toward school: T>C
                                                                                                                                           Felt safe during afterschool hours: T>C
                                                                                                                                           Educational expectations (how far you will go in school) :
                                                                                                                                           T>C c
LA's BEST              Same as above.                     Compares participants to schoolmates            2nd-5th Grade   Initial:         Language redesignation (English profic): T>C
(Huang et al. 2000)                                       who did not participate. Followed                               T=4312           (grades 4, 6, 8), T=C (grades 5, 7)
                                                          students for five years. Broke down                             C=15010          School absence: T<C (grade 6, 7), T=C
                                                          participants into those who attended 75%                                         (grades 8, 9)
                                                          of days (high), 25-74% (med), and less                                           Math acheivement test scores: T=C (but
                                                          than 25% (low).                                                                  started with T<C)
                                                          Control for gender, ethnic, income,                                              Felt safe after school: T>C
                                                          and language status (English profic).                                            Like school: T>C
                                                          Not random assignment.                                                           Engagement in school: T>C
                                                                                                                                           Educational expectations: T>C
                                                                                                                                           Standardized math tests: High>Low
                                                                                                                                           Standardized reading tests: High>Low
                                                                                                                                           Standardized language arts tests: High>Low
                                                                                                                                           School attendance: High>Low
LA's BEST              Same as above.                     Surveys 74 of the 76 LA's BEST sites in June    2nd-5th Grade   Initial: 3,717   Reading SAT-9: Proportion of LA's BEST students scoring
(Huang et al. 2001)                                       2001. Participants whose parents                                                 above 50th
                                                          gave permission (27% of all participants). No                                       National Percentile Rank (NPR) rose by 1 percentage pt.
                                                          control group. Students tested in
                                                         1998-99 and again in 1999-00.                                                              Math SAT-9: Proportion of LA's BEST students scoring
                                                                                                                                                    above 50th
                                                                                                                                                       NPR rose by 3 percentage pts.
                                                                                                                                                    Language arts SAT-9: Proportion of LA's BEST students
                                                                                                                                                    scoring above 50th
                                                                                                                                                       NPR rose by 5 percentage pts.
Milwaukee Public School Formal ASP participants were     Parents volunteered for the study and              3rd Grade       Initial: 216            GPA math: T>C1, C2
District                in 8 different programs at 5     216 children were selected if they                                 T=34 Formal ASP         GPA reading: T>C1, C2
(Posner & Vandell 1994) elementary schools. 21 kids      participated in one of the arrangements                            C1=121 Maternal care GPA other subjects: T> all C
                        attended the same on-site        for 3 days a week or more.                                         C2=45 Informal adult    GPA conduct: T> C1, C2
                        ASP sponsored by the district    Children evaluated with teacher and                                supervision             Wisconsin 3rd grade reading test: T= all C
                        that offered academic,           parent reports of behavior, the child's                            C3=15 Self-care         Antisocial: T<C2, C3
                        recreational, and remedial       grades, and a standardized reading test.                                                   Work habits: T> all C
                        activities at the end of the     Not random.                                                        Low income              Peer relations: T> all C
                        school day. The other prgms.     Chi-sq tests for selection on categorical                                                  Emotional adjustment: T>C1, C2
                        attended typically had a         variables lead them to control for race,                                                   Adult relations: T= all C
                        recreational focus with          mother's education, and family income.                                                     Anxious: T= all C
                        some optional assisted           Use ANCOVA and MANCOVA.                                                                    Dependent: T= all C
                        homework time.                   Then Fisher tests for differences between                                                  Hyperactive: T= all C
                        Participants in all categories   T and all C.                                                                               Time engaged in academic activities: T> all C
                        had to spend at least 3                                                                                                     Time engaged in enrichment: T> all C
                        days per week in these                                                                                                      Time watching TV: T< all C
                        arrangements.                                                                                                               Time in outdoor unorganized activities: T< all C
                                                                                                                                                    Time in transit: T= all C
                                                                                                                                                    Time eating: T= all C
                                                                                                                                                    Time in indoor unorganized activities: T= all C
                                                                                                                                                    Time with adults present: T> all C
                                                                                                                                                    Time with peers present: T> all C
                                                                                                                                                    Actively engaged with peers: T> all C
                                                                                                                                                    Actively engaged with adults: T> all C
                                                                                                                                                    Actively engaged with siblings: T< all C
                                                                                                                                                    Academic activities with adults: T> all C
Milwaukee Public School Same as above.                   Followed the same children as above                3rd-5th Grade   Initial: Same as above. Time on academics: T> all C (grades 3, 4), T= all C (grade 5)

District                                                 for 2.5 yrs.                                                       Final: 194              Time on non-sport extracurriculars: T> all C (grades 3, 4, 5)

(Posner & Vandell 1999)                                  Used t-tests to contrast the outcomes of kids in                   no diff. attrition      Time in outdoor unorganized activities: T< all C (grades 3, 4,
                                                         formal programs with others.                                                               5)
                                                                                                                            T=26 Formal ASP         Time in coached sports: T= all C (grades 3, 4), T> all C
                                                                                                                            C1=121 Maternal care    (grade 5)
                                                                                                                            C2=30 Informal adult    Time in indoor structured activities: T= all C (grades 3, 4),
                                                                                                                            supervision             T> all C (grade 5)
                                                                                                                            C3=17 Self-care         Time watching TV: T< all C (grades 3, 4, 5)
                                                                                                                                                    Time socializing: T= all C (grades 3, 4), T< all C (grade 5)
                                                                                                                                                    Time doing chores: T< all C (grades 3, 4, 5)
                                                                                                                                                    Time in transit: T= all C (grades 3, 4, 5) d
                                                                                                                            Low income
The Afterschool                        Community-based organizations                Compares the actual changes in academi          K-8th grade          T=25,909                     gains in math: T>C, especially for students from
Corporation (TSAC)                     (CBOs) and other nonprofit                   indicators (performance on standardized tests                        C=39,780                     disadvantaged circumstances.
(Welsh et al. 2002)                    organizations are funded by The              and school attendance) of TASC participants                                                       increase in attendance T>C
                                       After-School Corporation (TASC)              over a three year period to projected changes
                                       to operate in-school after-school            for nonparticipants, derived from OLS
                                       programs from 3:00 p.m. to 6:00              regressions controlling for factors including
                                       p.m. Monday through Friday                   prior year's test scores, and demographic and
                                       throughout the public school year.           educational background. Data were collected
                                       TASC programs include                        from TASC sites.
                                       educational enrichment through
                                       activities in language arts,
                                       science, mathematics, fine and
                                       performing arts and sports.

a
    Throughout the table, 'T' refers to treatment group and 'C' refers to control or comparison group.
b
    Outcomes listed as T>C or C>T were statistically significant at the 5% level unless otherwise noted.
c
 All outcomes reported are based on Brooks et al.'s "method 1" which compares improvements in test scores of the treatment and control groups (as described above). "Method 2" finds stronger evidence of positive effects of LA's BEST as cited in other
meta-analyses. However, method 2 simply excludes low-scoring students from the treatment group, thereby biasing the results.
d
  Posner and Vanell also report the effects that these activities had on GPA, emotional adjustment, work habits, and behavior problems in 5th grade. They find that time spent on unorganized outdoor activities is associated with worse outcomes for whites.
Considering this finding in conjunction with the list of results above, suggests that formal afterschool programs may have some positive effects. On the other hand, time in non-sport extracurriculars lowers emotional adjustment among blacks, so to the
extent that afterschool programs increase time spent in these types of activities, they may have detrimental effects on student outcomes.
                                                       Table 21. Studies of the Effects of Positive Youth Development Programs on Child Outcomes

Program Name                  Program Description                 Study Design                                   Age of Participation   Sample Sizea            Outcomesb
             c,d
Across Ages                   Mentoring by adults over            Random assignment of sixth grade               6th Grade              Initial: 729            Increased positive attitudes: T>C
(LoSciuto, Rajala,            age 55 at least 2 hours/wk,         classes in three schools to either program                            Final: 562 no diff.     Inc. knowledge of older people: T>C
Townsend & Taylor 1996)       community service 1 hr/wk,           or control group. Used ANCOVA.                                                               Likely to have negative reaction to drug use: T>C
                              26 sessions of social problem                                                                                                     More community service: T>C
                              solving, wrkshps for parents.                                                                                                     School attendance: T>C
Big Brothers/Big Sisters      Mentors from the community          Randomly assigned eligible youth to            Program: Age 5-18      Initial: 1138           Likelihood of initiating drug use: T<C
(Tierney, Grossman            are matched with eligible           treatment or wait list at eight sites with     Study: Age 10-16       T=572, C=567            Likelihood of initiating alcohol use: T=C (T<C at 10%)
& Resch 1995)                 youth (typically those with         large case loads across the country.                                  Final: 959              No. of times hit someone: T<C
                              only one adult involved in life).   Surveys were administered to parents                                  T=487, C=472            No. of times stole something: T=C
                              Mentors are usually required        and youth at the time of assignment and                                                       No. of times damaged property: T=C
                              to interact with youth              18 months later (note: those assigned to                              From single-parent      Perceived ability to complete schoolwork: T>C
                              9-12 hours per month for the        wait list remained on it for all 18 months).                          households.             GPA: T=C (T>C at 10%)
                              first year.                         Case managers also completed data                                                             No. times skipped class: T<C
                                                                  collection forms throughout the study.                                                        No. of times skipped day of school: T<C
                                                                  Interestingly, 22% of youth in the                                                            Weekly hours of homework: T=C
                                                                  treatment group were never matched,                                                           Weekly hours spent reading: T=C
                                                                  usually because the youth became                                                              School value scale: T=C
                                                                  ineligible or no longer wished to be                                                          Overall positive parental relationship: T>C
                                                                  matched. This is typical for the program.                                                     Improved parental relationships (trust): T>C
                                                                  The treatment group represents the                                                            Improved communication wth parent: T=C
                                                                  opportunity to be matched.                                                                    Anger/alienation in parental relationship: T=C
                                                                  Outcomes were usually based on                                                                Number of times lied to parents: T<C e
                                                                  several survey questions and established
                                                                  scales of peer relationships, scholastic
                                                                  competence, etc. Used OLS w/ covariates
                                                                  controlling for age, race, gender, abuse,
                                                                  home environment, and site. Used logit
                                                                  for dichotomous outcomes.
I Have a Dream                A sponsor adopts a sixth            Natural experiment where participants          6th-12th Grade         Final: T=92, C=89       High school graduation: T=70.6%, C=35.5%
(Kahne & Bailey 1999)         grade class and offers              are compared to the sixth graders of the                                                      College enrollment: T=64.7%, C=18.9% (approx)
                              long-term financial, academic,      previous year (in the same school).
                              and social support including        Study focuses on two IHAD programs in                                                         No significance tests reported.
                              afterschool programs,               Chicago.
                              tutoring, summer programs,
                              and college scholarships.
Teen Outreachc,d              45 hrs of volunteer svc. And        25 schools nationwide randomly assigned        9th-12th Grade         Initial: T=342, C=353   School failure: T<C
(Allen, Philliber, Herrling   weekly small class                  to treatment or control from 1991 to 1995,                            Final: T=324, C=323     School suspension: T<C
& Kuperminc 1996)             discussions of values,              but students in those schools elected to                                                      Teen pregnancy: T<C
                              decision making, parenting,         participate. Sites with more interested
                              life options.                       students than could participate held
                              Can be in-school or after.          lotteries. Immediate posttests after
                                                                  1-year of participation.
Woodrock Youth                Weekly classes (skills for          Classes in 4 Philadelphia schools were         Age: 6-14              Initial: 453            Self-esteem: T=C (age 6-9, age 10-14)
Development Project                      human relations), daily                     randomly assigned to treatment or control.                                               T=161, C=292                       Relationship w/ and perception of students of
(LoSciuto, Freeman,                      mentoring, peer tutoring,                   Different pre- and posttests given to                                                    Final: 367                            other races: T>C (age 6-9), T=C (age 10-14)
Altman & Lanphear 1997)c                 homework assistance,                        younger children (age 6-9) and older                                                     T=130, C=237                       Alcohol, tobacco, or drug use in last year:
                                         extracurricular activities, and             children (age 10-14). ANCOVA to                                                          Age 6-9: n=170                        T<C (age 6-9), T=C (age10-14)
                                         some home visits. Also,                     compare outcomes.                                                                        Age 10-14: n=197                   Alcohol, tobacco, or drug use in last month:
                                         out-of-school special events.                                                                                                        Atrit diffs in age (older             T<C (age 6-9, age 10-14)
                                         In-school classes once a wk                                                                                                          attrited more) and more            Negative attitude toward alcohol, tobacco, and
                                         and an after-school prgrm.                                                                                                           from T group among                    drug use: T=C (age 6-9), T<C (age10-14)
                                                                                                                                                                              older and more from C
                                                                                                                                                                              for younger.                       (Note that paradoxically, among the older group,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 T had a less negative attitude toward drugs.)

a
    Throughout the table, 'T' refers to treatment group and 'C' refers to control or comparison group.
b
    Outcomes listed as T>C or C>T were statistically significant at the 5% level unless otherwise noted.
c
    in Catalano et al. (1999)
d
    in Roth et al. (1998)
e
    Other social and behavioral outcomes were also reported, such as self-confidence, social acceptance, conflict with peers, and time spent in cultural activities, but none were significantly different for the treatment and comparison groups.
     c   Figure 1: Nonlinear Child Care Subsidies and
                          Hours Worked




I3                         w-p+s3

I2
         w-p                         w-p+s2


I1
                                              w-p+s1


                                                 y




                     h3         h2      h1             R
