NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PORTFOLIO CONCENTRATION AND
THE PERFORMANCE OF INDIVIDUAL INVESTORS
Zoran Ivković
Clemens Sialm
Scott Weisbenner
Working Paper 10675
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10675
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2004

We extend our gratitude to an anonymous discount broker for providing the data on individual investors’ trades,
positions, and demographics. Special thanks go to Terry Odean for his help in obtaining and understanding the data
set. We thank Marcin Kacperczyk, George Pennacchi, Sophie Shive, and Lu Zheng for useful insights and helpful
discussions. Ivković and Weisbenner acknowledge the financial support from the College Research Board at the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Finally, we thank seminar participants at the University of Illinois and
the University of Michigan for their comments and constructive suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Zoran Ivković, Clemens Sialm, and Scott Weisbenner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Portfolio Concentration and the Performance of Individual Investors
Zoran Ivković, Clemens Sialm, and Scott Weisbenner
NBER Working Paper No. 10675
August 2004
JEL No. D82, G11
ABSTRACT
Using data on the investments a large number of individual investors made through a discount
broker from 1991 to 1996, we find that the stock trades by households with concentrated
portfolios outperform those with diversified portfolios. While in general the stocks bought by
individual investors significantly underperform the stocks they sell, the reverse is true for
households whose holdings are concentrated in a few stocks. The excess return of concentrated
relative to diversified portfolios is stronger for households with large account balances as well as
for stocks not included in the S&P 500 Index and local stocks, potentially reflecting concentrated
investors’ successful exploitation of information asymmetries. This finding is very robust to
alternative concentration measures and regression specifications, and to alternative explanations
such as differences across concentrated and diversified investors in the portfolio turnover and
access to inside information, suggesting that some of these concentrated households have
superior information processing skills. Moreover, controlling for a household’s average
investment ability, the household’s trades perform better as the household’s portfolio includes
fewer stocks. However, while concentrated household portfolios on average outperform
diversified ones, their levels of total risk are larger and the Sharpe ratios of their stock portfolios
are lower.
Zoran Ivković
College of Business
University of Illinois
340 Wohlers Hall
1206 South Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 61820
ivkovich@uiuc.edu
Clemens Sialm
Department of Finance
University of Michigan Business School
701 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
and NBER
sialm@umich.edu

Scott Weisbenner
College of Business
University of Illinois
340 Wohlers Hall
1206 South Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
weisbenn@uiuc.edu

Despite the longstanding and widespread financial advice to hold well-diversified portfolios,
several studies have found that many individual investors instead tend to concentrate their
portfolios in a small number of stocks.1 There are a few key reasons why households might hold
poorly diversified portfolios. First, a lack of diversification could be prompted by behavioral
biases such as familiarity2 or overconfidence.3 That is, households’ investment decisions might
be affected by a tendency to consider investing in only a relatively small subset of companies
one is familiar with or confident in, though not necessarily informed about. Second, individual
investors might hold concentrated portfolios because they are able to identify stocks with high
expected abnormal returns. Under such circumstances, rational investors would need to assess
the trade-off between the benefits of higher stock returns with the costs of higher total risk and
the implications of combining such prospective investments with their existing portfolios. The
main contribution of this paper is to compare the performance of investors with concentrated and
diversified holdings and to shed some light as to why investors might hold undiversified
portfolios.
If under-diversification is driven solely by behavioral effects, then concentrated
household portfolios on average should not exhibit superior performance. For example, if
portfolio concentration stems from familiarity bias or overconfidence, the holdings of
concentrated investors will not earn superior returns on average relative to stocks held by
diversified households. Indeed, in the context of 401(k) plans, Benartzi (2001) finds that
concentrated allocations to company stock (one that its employees participating in its 401(k) plan
are surely familiar with) do not predict future company stock returns. However, if households
that have favorable information concerning a stock act upon this information by tilting their
portfolio towards it, then the stock-picking ability of concentrated households should be superior
to that of diversified households. Moreover, if informational advantages are the cause of the
superior performance, the abnormal returns should be generated by investments that have greater
1

See, for example, Blume and Friend (1975), Kelly (1995), Barber and Odean (2000), and Goetzmann and Kumar
(2001).
2
There is a body of evidence that investors tend to invest disproportionately in the companies with which they are
relatively familiar. French and Poterba (1991) document a tendency for investors to favor domestic over
international stocks. Huberman (2001) shows that the shareholders of a Regional Bell Operating Company tend to
live in the area that it serves. Zhu (2002) and Ivković and Weisbenner (2004) show that individual investors who
invest through a discount broker exhibit considerable local bias. In the context of 401(k)-plan investing, participants
on average have considerable holdings in own-company stock (Benartzi (2001) and Liang and Weisbenner (2002)).
3
Odean (1999) and Barber and Odean (2000, 2001) show that individual investors tend to trade excessively and that
such behavior is consistent with overconfidence.

1

informational asymmetries (e.g., stocks not in the S&P 500 Index, particularly those local to the
investor).
Research in cognitive psychology suggests that there are limits to human capacity for
processing information and conducting more than a limited number of tasks at a time and that
such processing limitations might constrain human reasoning and problem solving.4 Cognitive
limitations notwithstanding, in reasonably efficient financial markets, the availability of
particularly insightful value-relevant information may be scarce and difficult to identify and the
ensuing search costs may be prohibitively large. Assuming that the availability of relevant
information and/or the information processing skills of investors are limited, households may be
better off investing in a subset of the limited number of stocks with informational asymmetries.
Expansions of the portfolio beyond this limited subset into additional stocks will likely depress
portfolio performance, either because the stocks about which one may possess superior
information have already been tapped or because the increasing number of different investments
lessens one’s ability to effectively monitor any of them.
The empirical literature studying the performance of individual investors finds that, on
average, households’ stock investments perform poorly. For example, Odean (1999) reports that
individual investors’ purchases tend to underperform their sales by a significant margin. Barber
and Odean (2000, 2001) further show that, on average, individual investors who hold common
stocks pay a substantial penalty in performance for trading actively. These results are consistent
with the hypothesis that individual investors are overconfident and trade excessively.
On the other hand, certain individual investors have been found to fare better. Coval,
Hirshleifer, and Shumway (2002) document that individual investors that have performed
abnormally well in the past continue to perform abnormally well in the future. Thus, it appears
that some skillful individual investors might be able to exploit market inefficiencies to earn
abnormal profits. Ivković and Weisbenner (2004) find that households exhibit a strong
preference for local investments and further show that, on average, individuals’ investments in
local stocks outperform their investments in non-local stocks, suggesting that investors are able
to exploit local knowledge. The excess return is particularly large for stocks not included in the

4

See, for example, Miller (1956), Piaget (1971), Bachelder and Denny (1977), Dempster (1981), Chapman (1990),
Just and Carpenter (1992), and Cantor and Engle (1993).

2

S&P 500 Index, in regard to which informational asymmetries between local and non-local
investors may be the largest.
Using data on the investments a large number of individual investors made through a
discount broker from 1991 to 1996, we study the relation between the performance of
households’ trades and the concentration of their portfolios, with a particular focus on
households with substantial account balances. Consistent with Odean (1999), we find that, on
average, the stocks bought by individual investors underperform the stocks they sell by a wide
margin. However, we find that the reverse is true for households with concentrated investments.
Specifically, we find that the trades of concentrated households perform significantly better than
the trades of diversified households (note that, throughout the paper, we use the term
“diversified” rather loosely–simply to refer to investors who hold portfolios that are not
concentrated in one or a few stocks, i.e., the opposite of concentrated investors).5 This result is
particularly strong for households with large account balances. The purchases of diversified
investors with account balances of at least $100,000 underperform their sales by 1.8 percentage
points per year. On the other hand, the purchases of concentrated investors with such large
account balances outperform their sales by 3.0 percentage points per year. The excess return
associated with concentration is stronger for investments in local stocks and stocks that are not
included in the S&P 500 Index (which tend to have less analyst coverage and national media
attention), potentially reflecting concentrated investors’ ability to exploit informational
asymmetries. In sum, these findings are consistent with the hypothesis that skilled investors can
exploit informational asymmetries by concentrating their portfolios in the stocks about which
they have particularly favorable information.
Across all households, the stock picks made by concentrated investors outperform those
made by diversified investors by about one percentage point over the year following the
purchase, with the difference in performance growing to three percentage points for households
with relatively large portfolios (i.e., $25,000 or more) and to four percentage points for those
with the largest portfolios (i.e., $100,000 or more). However, the purchases made by
concentrated households with small portfolios (i.e., less than $25,000) do not outperform the
purchases made by diversified households.

5

However, as Goetzmann and Kumar (2001) point out, “diversified” investors may not be really diversified, as the
correlations in returns among stocks within portfolios with many holdings can be fairly high.

3

Unlike households with small portfolios, wealthy households have the resources to hold a
larger number of stocks, if desired, and thus obtain the potential benefits of diversification. The
fixed costs of purchasing securities make it uneconomical for households with limited wealth to
hold a large number of securities directly. It is also likely that some wealthy households might
have greater access to value-relevant information and might possess processing skills superior to
those prevailing among households with smaller accounts, causing this portion of investors to
concentrate their portfolios in a few investments.
This leads to two clear predictions. First, there should be a much greater dispersion in the
diversification levels of large portfolios relative to small portfolios. Second, among households
with large portfolios, concentrated investors should be better stock pickers, as informed investors
may be under-diversified, holding substantial positions in the stocks with the most promising
prospects, while uninformed investors would rationally hold a more diversified portfolio. Large
household portfolios indeed display more variation in their diversification levels, potentially in
accordance with the degree of their informational advantage.6 On the other hand, households
with small portfolios may hold very few stocks because of fixed commissions and other trading
costs and/or have less access to value-relevant information, leading to no relation between
performance and concentration for this group of investors, while there is such a relation for
investors with larger portfolios.
However, rather than reflecting investor stock-picking ability, the superior performance
of concentrated households could also be attributed to alternative explanations such as
differences across the two groups of investors in the volatility of stocks purchased, turnover of
household portfolios, some omitted investor-specific variable like financial sophistication, and
the exploitation of inside information. We explore these alternatives and show that they cannot
explain the finding. A particularly compelling result is that the trades made by concentrated
households outperform the trades made by diversified households even after adjusting for
household fixed effects, that is, after controlling for households’ average investment abilities.
We also conduct several other robustness checks including exploring alternative measures of

6

Specifically, households with stock portfolios of $100,000 or more held 11.7 stocks on average with an
interquartile range of 4 – 16 stocks. The 10th and 90th percentiles were 2 and 24 stocks, respectively. However,
households with stock portfolios less than $25,000 or more held only 2.4 stocks on average with an interquartile
range of 1 – 3 stocks. Their 10th and 90th percentiles were 1 and 5 stocks, respectively.

4

concentration and aggregating the trades and the holdings of concentrated and diversified
investors to form portfolios.
We do not argue that investors should hold poorly diversified portfolios. The relation
between performance and portfolio concentration among individual investors does not mean that
simply altering one’s portfolio to hold just a few stocks will improve its performance. Rather, it
suggests that some investors with superior stock-picking ability exploit that advantage by
concentrating their portfolio in a few stocks. Portfolio concentration only has benefits if the
investor’s informational advantage is sufficiently large and if the investor is sufficiently risk
tolerant.
While we do find that, on average, wealthy households holding highly concentrated
portfolios perform significantly better than households holding widely diversified portfolios, we
also find that concentrated portfolios have substantially higher levels of total risk. Indeed, we
show that, although concentrated household portfolios on average outperform diversified ones,
their levels of total risk are larger and the Sharpe ratios of their stock portfolios are lower.
Our results are consistent with those reported by Kacperczyk, Sialm, and Zheng (2004),
who study the diversification of actively managed equity mutual funds. They report that mutual
funds that are concentrated in specific industries perform better than widely diversified mutual
funds. They attribute those results to the skilled mutual fund managers’ tendency to select their
asset holdings from a limited number of industries, presumably because their expertise is linked
to those industries.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. After describing the data sources and
presenting summary statistics in Section I, in Section II we study the performance of the trades
of households with varying degrees of portfolio concentration. Upon finding that the trades of
concentrated households perform substantially better, particularly for households with large
accounts, we further examine whether the superior performance is robust to the inclusion of
investor fixed effects and is driven by investments in stocks regarding which there are likely to
be greater informational asymmetries. Section III considers alternative explanations for the
superior performance of the trades of concentrated individual investors we find in Section II,
including checking for differences across concentrated and diversified investors in the access to
and exploitation of inside information, the turnover in households’ stock portfolios, and the
volatility of transacted stocks. Section IV presents additional robustness checks, including

5

portfolio analyses of the trades and stock positions of concentrated and diversified households, as
well as a discussion of the risk-return tradeoff for concentrated investment strategies. Section V
concludes.

I. Data and Summary Statistics
The primary data source used in this study, obtained from a discount broker, includes
individual investors’ monthly trades and positions over a six-year period between 1991 and
1996. The data set captures all the investments that 78,000 households made through the
brokerage house, covering common stocks, mutual funds, bonds, foreign securities, and
derivative securities. The data set also provides some additional information about the
households such as their zip codes. See Barber and Odean (2000) for a detailed description of the
data set.
We focus on the common stocks traded on the NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ markets.
Common stock investments constitute nearly two-thirds of the total value of household
investments in the sample. We use the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) database to
obtain information on stock prices and returns and COMPUSTAT to obtain several firm
characteristics, including the location of the company headquarters. We exclude stocks that could
not be matched with CRSP (they were most likely listed on local exchanges or traded over the
counter).
A. Concentration of Stock Holdings
We use the Herfindahl Index as a measure of the concentration of the individual
investors’ stock holdings. The Herfindahl Index HIh,t of household h at time t is defined as the
sum of the squared weights of each stock i in the household portfolio ( wth,i ):
N

( )

HI h,t = ∑ wth,i
i =1

2

.

(1)

The Herfindahl Index equals one if a household owns only one common stock, and an
equally-weighted portfolio of N securities has a Herfindahl Index of 1/N. The index decreases as
households become more diversified across different securities.

6

We present the basic portfolio characteristics of the households in our sample in Table I.
The sample contains 268,734 household-year observations. The mean account balance of
$45,604 is substantially larger than the median balance of $13,865. A large fraction of brokerage
accounts have relatively small balances. Around two-thirds of households have portfolio values
below $25,000 and only nine percent of households have portfolio values above $100,000.
Past studies have found that households do not tend to diversify their account holdings
across a large number of common stocks.7 Indeed, in our sample, households own on average 3.9
stocks in their brokerage account and the average Herfindahl Index of household portfolios
equals 0.62. The median portfolio includes two stocks and has a Herfindahl Index of 0.56. One
third of the households own only one stock, but this concentration is driven by the small
accounts.
Among households with larger portfolios, however, we find large variation in the extent
of portfolio diversification (recall that, throughout the paper, we use the term “diversified” rather
loosely–we use it simply to refer to investors who hold portfolios that are not concentrated in one
or a few stocks, i.e., the opposite of concentrated investors). Focusing on households with a stock
portfolio of at least $100,000, the 10th and 90th percentiles of the distribution of the number of
stocks held are 2 and 24 stocks, respectively, while the 10th and 90th percentiles of the Herfindahl
Index span from 0.07 to 0.93. The average number of stocks increases substantially and the
average Herfindahl Index decreases with the size of the account balance. For example,
households with portfolio balances exceeding $100,000 own on average 11.7 stocks and have a
Herfindahl Index of 0.33, with 7.5 percent of the households concentrating all of their portfolio
in one stock.
The aggregate holdings of households in the sample differ from the market portfolio.
Households tend to overweight local stocks and stocks not included in the S&P 500 Index.
Slightly more than one-half of the holdings are held in stocks included in the S&P 500 Index,
while the S&P 500 Index stocks represent around two-thirds of the total market capitalization of
the U.S. stock market during the sample period. One-seventh of the holdings are held in stocks of
companies headquartered less than 50 miles away from the respective households’ residences, a
figure substantially higher than the fraction that would be observed if individuals invested in the

7

See, for example, Blume and Friend (1975), Kelly (1995), Barber and Odean (2000), and Goetzmann and Kumar
(2001).

7

market portfolio.8 The portfolios of wealthier households correspond more closely to the market
portfolio, but the bias towards local, non-S&P 500 stocks persists.

B. Persistence of Concentration Levels
To assess the persistence of our concentration measure, we compute the average
Herfindahl Index over the following six years for households that initially held exactly one stock
and therefore had an initial Herfindahl Index of one. The Herfindahl Index decreases on average
to 0.79 after one year and to 0.69 after six years. These concentration measures remain above the
unconditional average Herfindahl Index of 0.62 in our sample. The persistence is substantially
stronger for households with initial portfolio values exceeding $100,000. The Herfindahl Index
of households that initially own one stock decreases to 0.85 after one year and to 0.79 after six
years, which is substantially larger than the average Herfindahl Index of 0.33 for these wealthy
households. We obtain similar results if we compute the correlation of Herfindahl Indices for the
same household over time.
The persistence in portfolio concentration could reflect buy-and-hold investors who
simply continue to hold their initial stock position. However, the concentration levels remain
very high even for households that have substantial portfolio turnover. We compute the average
Herfindahl Indices at different time horizons for households that own initially one stock and that
make at least ten stock transactions during each year. The average Herfindahl Index equals 0.48
after one year and 0.40 after six years, indicating that even the households with substantial
turnover remain concentrated in a relatively small number of stocks. Again, the persistence is
even stronger for larger portfolios. Coval, Hirshleifer, and Shumway (2002) find strong
persistence in the performance of individual investors’ trades. The strong persistence in portfolio
concentration, if coupled with superior returns to concentrated investments, offers a potential
explanation for their finding.

C. Comparison with Survey of Consumer Finances
To gauge the extent to which our discount brokerage sample is representative of the
overall population of U.S. individual investors, we compare some of their major portfolio
characteristics with the portfolio characteristics of the general population. Given our aim to study
8

See Zhu (2002) and Ivković and Weisbenner (2004).

8

the relation between the concentration of a household’s portfolio and its performance, it is useful
to assess whether the stock holdings in the brokerage account likely represent a large or small
portion of a household’s overall portfolio. Table II compares basic household portfolio
characteristics from our sample with total household portfolio characteristics from the Federal
Reserve Board’s Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF). The SCF is conducted every three years
and collects balance sheet, pension, income, and other demographic characteristics of a sample
of U.S. households.9 It reports the number of stocks held in households’ taxable accounts and
their total portfolio value. For direct comparison, we report stock holdings in taxable accounts
for our brokerage house sample. The SCF over-samples wealthy households because these
households own a disproportionate fraction of the financial assets; accordingly, we use the
provided population weights to compute the distribution of the wealth and diversification levels.
We compare the characteristics of our discount brokerage sample from December 1992
with the 1992 SCF in Panel A and our sample in November 1996 with the 1998 SCF in Panel B.
In December 1992, the average account balance of households in our sample was $44,707, while
the average account balance of the SCF households holding equity in a taxable account was
$66,810. On the other hand, the median household in our sample has a higher account balance
($13,869) than the median household in the SCF ($8,000), with the 75th percentile of account
balances being fairly close ($35,604 in discount brokerage sample and $30,000 in SCF).
Conditioning on a stock portfolio of at least $100,000, the median stock holdings of $181,355 in
the sample corresponds very closely with the median of $181,000 in the SCF, with the interquartile range also similar across the two groups. Panel B shows that account balances are larger
during the latter time period. For all but the largest stock portfolios, the distribution of account
balances at the 25th, 50th, and 75th percentiles for the discount broker sample matches the
distribution for the general population fairly well.
The distribution of the number of stocks in our discount brokerage sample also closely
resembles the distribution in the SCF. Households in the discount brokerage sample owned on
average 4.3 stocks in December 1992 and households in the 1992 SCF sample owned on average
4.0 stocks; in the latter period the average number of stocks held is 5.1 and 5.7 stocks,
respectively. This indicates that that the diversification of households’ complete stock portfolios,
as measured by the SCF sample, is not substantially different from the diversification of the
9

See Kennickell and Starr-McCluer (1994) for a detailed description of the SCF data set.

9

stock portfolios held by households in the discount brokerage house sample. Overall, there is a
close match between the two samples along several important portfolio characteristics.

D. Summary Statistics for Trades
Table III describes some summary statistics for the individual investors’ stock
transactions during the sample period. The complete sample includes 640,070 buy transactions
and 552,832 sell transactions of common stocks made by households that had stock holdings at
the end of the prior year (needed to construct concentration levels and portfolio-value cutoffs).
We compute the performance of the trades for households with various portfolio values. In
addition to our usual portfolio-value cutoffs, we also include summary statistics for households
with a stock portfolio less than $25,000 at the end of the prior year, because they typically make
substantially smaller trades. Households with portfolio values above $100,000 account for nine
percent of the households in the sample, but they account for 28 percent of the transactions,
while households with portfolios less than $25,000 constitute about two-thirds of the households,
but just over one-third of the trades. The size of the purchase and the sale transactions is related
to the total portfolio value. The average stock purchase is $5,665 for households with portfolios
less than $25,000 and $19,453 for households with portfolio values of at least $100,000.
Individual investors disproportionately favor trading local stocks and the stocks not
included in the Standard & Poor’s 500 Index. Only about 40 percent of transactions involve the
stocks included in the Standard & Poor’s 500 Index and around 15 percent of the transactions
involve the stocks of firms headquartered within 50 miles of the investor. The last two rows of
Table III summarize the excess returns of the purchases and the sales during the subsequent year.
The excess returns are computed by subtracting the appropriate Fama and French (1992)
benchmark portfolio return formed according to size and book-to-market deciles from the raw
returns. Consistent with Odean (1999), we find that the stocks purchased perform on average
worse than the stocks sold10 for all portfolio-value cutoffs. However, the underperformance is
more substantial for the households with the smallest portfolio values. The stocks purchased by
all households have an average excess return of –1.6 percent during the year following the
purchase, while the stocks sold by all households have an average excess return of 0.2 percent,
10

Odean (1999) finds that stocks purchased by individual investors have an average return of 5.69 percent and
stocks sold have an average return of 9.00 percent in the year after the transaction. Odean attributes the result to
individual investors tending to be overconfident and trading excessively.

10

resulting in a performance differential of –1.8 percent over the year following a purchase relative
to a sell. For portfolios of at least $100,000, the difference in average one-year returns (purchases
minus sales) is –0.9 percent. The difference in median returns following purchases and sales is
similar.

E. Portfolio and Trade Characteristics by Portfolio Concentration
Table IV compares the characteristics of the trades made by households that own only
one stock at the beginning of the year (i.e., completely concentrated households) with the
characteristics of the trades made by households that own more than one stock. For various
subsamples defined by portfolio size, we summarize the characteristics of household portfolios
holding more than one stock in the first column and show the difference between the two groups
of portfolios in the second column.
One issue related to this dataset is that the investors whose common-stock investments
are concentrated might hold well-diversified mutual funds through the same broker or they might
be well diversified by holding other securities in their accounts with other brokers or though
other investment channels. While we cannot completely rule out the latter possibility, the
comparison of our sample with the SCF samples (see Section I.C) suggests that the summary
statistics associated with household investments held through this broker are very close to those
of the SCF samples. In regard to the possibility that investors concentrated in common stocks
might be well-diversified through mutual funds or other securities, we find that concentrated
households are significantly less likely to hold other asset classes in their accounts with this
brokerage house. Panel A of Table IV shows that 53.3 percent of diversified households and 33.5
percent of concentrated households own other asset classes in their accounts with this broker.
While the fraction of households with diversified stock portfolios that hold other types of assets
rises with the size of the stock portfolio (from 48.7% for households with stock portfolios less
than $25,000 to 70.8% for households with stock portfolios of at least $100,000), the fraction of
households with concentrated stock portfolios that hold other types of assets actually declines
with the size of the stock portfolio (from 35.4% for households with stock portfolios less than
$25,000 to 21.8% for households with the largest stock portfolios of at least $100,000). Thus,
households with concentrated stock holdings are no more likely to invest into other asset classes

11

at this brokerage house than are households with diversified stock holdings, and in fact are less
likely to do so.
Panel B of Table IV reports the characteristics of total stock transactions for concentrated
and diversified households. While 55.6 percent of diversified households purchase at least one
stock in a given year, the same is true for only 32.5 percent of concentrated households.
Moreover, the number of purchases is significantly lower for concentrated households than for
diversified households even after conditioning on having at least one purchase in a given year.
The median total value of annual common-stock purchases made by the diversified
households that made any common-stock purchases is $13,375. The value of the purchases
increases significantly with the total household portfolio value at the beginning of the year. The
median household with buy transactions in a given year tends to add funds to the account
because the total costs of the purchases exceed the total proceeds from the sales. Concentrated
households with relatively small initial balances (below $25,000) tend to increase their portfolio
values by more than the diversified households. However, this tendency reverses as the account
size increases. Specifically, the sale proceeds of the concentrated households with account values
exceeding $100,000 are actually slightly larger than the costs of the total purchases, indicating
that these concentrated households do not tend to add to their existing stock holdings, but rather
use the proceeds of sales of existing positions to finance their new stock purchases. This finding
is consistent with the persistence in concentration documented in Section I.B.
Panel C of Table IV describes the characteristics of individual purchases. The median
purchase for all households is just below $5,000 and does not depend significantly on the
concentration level. Concentrated households with portfolio values of at least $25,000 tend to
execute substantially larger but less frequent trades than diversified households. For example, the
median individual stock purchase by a diversified household with a portfolio value of at least
$100,000 is $9,128, while the median purchase by such a concentrated household is about three
times larger ($27,750). Regarding the type of stocks purchased, consistent with the hypothesis
that households may concentrate holdings in stocks among which there are likely to be larger
informational asymmetries, concentrated households are significantly more likely to purchase
local stocks that are not included in the S&P 500 Index.
Thus, investors who were concentrated at the prior year-end tend to make larger
purchases in a few stocks while diversified investors tend to make smaller purchases in a greater

12

number of stocks. Further, especially for households with sizeable portfolios, concentrated
households in general remain concentrated because they tend to finance new purchases with the
sales of existing positions.

II. Performance of Trades
In this section, we analyze whether the difference in performance between purchases and
sales depends upon the initial concentration of the individual investors’ portfolios.11 Upon
finding that the trades of concentrated households perform substantially better, particularly for
households with large accounts, we examine whether the “return to concentration” is robust to
the inclusion of investor fixed effects and is driven by investments in stocks regarding which
there are likely to be greater informational asymmetries.

A. Estimation Methodology
To determine the relation between the performance of trades and the concentration of the
investor’s portfolio, we consider several specifications. The first specification regresses the raw
return of stock i purchased by household h at time t during the subsequent year (Ri,h,t+1 to t+12) on
the Herfindahl Index of the household’s portfolio at the end of the previous year (denoted as

HIh,y-1):12
Ri,h,t+1

to t+12

= α + β HIh,y-1 + εi,h, t+1 to t+12,

(2)

Thus, the unit of observation is a stock purchased by a household at a specific point in
time. The return is computed as the return during the year following the transaction.13 The
coefficient β represents the sensitivity of the return following the purchase, Ri,h,t+1 to t+12, to the
initial Herfindahl Index of the portfolio (HIh,y-1). Thus, on average, the stock purchases made by
11

Because holdings may simply reflect inertia, and thus be less directly related to information, examining positions
might bias the results against identifying the information content embedded in the trades made by concentrated
investors (which reflect direct investment decisions). Nevertheless, a robustness test that we report in Section IV.D
(Table XI) suggests that the consideration of positions still uncovers a “return to concentration.”
12
As discussed previously, the concentration level is highly persistent. For example, the correlation between the
Herfindahl Index values in two subsequent years is 0.79. Moreover, as shown in Table IV, concentrated households
tend to offset the purchase of a new stock with the liquidation of an old position.
13
When computing the return over the year following the transaction, the return calculation starts on the first day of
the next month, ending on the last day of the 12th month after the transaction. Hence, we will refer to the one-year
return following the transaction as Ri,h,t+1 to t+12. This timing convention might understate the performance of skilled
investors as excess returns might begin to accrue immediately after their transactions, an issue we address in Section
IV.B (Table IX).

13

perfectly concentrated households (i.e., HI = 1) would have outperformed those made by
perfectly diversified households (i.e., HI = 0) by β percentage points the year following the
buy.14 Likewise, we separately estimate return regressions for the households’ sales of common
stocks.
We also relate the excess return of stock i bought or sold by household h at time t during
the subsequent year (Xi,h,+1 to t+12) to the portfolio concentration of the household and to industry
and momentum controls:

Xi,h,t+1 to t+12 = β HIh,y-1 + γ IIi,t + δ It Ri,h,t-12 to t + εi,h, t+1

to t+12,

(3)

The excess returns are computed by subtracting the appropriate Fama and French (1992)
benchmark portfolios formed according to size deciles and book-to-market deciles from the raw
stock returns Ri,h,t+1 to t+12.15
For this regression, the industry and momentum controls are interacted with indicator
variables for the month of the transaction. To control for overall industry performance in the year
following the transaction we include in the regressions the vector of industry indicator variables
IIi,t which corresponds to the 5,183 industry-month fixed effects based on the 73 distinct twodigit SIC codes and the 71 months a transaction could occur (from January 1991 to November
1996). To control for momentum, we include an interaction term between the lagged one-year
return Ri,h,t-12

to t

and indicator variables for the 71 time periods (the coefficient vector

δ corresponds to the 71 sensitivities of current returns to past returns). The standard errors are
robust and take into account heteroskedasticity and cross-sectional correlation (e.g., the same
stock being transacted in the same month by multiple investors).
Finally, we combine the purchases and the sales by estimating two specifications—
analogously to Equations 2 and 3, one for raw returns and another for excess returns—that
include an indicator variable for purchases (BUYi,h,t) and an interaction term between the
purchase indicator variable and the Herfindahl Index (BUYi,h,t x HIh,y-1):

14

We denote households that have a Herfindahl Index of one as perfectly concentrated households and households
that have a Herfindahl Index of zero as perfectly diversified households. Of course, households cannot literally have
a Herfindahl Index of zero because the index ranges between 1/N and one, where N is the number of available
securities. However, in practice, the Herfindahl Index can take on values very close to zero for portfolios consisting
of many stocks (that is, for large N).
15
The returns on these benchmark portfolios are obtained from Kenneth French’s website:
http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/Data_Library.

14

Ri,h,t +1 to t+12 = α + β0 BUYi,h,t + β1 HIh,y-1 + β2 BUYi,h,t x HIh,y-1 + εi,h, t+1
Xi,h,t+1

to t+12

to t+12,

(4)

= β0 BUYi,h,t + β1 HIh,y-1 + β2 BUYi,h,t x HIh,y-1 + γ IIi,t + δ It Ri,h,t-12 to t + εi,h, t+1 to t+12. (5)

The indicator variable BUYi,h,t equals one if the corresponding transaction is a purchase
and zero if it is a sale. The average return of a purchase made by a household with a perfectly
diversified portfolio (HI = 0) exceeds the average return of a sale made by a household with a
perfectly diversified portfolio by β0. The average return of a sale made by a household with a
perfectly concentrated portfolio (HI = 1) exceeds the average return of a sale made by a
household with a perfectly diversified portfolio (HI = 0) by β1. The coefficient on the interaction
term of the buy indicator variable and the Herfindahl Index of the portfolio, β2, is a key summary
statistic of this study. It estimates the extent to which the trades (purchases and sales) made by
concentrated households outperform those made by diversified households. Specifically, β2
estimates the difference between (1) the difference between average performances of purchases
and sales made by perfectly concentrated households and (2) the difference between average
performances of purchases and sales made by perfectly diversified households. The coefficient

β2 can be interpreted as a measure of the “return to concentration.”
While sales of stock can be motivated by information, they can also be the result of
liquidity needs and tax considerations (e.g., tax-loss selling in December or before the asset loses
short-term holding period status). Stock purchases, on the other hand, are not a result of the latter
two motivations, and thus are more likely to reflect the investors’ financial sophistication.
Moreover, sales could be motivated by the “disposition effect” (i.e., loss-aversion, Odean
(1998)), a tendency to sell good performers and retain poor performers in the portfolio.16 Thus,
by excluding the sale decisions and only capturing the difference in performance of the stock
purchases made by concentrated investors and the stock purchases made by diversified investors,
an alternative “return to concentration” measure (the sum β1 + β2, labeled as “Herfindahl + Buy
indicator * Herfindahl” in the tables) captures precisely the transactions most likely to be based

16

Assume, for example, that concentrated investors are good stock pickers, and that their sales are motivated by the
disposition effect. If the good performers that are sold continue to perform well after the sale, that would bias against
finding a return to concentration as the concentrated investor that makes good stock picks would also sell stocks that
will likely continue to perform well.

15

on asymmetric information and, at the same time, the least likely to be affected by other
considerations.

B. Estimation Results
The one-year returns following purchases and sales made by individual investors with
varying levels of concentration are summarized in Table V. Panel A of Table V summarizes the
regression coefficients on the portfolio Herfindahl Index for the purchases of stocks for various
samples of households. For each sample, the first column corresponds to the first specification
using raw returns (Equation 2) and the second column corresponds to the second specification
using excess returns relative to the Fama-French size and book-to-market decile portfolios and
controlling for momentum and industry effects (Equation 3). Focusing first on the raw-return
results, the coefficient estimate associated with the Herfindahl Index is significantly positive for
households with initial portfolio values of at least $25,000, with the relation between
concentration and performance strengthening for households with larger accounts. For
households with smaller initial portfolios (i.e., less than $25,000), there is no significant
difference in the performance of purchases with respect to household portfolio concentration. For
example, in keeping with the interpretation of the coefficients on the Herfindahl Index as the
total effect of concentration on trade performance when comparing a perfectly concentrated
investor (Herfindahl Index of one) to a perfectly diversified investor (Herfindahl Index of zero),
stocks purchased by perfectly concentrated households outperform stocks purchased by perfectly
diversified households by 2.3 percent per year in the sample of households with portfolio values
of at least $25,000. The return differential further increases to 3.9 percent among households
with account balances of at least $100,000.
The second columns associated with the respective samples in Panel A correspond to the
coefficient estimates after controlling for various risk, industry, and style characteristics. With
the exception of the sample of households with stock portfolios less than $25,000, all coefficients
associated with the Herfindahl Index are significantly different from zero at the one percent
level. For example, among households with portfolios of at least $25,000, purchases made by
concentrated investors outperform those made by diversified investors by 2.9 percentage points
over the course of the year following the purchase. This percentage grows to 3.7 for households
with portfolios of at least $100,000.

16

Panel B reports results pertaining to stock sales, which indicate that, unlike stock
purchases, there is no significant relation between concentration and performance following the
transactions. This asymmetry of purchases and sales in regard to the relation between
concentration and returns likely reflects the notion that sales can be driven by many factors other
than information about the stock’s prospects, such as liquidity needs, taxes, and portfolio
rebalancing. Besides, investors can only sell the stocks they already own.17 In contrast, no such
limitations apply to stock purchases. Therefore, purchases made by concentrated investors on
average likely contain more information about a stock’s prospects than their sales.
Finally, Panel C combines the purchases and the sales. The first column reports the
coefficient estimates based on the specification from Equation 4 and the second column reports
the estimates based on the specification from Equation 5. The coefficient on the buy indicator,

β0, is significantly negative for all specifications and remains remarkably stable for various
household portfolio sizes. On average, the buys made by perfectly diversified investors
underperform the sales by 2.1 percent per year using raw returns and by 1.6 percent after the risk,
industry, and style adjustments. These estimates are consistent with Odean’s (1999) results that
individual investors’ purchases underperform their sales. The coefficient on the Herfindahl
Index, β1, is not significantly different from zero, confirming our previous result that the
performance of the sales does not differ between concentrated and diversified households.
We find that the coefficient on the interaction term of the buy indicator variable and the
Herfindahl Index of the portfolio, β2, is positive and significantly different from zero for all but
the households with the smallest portfolios. Thus, the differential performance following
purchases relative to sales is consistently higher for concentrated households: controlling for
risk, industry, and style, the differential performance following purchases relative to sales for
concentrated households is 80 basis points per year higher than that for diversified households,
rising to a difference of 2.4 percentage points for investors with portfolios of at least $25,000 and
4.8 percentage points for those with portfolios of at least $100,000. Thus, the trades of
concentrated investors perform significantly better than those of their more diversified
counterparts.
Panel C of Table V also reports an alternative measure of the return to concentration,
namely the sum β1 + β2, which measures the performance of purchases made by perfectly
17

A potential exception would be short sales. However, very few investors in the sample place short sales.

17

concentrated households relative to purchases made by perfectly diversified households. This
measure tends to be positive in the analyses based on the sample of all households, though the
magnitude of the coefficient is only statistically significant for the specification including
controls for risk, industry, and style (coefficient estimate of 90 basis points per year). However,
for larger account sizes, the difference in the performance following stock purchases across
concentration levels increases substantially: depending on the specification, households with
portfolio values of at least $25,000 are associated with performance differentials of 2.3-2.9
percentage points per year, whereas the purchases of concentrated investors outperform those of
diversified investors by almost four percentage points or households with portfolio values of at
least $100,000. These findings are consistent with the hypothesis that some households,
particularly wealthy ones, have informational advantages that induce them to hold concentrated
portfolios.18, 19

C. Controlling for Investors’ Average Stock-Picking Abilities
A concern with any cross-sectional analysis is that some omitted household-specific
attribute can explain the observed correlation (in this case between the concentration of investor
portfolios and the performance of an investor’s trades). To control for investor-specific attributes
such as financial sophistication, we augment the previous specifications with household-level
fixed effects. For example, we estimate the specifications based upon Equations (4) and (5) that
also include fixed effects for each household as follows:
18

Throughout the paper, we use the Herfindahl Index of the household’s stock portfolio at the end of the prior year
as our primary measure of concentration. An alternative concentration measure, such as the inverse of the number of
stocks in the portfolio, yields very similar results. For example, the trades of perfectly concentrated households
outperform those of perfectly diversified households by 2.4 percentage points using the Herfindahl Index measure
and by 2.3 percentage points using the inverse of the number of stocks measure, with the comparable estimates 4.8
and 4.7, respectively, for the households with the largest portfolios.
19
We also run Fama-MacBeth (1973) regressions to test whether the results are robust in the various cross-sections.
Focusing on households with stock portfolios of at least $25,000, the time-series mean (median) of the differences in
the performance of the trades across the two investor groups (β2) is 2.7 (2.0) percentage points and is highly
statistically significant. The trades made by perfectly concentrated households perform better than the trades made
by perfectly diversified households in 51 of the 71 cross-sections. We also consider our alternative return to
concentration measure, the difference in the one-year excess returns following purchases for concentrated investors
relative to diversified investors (again focusing on households with portfolios of at least $25,000). The distribution
of this alternative measure is very similar to the prior one, with a time-series average (median) of 3.5 (2.5)
percentage points. Further, the purchases made by perfectly concentrated households perform better than those made
by perfectly diversified households over the following year in 54 of the 71 cross-sections. Thus, both return to
concentration measures appear to be a stable phenomenon in that they do no appear to be driven by unusually high
returns in relatively few time periods.

18

Ri,h,t+1

to t+12

= β1 HIh,t-1 + β2 BUYi,h,t HIh,t-1 + µ Ih BUYh + η Ih SELLh + εi,h, t+1

to t+12

(6)

Xi,h,t+1 to t+12 = β1HIh,t-1 + β2BUYi,h,tHIh,t-1 + γΙIi,t + δItRi,h,t-12 to t +µIhBUYh + ηIhSELLh +εi,h, t+1 to t+12, (7)
where Ih BUYh and Ih SELLh denote that separate household fixed effects are included for buys
and sales, thus controlling for the average stock-picking ability (both for purchases and sales) of
the household. The buy indicator variable, BUYi,h,t, is not included in the regression by itself, as it
is absorbed in the household fixed effects.
Assuming that the availability of relevant information and/or the information processing
skills of investors are limited, households may be better off investing in a subset of the limited
number of stocks with informational asymmetries. Expanding the portfolio beyond this limited
subset into additional stocks will likely depress portfolio performance, either because the stocks
about which one may possess superior information have already been tapped or because the
increasing number of different investments lessens one’s ability to effectively monitor any of
them. The specification that includes fixed effects is suitable for testing this hypothesis.
Results are presented in Table VI. The first two columns replicate the first two columns
from Table V, whereas the last two columns present estimates based on specifications that
include fixed effects. The full sample consists of 52,661 households. All the returns are
expressed in percentage points. In short, all the major conclusions from Table V hold. Both
measures of the return to concentration (Panel C, Table VI) are large and positive—in fact, they
are even larger than the estimates based on specifications that do not include household fixed
effects. For example, the return to concentration is estimated at 2.4 – 2.7 percentage points in the
excess return specification. The strong return to concentration results obtained from fixed-effect
specifications constitute a particularly compelling result because they suggest that, even after
controlling for a household’s average investment ability, the household’s trades perform better as
the household’s portfolio includes fewer stocks.

D. Interactions with Measures of Asymmetric Information
Having demonstrated that the trades of concentrated households performed significantly
better than the trades of diversified households, in this section we investigate whether this result
can be explained by informational asymmetries. For example, Ivković and Weisbenner (2004)
suggest that asymmetric information among investors is more prevalent for stocks that are local
to the households and are less apt to be widely known (i.e., not included in the S&P 500 Index),
19

and, similar to individuals, Coval and Moskowitz (2001) show that mutual fund managers’ local
investments also outperform their non-local investments. It follows that the return to
concentration could be the strongest for these types of stocks.
Table VII reports the estimated excess returns for the trades of perfectly concentrated and
perfectly diversified households under the specification from Equation 5 (i.e., excess returns with
industry-month and momentum controls). The first column reports the excess returns of the
trades for all households with a known location. These estimates differ slightly from the basecase results in Table V because those results include households with and without known
locations. The next four columns report one-year excess returns following trades of S&P 500
stocks, non-S&P 500 stocks, local stocks (i.e., the company headquarters is located within 50
miles of the household), and non-local stocks. The final four columns report returns based on the
various interactions of the S&P 500 status and locality of the stock. We observe larger
differences between the excess returns of trades of perfectly concentrated and diversified
households for stocks that are not included in the S&P 500 Index (the third column) and are local
to the household (the fourth column). For example, for all households with a known location, the
trades of concentrated households outperform those of diversified households by 1.4 percentage
points per year. However, focusing on the transactions of non-S&P 500 stocks, the difference in
the performance of trades is 2.4 percentage points, and focusing on the transactions of local
stocks, the trades of concentrated households outperform those of diversified households by 5.0
percentage points.
The superior performance of the trades made by concentrated investors is particularly
pronounced for local stocks excluded from the S&P 500 Index (the eighth column), amounting to
6.9 percentage points for the sample of all households, thus indicating that exploiting
informational asymmetries may play an important role in the return to concentration. Subsequent
rows of the table suggest that the performance differential increases with the size of the
household portfolio: from 6.9 percentage points for all households to more than 10 percentage
points for households with larger portfolios—specifically, 13 percentage points for the sample of
portfolios of at least $25,000.
Thus, the “return to locality” for individual investors documented by Ivković and
Weisbenner (2004) seems to be driven by the performance of the local investments made by
concentrated investors. That said, concentrated investors still possess stock-picking skill in the

20

realm of non-local stocks, as the trades of non-S&P 500, non-local stocks by concentrated
investors outperform those of diversified investors by 1.7 percentage points. On the other hand,
among investments in S&P 500 stocks, which have much greater analyst coverage and national
media attention, there is no difference in the performance of the trades of concentrated versus
diversified investors across all portfolio-value cutoffs.

III. Alternative Explanations
The results of Section II suggest that the trades of concentrated investors perform
significantly better than those of diversified investors, with the difference being particularly
striking when the comparison is made across households with large portfolios. While consistent
with the hypothesis that concentrated investors, particularly those with large portfolios, are better
stock pickers, this finding could also potentially be attributed to alternative explanations such as
differences across the two groups of investors in the access to and exploitation of inside
information, the turnover in households’ stock portfolios, and the volatility of transacted stocks.
In this section we examine and rule out these alternative explanations.

A. Relating Return to Concentration to Timing the Market, Exploiting Inside Information, and
Holding Non-Stock Assets
In this section we consider three groups of alternative explanations for the return to
concentration. First, we assess the possibility that strong returns to concentration stem from the
concentrated investors’ ability to time the overall market or its particular sector rather than from
concentrated investors’ stock-picking ability. Second, we test whether the return to concentration
is driven by households transacting in the same stock over time, which could be consistent with
receiving inside information. Finally, we also consider how returns to concentration differ across
household portfolios with and without other non-common stock assets (e.g., mutual funds and
bonds).
We report the differential returns following trades (buy returns minus sale returns) of
perfectly concentrated investors relative to diversified investors (β2) for various samples in Table
VIII. The first row replicates results from Table V for the full sample across various portfoliovalue cutoffs. In the second and third rows we replace the actual one-year return of the stocks
bought and sold with either the return of the market (second row) or the return of the appropriate

21

Fama-French portfolio formed based on size and book-to-market deciles (third row). This
enables us to tell whether the performance of the trades of concentrated investors is attributable
to specific stock-picking ability or to broader market timing. The results suggest the former, as
the market and the appropriate Fama-French portfolio perform slightly worse following the
trades of concentrated households relative to those of diversified households. Thus, the return to
concentration is driven by concentrated investors transacting in the right stocks, rather than by
timing the broad equity market.
In the next three rows (rows (4) through (6)), we exclude the stock(s) that represented the
largest dollar-purchase or sale, the stock(s) that had the largest return following a purchase or the
smallest return following a sale, and the stock(s) that had the greatest number of purchases or
sales, respectively. All three screens serve as possible indicators that the individual has access to
inside information for this particular stock, with the last exclusion similar to that made by Coval,
Hirshleifer, and Shumway (2002). In each case, we not only exclude the particular transaction
that was the largest in value or had the largest return, but we also drop any other household
transactions involving that stock. Since we do this both for purchases and sales, at most the
transactions involving two distinct stocks will be excluded from the sample for each household.
These exclusions do reduce the return to concentration, however it still remains at about one-half
to four-fifths of its original size for households with sizeable portfolios (i.e., at least $25,000).
For example, focusing on households with portfolios of at least $100,000, the differential return
of trades for concentrated households exceeds that for diversified households by 3.1 to 4.0
percentage points per year across the samples in which we exclude certain stock transactions,
compared to 4.8 percentage points estimated over all trades. Thus, the superior performance of
the concentrated investments in large portfolios is not predominantly attributable to the
concentrated households transacting in the same stock over time. This result suggests that
simply exploiting inside information is not likely the source of the return to concentration, but,
rather, that households holding sizeable, concentrated portfolios have broader stock-picking
ability.
In the last two rows (rows (7) and (8)), we assess whether investment ability differs
across households with and without other non-stock assets (e.g., mutual funds and bonds).
Clearly, a concentrated stock investment has a larger consequence for a household whose
portfolio consists only of that stock than if the portfolio also consists of a broad-based equity

22

mutual fund. Presumably, rational investors would not concentrate their entire portfolio in one or
a few stocks unless they are very confident in their investment ability and the quality of the
information they acquired. On the other hand, if such undiversified investments are the
manifestation of overconfidence, then the trades of these households will not earn excess returns.
Results presented in the last two rows of Table VIII suggest that there clearly is a
“courage in your convictions” effect, as the return to concentration documented throughout this
paper is concentrated in the group of investors that do not hold assets other than common stocks
with this brokerage house. Estimated over the full sample, there is no difference between the
performance of trades among households with concentrated stock portfolios and those with
diversified stock portfolios if the households also hold other non-stock assets. However, the
trades made by concentrated households outperform those made by diversified households by 2.1
percentage points for the sample of households that only own stocks, with the performance of the
trades increasing in the size of the portfolio. The difference in the return to concentration
between the sample of investors that do not hold other assets and those that do is two to four
percentage points and is significant across the full sample as well as the subsamples of investors
with large portfolios. Thus, it appears that households that have superior information concerning
a stock act upon this information by not only tilting their stock portfolio towards it, but by
concentrating the bulk of their holdings (at least with this brokerage house) into this stock.

B. Household Portfolio Turnover
Table IV shows that concentrated investors purchase new stocks with a lower frequency
than diversified investors. This may suggest that diversified investors have greater portfolio
turnover than their concentrated counterparts. Barber and Odean (2000) find that “trading is
hazardous to your wealth,” that is, that households with greater portfolio turnover tend to earn
lower returns. Thus, if the turnover of its portfolio is negatively related to the concentration of its
portfolio, the return to concentration may not reflect investor stock-picking skill, but instead may
simply be an artifact of the differential turnover across the two groups of households.
To address this issue, we calculate the average annual household portfolio turnover,
defined as the average of the total buys and the total sales the household made during the year
divided by the total portfolio balance at the beginning of the year (very similar to the turnover
measure constructed by Barber and Odean (2000)). Across all households, the median annual

23

portfolio turnover of concentrated investors (defined here as those holding one stock) is 4.1
percentage points lower than that for diversified investors. However, focusing on households
with common-stock portfolios of at least $25,000, the difference in annual turnover shrinks to
1.1 percent across the two groups (and disappears all together among households with commonstock portfolios of at least $100,000), reflecting the offsetting effects of a lower propensity to
purchase stocks with a higher transaction value conditional upon trade on the turnover of
concentrated households relative to the turnover of diversified households.
In unreported analyses, we conduct a “horse race” between portfolio concentration on the
one hand and average portfolio turnover on the other hand by re-estimating an augmented
version of Equation 5 with two additional regressors: the household’s average annual portfolio
turnover over the sample, and an interaction of that term with the Buy indicator. The stocks
purchased by households with higher average portfolio turnover over the sample performed
worse than the stocks bought by households with low turnover, consistent with Barber and
Odean (2000). The inclusion of the household’s average portfolio turnover, while significant in it
own right, does not diminish the return to concentration.20 For example, our primary return to
concentration measure, β2, is 0.8 percentage points across the sample of all trades made by all
households both with and without portfolio turnover controls, and changes little for the sample of
trades made by households with the largest portfolios (4.8 percentage points without turnover
controls and 4.7 with turnover controls).21 This reflects that turnover is not that different between
concentrated and diversified investors (particularly those with larger accounts); households with
diversified-stock holdings tend to transact more than concentrated investors do, however, the
trades of concentrated investors are larger, resulting in similar turnover levels.

C. Stock Volatility
Throughout the paper we report simple arithmetic returns. A potential concern with the
return to concentration is that it could be a manifestation of concentrated households investing in
riskier stocks (i.e., those with greater volatility). It is well known that if stock returns are lognormally distributed, then two stocks with the same average logarithmic returns will have
20

Including the household’s turnover during the year preceding the transaction, rather than the average of the
household’s annual portfolio turnover throughout the sample, does not effect the relation between trade performance
and portfolio concentration. However, the turnover coefficients are now smaller in magnitude and insignificant.
21
Including household portfolio turnover during the year preceding the transaction also does not diminish the
estimated return to concentration in specifications with investor fixed effects.

24

different simple arithmetic returns if their standard deviations differ (higher volatility leads to a
higher average arithmetic return). In this case, the higher-volatility investments held by
concentrated investors would mechanically have higher average one-year simple arithmetic
returns, even if these investors had no investing skill relative to diversified households, just by
virtue of the right-skewness of the return distribution.
The purchases of concentrated households (defined in this case as those holding only one
stock) do have a higher monthly volatility that those of diversified households, however the
difference is slight (13.1 vs. 12.5 for all households and 12.8 vs. 12.0 for households with
accounts of at least $100,000). However, concentrated households are also more apt to sell
slightly more volatile stocks as well (13.1 vs. 12.4 for all households and 12.5 vs. 11.8 for
households with the accounts of at least $100,000). Given that our primary return to
concentration measure is the differential performance of trades (performance of purchases minus
performance of sales) across the two investor-types, the level of volatility should not
mechanically affect this difference in returns. Since both the stocks bought and sold have the
same volatility on average for both groups of investors, any bias in arithmetic returns is
effectively differenced out.
Nonetheless, to test for this potential alternative explanation for the return to
concentration we conduct a “horse race” between portfolio concentration and volatility of the
transacted stock. In unreported analyses, we re-estimate Equation 5 with the addition of the
monthly volatility over the past 24 months and an interaction of that term with the Buy indicator.
Including the volatility of the transacted-stock in the return regression actually has little effect on
the return to concentration, suggesting that focusing on the differential performance of trades
across investor groups mitigates any potential bias in average raw returns that can result from
greater volatility.
Yet another way to address the potential role volatility can play in boosting the mean
simple return is to use logarithmic returns instead of simple raw returns in the regression. In
unreported analyses we find that a regression using log returns instead of regular raw returns
estimates that, among portfolios of at least $100,000, the differential performance following
purchases relative to sales for concentrated households is 3.3 percentage points per year higher
than that for diversified households, a figure similar to the 4.4 percent estimated with simple
returns (as presented in Table V).

25

IV. Further Robustness Tests
Building upon the results of the previous sections, we conduct several other robustness
tests including exploring alternative measures of concentration, considering alternative
investment horizons, and aggregating the trades and the positions of concentrated and diversified
investors to conduct a portfolio analysis. The section concludes with a discussion of the riskreturn tradeoff of the concentrated investment strategies employed by some of the investors in
our sample.

A. Alternative Specifications and Concentration Measures
We begin this section by reporting on the results using four alternative specifications. The
first focuses on transactions above $10,000, the second weights each observation by the total
value of the transaction, the third replaces the Herfindahl Index with the inverse of the number of
stocks held in the household portfolio, and the fourth caps the distribution of returns following
transactions at the top one percent to test if these extreme returns affect our results. In sum, both
measures of the return to concentration are unaffected by any of the four alternative
specifications: the positive relation between portfolio concentration and trade performance
remains robust both in terms of magnitude and statistical significance. For example, focusing on
households with portfolios of at least $100,000, the trades of concentrated households
outperform those of diversified households by 2.7 – 4.7 percentage points (depending on the
specification), a range similar to the baseline estimate of 4.8.
In unreported analyses, we further test whether there is a non-linear pattern between
stock-picking ability and the concentration of the household’s portfolio. The coefficient
estimates for the squares of the Herfindahl Index are jointly statistically significant at the ten
percent level except for the sample of households with portfolio values exceeding $100,000 (the

p-value is 0.12 for this specification). For any portfolio-value group, the stock returns following
sales are concave with respect to the Herfindahl Index. The return following a sale actually starts
to decline for households with a portfolio Herfindahl Index of 0.58 or more (for the “all
households” regression) and a Herfindahl of 0.37 or more (for the “portfolio at least $100,000”
regression). Focusing on the sample of portfolios of at least $100,000, the point estimate for the
one-year return following a sale is actually negative (–1.5 percentage points) for a perfectly
concentrated investor, indicating some market-timing ability as to when to unload stocks for this
26

group of investors. On the other hand, the stock returns following purchases are convex and tend
to be highest at very high levels of concentration. Taking into account non-linearities in the
relation between concentration and performance slightly increases the returns of the buys relative
to the sales for concentrated households.

B. Alternative Return Horizons
The analyses reported thus far have considered one-year returns starting from the
beginning of the month following the month of the transaction. This timing convention might
understate the performance of skilled investors as excess returns might begin to accrue
immediately after their transactions. To address this issue, we consider one-year returns that
begin accruing immediately after the day of the transaction, as well as over a variety of horizons:
one week, one month, three months, and six months. Examination of holding periods shorter than
a year enables one to better determine whether the return to concentration accrues primarily over
the first few days or weeks following a stock purchase, or rather accrues over a longer horizon.
In estimating the specifications that require the computation of excess returns, we use the six
daily Fama-French (1992) benchmarks formed according to two size and three book-to-market
groupings (the 100 Fama-French portfolios based on size and book-to-market deciles are not
available with daily frequency).22 Aside from different horizons and slightly different
computations of excess returns, the specification is quite analogous to that from Equation 5.
The results, presented in Table IX, suggest that the return to concentration is not
attributable to short-term individual stock-timing (i.e., excess returns do not accrue immediately
after the transaction). Generally, returns to concentration are only detectable starting at the threemonth horizon (Panel C, Table IX) and keep increasing proportionate to the duration of the
horizon. For example, focusing on the transactions made by all households, the trades of
concentrated investors outperform those made by diversified investors by 30, 70, and 100 basis
points over the first three months, six months, and one year after the transaction, respectively,
while the differential performance of trades is 1.5, 2.9, and 5.7 percentage points over these
horizons for households with large portfolios, respectively. This suggests that the return to
concentration builds up gradually; it is not a consequence of some sudden burst of information
revealed to the public shortly after the stock purchase (e.g., early access to an earnings report). In
22

The returns on these benchmark portfolios are also obtained from Kenneth French’s website:
http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/Data_Library.

27

that sense, the return pattern prevailing in Table IX presents perhaps our most compelling
evidence that the return to concentration stems from sources other than access to inside
information.
We also study the relation between concentration and the performance of trades using
longer investment horizons. In unreported results, we find that the magnitude of the differential
performance following purchases relative to sales tends to increase with the investment horizon,
but the estimates are no longer statistically significance beyond the three-year horizon.

C. Portfolio Analysis of Trades
In this section we provide an alternative test of whether the trades of concentrated
investors outperform the trades of diversified investors. In particular, we aggregate the trades
made by concentrated and diversified investors into portfolios to test whether the trades (i.e.,
return following purchases minus return following sales) made by concentrated households
outperform those placed by diversified households. Thus, loosely speaking, this portfolio return
is the analog of β2, the return to concentration, from Equation 5. Similar to Table VII, for various
subsamples—trades in all stocks, trades in stocks classified according to their S&P 500 Index
membership status, trades in stocks characterized by the distance between the household and the
corporate headquarters, as well as the interactions of the latter two criteria—we form zero-cost
portfolios and evaluate their performance.

Given we can no longer employ a continuous

measure of concentration in the portfolio analysis (i.e., we need to categorize households as
either concentrated or diversified), we define a concentrated investor as one with a portfolio
Herfindahl Index of at least 0.5 at the prior year-end.23 A stock transaction is kept in the
appropriate portfolio (buy/sale, concentrated/diversified) for 12 months, starting with the first
full calendar month after the trade date, with transactions weighted by their value.
We compute raw and abnormal returns of various portfolios. The abnormal monthly
returns are computed using Carhart’s (1997) four-factor model, which accounts for the three
Fama-French (1993) factors (market, size, and book-to-market factors), as well as the fourth
momentum factor. We estimate the following regression:

Ri,t – RF, t = αi + βi,M (RM,t – RF,t) + βi,S SMBt + βi,V HMLt + βi,m MOMt + ei,t,

(8)

23

We also consider other thresholds for the definition of a concentrated investor, such as a portfolio Herfindahl
Index of 1.0 or at least 0.33, and obtain qualitatively similar results.

28

where the dependent variable is the return on portfolio i in month t minus the risk-free rate, and
the independent variables are given by the returns of the standard four zero-investment factor
portfolios.24 The intercept of the model, αi, is the Carhart measure of abnormal performance. The
computation of standard errors follows the Newey-West correction and takes into account
autocorrelation up to three lags.
Table X presents the results. Both panels in the table (pertaining to all households and to
households with portfolios of at least $100,000 at the prior year-end, respectively) confirm that
the conclusions obtained with the pooled cross-sectional regressions in the prior tables also hold
with the portfolio analysis. In particular, focusing on the sample of all trades made by all
households, both the cross-sectional regression (Table V, second column) as well as the portfolio
analysis (Table X, first column) suggest that the trades of concentrated investors outperform
those of diversified investors by 0.8 percentage points on an annual basis. The portfolio results
also confirm that the return to concentration is primarily attributable to non-S&P 500 stocks
(third column), as well as stocks local to the household (fourth column). Moreover, the
intersection of these two criteria, presented in the eighth column, yields by far the strongest
returns to concentration. For all households (Panel A), the risk-adjusted return is 59 basis points
per month (7.3 percentage points annualized), comparable to the 6.9 estimated in the crosssectional regression (Table VII, eighth column). Again, the return to concentration measure is
stronger for households with large portfolios, estimated at 23 basis points per month (2.8
percentage points annualized), compared with the 4.8 estimated in the cross-sectional regression
(Table V, eighth column).25
We also consider the returns to a zero-cost portfolio that consists of purchases made by
concentrated households on the long side of the portfolio and purchases made by diversified
households on the short side of the portfolio. This zero-cost portfolio is a close equivalent of the
alternative measure of the return to concentration (i.e., β1 + β2). In unreported analyses, we find
24

RMt – RFt is the excess return of the market portfolio over the risk-free rate. The market returns RMt are calculated
as the value-weighted return on all NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ stocks using the CRSP database. The monthly
return of the one-month Treasury bill rate is obtained from Ibbotson Associates. SMB is the return difference
between small and large capitalization stocks. HML is the return difference between high and low book-to-market
stocks, and MOM is the return difference between stocks with high and low past returns. The size, value, and
momentum factor returns are taken from Kenneth French’s website:
http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/Data_Library.
25
Other thresholds for the definition of a concentrated investor, such as a portfolio Herfindahl Index of 1.0 or at
least 0.33, yield an estimate of the return to concentration of 28 basis points and 17 basis points per month for the
households with large portfolios, respectively (with both estimates significant at the 10 percent level).

29

that essentially all of the differential performance of trades is attributable to the purchases of
concentrated investors outperforming those of diversified investors, with no differential in the
performance following stock sales.

D. Portfolio Analysis of Positions
We explore the information content of not only the trades investors explicitly made, but
also the implicit investment decisions associated with continuing to hold the existing
investments. Toward that goal, we form and compute excess returns from a portfolio consisting
of the accumulated holdings of households with concentrated investments and contrast those
returns with the performance of a portfolio consisting of the stocks held by households with
diversified holdings. We first form three portfolios to explore the relation between individual
investor portfolio concentration and subsequent performance. The first portfolio—the
“concentrated portfolio”—includes the stocks held by concentrated households, that is, those
holding one or two stocks at the beginning of each month (the median stock ownership is two
stocks in the sample). The second portfolio—the “diversified portfolio”—includes the stocks
held by diversified households, that is, those holding more than two stocks at the beginning of
each month.26 The holdings are kept in the portfolio for one month, after which time the portfolio
is updated with the households’ stock holdings at the end of the next month. We also compute
the returns to a third, zero-cost portfolio that is long the concentrated portfolio and short the
diversified portfolio. The portfolio returns are computed by value-weighting the returns of the
individual stocks by their total value in the respective household portfolios. We form the
portfolios based on holdings of all households, as well holdings of households with initial
portfolio values above $100,000, to test whether the results depend upon the portfolio value.
The structure of the columns of Table XI is the same as that of Table X. In each panel of
Table XI, the first row reports excess returns from zero-cost concentrated portfolios, the second
row reports excess returns from zero-cost diversified portfolios, and the third row reports their
differences. In essence, Table XI confirms all of the key results obtained from Table X, except
this time the inferences are based on a much broader set of investment choices that include not
26

Here, we employ a concentration measure based on the number of stocks, rather than the portfolio shares, so as
not to induce a positive correlation between the Herfindahl Index of the portfolio and subsequent household
portfolio performance for investors that buy and hold good performers. We also consider other thresholds for the
definition of a concentrated investor, such as holding only one stock or holding three or less, and obtain qualitatively
similar results.

30

only trades, but also holdings. Namely, the holdings of concentrated investors outperform those
by diversified investors by 16 basis points per month (1.9 percentage points annualized) and by
41 basis points per month (5.0 percentage points annualized) for households with portfolios of at
least $100,000. Consistent with the analysis of trades, the return to concentration is stronger for
non-S&P 500 investments, as well as for investments local to the household, and is particularly
strong for household investments in the intersection of the two categories.

E. Risk-Return Tradeoff for Concentrated Investments
Although we find that wealthy households holding highly concentrated portfolios
perform significantly better on average than households holding widely diversified portfolios, we
do not argue that investors should necessarily hold poorly diversified portfolios. Portfolio
concentration only has benefits if the investor’s informational advantage is sufficiently large and
if the investor is sufficiently risk tolerant. After all, high portfolio concentration leads to an
increase in idiosyncratic risk that a risk-averse investor might not be prepared to ignore.
To gauge the extent to which pursuing concentrated strategies affects the risk-return
trade-off, we consider the time series of monthly household portfolios returns of the 14,702
households that have had at least 60 months of returns over the period from February 1991 to
December 1996.27 We again split the sample into concentrated and diversified households. The
identifying criterion is the average annual portfolio concentration, computed as the arithmetic
average of the concentration measures at the beginning of each year during the sample period.
The portfolio concentration measure used in these analyses is the inverse of the number of stocks
in the portfolio and the threshold that separates concentrated from diversified households is 0.5.28
Table XII summarizes the average monthly household portfolio return, the standard
deviation of these monthly returns, and the resulting Sharpe ratio for concentrated and diversified
investors. The Sharpe ratio of a portfolio is defined as the ratio of the average excess monthly
return of the portfolio above the risk-free rate divided by the standard deviation of the return of
27

Requiring household returns for 60 months does not bias our results. In our sample, we find no evidence that
individual investors systematically liquidated their positions because of their underperformance. Specifically, in
unreported analyses, we regress the probability of a household liquidating its account during the year on the
household’s prior one-year portfolio return separately for each year. In no year was there a significantly negative
relation between the prior portfolio return and the probability of liquidating the account.
28
This choice of a concentration measure and the threshold effectively stipulates that the harmonic mean of the
number of stocks held in the portfolio is two or less for concentrated households and is more than two for diversified
households.

31

the portfolio. Panel A suggests that concentrated households’ time-series average of monthly
returns exceeds that of the diversified households by 1.2 percentage points on an annual basis. It
also suggests that, based on the cross-sectional distributions of returns across the two types of
households, that portfolio performance varies quite a bit among both concentrated and
diversified investors, although the dispersion in performance is greater among concentrated
households. Panel B illustrates very clearly that greater concentration is associated with greater
total portfolio risk. Indeed, the monthly standard deviations incurred by concentrated households
exceed those incurred by diversified households by three percentage points, on average, with the
25th percentile level of portfolio risk for concentrated investors (5.8 percentage points) roughly
equal to the median level of risk for diversified investors (5.5 percentage points).
Finally, and not surprisingly in light of the results presented in Panels A and B, the riskreturn trade-off as characterized by the Sharpe ratio in Panel C suggests that the increased
portfolio risk offsets the, on average, larger portfolio returns, resulting in a poorer risk-return
tradeoff for concentrated households. For example, the average Sharpe ratio is 0.14 for
concentrated investors, as compared to 0.18 for diversified investors, with the Sharpe ratio for
diversified investors dominating that for concentrated investors at each point reported in the
distribution.
That said, there are limitations to the inferences that can be drawn from the Sharpe ratios
calculated in Table XII. To assess the marginal contribution of the concentrated stock
investments made by some households to the household’s overall risk-return profile, though,
would require data on the overall household portfolio, including employer-sponsored retirement
plans, real estate, and human capital. However, we can conclude that while the stock portfolios
of concentrated households perform better on average, they do so with a higher standard
deviation in returns.

V. Conclusion
This study provides a detailed insight into the relation between portfolio concentration
and the performance of individual investors. As found by Odean (1999) and Barber and Odean
(2000, 2001), many individual investors make poor investment decisions (e.g., the stocks they
purchase underperform the stocks they sell). However, our results indicate that the investments
made by households that focus their attention on a few securities tend to perform significantly

32

better than those made by households that are diversified across many different stocks. For
example, we find that the purchases of concentrated investors on average outperform their sales
by a substantial margin (with the differential increasing with the size of the portfolio), while the
purchases of more diversified investors significantly underperform their sales. Across all
households, the stock picks of concentrated investors outperform those of diversified investors
by about one percentage point over the year following the purchase, with the difference in
performance growing to four percentage points for households with large portfolios (i.e.,
$100,000 or more). Moreover, the trades of concentrated households outperform the trades of
diversified households, even after controlling for household fixed effects. This is a particularly
compelling result, as it suggests that controlling for households’ average investment ability,
households’ trades perform better as household portfolios include fewer stocks. The “return to
concentration” appears to be strongest for the stocks that likely have greater informational
asymmetries. This finding is very robust to alternative concentration measures and regression
specifications and to alternative explanations such as differences across concentrated and
diversified investors in the volatility of transacted stocks, portfolio turnover, and access to inside
information.
The correlation between the performance of trades and portfolio concentration does not
mean that by simply altering one’s portfolio to hold just a few stocks that performance will
improve. Rather, it suggests that some investors with superior stock-picking ability exploit their
skills by concentrating their portfolio in a few stocks. However, while the stock investments of
concentrated individual investors have earned excess returns, on average, these portfolios also
have increased total risk, and thus, on average, result in a worse risk-return tradeoff than the
stock portfolios of diversified investors.
Coval, Hirshleifer, and Shumway (2002) document a strong persistence in the
performance of trades of individual investors. We show that there is strikingly strong persistence
in the concentration of households’ portfolios over time, even among households with substantial
turnover. The strong persistence in portfolio concentration coupled with the return to
concentration—the key finding of our paper—offer a compelling explanation for their finding.
Our results are also consistent with Kacperczyk, Sialm, and Zheng (2004), who report that
mutual funds that are concentrated in specific industries perform better than widely diversified

33

mutual funds. Thus, at least in the context of the performance of stock investments, it appears
that for both individuals and professional money managers sometimes less can be more.

34

References
Bachelder, B. L., and M. R. Denny, 1977, A theory of intelligence: I. Span and the complexity of
stimulus control, Intelligence 1, 127-150.
Barber, Brad, and Terrance Odean, 2000, Trading is hazardous to your wealth: The common
stock investment performance of individual investors, Journal of Finance 55, 773-806.
Barber, Brad, and Terrance Odean, 2001, Boys will be boys: Gender, overconfidence, and
common stock investment, Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 261-292.
Benartzi, Shlomo, 2001, Excessive extrapolation and the allocation of 401(k) accounts to
company stock, Journal of Finance 56 (5), 1747-1764.
Blume, Marshall E. and Irwin Friend, 1975, The asset structure of individual portfolios and some
implications for utility functions, Journal of Finance 30 (2), 585-603.
Cantor, J., and R. W. Engle, 1993, Working memory capacity as long-term memory activation:
An individual-differences approach, Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory
and Cognition 19, 1101-1114.
Carhart, Mark M., 1997, On persistence in mutual fund performance, Journal of Finance 52, 5782.
Chapman, M., 1990, Cognitive development and the growth of capacity: Issues in neoPiagetian
theory, in J. T. Enns (editor), The development of attention: Research and theory (Elsevier,
Amsterdam), 263-287.
Coval, Joshua D., David Hirshleifer, and Tyler Shumway, 2002, Can individual investors beat
the market?, Working Paper, University of Michigan.
Coval, Joshua D., and Tobias J. Moskowitz, 2001, The geography of investment: Informed
trading and asset prices, Journal of Political Economy 109(4), 811-841.
Dempster, F. N., 1981, Memory span: Sources of individual and developmental difference,
Psychological Bulletin 89, 63-100.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1992, The cross section of expected returns, Journal
of Finance 47, 427-465.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth French, 1993, Common risk factors in the return on bonds and
stocks, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3-53.
Fama, Eugene F., and J. MacBeth, 1973, Risk, return, and equilibrium: Empirical tests, Journal
of Political Economy 71, 607-636.

35

French, Kenneth R., and James M. Poterba, 1991, Investor diversification and international
equity markets, American Economic Review 81, 222-226.
Goetzmann, William and Kumar, Alok, 2001, Equity portfolio diversification, NBER Working
Paper 8686.
Huberman, Gur, 2001, Familiarity breeds investment, Review of Financial Studies 14(3), 659680.
Ivković, Zoran and Scott Weisbenner, 2004, Local does as local is: Information content of the
geography of individual investors’ common stock Investments, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Just, M. A., and Carpenter, P. A., 1992, A capacity theory of comprehension: Individual
differences in working memory, Psychological Review 99, 122-149.
Kacperczyk, Marcin, Clemens Sialm, and Lu Zheng, 2004, On the industry concentration of
actively managed equity mutual funds, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Kelly, Morgan, 1995, All their eggs in one basket: Portfolio diversification of US households,
Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 27, 87-96.
Kennickell, Arthur B. and Martha Starr-McCluer, 1994, Changes in family finances from 1989
to 1992: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances, Federal Reserve Bulletin 80, 861882.
Liang, Nellie and Scott Weisbenner, 2002, Investor behavior and the purchase of company stock
in 401(k) plans – The importance of plan design. NBER Working Paper 9131.
Miller, G. A., 1956, The magical number seven, plus or minus two: some limits on our capacity
for processing information, Psychological Review 63, 81-97.
Odean, Terry, 1998, Are investors reluctant to realize their losses?, Journal of Finance 53, 17751798.
Odean, Terry, 1999, Do investors trade too much?, American Economic Review 89 (5), 12791298.
Piaget, J., 1971, The theory of stages in cognitive development, in D. R. Green (editor),
Measurement and Piaget (McGraw Hill, New York), 1-11.
Zhu, Ning, 2002, The local bias of individual investors, Working Paper, Yale School of
Management.

36

Table I: Summary Statistics of Distribution of Portfolio Value, Number of Stocks, and Herfindahl Index by Portfolio Size
The table summarizes the distribution of portfolio values, the number of the stocks held,2 and the portfolio Herfindahl Index for
households with portfolios of various sizes. The Herfindahl Index is defined as HIh = ∑(wh,i) (where wh,i is the weight of stock i held
by household h at time t). The table also reports the proportion of households holding only one stock and the proportion of portfolios
invested in S&P 500 and local stocks (i.e., stocks of corporations headquartered within 50 miles from the household).

All Households

Portfolio at least $25,000

Portfolio at least $100,000

Portfolio
Value ($)

No. of
Stocks

Herf.
Index

Portfolio
Value ($)

No. of
Stocks

Herf.
Index

Portfolio
Value ($)

No. of
Stocks

Herf.
Index

45,604

3.9

0.62

119,130

7.0

0.43

322,035

11.7

0.33

(234,902)

(5.2)

(0.33)

(398,442)

(7.7)

(0.31)

(744,697)

(12.1)

(0.30)

Percentiles
10th

2,243

1.0

0.18

28,425

1.0

0.11

110,250

2.0

0.07

25th

5,750

1.0

0.33

35,018

3.0

0.18

130,538

4.0

0.11

50th

13,865

2.0

0.56

53,492

5.0

0.32

184,000

9.0

0.21

75th

34,700

5.0

1.00

103,441

9.0

0.61

313,677

16.0

0.46

90th

86,625

8.0

1.00

228,187

14.0

1.00

588,900

24.0

0.93

Mean
(std. dev.)

% of HHs holding
one stock
% of holdings in
S&P 500 stocks
% of holdings in
local stocks
% of holdings in
non-S&P 500,
local stocks
# HH-year obs.
# HH-stock-year obs.

33.1

13.0

7.5

53.2

56.7

59.3

14.7

13.1

11.1

7.6

6.3

5.1

268,734

88,836

23,073

1,046,282

618,756

269,298

37

Table II: Comparison of Stock Portfolio Size and Concentration in Sample with Survey of
Consumer Finances
The table presents a comparison between stock portfolio values and the number of stock holdings
in the discount brokerage sample and the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) for households
with various initial portfolio levels. The two reported comparisons are between the December
1992 sample and the 1992 SCF and between the November 1996 sample and the 1998 SCF. For
direct comparison with the SCF, the table reports stock holdings only in taxable accounts for the
brokerage house sample.
Panel A: Comparison of 12/1992 Sample with 1992 Survey of Consumer Finances
Portfolio at least
Portfolio at least
All Households
$25,000
$100,000
Sample

SCF

Sample

SCF

Sample

SCF

Portfolio Value ($)
Mean
44,707 66,810
116,503 213,145
304,076 465,515
th
25 percentile
5,401
2,000
35,728
35,000
129,833 120,000
50th percentile
13,869
8,000
54,475
70,000
181,355 181,000
th
75 percentile
35,604 30,000
105,273 150,000
306,182 400,000
Number of Stocks
Mean
4.3
4.0
7.7
8.6
12.8
12.4
th
25 percentile
1.0
1.0
3.0
3.0
5.0
4.0
50th percentile
3.0
2.0
5.0
6.0
9.0
10.0
75th percentile
5.0
4.0
10.0
10.0
17.0
15.0
Percent hold one stock 30.1
45.1
11.8
11.4
6.3
7.8
Panel B: Comparison of 11/1996 Sample with 1998 Survey of Consumer Finances
Portfolio at least
Portfolio at least
All Households
$25,000
$100,000
Sample
SCF
Sample
SCF
Sample
SCF
Portfolio Value ($)
Mean
87,509 160,697
181,881 351,327
426,820 783,228
th
25 percentile
6,344
4,000
39,295
45,000
141,037 150,000
50th percentile
20,664 18,000
66,625
70,000
213,811 251,000
th
75 percentile
59,613 63,000
147,406 175,000
399,576 600,000
Number of Stocks
Mean
5.1
5.7
8.3
9.8
13.3
15.6
th
25 percentile
1.0
1.0
3.0
3.0
5.0
4.0
50th percentile
3.0
2.0
6.0
6.0
10.0
10.0
75th percentile
6.0
6.0
10.0
11.0
17.0
20.0
Percent hold one stock 28.6
33.8
10.1
13.3
5.1
7.5

38

Table III: Summary Statistics for Trades
The table summarizes the characteristics of trades for households with various portfolio values at the end of the year preceding the
transaction. The table reports the distribution of transaction sizes, the proportion of transactions of stocks belonging to the S&P 500
Index, the proportion of trades in local stocks (i.e., stocks of corporations headquartered within a 50 miles radius from the location of
the household), and the proportion of transactions of at least $10,000. The last two rows report the performance of stocks following a
transaction. Excess returns are computed by subtracting the appropriate Fama and French (1992) benchmark portfolios formed
according to size deciles and book-to-market deciles from raw stock returns.

All Households

Portfolio Less than
$25,000
Buys
Sales

Portfolio at Least
$25,000
Buys
Sales

Portfolio at Least
$100,000
Buys
Sales

Buys

Sales

640,070

552,832

248,067

207,436

392,003

345,396

180,304

155,375

Distribution of transactions
Mean ($)

10,640

12,874

5,665

6,463

13,788

16,723

19,453

24,091

25th percentile ($)

2,550

2,713

1,825

1,850

3,400

3,650

4,600

5,073

50th percentile ($)

4,988

5,650

3,350

3,675

6,513

7,625

9,350

11,250

75th percentile ($)

10,375

12,600

6,100

7,000

14,025

17,375

20,600

25,875

39.8

42.4

38.3

40.9

40.7

43.3

40.9

43.0

Percent local

14.5

15.2

15.9

17.0

13.6

14.0

12.5

12.9

Percent at least $10,000

26.2

31.5

12.2

15.6

35.0

41.1

47.4

54.0

–1.6

0.2

–2.1

0.4

–1.4

0.1

–0.9

–0.0

–7.1

–5.3

–7.9

–5.4

–6.7

–5.3

–6.2

–5.2

Number of transactions

Composition of transactions
Percent S&P 500

Performance after transaction
Excess return following year
(mean, in percent)
Excess return following year
(median, in percent)

39

Table IV: Characteristics of Household Portfolios and Yearly Stock Purchases by Portfolio Concentration,
Estimated Differences Between Portfolios with Multiple Stocks and Portfolios with One Stock
The table summarizes the characteristics of the portfolio and the trades for households with various portfolio values at the end of the year
preceding the transaction. For each subsample, the first column summarizes the average characteristics for households that initially hold more
than one stock (i.e., the “Baseline”) and the second column summarizes the differences between the average characteristics of concentrated
and diversified households.

All Households
Baseline Difference
(hold > 1 (when hold
stock) one stock)

Portfolio < $25,000 Portfolio ≥ $25,000 Portfolio ≥ $100,000
Baseline Difference
(hold > 1 (when hold
stock) one stock)

% of HHs holding assets other than common stocks

Panel A: Total Portfolio
53.3 –19.8***
48.7

% of total assets not in common stocks

18.3

Baseline Difference
(hold > 1 (when hold
stock) one stock)

Baseline Difference
(hold > 1 (when hold
stock) one stock)

–13.3***

59.8

–38.9***

70.8

–49.0***

2.3***

15.9

–8.7***

15.6

–10.7***

Panel B: Total Household-Level Stock Transactions During a Given Calendar Year
% of HHs with at least one stock purchase during year
55.6 –23.1***
48.4 –16.1***
65.7 –31.5***

74.4

–35.4***

2.1***

20..1

# of buys per HH (mean)

3.4

–2.3***

1.8

–0.8***

5.5

–3.7***

9.7

–6.5***

# of buys conditional on at least one purchase (mean)

6.1

–2.6***

3.8

–0.6***

8.4

–3.2***

13.0

–4.8***

13,375 –3,575***

7,600

944***

27,509

8,191***

933***

2,025

Total buys conditional on purchase (median, $)
Total buys – total sales given purchase (median, $)
Amount per purchase (median, $)

68,775 35,350***

2,250

–338

3,496 –4,246***

Panel C: Individual Stock Purchases
4,937
373
3,000 1,525***

6,325

8,869***

9,128 18,622***

2,080

1,056

% S&P 500

39.8

0.0

37.9

1.4***

40.7

1.2

40.8

3.0

% Local

13.7

5.1***

14.9

3.5***

13.1

7.6***

12.0

12.5***

% Non-S&P 500, Local
9.1
3.4***
10.1
2.2***
*** ** *
, , denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

8.6

4.8***

7.8

9.2***

40

Table V: Relating One-Year Stock Returns Following Purchase or Sale to Household Portfolio Concentration at Prior-Year End
The table reports the estimates of regression specifications relating returns and concentration levels. Panels A and B report results based on
specifications from Equations 2 and 3, estimated separately for purchases and sales. Panel C reports estimates based on all trades:
Ri,h,t+1 to t+12 = α + β0 BUYi,h,t + β1 HIh,y-1 + β2 BUYi,h,t HIh,y-1 + εi,h, t+1 to t+12 (Equation 4) and Xi,h,t+1 to t+12 = β0 BUYi,h,t + β1 HIh,y-1 +
β2 BUYi,h,t HIh,y-1 + γ ΙIi,t + δ It Ri,h,t-12 to t + εi,h, t+1 to t+12 (Equation 5). The dependent variable is either the raw or the excess return of stock i
purchased or sold by household h at time t during the subsequent year (Ri,h,t +1 to t+12 and Xi,h,t +1 to t+12, respectively). The excess returns are
computed by subtracting the appropriate Fama and French (1992) benchmark portfolios formed according to size deciles and book-tomarket deciles from the raw stock returns. Specifications from Equations 3 and 5 include IIi,t, the interaction terms between the two-digit
SIC codes and indicator variables for the 71 months during which a transaction could occur, and momentum effects, measured by the return
of the stock during the previous 12 months, Ri,h,t-12 to t, again interacted with indicator variables for the 71 months. The Herfindahl Index is
defined as HIh,y-1 = ∑(wh,i,y-1)2 (wh,i,y-1 is the weight of stock i held by household h at the end of the year preceding the year in which the
transaction took place). The indicator variable BUYi,h,t captures whether a transaction was a buy transaction. The standard errors, given in
parentheses, take into account heteroskedasticity and cross-sectional correlation. All the returns are expressed in percentage points.

41

Table V: Continued

Variable
Herfindahl Index
Excess returns with industry-month
and momentum controls?
Number of observations
Herfindahl Index
Excess returns with industry-month
and momentum controls?
Number of observations
Buy indicator
Herfindahl Index
Buy indicator * Herfindahl
Herfindahl + Buy indicator * Herfindahl
(i.e., buy of concentrated investor
relative to buy of diversified investor)
Excess returns with industry-month
and momentum controls?
Number of observations

All Households
0.3
(0.7)

1.0 ***
(0.3)

Portfolio Less than
Portfolio at Least
Portfolio at Least
$25,000
$25,000
$100,000
Panel A: Purchases Only
–0.2
0.1
2.3 ***
2.9 ***
3.9 ***
3.7 ***
(0.6)
(0.5)
(0.8)
(0.6)
(1.4)
(1.0)

No

Yes

No

622,960

581,516

240,913

0.6
(0.8)

0.1
(0.3)

0.4
(0.7)

No

Yes

No

533,061

509,869

Yes

No

222,569
382,047
Panel B: Sales Only
–0.3
0.9
(0.5)
(0.7)
Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

358,947

175,714

165,761

0.4
(0.5)

–0.6
(1.1)

Yes

No

Yes

149,956

143,910

–2.2 ***
(0.5)
–0.6
(1.1)
4.4 ***
(1.3)

–1.8 ***
(0.4)
–1.1
(0.8)
4.8 ***
(1.1)

3.9 ***
(1.4)

3.7 ***
(1.0)

199,429
189,957
333,632 319,912
Panel C: Purchases and Sales
–2.5 ***
–1.8 ***
–2.4 ***
–1.8 ***
(0.8)
(0.5)
(0.4)
(0.3)
0.4
–0.4
0.9
0.5
(0.7)
(0.5)
(0.7)
(0.5)
–0.6
0.5
1.5 *
2.4 ***
(0.9)
(0.6)
(0.8)
(0.6)

–1.0
(0.8)

–2.1 ***
(0.5)
0.6
(0.8)
–0.4
(0.6)

–1.6 ***
(0.3)
0.1
(0.3)
0.8 **
(0.4)

0.3
(0.7)

0.9 ***
(0.3)

–0.2
(0.6)

0.1
(0.4)

2.3 ***
(0.8)

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

440,342

412,526

715,679

678,859

325,670

309,671

No

1,156,021 1,091,385

2.9 ***
(0.5)

*** ** *

, , denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

42

Table VI: Relating One-Year Stock Returns Following Purchase or Sale to Household Portfolio
Concentration at Prior-Year End, Inclusion of Household Fixed Effects
The table reports the estimates of the fixed-effects regression specification based on Equations 2
through 5. The variables and the underlying specifications are the same as in Table V. The only
difference is the inclusion of fixed effects. For example, fixed effects are incorporated into Equations 4
and 5 to produce Equations 6 and 7, respectively:

Ri,h,t+1
Xi,h,t+1

to t+12

to t+12

= β1 HIh,y-1 + β2 BUYi,h,t HIh,y-1 + µ Ih BUYh + η Ih SELLh + εi,h, t+1

(6)

to t+12

= β1HIh,y-1 + β2BUYi,h,tHIh,y-1 + γΙIi,t + δItRi,h,t-12 to t +µIhBUYh + ηIhSELLh +εi,h, t+1 to t+12 (7).

The dependent variables are the raw return and the excess return of stock i purchased or sold by
household h at time t during the subsequent year (Ri,h,t +1 to t+12 and Xi,h,t +1 to t+12, respectively). Ih BUYh
and Ih SELLh denote that separate household fixed effects are included for buys and sales, thus
controlling for the average stock-picking ability (both for purchases and sales) of the household. The
indicator variable BUYi,h,t captures whether a transaction was a buy transaction. The buy indicator
variable is not included in the regression by itself, as it is absorbed in the household fixed effects. The
standard errors are given in parentheses and take into account heteroskedasticity and cross-sectional
correlation. The full sample consists of 52,661 households. All the returns are expressed in percentage
points.

Variable
Herfindahl Index
Excess returns with industry-month
and momentum controls?
Number of observations
Herfindahl Index
Excess returns with industry-month
and momentum controls?
Number of observations
Buy indicator
Herfindahl Index
Buy indicator * Herfindahl

Without Fixed Effects
0.3
(0.7)
No
622,960
0.6
(0.8)
No

With Fixed Effects for
Purchases & sales

Panel A: Purchases Only
1.0***
2.8 **
(0.3)
(1.4)
Yes

No

2.6 ***
(0.6)
Yes

581,516
622,960 581,516
Panel B: Sales Only
0.1
1.4
0.4
(0.3)
(1.1)
(0.5)
Yes

No

Yes

533,061 509,869
533,061 509,869
Panel C: Purchases and Sales
–2.1***
–1.6***
absorbed absorbed
(0.5)
(0.3)
0.1
1.4
0.3
0.6
(0.8)
(0.3)
(1.1)
(0.6)
–0.4
0.8**
1.4
2.4 ***
(0.6)
(0.4)
(1.1)
(0.7)

Herfindahl+Buy indicator*Herfindahl
0.9***
2.8 **
2.7 ***
0.3
(i.e., buy of concentrated investor
(0.3)
(1.4)
(0.6)
(0.7)
minus buy of diversified investor)
Excess returns with industry-month
No
Yes
No
Yes
and momentum controls?
Number of observations
1,156,021 1,091,385
1,156,021 1,091,385
*** ** *
, , denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.
43

Table VII: One-Year Excess Returns Following Transactions, Differential Between Purchases and Sales,
Interaction with S&P 500 Status and Locality of Stock
The table reports the estimates of the regression specification relating returns and concentration levels: Xi,h,t+1 to t+12 = β0 BUYi,h,t +
β1 HIh,y-1 + β2 BUYi,h,t HIh,y-1 + γ ΙIi,t + δ It Ri,h,t-12 to t + εi,h, t+1 to t+12 (Equation 5). The dependent variable is the excess return of stock i
purchased or sold by household h at time t during the subsequent year (Xi,h,t +1 to t+12). The excess returns are computed by subtracting
the appropriate Fama and French (1992) benchmark portfolios formed according to size deciles and book-to-market deciles from the
raw stock returns. The specification also includes IIi,t, the interaction terms between the two-digit SIC codes and indicator variables for
the 71 months during which a transaction could occur, and momentum effects, measured by the return of the stock during the previous
12 months, Ri,h,t-12 to t, again interacted with indicator variables for the 71 months. The Herfindahl Index is defined as HIh,y-1 = ∑(wh,i,y2
1) (wh,i,y-1 is the weight of stock i held by household h at the end of the year preceding the year in which the transaction took place).
The indicator variable BUYi,h,t captures whether a transaction was a buy transaction. The difference between one-year excess returns
following purchases and excess returns following sales is (β0 + β2) for perfectly concentrated households and β0 for perfectly
diversified households, yielding a difference in the buy/sale differential return across perfectly concentrated and diversified
households of β2 (shown in the table). The difference in differential returns (i.e., the return to concentration) is reported for various
samples of transactions formed on the basis of the stock’s S&P 500 status and the locality to the investor. Stocks headquartered within
50 miles of the investor are classified as local stocks. The standard errors, given in parentheses, take into account heteroskedasticity
and cross-sectional correlation. All the returns are expressed in percentage points.
Sample

All Stocks
(given know
HH Location)

S&P 500 Non-S&P 500

Local

Non-Local

S&P 500, S&P 500, Non-S&P 500, Non-S&P 500,
Local
Non-Local
Local
Non-Local

All Households

1.4 ***
(0.5)

0.4
(0.5)

2.4 ***
(0.8)

5.0 ***
(1.5)

0.8
(0.5)

1.3
(1.1)

0.0
(0.5)

6.9 ***
(2.3)

1.7 **
(0.8)

Portfolio Less
than $25,000

1.1
(0.8)

–0.1
(0.6)

2.0
(1.2)

4.3 **
(2.0)

0.7
(0.7)

2.4
(2.0)

–0.7
(0.6)

4.7
(3.0)

1.8
(1.2)

Portfolio at
Least $25,000

3.2 ***
(0.8)

1.3 *
(0.7)

4.8 ***
(1.4)

8.6 ***
(3.1)

2.1 ***
(0.7)

1.9
(2.0)

1.2 *
(0.7)

13.0 ***
(5.0)

3.0 **
(1.3)

Portfolio at
Least $100,000

5.7 ***
(1.5)

1.2
(1.0)

9.5 ***
(2.7)

11.6 *
(6.8)

4.5 ***
(1.5)

–1.1
(3.2)

1.6
(1.0)

***

,

18.0 *
(10.2)

7.4 ***
(2.6)

** *

, denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

44

Table VIII: Sensitivity of Return to Concentration to Specific Stocks and Non-Stock Holdings
The table reports the estimates of the regression specification relating returns and concentration levels:
Xi,h,t+1 to t+12 = β0 BUYi,h,t + β1 HIh,y-1 + β2 BUYi,h,t HIh,y-1 + γ ΙIi,t + δ It Ri,h,t-12 to t + εi,h, t+1 to t+12 (Equation
5). The dependent variable is the excess return of stock i purchased or sold by household h at time t
during the subsequent year (Xi,h,t+1 to t+12). The excess returns are computed by subtracting the
appropriate Fama and French (1992) benchmark portfolios formed according to size deciles and bookto-market deciles from the raw stock returns. The specification also includes IIi,t, the interaction terms
between the two-digit SIC codes and indicator variables for the 71 months during which a transaction
could occur, and momentum effects, measured by the return of the stock during the previous 12
months, Ri,h,t-12 to t, again interacted with indicator variables for the 71 months. The Herfindahl Index is
defined as HIh,y-1 = ∑(wh,i,y-1)2 (wh,i,y-1 is the weight of stock i held by household h at the end of the year
preceding the year in which the transaction took place). The indicator variable BUYi,h,t captures
whether a transaction was a buy transaction. The difference between one-year excess returns following
purchases and excess returns following sales is (β0 + β2) for perfectly concentrated households and
β0 for perfectly diversified households, yielding a difference in the buy/sale differential return across
perfectly concentrated and diversified households of β2 (i.e., the return to concentration), shown in the
table for various subsamples. The first row displays differential returns for the full sample. The next
three rows feature differential returns for the subsamples that exclude stocks according to three
criteria: largest transactions, largest (smallest) subsequent returns, and largest number of transactions.
The last two rows present differential returns for the subsamples of households that hold, or do not
hold, assets other than common stocks. The standard errors, given in parentheses, take into account
heteroskedasticity and cross-sectional correlation. All the returns are expressed in percentage points.
Sample
(1) Full Sample
(2) Replace stock’s excess return with
market return
(3) Replace stock’s excess return with
appropriate portfolio return

All
Portfolio Less Portfolio at
Portfolio at
Households than $25,000 Least $25,000 Least $100,000
0.8 **
0.5
2.4 ***
4.8 ***
(0.4)
(0.6)
(0.6)
(1.1)
–0.3 ***
–0.6 ***
–0.3 **
–0.3
(0.1)
(0.1)
(0.1)
(0.2)
–0.4 ***
–0.6 ***
–0.5 **
–0.5
(0.1)
(0.2)
(0.2)
(0.3)

(4) Exclude stock(s) that had the largest
(in $) purchase and/or sale
(5) Exclude stock(s) that had the largest
(smallest) return purchase (sale)
(6) Exclude stock(s) that had the largest
number of purchases and/or sales

0.2
(0.4)
0.2
(0.4)
0.3
(0.5)

1.0
(0.6)
0.6
(0.6)
0.6
(0.9)

1.3 **
(0.7)
1.3 **
(0.6)
1.5 **
(0.8)

3.1 **
(1.3)
3.8 ***
(1.0)
4.0 ***
(1.4)

(7) Household holds assets other than
common stocks (e.g., mutual funds)

–0.1
(0.5)
2.1 ***
(0.6)

0.5
(0.8)
0.6
(1.0)

0.8
(0.8)
4.6 ***
(0.9)

3.5 ***
(1.4)
7.2 ***
(1.8)

(8) Household holds only common stocks
***

,

** *

, denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

45

Table IX: Relating Stock Returns at Various Horizons Following Purchase or Sale to
Household Portfolio Concentration at Prior-Year End
The table reports the estimates of two regression specifications relating returns and concentration levels: Ri,h,t to t+∆t = α + β0 BUYi,h,t +
β1 HIh,y-1 + β2 BUYi,h,t HIh,y-1 + εi,h, t to t+∆t (Equation 4) and Xi,h t to t+∆t = β0 BUYi,h,t + β1 HIh,y-1 + β2 BUYi,h,t HIh,y-1 + γ ΙIi,t + δ It Ri,h,t-12 to t + εi,h, t
to t+∆t (Equation 5). The dependent variable is either the raw return of stock i purchased or sold by household h at time t during the subsequent
time interval ∆t (Ri,h,t to t+∆t), or the excess return of stock i purchased or sold by household h at time t during the subsequent time interval ∆t
(Xi,h,t to t+∆t). The time intervals we consider are one week, one month, three months, six months, and one year since purchase. The excess
returns are computed by subtracting the appropriate Fama and French (1992) benchmark portfolios formed according to two size and three
book-to-market groupings from the raw stock returns. The second specification includes IIi,t, the interaction terms between the two-digit SIC
codes and indicator variables for the individual trading days during which a transaction could occur, and momentum effects, measured by the
return of the stock during the previous 12 months, Ri,h,t-12 to t, interacted with indicator variables for the 71 months in the sample. The
Herfindahl Index is defined as HIh,y-1 = ∑(wh,i,y-1)2 (wh,i,y-1 is the weight of stock i held by household h at the end of the year preceding the year
in which the transaction took place). The indicator variable BUYi,h,t captures whether a transaction was a buy transaction. The standard errors,
given in parentheses, take into account heteroskedasticity and cross-sectional correlation. All the returns are expressed in percentage points.

Variable
Herfindahl * Buy indicator

Herfindahl + Herfindahl*Buy indicator
(i.e., buy of concentrated investor
relative to buy of diversified investor)
Excess Returns & Controls?
Number of observations
Herfindahl * Buy indicator

Herfindahl + Herfindahl*Buy indicator
(i.e., buy of concentrated investor
relative to buy of diversified investor)
Excess Returns & Controls?
Number of observations

All Households
–0.0
(0.1)
–0.0
(0.1)

0.1
(0.1)
0.0
(0.1)

No
Yes
1,192,132 1,124,343
–0.1
(0.1)
0.2 **
(0.1)

0.2 *
(0.1)
0.1
(0.1)

No
Yes
1,190,993 1,123,629

Portfolio Less than
Portfolio at Least
$25,000
$25,000
Panel A: One-week return
0.1
0.2 **
0.0
0.1
(0.1)
(0.1)
(0.1)
(0.1)
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
(0.1)
(0.1)
(0.1)
(0.1)

Portfolio at Least
$100,000
0.2
(0.1)
0.1
(0.1)

0.2
(0.1)
0.2 *
(0.1)

No
Yes
No
Yes
455,113
425,790
737,019 698,553
Panel B: One-month return
0.0
0.4 **
0.0
0.3 *
(0.2)
(0.2)
(0.2)
(0.1)
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.3 ***
(0.1)
(0.1)
(0.1)
(0.1)

No
Yes
335,507 318,764

No
454,552

No
Yes
335,267 318,617

Yes
425,455

No
736,441

Yes
698,174

–0.0
(0.3)
0.2
(0.2)

0.4
(0.3)
0.7 ***
(0.2)

*** ** *

, , denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

46

Table IX: Continued

Variable
Herfindahl * Buy indicator

Herfindahl + Herfindahl*Buy indicator
(i.e., buy of concentrated investor
relative to buy of diversified investor)
Excess Returns & Controls?
Number of observations

All Households
0.0
(0.2)
0.6 ***
(0.2)

No
Yes
1,186,448 1,119,326

0.5 **
(0.3)
Herfindahl + Herfindahl*Buy indicator
0.6 ***
(i.e., buy of concentrated investor
(0.2)
relative to buy of diversified investor)
Herfindahl * Buy indicator

Excess Returns & Controls?
Number of observations

Excess Returns & Controls?
Number of observations

0.7 ***
(0.2)
0.3 *
(0.2)

No
Yes
1,177,380 1,110,785

–0.5
(0.4)
Herfindahl + Herfindahl*Buy indicator
0.1
(i.e., buy of concentrated investor
(0.3)
relative to buy of diversified investor)
Herfindahl * Buy indicator

0.3 **
(0.2)
0.2
(0.1)

1.0 ***
(0.4)
1.1 ***
(0.3)

No
Yes
1,155,970 1,090,941

Portfolio Less than
Portfolio at Least
$25,000
$25,000
Panel C: Three-month return
0.0
0.7 **
0.5 **
0.8 ***
(0.3)
(0.3)
(0.3)
(0.3)
0.5 ***
0.2
0.5 **
0.7 ***
(0.2)
(0.2)
(0.2)
(0.2)

Portfolio at Least
$100,000
1.1 **
(0.5)
1.5 ***
(0.3)

1.5 ***
(0.5)
1.9 ***
(0.3)

No
Yes
No
Yes
452,553
423,599
733,895 695,727
Panel D: Six-month return
0.4
0.9 **
1.2 ***
1.4 ***
(0.4)
(0.4)
(0.4)
(0.4)
*
***
0.5
0.1
1.0
1.1 ***
(0.3)
(0.3)
(0.3)
(0.3)

No
Yes
334,149 317,528

No
448,834

No
Yes
331,702 315,209

–0.7
(0.7)
–0.3
(0.4)
No
440,619

Yes
No
Yes
420,153
728,546 690,632
Panel E: One-year return
0.5
1.4 **
3.0 ***
(0.7)
(0.6)
(0.6)
***
–0.2
2.2
3.3 ***
(0.5)
(0.5)
(0.5)
Yes
412,569

No
715,351

Yes
678,372

2.6 ***
(0.7)
2.3 ***
(0.5)

4.3 ***
(1.1)
3.9 ***
(0.8)

2.9 ***
(0.7)
2.7 ***
(0.5)

5.7 ***
(1.2)
4.8 ***
(0.9)

No
Yes
325,418 309,381

*** ** *

, , denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

47

Table X: Monthly Portfolio Returns Measuring the Differential in
Performance of Trades between Concentrated and Diversified Households
The average raw return per month and the abnormal return per month (Alpha) from various portfolios over the period from February 1991
to November 1997 are expressed in percentage points. Abnormal monthly returns are calculated from a four-factor model, which accounts
for the market, size, book-to-market, and momentum effects (Carhart (1997)). The loadings on the four factors are not displayed in the
table. We aggregate the trades made by concentrated and diversified investors into portfolios to test whether the trades (return following
purchases minus return following sales) made by concentrated households outperform those placed by diversified households. For various
subsamples—trades in all stocks, trades in stocks classified according to their S&P 500 Index membership status, trades in stocks
characterized by the distance between the household and the corporate headquarters, as well as the interactions of the latter two criteria—
we form zero-cost portfolios and evaluate their performance. A stock is defined to be local to the household if the firm is headquartered
within 50 miles of the household. The long side of each zero-cost portfolio is itself a zero-cost portfolio wherein all the stock purchases
(sales) made by concentrated households are on its long (short) side. The short side, quite analogously, again is itself a zero-cost portfolio
wherein all the stock purchases (sales) made by diversified households are on its long (short) side. We define a concentrated investor as
one with a portfolio Herfindahl Index of at least 0.5 at the prior year-end. A stock transaction is kept in the appropriate portfolio (buy/sale,
concentrated/diversified) for 12 months, starting with the first full calendar month after the transaction, with the aggregated transactions
weighted by the amount of the transaction. The top panel focuses on portfolios formed with stock trades made by all households. The
bottom panel focuses on portfolios formed with stock trades made by households with stock portfolios of at least $100,000 at the prior
year-end. Standard errors incorporate the Newey-West correction with autocorrelation up to three lags.
All Stocks

S&P 500, S&P 500, Non-S&P 500, Non-S&P 500,
Local
Non-Local
Local
Non-Local
Panel A: All Households
0.22
0.04
0.02
0.05
0.41 *
0.08
(0.17)
(0.03)
(0.17)
(0.04)
(0.21)
(0.06)

S&P 500 Non-S&P 500

Local

Non-Local

Raw Returns

0.08 *
(0.04)

0.05
(0.04)

0.14 **
(0.07)

Alpha

0.07 *
(0.04)

0.05
(0.05)

0.04
(0.05)

0.59 ***
(0.18)

0.06
(0.05)

Raw Returns

0.22 ***
(0.07)

0.17 *
(0.09)

0.13 *
0.30 *
0.03
0.10
(0.07)
(0.16)
(0.04)
(0.17)
Panel B: Household Portfolio $100,000+
0.41 ***
0.53 **
0.13
0.11
(0.13)
(0.26)
(0.09)
(0.37)

0.08
(0.09)

0.63 **
(0.30)

0.21
(0.16)

Alpha

0.23 **
(0.10)

0.13
(0.08)

0.42 **
(0.17)

0.02
(0.10)

0.89 ***
(0.34)

0.21
(0.13)

***

,

0.49 *
(0.30)

0.09
(0.08)

–0.46
(0.50)

** *

, denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

48

Table XI: Excess Monthly Portfolio Returns, Concentrated vs. Not Concentrated Holdings,
by Investment Type (S&P 500 status interacted with locality)
The average abnormal return per month (Alpha) from various portfolios over the period from February 1991 to December 1996 is expressed in
percentage points. Abnormal monthly returns are calculated from a four-factor model, which accounts for the market, size, book-to-market, and
momentum effects (Carhart (1997)). The loadings on the four factors are not displayed in the table. Concentrated investments are the stocks held by
households that hold only two or fewer stocks (two stocks is the median sample ownership across all households). The alpha for concentrated
investments in the universe of all stocks is the excess return on investments held by households that hold only one or two stocks weighted across all such
household portfolios, while the alpha for not-concentrated investments in the universe of all stocks is the excess return on investments held by
households that hold more than two stocks, weighted across all such household portfolios. The alpha for concentrated investments in S&P 500 stocks is
the abnormal return on S&P 500 stocks held by concentrated investors, weighted across all such households, while the alpha for not-concentrated
investments in all S&P 500 stocks is the abnormal return on S&P 500 investments held by households that hold more than two stocks, weighted across
all such stock positions. The alphas for concentrated and not concentrated investments are defined analogously for the other categories of stocks (e.g.,
local, non-S&P 500 and local, etc.). A stock is defined to be local to the household if the firm is headquartered within 50 miles of the household. The
holdings are kept in the portfolio for one month, after which time the portfolio is updated with the households’ stock holdings at the end of the next
month. The top panel focuses on portfolios formed with stocks held by all households. The bottom panel focuses on portfolios formed with stocks held
by households with stock portfolios of at least $100,000. Standard errors incorporate the Newey-West correction with autocorrelation up to three lags.

All Stocks
Alpha,
Concentrated

0.15
(0.13)

0.21
(0.13)

0.19
(0.22)

Alpha, Not
Concentrated

–0.01
(0.08)

0.17 **
(0.09)

–0.31 *
(0.17)

Difference

0.16 *
(0.09)

0.04
(0.08)

Alpha,
Concentrated

0.41 *
(0.23)

Alpha, Not
Concentrated
Difference
***

,

S&P 500, S&P 500, Non-S&P 500, Non-S&P 500,
Local
Non-Local
Local
Non-Local
Panel A: All Households
0.39 *
0.13
0.23
0.21
0.64
–0.01
(0.21)
(0.15)
(0.17)
(0.14)
(0.42)
(0.26)

S&P 500 Non-S&P 500

Local

Non-Local

0.15 *
(0.08)

–0.21
(0.23)

–0.31 **
(0.16)

0.06
(0.10)

0.84 *
(0.51)

0.30 *
(0.17)

0.24
(0.19)

0.50 ***
0.33 *
0.13
–0.00
(0.20)
(0.20)
(0.10)
(0.09)
Panel B: Household Portfolio $100,000+
0.88 *
0.82 *
0.35
0.28
(0.49)
(0.45)
(0.28)
(0.26)

0.28
(0.26)

1.50
(0.99)

0.49
(0.53)

–0.00
(0.08)

0.16 *
(0.08)

–0.31 *
(0.18)

0.04
(0.14)

0.01
(0.07)

0.23 *
(0.13)

0.15 *
(0.08)

–0.23
(0.25)

–0.29 *
(0.17)

0.41 **
(0.20)

0.08
(0.15)

1.20 **
(0.50)

0.78 *
(0.46)

0.34
(0.23)

0.05
(0.18)

0.14
(0.23)

1.73
(1.13)

0.78 *
(0.47)

0.05
(0.13)

–0.00
(0.08)

0.23 **
(0.12)

** *

, denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.
49

Table XII: Monthly Sharpe Ratios of Households by Average Portfolio Concentration
The average monthly household portfolio excess return (raw return minus the Treasury bill rate), monthly standard
deviation of excess returns, and the resulting Sharpe ratio is calculated for each of the 14,702 household that have at
least 60 months of household portfolio returns over the period from February 1991 to December 1996. Concentrated
households are those whose beginning of year portfolio concentration averages 0.5 or more over the sample period
(where the portfolio concentration measure is the inverse of the number of stocks in the portfolio). All the returns
and standard deviations are expressed in percentage points.

Mean
99th %
95th %
90th %
75th %
Median
25th %
10th %
5th %
1st %
Mean
99th %
95th %
90th %
75th %
Median
25th %
10th %
5th %
1st %
Mean
99th %
95th %
90th %
75th %
Median
25th %
10th %
5th %
1st %

Concentrated Households
Diversified Households
Difference
Panel A: Average Monthly Household Excess Returns
1.1
1.0
0.1 ***
4.8
3.4
1.4 ***
3.2
2.4
0.8 ***
2.6
1.9
0.6 ***
1.7
1.4
0.3 ***
1.0
1.0
0.0
0.4
0.6
–0.2 ***
–0.1
0.2
–0.4 ***
–0.6
–0.0
–0.5 ***
–1.7
–0.7
–0.9 ***
Panel B: Standard Deviation of Monthly Household Portfolio Returns
9.2
6.2
3.0 ***
26.7
15.7
11.0 ***
18.3
11.6
6.7 ***
15.3
9.8
5.4 ***
11.1
7.3
3.8 ***
7.8
5.5
2.4 ***
5.8
4.2
1.6 ***
4.7
3.6
1.1 ***
4.2
3.3
0.9 ***
3.4
2.9
0.6 ***
Panel C: Monthly Household Portfolio Sharpe Ratio
–0.05 ***
0.14
0.18
0.40
0.43
–0.04 ***
0.34
0.36
–0.03 ***
0.29
0.33
–0.04 ***
0.22
0.26
–0.04 ***
–0.05 ***
0.14
0.19
0.05
0.11
–0.06 ***
–0.01
0.04
–0.05 ***
–0.05
–0.01
–0.05 ***
–0.13
–0.09
–0.04 ***

*** ** *

, , denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

50

