NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

REFUGEES, ASYLUM SEEKERS AND POLICY IN EUROPE
Timothy J. Hatton
Jeffrey G. Williamson
Working Paper 10680
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10680
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2004

This paper draws heavily on our own recent work (Hatton and Williamson 2003; Hatton 2004) and
on our ongoing book World Mass Migration: Two Centuries of Policy and Performance. We are
grateful to the organizers of the Kiel Week Conference on Labor Mobility and the World Economy
(June 21-22, 2004), where an earlier version of this paper was presented and to the participants at
the conference for their comments. Hatton acknowledges support through a British Academy
Research Readership and Williamson acknowledges financial support from the National Science
Foundation SES-0001363. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Timothy J. Hatton and Jeffrey G. Williamson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Refugees, Asylum Seekers and Policy in Europe
Timothy J. Hatton and Jeffrey G. Williamson
NBER Working Paper No. 10680
August 2004
JEL No. F22, J1, O15
ABSTRACT
The number of refugees worldwide is now 12 million, up from 3 million in the early 1970s. And the
number seeking asylum in the developed world increased tenfold, from about 50,000 per annum to
half a million over the same period. Governments and international agencies have grappled with the
twin problems of providing adequate humanitarian assistance in the Third World and avoiding
floods of unwanted asylum seekers arriving on the doorsteps of the First World. This is an issue that
is long on rhetoric, as newspaper reports testify, but surprisingly short on economic analysis. This
paper draws on the recent literature, and ongoing research, to address a series of questions that are
relevant to the debate. First, we examine the causes of refugee displacements and asylum flows,
focusing on the effects of conflict, political upheaval and economic incentives to migrate. Second,
we examine the evolution of policies towards asylum seekers and the effects of those policies,
particularly in Europe. Finally, we ask whether greater international coordination could produce
better outcomes for refugee-receiving countries and for the refugees themselves.
Timothy J. Hatton
School of Economics
Australian National University
Canberra, ACT 0200
Australia
tim.hatton@anu.edu.au
Jeffrey G. Williamson
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
jwilliam@fas.harvard.edu

Introduction
The worldwide number of refugees has increased by a factor of four since the
early 1970s -- from about 3 to 12 million. And the number seeking asylum in developed
countries has increased by a factor of about ten over the same period—from about 50,000
per annum in the early 1970s to half a million in 2001. This is seen by many as a crisis of
growing proportions, and for two reasons. First, there is the humanitarian issue. Most
refugees are displaced across borders in the Third World, suffering oppression, poverty
and disease. With each new humanitarian crisis comes new criticism of the unwillingness
or inability of governments and international agencies to act more decisively to solve the
refugee problem, or at least to better ameliorate the condition of the refugees. Second, the
arrival of increasing numbers of asylum seekers on the doorsteps of the First World has
led to fierce political debate about asylum policies, often fuelled by parties of the far
right. Despite protest from humanitarian groups, governments have responded to the
rising political temperature with a range of measures aimed at deterring asylum
applications.
This paper draws on the recent literature and some of our own analysis to address
a series of questions that are relevant to these debates. First, what are the causes of
refugee displacement? Are they mainly political or economic? Second, how far can wars,
political crises and economic conditions explain the apparently inexorable rise in the
number of asylum seekers, particularly in Europe, but in the rest of the OECD as well?
Third, how has asylum policy evolved in Europe and has it been effective in deterring
asylum seekers, or has it instead simply deflected them elsewhere? Fourth, could greater
international cooperation lead to outcomes that are better for refugee-receiving countries
as well as for the refugees themselves? And finally, are there better policies?

3

Refugees and Asylum Seekers
Refugee and asylum seeker figures come from estimates compiled by the United
Nations High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR). The definition of a refugee is derived
from the 1951 Geneva Convention on Refugees, namely someone who, owing to a wellfounded fear of persecution, is outside his or her country of normal residence and who is
unable or unwilling to return to it. The UNHCR estimates plotted in Figure 1 show a
dramatic increase from the early 1970s to a peak of nearly 18 million in 1992, before
falling by a third to 12 million in 2001.1 Two further points are worth noting about these
refugee totals. First, they exclude an additional five million who in 2001 were internally
displaced and living in refugee-like situations but who were not classified as refugees
because they were not outside their country of origin. Second, these refugee stock figures
undergo considerable turbulence and turnover. When the refugee stock fell by 5.8 million
between 1992 and 2001, there were 10.7 million new refugee arrivals and 16.5 million
exits.
The overwhelming majority of these refugees are located in the Third World,
close to their country of origin. As Table 1 shows, there is a very strong correlation
between the number of refugees that originated in a region and the number who are
located within that region. In 2001 49 percent of refugees originated somewhere in Asia
or the Middle East and 46 percent were located there, while 30 percent originated in
Africa and 27 percent were located there. Eastern Europe was the source of 11 percent of
the refugees and host to 6 percent, some of whom were from outside the region. Western
Europe hosted 1.7 million refugees from other regions in 2001 (14 percent of the
worldwide total) while a further 646,000 (5 percent) were located in North America. As
Figure 1 shows, the number of refugees in Europe rose sharply between the late 1980s
and the early 1990s while the number in North America declined. These trends are
consistent with the rapid growth in the number of asylum seekers arriving in Europe.

1

Estimates of the total number of refugees differ. The United States Committee for Refugees (2003, p. 3)
provides a figure of 14.9 million for 2001, nearly 3 million higher than the UNHCR estimate. Some of the
definitional issues in constructing these totals are discussed in UNHCR (2002, pp. 71-5) and Crisp (1999).
Nevertheless, while estimates of the total differ, the profile of change over time is essentially the same.

4

Figure 2 plots the total number of new asylum applications lodged in 37
industrialized countries (a flow rather than a stock) by region of asylum.2 It documents an
enormous surge from about 150,000 per annum in the early 1980s to a peak of more than
850,000 in 1992, falling sharply to 380,000 in 1997 before rising again more recently. It
also confirms once again that the bulk claimed asylum in Europe, principally in the 15
countries of the European Union (pre-enlargement). The EU accounted for 68 percent of
all applications over the 20-year period, and North America accounted for most of the
remainder. The sharp spike in the early 1990s (Figure 3) was accounted for by
applications from Eastern Europe following the disintegration of the Soviet Union and
the conflicts that followed the breakup of the former Yugoslavia. Still, there is evidence
of an underlying upward trend, not only in applications from Europe, but also from
Africa and Asia.
The left hand panel of Table 2 reports the total number of applications from each
of the top 20 source countries by decade. Not surprisingly Eastern Europe is well
represented with large numbers arriving from Yugoslavia, Romania, Bosnia and the
Russian Federation, as is the Middle East with large numbers from Turkey, Iraq, Iran and
Afghanistan. Asia is also well represented by China, India, Pakistan and Sri Lanka. While
there is a clear correspondence between the number of refugees and the number of
asylum seekers, some of the poorest countries (such as Angola, Rwanda and
Ethiopia/Eritrea) did not generate as many asylum seekers as might have been expected
given the scale of the conflicts. Indeed, most African refugees do not get much further
than a neighboring country, if they manage to leave at all. It is also notable that most of
the countries that generated large numbers of asylum seekers in 1992-2001 also generated
significant numbers in the previous decade. As we shall see, this historical persistence is
an important feature of asylum flows, especially to Europe.
The right-hand panel of Table 2 documents the top 20 countries in the developed
world that receive asylum applications. Germany tops the list with a massive 1.6 million
applications in 1992-2001, followed by the United States and the United Kingdom. Nine
other EU countries also appear on the list, some of which have very large per capita rates
2

These data are collected by the UNHCR, mainly from national governments. They are typically first
instance claims and they represent the number of applications rather than the number of individuals. On

5

(Belgium, Netherlands, Sweden, Switzerland). More notable still is the appearance on the
list of Turkey, the Czech Republic, Hungary and Poland, countries that were major
sources of asylum seekers in the 1980s. Those countries might have become more
attractive havens in the post-Soviet period, but it may also reflect the increasing difficulty
of entering Western Europe. While most destination countries experienced an increase in
the number of applications between the 1980s and the 1990s, the growth in those
numbers varied widely. In Western Europe, large percentage increases occurred in the
UK, the Netherlands, Belgium and Ireland (from a base close to zero), while modest
increases or small declines occurred in France, Switzerland, Sweden and Austria. We
shall examine the pattern of asylum claims in European destinations later, but first we
turn to refugee origins.
The Causes of Refugee Flights
What causes refugees to flee their home country and seek sanctuary abroad?
Perhaps the answer seems too obvious to warrant further discussion. For major refugee
displacements such as those in Rwanda, Somalia, El Salvador or Afghanistan the
associated wars and conflicts are well known. Quantitative analyses typically focus on
some measure of the incidence and intensity of conflict within the country as the main
explanation. Table 3 offers an example using data from sub-Saharan Africa. Here the
dependent variable is the total stock of refugees from a given country per thousand of the
source country population, across 41 African countries annually from 1987 to 1992.
There are 142 cases in this sample where no refugees are observed and another 104 with
positive numbers of refugees. We therefore use tobit analysis. The explanatory variables
exploit a variety of measures of violence and political instability from data assembled by
Robert Bates (see Hatton and Williamson 2003).
Given that most of the variables in Table 3 are dummies, the coefficients can be
read as the number of refugees per thousand created as a result of the violence event in
question. Coups d’etat typically create an efflux of 35 per thousand while government
crises generate about 18 per thousand, but these effects are only on the borderline of
significance. The incidence of guerilla warfare yields a more significant coefficient and
average, each application represents around 1.2 to 1.3 individuals.

6

the effect generates 25 refugees per thousand of the population. However, civil war is the
most important variable generating refugees—about 35 refugees per thousand—while
each military death in civil war (a proxy for the intensity of the war) generates another 35
refugees per thousand. Despite the strength of the civil war effects, the explanatory power
of the regression as a whole is still rather low, as reflected in the pseudo R2. This is
because of the enormous heterogeneity in the size and intensity of the conflicts, and their
refugee generating effects, none of which is adequately reflected by these crude
explanatory variables.
Perhaps these results are unsurprising, but they raise a number of issues. First, if
as some believe, refugee flights are determined by economic and demographic forces as
well as by politics and violence, then these variables should also play a role. Indeed,
some studies do find such effects, but they are generally weak in comparison to politics
and violence. The African data also support that view. When variables such as real wage
rates and the share of population aged 15-29 were added, they proved to be insignificant.
Should we therefore conclude that economic and demographic factors play no role? Not
necessarily, since war and violence are highly correlated with poor economic conditions
and large young adult populations. And once the conflicts cease, the economy rapidly
bounces back, so that their effects on refugees may not persist.3
Second, the regression analysis is applied to the stock of refugees, rather than the
flow in to and out of refugee status. If refugees remain displaced for a number of years,
even after the end of the conflict or crisis, then lagged values should also matter.
However, when the regression in Table 3 is re-estimated with the addition of lagged
explanatory variables one and two years, the coefficients were not significant, suggesting
that persistence is not important. This contrasts with the findings of some other studies
where lags are found to matter (Schmeidl 1997; Azam and Hoeffler 2000). There are two
possible explanations for our conflicting result. One is that the dynamics cannot be
isolated in a short panel where most of the variance is in the cross section. The other is
3

Collier (1999) finds that the economies of war-ravaged states grow at 6 percent per year in the five years
following the outbreak of peace. Pottenbaum and Kanbur (2001) find that the post-war bounce back in a
range of socioeconomic indicators is significantly greater for low-income economies that for middle
income economies. They attribute this to the fact that the poorest countries have little infrastructure that can
be destroyed during a conflict and they can therefore return to pre-existing socioeconomic levels relatively
quickly.

7

that most refugee migrations in Africa occur just across borders; they are temporary and
quickly reversed. Thus, of the14.2 million voluntary repatriations in 1992-2001, 8.3
million of them were in Africa.
It is worth dwelling on the second point for what follows later. Most of the
refugee displacements occur when war breaks out or when there is a sudden rise in its
intensity. Thereafter the flood subsides and the stock of refugees rises more gently. When
the war or crisis abates, repatriation takes place, often quickly and on a scale that
resembles that of the original displacement. This is particularly true in Africa where
refugees are often displaced to camps just across the border in which conditions are
worse even than those in the refugee’s war ravaged homeland. In addition, refugees have
in Africa sometimes been pushed back over the border by unwelcoming governments and
hostile host populations (Rogge 1994). This response is less likely where the war is
protracted and the refugees have assimilated into the host society. It is also less likely
when refugees have gained asylum in a country where living standards are an order of
magnitude higher than at home. This latter fact helps to explain the strong persistence of
refugees in Europe that was observed in Figure 1. It can even be observed within Africa
where those finding sanctuary in the Republic of South Africa have been less eager to
return.4
Has the World Become a More Violent and Dangerous Place?
If war, violence and political oppression are the fundamental causes that create
refugees, then the refugee trends observed in Figure 1 and of asylum applications
observed in Figures 2 and 3 should be explained largely by trends in war, violence and
persecution. The sources of ‘well founded fear of persecution’ may, of course, take many
forms that are not easy to quantify. Even if we consider wars alone, how do we combine
the incidence, intensity and the scale of wars in a way that captures the potential for
generating refugees?

4

A 1994 survey of Mozambican refugees indicated that the majority did not want to repatriate. A UNHCR
fact finding mission showed that many of these Mozambicans whose families had joined them in the
homelands were working on farms and in mines or were otherwise integrated and did not wish to return
(Dolan 1999, p. 90).

8

One index of worldwide conflict is plotted in Figure 4. Each episode of conflict is
given a score ranging from one to seven that reflects the scale of the conflict and the
overall societal impact (Marshall 2002). A score of one denotes ‘sporadic or expressive
political violence’—effectively, low level violence by small militant groups. A score of
seven denotes ‘pervasive warfare’—full-scale war that consumes the entire society. The
total conflict index, which adds together all wars, followed an upward trend from 1965
until the late 1980s, a trend that dates back to the 1940s. Contrary to widespread belief,
the cold war evinced a secular increase in violence, often associated with proxy wars,
independence struggles, and post-colonial civil wars. These escalating levels of violence
reached a peak between 1984 and 1992 and have since declined to levels similar to those
of the early 1970s. The independence wars of the 1960s and 1970s gave way in the 1980s
to inter-country wars, often involving newly independent states. While inter-country wars
declined after the late 1980s, civil wars, which account for the bulk of worldwide
violence, continued to rise until the early 1990s. These local conflicts often reflect longstanding ethno-political tensions, such as in the former Yugoslavia, that were unleashed
by the ending of the cold war.
These patterns bear a fairly close resemblance to those observed in the total stock
of refugees and in the flows of asylum seekers. The outbreak of new conflicts declined in
the 1990s and the number of conflicts that were either contained or settled increased
(Gurr, Marshall and Khosla 2000), However, while the level of conflict fell in the 1990s
back to that of the 1970s, the number of refugees and asylum seekers has not returned to
its former level. This may reflect an increase in the ability of refugees to escape conflict.
On the other hand, the number of refugees generated per conflict may have increased
over time as a result of the growth of population at risk and, more importantly, due to
greater access to weapons and to advances in weapons technology (Weiner 1997).
A further possibility is that refugee flights have increasingly been generated by
causes other than full-scale war. Repressive political regimes, while not engaged in
outright war, might nevertheless brutalize or persecute their populations. Measures of
human rights abuse are correlated with lack of democracy and/or civil rights, and not
only where there are wars and military regimes (Poe et al.1999). One human rights
measure is the Freedom House index, which scores the degree of political rights and of

9

civil liberties on a scale of one to seven. The index is plotted in Figure 5 where lower
numbers represent lower levels of human rights abuse and higher levels of freedom. They
show a general increase in civil rights and political freedom with sharp improvements
since the late 1980s.
These trends are also reflected in the evolution of political regimes. The
percentage of all governments that were autocracies fell gradually from the 1970s and
more sharply after the collapse of the Soviet Union and the ending of the cold war
(Marshall 1999). Although the number and share of countries under democratic
government increased, the greatest rise was – almost by definition -- in the transitional
regimes. The evidence suggests that transitional regimes are almost as prone to conflict as
autocracies, but it may be easier to escape a chaotic transitional regime than an autocratic
police state. That would be consistent with the experience of Eastern Europe after 1989,
which accounts for most of the recent increase in the number of states that are labeled
transitional. But while states that are not autocratic may be easier to flee, there may also
be less reason to do so.
From Refugees to Asylum Seekers in the West
As we have seen, the total number of refugees rose strongly until 1992 and then
fell back while the flow of asylum seekers followed the same pattern but with a steeper
increase. This suggests that refugees (or those who claim to be refugees) have over time
moved farther away from home conflicts and rights abuse and closer to the developed
world, particularly Europe. Very few who claimed asylum did so in the developed world
before the 1970s. In 1980-2, the ratio of annual asylum claims to the world-wide stock of
refugees was 1.7 percent; by 1999-2001 it had risen to 4.8 percent. So how and why do
those displaced by conflicts in the Third World become asylum seekers in the First
World?
While some manage to escape directly to Europe or America, costs and
increasingly stringent visa requirements have made direct escape difficult. For most
refugees, the first and only step is to escape over the border to a neighboring country.
Poverty, disease, and risk of violence in refugee camps or shanty towns are among the
reasons that so many return home as soon as war ends. Added to this, few of these

10

neighboring countries offer the security of refugee status since most are not signatories of
the Geneva Convention. Often only temporary visas are given, with limited rights to
move outside the camps, to gain employment and to resettle into the host community.
While these are good reasons to return home if circumstances permit, they are equally
good reasons for onward migration in the hope of better conditions further afield. Thus,
although refugee displacements are almost always due to conflict and little else,
economic factors play a much greater role in determining the numbers that emerge as
asylum seekers in the West and the specific countries to which they apply—an issue that
is explored further below.
For some refugees, the escape over the border to a neighboring country is the start
of a much longer trip. But it is not simply a matter of applying for asylum at the embassy
or consulate of the country of choice upon arrival in some transit country, since most
western nations do not admit asylum claims that are lodged outside their borders. Often
the only prospect of gaining refugee status is through the refugee status determination
procedure offered in the refugee camps or settlements by the UNHCR or even more
indirectly through the fieldwork organizations of other NGOs. But the quota for direct
resettlement in third countries is small—less than 100,000 per year worldwide—and it
has become even more restricted after September 11, 2001. Hence, many potential
asylum seekers bypass this process. As one recent report on conditions in East Africa and
the Middle East puts it:
Relatively large numbers of people, many in need of international protection and with valid
asylum claims, choose not to avail themselves of the UNHCR’s refugee determination procedures
in the Middle East. Many fear making themselves known to the authorities out of concern of being
detained pending refugee status determination and being treated like criminals by local police or
security officials. Would be asylum seekers also know that generally only a fraction of asylum
applications are granted. Concerned that the determination procedures are lengthy—lasting several
months to several years in some countries—that they are unlikely to receive adequate social and
economic assistance either from the host government or the UNHCR, and that they may have a
better chance of getting to the West if they remain outside the official system, asylum seekers
often turn to the services of smuggling organizations (ECRE and USCR, 2001, p. 13).

For many, this means clandestine travel, often across many borders and using
many transport modes to reach the chosen destination. Routes into the EU include: from
the north, through Russia and the Baltic; from the east, through Hungary, Poland or the
Czech and Slovak Republics, stretching back through to the Ukraine; or from the south,
either directly from North Africa (the ‘blue route’) or via Turkey and the Balkans.

11

Although hard data are scarce, estimates suggest that more than half of those claiming
asylum in countries like Germany, France, the UK and the Netherlands are smuggled in
(Morrison and Crosland 2001, p. 17). Estimates for the mid-1990s also suggest that the
median payment to traffickers on European inward routes was around $4000 to $5000—
the longer the route, the higher the cost (International Organisation for Migration 2000, p.
94). Thus, it “is the poorest and most marginalized populations around the world that are
least able to pay the price to enjoy asylum in Europe” (Morrison and Crosland 2001, p.
21).
Surveys of asylum seekers in Europe show that the degree of deliberation in the
choice of route and destination depends on how sudden and unexpected was the departure
and how limited were the individual’s resources. Where there are choices, asylum seekers
tend to gravitate to countries where friends and relatives have preceded them and along
routes followed by other asylum seekers from the same source. Factors such as language
or other cultural affinities matter too, as do perceptions of economic and social conditions
at the destination.5 For those who are smuggled in, the destination may be determined by
the smugglers and sometimes the journey may end in a transit country rather than at the
intended destination.
While a small number of refugees have arrived through organized programs the
vast majority are ‘spontaneous arrivals’ who apply for asylum after having entered the
country or at the border. Once having lodged a claim, the applicants must then wait for it
to be adjudicated, a process that can take a long time. In the late 1990s, median
processing times in the EU were about six months, although these durations have since
fallen as processing has been speeded up. But, for a significant minority, the process can
drag on for years, especially when there are appeals. At the end of this process, some are
granted full refugee status under the Convention while some who are not recognized are
nevertheless given residency on humanitarian grounds (often with more restricted rights).
The proportion who are successful has declined over the last 20 years. Among
applications to 37 industrialized countries, the share of adjudications that resulted in
Convention status fell from 50 to 20 percent between 1982 and 2001 while share

5

See for example Böcker and Havinga (1997), Khoser and Pinkerton (2001) and Robinson and Segrott
(2002).

12

receiving any form of humanitarian status fell from 52 to 32 percent (UNHCR 2002,
pp.121-2, 124-5). The EU-15 recognition rate for full Convention status was down to
only 15 percent in 2001.
What happens to those who are rejected? In the late 1990s, removals and
voluntary departures in major EU destinations were around half the number of claims that
were rejected. Some may have simply left ahead of the threat of removal, but it is hard to
escape the conclusion that most did not.6 Most probably they either went underground or
simply remained in a state of limbo because there was no possibility for legal migration
elsewhere. It is also possible that the rising rejection rates have deterred some potential
asylum seekers from making claims at all, preferring instead to remain underground
rather than to risk rejection and removal. This is all the more likely for those with
relatively weak claims and in countries where the flourishing underground economy
makes it relatively easy to live and work undetected. For these migrants, low wages and
uncertain employment in the EU are better than the conditions they would face in their
country of origin. Hence, EU asylum policy has become increasingly bound up with the
problem of illegal immigration.
Explaining Asylum Applications to the EU
Two thirds of all asylum applications in the industrialized world are lodged in the
15 countries of the (pre-enlargement) European Union, and the absolute number of
applications has risen dramatically over the last three decades. War and oppression may
account for much of the rise but other things must matter too. It is often argued that flows
of asylum seekers from poor origins to rich destinations are driven by the same economic
and demographic fundamentals that determine other migration flows. Such evidence
might be interpreted as support for the view that most asylum seekers are ‘economic
migrants’, but we think it has a bigger influence on the number of refugees that become
asylum seekers in the West. Even so, it is far from clear that economic variables can
6

An average of 42,340 first instance claims were rejected in the UK over the years 1997-2001, while
23,200 were successful on appeal. Removals and voluntary departures were around 10,000 per annum in
the late 1990s, rising to 13,460 in 2001, Thus removals and departures account for only a little over half of
the total number rejected. A parliamentary report noted with dismay that the government was unable to
offer even a rough estimate of the number of asylum seekers whose claims had been rejected but who
nevertheless remained in the country (UK Home Affairs Committee 2003, p. 12.)

13

account for much of the trend increase in asylum applications. Furthermore, and as we
shall see below, there has been a massive tightening in policies aimed at deterring asylum
applications. If these policies have been at all effective, then applications should have
been falling rather than rising. There must be other, even stronger, forces off-setting the
impact of economic variables and policy.
Quantitative studies of the determinants of asylum claims are scarce. Rotte,
Vogler and Zimmermann (1997) analyzed applications to Germany from 17 countries in
Asia and Africa over the years 1987 to 1995. They found that the level of political terror
in the source country was a key factor generating asylum seekers but that improvements
in political rights and civil liberties tended to increase the numbers too. Economic
incentives and constraints were also found to be important: the bigger the income gap
between Germany and the source country, the greater the number of asylum applications;
in addition, source country income by itself had a positive effect, suggesting that poverty
constraints were important. In the presence of these and other variables they found that
the key reforms in German asylum policy, in 1987 and 1993, had large negative effects
on the number of asylum applications. Thieleman (2002) analyzed relative movements in
asylum applications across 20 OECD countries from 1985 to 1999 to see whether the
German policy results could be generalized. His pooled regression indicated that the key
destination country variables were the unemployment rate, the existing stock of foreign
nationals and the country’s reputation for generosity, as reflected by development aid. An
index of the toughness of asylum policy had the expected negative effect on applications,
but was not found to be very important.7
Existing studies focus either on one destination country (which may not be
representative) or on the distribution of asylum claims between countries (thereby
excluding source country effects and eliminating overall trends). The econometric result

7

There have also been a number of other studies that assess the effects of policy more qualitatively. A
report from the Inter-Governmental Consultations on Asylum and Migration (1997, p. 22) concluded that
the fall in asylum applications from its peak in 1992 was partly explained by the tightening of policy in a
number of countries. More recently, a report commissioned by the UK Home Office found that, with the
exception of policies relating to access to the country’s territory, there is little evidence that policy has had
the desired effects in stemming the flow applications (Zetter et al. 2003). But without using econometric
methods it is impossible to isolate the effects of policy from other variables that determine the number of
asylum applications, nor is it possible to take account of the endogeneity of asylum policy.

14

presented in Table 4 overcomes some of these limitations. The dependent variable is the
annual number of asylum claims for 1981 to 1999 from three source regions (Africa, Asia
or Eastern Europe) and by 14 EU destinations. These flows are explained by variables
representing economic forces, violence and oppression in source regions, and asylum
policy in EU destinations. The coefficients imply that an increase of one percent in the
ratio of source to destination GDP per capita reduces the number of asylum claims by 2.1
percent while an increase in the unemployment rate of the destination country by one
percentage point reduces asylum applications by 7.5 percent. A ten percent increasing in
the index of source region conflict raises the number of asylum claims by 7.5 percent
while a ten percent improvement in the index representing political rights (higher values
represent less freedom) reduces asylum claims by 25 percent. Finally, the index of
asylum policy (higher values represent tougher policies) confirms the view that more
restrictive asylum policy reduces the number of applications.
These results indicate that economic forces, conflict and policy all influence the
number of asylum applications, but how do they account for dramatic increase since the
early 1980s? Table 5 provides a decomposition of the change in applications to the EU as
a whole from the three source regions between 1981 and 1999. Population growth in
source regions added about 50,000 to total applications. The impact of economic growth
at home, however, was negative: African and Eastern European GDP per capita fell
further behind that of the EU, but these effects were overwhelmed by improved economic
performance in Asia, so that the net effect was a reduction in claims by 31,300. And
because unemployment was higher in most EU countries in 1999 than it was in 1981, this
reduced asylum claims by a further 60,000. Thus, the view that ‘economic migration’ is
the cause of rising asylum applications seems to be untenable. Economic incentives have
substantial effects on asylum flows, but they cannot explain the long-term upward trend.
What about conflict and political oppression? The total effect of conflict across all
three source regions was to increase applications by a modest 11,600. Although rising
conflict contributed an increase of 83,000 to the annual flow between 1981 and 1992, this
was largely reversed as the number and intensity of conflicts declined. Improvements in
political rights in sending regions served to reduce the number of asylum claims
dramatically, especially from Eastern Europe (-138,500). However, the improved

15

political conditions that worked to keep Eastern Europeans at home were partially undone
by the increased possibilities of exit. Thus the dummy for Eastern Europe, which
represents the period from the fall of the Berlin Wall onwards, raised applications by
70,900 per annum after 1989.
Finally, the effect of the asylum policy index (Figure 6) was to reduce EU asylum
applications by 155,300. This index consists of eleven components representing different
elements of policy, each of which is a dummy variable taking the value 1 as policy
becomes more restrictive. The result is a dramatic confirmation of the deterrent effects of
policy but it leaves us with an even bigger puzzle. When the effects of policy are added to
those of other variables, they predict a dramatic fall of 269,300 in the number of asylum
applications between 1981 and 1999. Yet over the same period the annual flow actually
increased by 202,900.
What lies behind this mysterious upward trend? One possibility is that policy has
been far less effective in deterring asylum applications to the EU as a whole than the
country-specific results in Tables 4 and 5 suggest. Rather than deterring asylum
applications, the effect of tougher policies has been to deflect them from one EU country
to another. If that were true then the large negative policy effect for an individual country
would be offset by the deflection effects of tougher policy elsewhere and so the EU-wide
impact of policy might evaporate. To test this hypothesis an additional variable for
asylum policy in other EU countries (lagged one period) was added to the Table 4
regression. This took a positive sign as the deflection hypothesis would suggest but the
coefficient was small and insignificant (0.04, ‘t’ = 0.5). Deflection effects may be present
but they are difficult to identify in the data. And even if net policy effects are zero for the
EU as a whole, the overall increase in asylum applications would still remain
unexplained.
The most plausible explanation for the underlying trend is that asylum flows have
cumulative effects. These are analogous to chain migration effects that are widely
observed in studies of migration, but here they operate a little differently. More than half
of asylum applicants have arrived in the EU through illegal channels, often with the aid
of increasingly dense and efficient networks of people smugglers. Migrant trafficking has
grown since the late 1980s as smugglers have become more professional and expert,

16

developments that have been coupled with the opening up of a variety of routes through
Eastern Europe.8 To test for these effects a variable representing the cumulative flow of
asylum applicants to the destination from the source region was added to the Table 4
regression. This took a large and significant coefficient (0.53, ‘t’ = 6.8), and in its
presence the coefficient on the time trend becomes small and insignificant. Not
surprisingly, this effect is very powerful and it implies that every thousand of the
cumulative stock of asylum applications generated a further eighty applications each
year. This is a larger effect than is typically found in studies of other migration streams
and it can account for most of the otherwise unexplained upward trend.9 While the
interpretation of this ‘stock’ effect may be open to question, the view that it represents the
expansion of networks (legal and illegal) does seem consistent with much of the
qualitative literature.
The Development of Asylum Policies in the EU during the 1990s
The fundamental basis for asylum policy in the EU and elsewhere in the
developed world is the Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees, first signed in
Geneva in 1951, and the Protocol that followed in 1967.10 It has two key provisions. The
first (Article 1) is to define a refugee as someone who is outside his or her country of
normal residence and who is unable or unwilling to return to it ‘owing to a well founded
fear of persecution’. The second (Article 33) is that no person who has claimed asylum
under the Convention should be forcibly returned to a territory where he or she may be at
8

The process is well illustrated by a comment from an official of the Hungarian Border Guard: “In the
beginning, only a few isolated individuals were involved in human trafficking, but as time passed they
started cooperating, and step by step the business developed into an international one. Well-planned routes
and well-organised groups have evolved, which are no longer coordinated from Hungary. Trafficking can
be coordinated either from the destination country or from the migrants’ country of origin. This is the
result of a natural process of development; market demand and necessity have contributed to the
development of certain branches of crime” (International Organization for Migration 2000, p. 196).
9
Estimates for other migration streams generally suggest that every thousand of the stock generates a little
over 20 additional migrants per year (Hatton and Williamson 2002). However, the elasticity of the flow
with respect to the stock presented here is similar to that found in other studies (Pedersen et al. 2004).
10
The Convention, which became effective in 1954, was originally signed by 29 countries. Other countries
have since signed bringing the total to 145 in 2004. Among EU-15 countries, the most recent signatories
are Portugal (1976) and Spain (1978) and it is now a condition of EU membership. The right to asylum was
earlier enshrined in Article 14 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948) and also in the
European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights (1950), which contains a non-refoulement clause.
The main provision of the 1967 Protocol was to extend the coverage of the Convention to those displaced
from sources outside Europe.

17

risk of persecution—the so-called principle of non-refoulement. Any asylum claim
submitted in a signatory state must be considered under due process irrespective of the
whether the applicant entered the country legally or not. Thus the Convention provides
access to asylum procedures for an unlimited number of applicants, once having gained
access to the territory, irrespective of whether they enter legally or not.11
Nevertheless there are a number of ways that individual countries can deter
asylum claims: those designed to restrict access to the country’s borders by potential
asylum seekers; reforms to the procedures under which applications are processed; those
measures relating to the outcome of claims; and changes in the treatment of asylum
seekers during processing. Measures of toughness in these different dimensions of policy
are displayed in Figure 6. These are averages across 14 EU countries of variables that
take a value of 0 before and 1 after the introduction of a restrictive measure. The index
for ‘access’ includes two components whereas those reflecting ‘procedure’, ‘outcomes’
and ‘conditions’ each include three components. These are averages of the constituent
elements that were used to form the 11-point policy index for the individual EU countries
that was used in the Table 4 regression. Across the EU as a whole, all these dimensions
of policy show steep increases in restrictiveness particularly in the first half of the 1990s.
The various elements of policy involved differing degrees of coordination
between countries. Measures to tighten external border control followed from the
relaxation of internal borders under the Schengen Convention (1990) and the Maastricht
Treaty (effective 1993). Carrier sanctions were first introduced in the UK and Germany
in 1987 and by the late 1990s they had become universal. Visa restrictions were gradually
extended and by 1993 the Schengen signatories shared a joint list that included 73
countries, a figure that exceeded 150 by 1998.
The most important reforms to the processing of asylum applications followed
from the 1990 Dublin Convention and the resolutions of a ministerial meeting in London.
It was resolved in Dublin that an asylum claim would be dealt with by one state only,
specifically the state of first entry. A consensus was developed in London on three further
issues. The first was the ‘safe third country’ concept that allowed member states to refuse

11

The Convention does not guarantee permanent right of residence in a host country except insofar as this
is provided by the non-refoulement clause

18

to consider asylum claims if the applicant had transited through a country deemed ‘safe’
where he or she could have sought asylum. The second was to determine that ‘manifestly
unfounded’ asylum claims could be summarily rejected without the right of appeal. The
third was the designation of ‘safe countries of origin’ where there is a presumption of no
risk of persecution and where an expedited procedure could be used. In 1994 and 1995
the European Council of Ministers produced a series of further recommendations, the
most important of which were on readmission agreements.12
These recommendations were not binding on member governments but they
gradually diffused across the EU. The most notable case was Germany, where the
measures introduced in 1993 required an amendment to the constitution (Basic Law),
which contains a clause on the right to asylum. Particularly contentious was the adoption
of the safe country of origin concept. Similar sets of policies were introduced in most
other EU countries between 1991 and 1998 although the toughness and the timing
differed. In addition, there were reforms that affected the outcomes of the asylum
procedures. These included the speed with which asylum claims are processed (which
limits the opportunities for integration into the host community before a decision is
reached), and increases in the toughness of deportation policies in the event of an
unsuccessful claim. Some countries also moved to limit the granting of humanitarian
status to those denied full Convention status.
Finally, various reforms were introduced relating to the treatment of asylum
seekers during processing, in particular dispersal and detention, access to welfare benefits
and the right to seek employment. During the 1980s a number of countries permitted
asylum seekers to work while their applications were being processed but these rights
were largely withdrawn during the 1990s (e.g. France in 1991 and Belgium in 1993). A
number of countries also restricted access to welfare benefits, substituting in-kind
subsistence for cash benefits, often making them available only at designated reception
centers. Such measures were often reinforced by the dispersal of asylum seekers to
centers outside the major metropolitan centers and by increasingly strict rules on
detention.

12

These are bilateral agreements with non-member states that allow asylum seekers to be sent back to
countries they had transited. They have been heavily criticized for opening the door to serial refoulement.

19

It is important to stress, however, that while a degree of harmonization developed
during the 1990s, most of the recommendations made at inter-governmental conferences
and by the EU Council of Ministers were not binding on member governments, at least
until the end of the decade. In the absence of a binding EU-wide asylum policy,
individual governments responded to mounting pressures, often with a succession of
policy packages. Where some led, others followed. To a degree, EU wide initiatives can
be seen as attempts to harmonize policies that were developed by individual national
governments from the late 1980s onwards. But true international coordination in the
sense that policy is set at the international level, rather than percolating upwards from
below, did not emerge until the end of the decade.
The capacity to set policy at the EU level stemmed from the 1997 Treaty of
Amsterdam and the European Council meeting at Tampere, Finland in 1999. Under the
latter, EU ministers reaffirmed that any common EU policy would be based on a ‘full and
inclusive’ application of the Geneva Convention and in particular that the principle of
non-refoulement would be honored. Under the former, the European Commission gained
the exclusive right to propose legislation starting in 2002 in order to produce a set of
harmonized asylum policies by May 1, 2004.13 The first stage of the Common European
Asylum System involved setting minimum standards in a number of areas. They include
determining which state is responsible for considering an application (so-called Dublin
II) and setting minimum standards for the reception and treatment of asylum seekers.
While these regulations have been agreed upon, those establishing a common definition
of refugee status and procedural standards have not.
Much of the rhetoric surrounding the establishment of an EU-wide framework has
been about jointly improving the plight of refugees. Although the first stage of the
Common European Asylum system is often seen as a process of leveling down rather
than up, there are some signs in the opposite direction. Limited steps on ‘burden sharing’
include the setting up of the European Refugee Fund in 2000, chiefly to help defray the
costs of projects for economic integration of refugees and to finance emergency
temporary protection measures in the event of a mass influx of refugees. Also, the draft

13

In the jargon of the EU, the Treaty of Amsterdam moved immigration and asylum from the Third Pillar
(intergovernmental) to the First Pillar (Community).

20

directive on the definition of a refugee explicitly includes those who are in fear of
persecution by non-state agents. If adopted, this would widen the definition used by
France and Germany, which explicitly exclude as refugees those under threat of
persecution by agents of the state rather than by, say, rebels or bandits.14 But, while some
progress has been made, EU-wide measures still fall far short of a thoroughgoing
international asylum policy. A key issue now facing the EU is how the second stage
common European and Asylum System should develop.
The Case for International Cooperation
Throughout the 1990s, international agencies, NGOs and academic observers
sympathetic to the plight of refugees and asylum seekers urged the case for international
cooperation. They argued that, as a result of the limited degree of coordination, the
evolution of policy has been a race to the bottom.15 In the absence of truly international
policies there is essentially a non-cooperative outcome that settles on the lowest common
denominator. In his influential book Gregor Noll (2000) described in detail the mechanics
of what he saw as ‘the common market of deflection’ within the EU. The implication is
that individual governments acting alone have sought to protect themselves against floods
of asylum seekers by tightening access, toughening their procedures and affording less
generous treatment to asylum seekers, thus deflecting them elsewhere. That raises two
questions, one empirical and one theoretical. On the empirical side, we have seen that the
deterrent effects of policy shifts in the 1990s are substantial, but the deflection effects are
uncertain. On the theoretical side the case is yet to be made that a truly international
policy would yield ‘better’ outcomes and it is worth dwelling a little further on whether
(and why) this might be the case.
The outcomes of policy must be judged from a welfare point of view, and the
welfare in question is that of the citizens of states that control the admission of refugees
through their asylum policies. In this respect, a sharp distinction must be drawn between
asylum seekers and other (non-refugee) immigrants. Immigration policy is determined by
14

A strict interpretation of that definition would, in principle, rule out many asylum seekers from countries
like Somalia where there is effectively no national government, or from countries like Angola and Sri
Lanka, where many of the refugees are fleeing from rebel groups in areas outside the control of the
government.

21

the interests of the host population, either by selecting those most likely to make an
economic contribution and least likely to be a welfare burden, or by family reunification.
By contrast, asylum policy is altruistic: asylum seekers are admitted because of the
benefit it brings to them, not to the host society. Strong humanitarian motives for helping
others escape persecution are widely reflected in public attitudes towards genuine
refugees.16 Thus the ‘benefit’ of refugees to the host country population comes through
satisfying these altruistic motives, rather than through direct self-interest. Such benefit
accruing to one individual does not preclude the same benefit accruing to others and
hence providing a safe haven to refugees may be thought of as analogous to a public
good. Furthermore, individuals with these humanitarian motives are likely to gain
additional benefit from the knowledge that refugees also find safety in countries other
than their own. However there are also costs associated with asylum seekers that fall
exclusively on the country to which they apply.
These elements can be captured in a simple model for two (identical) countries.
The net benefit from refugees accruing to the citizens of refugee-receiving country 1 can
be represented as:
V1 = (r1 + λr2 ) b − cr1

(1)

where the valuation V1 depends on the number that are received in the home country, r1 ,
and the number that are accepted abroad, r2, minus the host country cost of refugees, cr1.
The parameter λ <1 reflects a lower valuation for refugees accommodated abroad while b
< 1 reflects diminishing marginal utility for (or diminishing tolerance of) refugees.
The number of refugees accepted in country 1 depends on overall ‘demand’ for
refugee places, on the generosity of asylum policy, and on deflection effects from policy
in country 2:
15

See for instance Edminster (2000).
An international opinion survey of 1995 shows that, in the developed world, public attitudes towards
genuine refugees are much more positive than those towards immigrants and very much more positive than
those towards illegal immigrants (Hatton 2004, Table 13; Hatton and Williamson 2004, Ch. 16). In most
countries, a majority of respondents responded positively to the question ‘refugees who have suffered
political oppression should be allowed to stay.’ Similar sentiments are revealed in a Dutch survey where

16

22

r1 = γ 1 A − βγ 2 A

(2)

where A is total refugee demand and γ represents the generosity of the country’s asylum
policy. The parameter β <1 captures the deflection effect from policy in country 2 on
refugees flowing to country 1. Thus, for a given level of demand, more refugees flow to
country 1 the more generous is country 1’s policy and the less generous is that of country
2.
Substituting (2) and the identical equation for country 2 into (1) gives country 1’s
valuation of refugees as:

V1 = [γ 1 A(1 − λβ ) + γ 2 A(λ − β )] − cA(γ 1 − βγ 2 )
b

(3)

The first order condition for maximizing this valuation with respect to γ1 gives the
optimal policy for country 1, taking country 2 policy as given, as:
1

−b
λ−β 
 c  b −1
γ 1 =   [1 − λβ ]b −1 A −1 − γ 2 

b 
1 − λβ 

(4)

Thus country 1’s policy will be tougher (γ1 is lower), the higher the cost per refugee, c,
and the higher the overall demand for asylum, A. But the effect of toughening policy in
the other country (a fall in γ2) depends on the sign of λ − β. On the one hand, because
people care about refugees in the other country, they might want to accept more if the
other country takes fewer. On the other hand, the deflection effect from tougher policy in
country 2 will cause country 1 to toughen its policy.
Solving the two identical reaction functions (4) together gives the non cooperative policy setting γn = γ1 = γ2 as:

70 percent of respondents agreed that ‘a country like the Netherlands has a strong moral obligation to admit
refugees’ (Brons et al. 2001).

23

1

−1
 c  b −1
γ n =   [1 − λβ ]b −1 A −1 [1 − λβ + λ − β ]−1
b 

(5)

If instead asylum policy is set jointly to maximize the total valuation from refugees V1 +
V2, the cooperative common policy parameter, γc = γ1 = γ2, will be:

1

1
−b
 c  b −1
γ c =   [1 − β ]b −1 A −1 [1 − λβ + λ − β ]1−b
b 

(6)

In both the cooperative and the non-cooperative regimes an increase in demand for
refugee status causes toughening of policy. While this is consistent with the empirical
evidence (Hatton 2004, Table 7), that evidence cannot not discriminate between the
alternative regimes.
What about absolute levels? As compared with the non-cooperative outcome, the
humanitarian benefit derived from refugees is higher, and policy is more generous, in the
cooperative case. This can be seen by taking the ratio of (6) to (5):
1

γ c  1 − λβ + λ − β  1−b
=
γ n 1 − λβ + λβ 2 − β 

(7)

Since this is greater than one, γc > γn, so there are gains from cooperation. This is due to
the public good spillover rather than to the internalization of deflection effects. Thus for

β = 0 and λ >0, the cooperative outcome produces higher welfare and more generous
policy.17 By contrast, if there are deflection effects but no public goods spillover, β > 0
and λ = 0, the cooperative and non-cooperative outcomes are the same. Thus the
argument that cooperative policy will raise welfare chiefly because it internalizes
deflection effects seems to be misplaced.

Just to illustrate, in the case where public good spillover is large, say λ =1, and with β =0 and b =0.5, the
ratio γc/γn is 4.
17

24

Of course, as the European experience shows it may be hard (or it may take a long
time) to reach agreement when there is an imbalance between countries in the level of
refugee demand, in processing and support costs, or in tastes for humanitarian action.
Such asymmetries are not considered in this simple model, and including them makes the
analysis less tractable and the conclusions less clear-cut. In addition there may be
opportunities for strategic game playing by some countries in order to shift the burden to
others. Nevertheless the evidence reviewed above does suggest that centrally determined
EU policies tend to be rather less restrictive than those of member governments. If so,
then shifting the locus of power over asylum policy to supra-national authorities should
benefit both the humanitarian-inclined voters in receiving countries and the refugees
themselves.
International Solutions

In recent years there has been a vigorous debate about reforming asylum policies
at the international level. The need for international cooperation is stressed on almost all
sides of the debate. One view is that the main instrument of policy, the 1951 Geneva
Convention, should either be replaced or reformed. Critics point out that the Convention
was conceived in conditions very different from those that exist today. It was designed in
the aftermath of wartime displacements in Europe and it operated in the shadow of the
cold war when asylum seekers were few in number and when escapees from communism
were welcomed. The arrival of large numbers of spontaneous migrants who can take
advantage of the legal entitlement to enter the asylum process and are protected against
refoulement is seen by some to compromise the entire edifice. Since the right to decide
who can and who cannot enter is one of the defining features of a nation state, the clash
between individuals’ rights under the Convention and under national immigration and
asylum laws has become all the more acute.
The trend in western countries has been to deny access to the country’s territory
so that refugees rights under the Convention do not become operative, to toughen up on
Convention status determination, to substitute lesser forms of protection, using expedited
processes, and to provide less favorable economic rights and conditions. While this may
be consistent with the letter of Convention law, it nevertheless undermines its spirit. The

25

weakness of the Convention’s provision for international cooperation makes it seem all
the more redundant in the eyes of some.18 This is not principally a failure of the
Convention itself but of cooperation within and around it. As one observer (referring to
recent Australian experience) puts it, “if we fail to systematize a process of collectivized
protection, we invite criticism of refugee law itself. Worse still we invite de facto
withdrawal from refugee law” (Hathaway 2001, p. 44).
However compromised and conditional the current refugee regime may seem, it
nevertheless puts a floor under what individual countries can do to avoid their obligations
under it. In this minimal sense it forces countries to be more generous than they might
otherwise be in the absence of the Convention or under alternatives that might be
negotiated in its place. In the light of the previous section’s argument that host countries
acting alone fail to maximize the welfare even of their own citizens, the Convention,
despite its loopholes, may still be seen as welfare enhancing. And even under the present
pressures it seems unlikely to fall apart.19 Ministers of signatory states gathered to mark
the fiftieth anniversary of the Convention strongly reaffirmed their commitment to
honoring it. The document that emerged from these ‘Global Consultations’ called for a
long series of enhancements, expressed as six goals, one of which was “sharing of
burdens and responsibilities more equitably and building of capacities to receive and
protect refugees.”20 Yet, for the most part, these represent good intentions rather than
concrete plans for multilateral action.
It seems likely that the best prospects are for cooperation among regional groups
of refugee-receiving states that face similar conditions. The European Union is the
obvious example. Beyond the immediate harmonization that followed from Amsterdam
18

Article 35 requires only that contracting States cooperate with the UNHCR in its duty of supervising the
application of the provisions of the Convention.
19
As the UK Government (2003, p. 9) candidly states: “The danger here is that a UK or European
withdrawal would lead to the collapse of the Convention with developing countries reasoning that they
need not tie themselves to obligations that the developed world is not prepared to keep. This would result in
increased global flows of refugees with millions of people being left in limbo without protection. Therefore
any future withdrawal from the Geneva Convention needs to be coupled with an alternative regime for
refugees.”
20
The other five goals were: strengthening implementation of the 1951 Convention and 1967 Protocol;
Protecting refugees within broader migration movements; addressing security-related concerns more
effectively; redoubling the search for more durable solutions; and meeting the protection needs of refugee
women and refugee children (United Nations 2002, p. 13). Details of the global consultations process and
associated documents can be found at: http://www.unhcr.ch/cgi-bin/texis/vtx/global-consultations.

26

and Tampere, the EU is still searching for a more workable policy for the second phase of
its common European Asylum System. While the Commission has repeatedly stressed the
need to develop a new system that is both comprehensive and humane, so far the focus
has remained firmly on measures to control, efficiently process, and deter asylum
seekers. Implicit in this is the recognition that expanding the opportunities for asylum
seekers will simply lead to larger flows of illegal immigrants, most of whom fail to
qualify as refugees but nevertheless remain in the country.
The European Council received two proposals in 2003, one from the UK
Government and one from the UNHCR, each mapping out a future European Asylum
System. The UK government’s scheme concentrated on extra-territorial processing of
asylum claims. Asylum seekers arriving in the EU would be transferred to a Regional
Protection Area outside the EU (in a transit country or in the region of origin) where their
refugee status would be determined (UK Government 2003). Those found to be in
genuine need would then either be transferred back to developed countries according to
pre-agreed quotas, resettled elsewhere, or would remain until they could be safely
repatriated. Aside from the practicalities of such a scheme, the proposal was widely
criticized as burden-shifting rather than burden-sharing and it has since been dropped. 21
The UNHCR’s proposal, which has received a more favorable reception, was
presented as the ‘EU prong’ of its wider so-called ‘Convention plus’ initiative (UNHCR
2003). Under this scheme one or more closed Asylum Processing Centres would be set
up within the borders of the EU, to act as community-wide clearing houses to which
asylum applicants would be transferred from member states. At these centers, asylum
seekers would be held and their claims determined on behalf of member governments by
a new European Asylum Agency. Those whose claims are successful would be
transferred for settlement in member states according to ‘agreed criteria’ for burden
sharing. Those whose claims are rejected would be returned to their countries of origin
through collective action by member states, and the costs of administration would be
defrayed by the pooling of resources in a re-launched version of the European Refugee
Fund. While such a system would at first deal with only some claims (such as those

27

deemed manifestly unfounded) it would progressively take on wider responsibilities for
registering and screening applications and it would become increasingly independent of
member governments.
There are a number of reservations even about this proposal. One is the legality of
transferring asylum claims to be processed extra-territorially, especially if such functions
are delegated to an agency that is not itself a responsible government. Another is the
question of whether asylum applicants should be kept in mandatory detention at the
Asylum Processing Centres, what freedoms they should have, and who would monitor
them. There are also serious questions about whether such centers would become
magnets for people-smugglers and traffickers, and about how to deal with unsuccessful
applicants who, for one reason or another, cannot be returned to their country of origin.
Related to these issues, there is the question of how individual countries might be
persuaded to allow EU Asylum Processing Centres to be established on their territory.22
Perhaps sufficient inducement might be provided to persuade one or more of the new
members of the EU to act as hosts to such a centers, which might be located conveniently
close to entry points. And although a legal instrument on resettlement within the EU has
been suggested, little attention has been given to exactly how successful claimants would
be reallocated among member states.
The fact that member states would still be responsible for the resettlement of
refugees suggests that the incentives for full cooperation (in the sense discussed above)
would be limited. Our proposal would be a scheme that sets a fixed contribution to the
European Refugee Fund (say, in proportion to the country’s GDP) and a resettlement
quota (say, in proportion to its population). For any EU member that took refugees in
excess of its quota there would be a per-refugee rebate that would effectively reduce the
cost of resettlement at the margin. This would have two advantages. First, reducing the
marginal cost of refugees would help to expand refugee numbers towards the fully
cooperative level, even in the absence of full cooperation. Second, the number of
refugees that a country accepted would be determined by its preferences for refugees and
21

The UK’s proposal was critically evaluated by the European Commission (2003) as well as in
commentaries by NGO’s such as the Refugee Council, Amnesty International, the United States Committee
on Refugees and the European Council for Refugees and Exiles.

28

by the costs of resettling them, rather than simply on the number who happen to apply to
that country.
While a system like this might provide the mechanism for efficient burdensharing, there remains the question of whether the system as a whole would be perceived
as more generous. On the one hand, centralized processing and greater enforcement of
removals might make applying for asylum less attractive to those with weak claims,
discouraging them from applying at all. On the other hand, if the processing of
applications using an EU-wide standard led to a larger number being accepted for
settlement, then according to the results in Table 4, that would add a boost the total
number of applications.
Tackling the Problem at Source

It has been widely suggested that more resources should be devoted to providing
aid to refugees closer to home, partly to prevent unwanted onward migration, but more
importantly, to alleviate the plight of the vast majority of refugees who are in countries of
first asylum in the origin regions. The UNHCR’s Convention-plus agenda calls for
situation-specific agreements to expand the opportunities for integration into countries of
first asylum as well as for resettlement further afield. It also seeks to create better
conditions for voluntary repatriation. 23 While rejecting the idea of Regional Protection
Areas that was proposed by the UK government, the UNHCR argues for rehabilitating
refugees through cooperation within origin regions--the so-called regional prong. 24 But it
also requires cooperation from the developed world in providing aid packages in order to
improve the economic conditions for refugees as well as providing better access to
22

These and other criticisms of the (revised) UNHCR proposal have recently been discussed by the
European Union Committee of the UK House of Lords (2004).
23
Ruud Lubbers, the current UN High Commissioner for Refugees, introduced this approach as the
“4R’s”—Repatriation, Reintegration, Rehabilitation and Reconstruction. Various documents describing
Convention-plus are available at the UNHCR’s website; see in particular “Convention Plus at a Glance”
which is periodically updated.
24
Recent history provides some examples. One is the Comprehensive Plan of Action that was adopted in
1989 by countries in Southeast Asia, which provided for a combination of resettlement (predominantly in
the United States), repatriation, and integration into the host countries in the region. Another is the
International Conference on Central American Refugees, which involved a commitment by seven Central
American countries, also in 1989, to recognizing and integrating refugees from conflicts in El Salvador
Guatemala and Nicaragua as well as attempts to broker reconciliation and development (ECRE and USCR
2003, pp. 33-38).

29

refugee status determination procedures and more generous quotas for resettlement in the
West.
If these enhanced procedures involved liberalizing refugee status determination to
something approaching that of the developed world, then more would qualify. Given that
80 percent of refugees do not currently have access to these procedures as they operate in
the industrialized world, this would lead to a vast increase in the number who would be
eligible for resettlement. That number is likely to far exceed the willingness of western
countries to accept more refugees, however genuine they may be. It would also provide
serious challenges to the neighbors of war-affected countries. One is that by providing
superior access to asylum processes and perhaps higher living standards than are
available in existing refugee camps, they would act as magnets to greater numbers of
displaced persons, who may be less willing to return. Although the UNHCR proposes
expanding the opportunities for permanent integration of refugees in countries within the
region where they were displaced, many such countries are already hosting far larger
numbers than they can (or wish to) absorb. While enhanced development aid tied to local
resettlement and integration of refugees might help, those inducements would have to be
provided (and policed) on a scale that would go far beyond existing aid budgets.
Policies that significantly improve access to asylum procedures and that enhance
the opportunities for resettlement would undoubtedly benefit asylum seekers, especially
those from the poorest countries of the Third World. But the incentives they provide are
likely also to generate even greater cross-border migration from war torn countries as
well as increased pressure for onward migration. As part of its ‘three pronged’ approach
to reforming the refugee regime, the UNHCR lays stress on promoting the voluntary
return, reintegration and rehabilitation of refugees in countries of origin. But widening
the options for exit and improving the conditions for those who gain access to it (the
second prong) would make it all the harder to foster voluntary return and reintegration.
Not surprisingly much lip service is paid to targeting development aid to countries in
post-civil war situations, not only to ensure a more stable future, but also to make return
migration more attractive.
While improving the conditions in source countries seems like the best of all
solutions, it is the least well worked out. One issue is whether to devote resources directly

30

to repatriation and reintegration programs, or simply to provide some form of economic
incentive to return. Some observers argue that such packages should simply be part of
broader strategies aimed at improving economic conditions generally. While these might
help to foster cross-border remigration from the refugee camps in neighboring regions,
they are less likely to stem the flow of long-distance illegal migrants, once such flows
have become established. Although relative incomes matter in determining the flows of
asylum seekers to the West, it would require dramatic increases in living standards at the
source to seriously reduce the numbers. And even that may be too optimistic. Recent
studies have suggested that, in the poorest countries, an increase in domestic living
standards has conflicting effects on the pressure to emigrate (Hatton and Williamson
2002). While higher income at home may make emigration less attractive, it also makes
emigration more feasible by easing poverty constraints.
The best option by far is to find ways of preventing civil wars or to stop them
recurring. As we have seen, apart from the upheavals in Eastern Europe and the former
Soviet Union, there are positive signs that the ending of the Cold War and the proxy wars
associated with it has been associated with a decline in global conflict. Recent
interventions in Sierra Leone and Liberia suggest that it is possible for western
governments to help promote the settlement of conflicts in the Third World. But the
greater challenge is to prevent such conflicts in the first place.
Recent analysis of civil wars suggest that the causes are chiefly economic rather
than political (Collier and Hoeffler 1998, 2004). If so, then political interventions that do
not get to the root causes are less likely to be successful. In these studies the major causes
of civil war are found to be low incomes, dependence on primary commodities, and the
dominance of a single ethnic group. One further factor is that the diaspora from the
source country, living in the developed world, raises the probability that war will recur.
This is because diasporas are often former refugees from displaced minorities who have a
vested interest in supplying economic aid to their particular faction. Thus refugees,
originally the consequence of war, may become a reason for its persistence.
This suggests a further reason why encouraging the return and reintegration of
former refugees is an important priority. Those who return are more likely to have an
interest in fostering peace than those who have gained a permanent foothold abroad. But

31

the tools for promoting the successful reintegration of refugees in ways that also reduce
the risk of war are the least well developed of all refugee policies.
Conclusions

European governments have reacted to the rising numbers of asylum seekers by
introducing successive reforms in their policies in order to deter them. While these have
had effects in the desired direction, they have been outpaced by the powerful cumulative
forces that have kept up the flow of applications. Two things follow. First, had some of
those policies been put in place a decade earlier, the numbers might not have increased so
dramatically and the cumulative rise in asylum seeking would have been attenuated. As a
result, there would have been less need for ever more draconian measures in the face of
the growing pressure of numbers. Second, the numbers are still ‘too high’ for countries
that face strong political pressures to limit them. This may help explain why the transfer
of asylum policy from the individual country level to the EU level has not so far resulted
in the more generous policies that the theory suggests should result from genuine
international cooperation.
In recent years there has been a vigorous debate about the reform of asylum
policies and refugee policies on an international scale. Given that existing asylum seeker
flows probably exceed those that would be optimal even under more cooperative policies,
a radical relaxation of asylum policies seems unlikely. Furthermore, proposals to shift
asylum claim processing to reception centers in the regions of origin are also likely to
meet with limited success. The resources put into such schemes might be better invested
in efforts to help displaced populations when they return home and to create conditions
that make civil wars less likely.

32

References

Azam, J-P. and Hoeffler, A. (2002), “Violence Against Citizens in Civil Wars: Looting or
Terror?” Journal of Peace Research, 7, pp. 461-485.
Böcker, A. and Havinga, T. (1997), Asylum Migration to the European Union: Patterns
of Origin and Destination, Luxembourg: Office for Official Publications of the
European Communities.
Brons, M., Meijnen, K. and Schaap, M. C. (2001), “Public Perceptions about Refugees,
Asylum Seekers and Persons with Temporary Protection Status: Country Report:
The Netherlands,” The Hague: International Organisation for Migration.
Collier, P. (1999), “On the Economic Consequences of Civil War,” Oxford Economic
Papers, 51, pp. 168-183.
Collier, P. and Hoeffler, A. (1998), “On the Economic Consequences of Civil War,”
Oxford Economic Papers, 50, pp 563-573.
Collier, P. and Hoeffler, A. (2004), The Challenge of Reducing the Global Incidence of
Civil War,” Oxford University: Copenhagen Consensus Challenge Paper.
Crisp, (1999), “Who Has Counted the Refugees? UNHCR and the Politics of Numbers,”
Geneva: UNHCR Working Paper No. 12.
Dolan, C. (1999), “Repatriation from South Africa to Mozambique—Undermining
Durable Solutions? In R. Black and K. Koser (eds.) The End of the Refugee
Cycle? Refugee Repatriation and Reconstruction, Berghan Books: New York.
Edminster, S. (2001), “The High Road or the Low Road: The Way Forward to Asylum
Harmonisation in the European Union,” USCR World Refugee Survey, 2000,
pp.54-61.
European Commission (2003), “Towards More Accessible, Equitable and Managed
Asylum Systems,” Brussels: Commission of the European Communities.
Gurr, T. R., Marshall, M. G. and Khosla, D. (2001), Peace and Conflict, 2001, University
of Maryland: Center for International Development and Conflict Management.
Hathaway, J. (2002) “Refugee Law is not Immigration Law,” World Refugee Survey,
2002, New York: US Committee for Refugees.
Hatton, T. J. (2004) “Seeking Asylum in Europe,” Economic Policy, 38, pp. 5-62.
Hatton, T. J. and Williamson, J. G. (2002), “What Fundamentals Drive World
Migration?” NBER Working Paper 9159, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Cambridge, Mass.
Hatton, T. J. and Williamson, J. G. (2003), “Demographic and Economic Pressure on
Migration Out of Africa,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 105, pp. 465-486.
Hatton T. J. and Williamson, J. G. (2004), World Mass Migration: Two Centuries of
Policy and Performance (ongoing).
IGC (1997), Report on Asylum Procedures, Geneva: Secretariat of the InterGovernmental Consultations on Asylum, Refugee and Migration Policies in
Europe, North America and Australia.
International Organisation for Migration (2000), Migrant Trafficking and Human
Smuggling in Europe, Geneva: United Nations.
Koser, K. and Pinkerton, C. (2002), “The Social Networks of Asylum Seekers and the
Dissemination of Information about Countries of Asylum,” London: UK Home
33

Office.
Marshall, M. G. (1999), Third World War: System, Process and Conflict Dynamics,
Boulder CO: Rowman and Littlefield.
Marshall, M G. (2002), “Measuring the Societal Impact of War,” in F. O. Hampson and
D. M. Malone (eds.), From Reaction to Conflict Prevention: Opportunities for the
UN System, Lynne Reinner: Boulder, Col.
Morrison, J. and Crosland, B. (2001), “The Trafficking and Smuggling of Refugees: The
End Game in European Asylum Policy?” UNHCR Working Paper No. 39,
Geneva: UNHCR.
Noll, G. (2000), Negotiating Asylum: The EU Acquis, Extraterritorial Protection and the
Common Market of Deflection, The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
Pederson, P. J., Pytlikova, M. and Smith, N. (2004), “Selection or Network Effects?
Migration Flows into 27 OECD countries, 1990-2000,” Bonn: IZA Discussion
Paper No. 1104.
Poe, S. C., Tate, C. N. and Keith, L. C. (1999), “Repression of the Human Right to
Personal Integrity Revisited: A Global Cross-National Study Covering the Years
1976-1993.,” International Studies Quarterly, 43, pp. 291-313.
Pottenbaum, D. and Kanbur, R, (2001), “Civil War, Public Goods and the Social Wealth
of Nations,” Cornell University: unpublished paper.
Robinson, V. and Segrott, J. (2002), “Understanding the Decision-Making of Asylum
Seekers,” Home Office Research Study 243, London: UK Home Office.
Rogge, J. R. (1994), “Repatriation of Refugees,” in T. Allen and H. Morsink (eds.), When
Refugees go Home, London: Africa World Press.
Rotte, R., Vogler, M. and Zimmermann, K. (1997), “South-North Refugee Migration:
Lessons for Development Co-operation,” Review of Development Economics, 1,
pp. 99-115.
Schmeidl, S. (1997), “Exploring the Causes of Force Migration: A Pooled Time-Series
Analysis, 1971-1990,” Social Science Quarterly, 78, pp. 284-308.
Thielemann, E. R. (2003), “Why EU Policy Harmonisation Undermines Burden
Sharing,” Canberra: National Europe Centre Paper 101, Australian National
University.
UK Home Affairs Committee (2003), Asylum Removals, Volume I: Report and
Proceedings of the Committee, London: House of Commons.
UK House of Lords, European Union Committee (2004), Handling EU Asylum Claims:
New Approaches Examined, 11th Report of Session 2003-04, London: Stationery
Office.
UK Government (2003), “New International Approaches to Asylum Processing and
Protection,” accessed as “New Vision for Refugees” from ProAsyl website:
http://www.proasyl.de/texte/europe/union/2003/UK_NewVision.pdf
United Nations (2002), Agenda for Protection, New York: UN General Assembly 53rd
Session.
United Nations (2003), World Population Prospects: the 2002 Revision, New York:
United Nations.
United Nations High Commission for Refugees (2001) The State of the World’s
Refugees: Fifty Years of Humanitarian Action, Geneva: UNHCR.
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (2002), Statistical Yearbook, 2001,

34

Geneva: UNHCR.
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (2003), “Summary of UNHCR
Proposals to Complement National Asylum Systems through new Multilateral
Approaches,” from Statewatch website at:
http://www.statewatch.org/news/2003/jun/unhcr.pdf.
United States Committee for Refugees (2003), World Refugee Survey 2003, New York:
USCR.
United States Committee for Refugees and European Council on Refugees and Exiles
(2003), Responding to the Asylum and Access Challenge, New York: USCR and
ECRE.
Weiner, M. (1997), “Bad Neighbours, Bad Neighbourhoods: An Enquiry into the Causes
of Refugee Flows, 1969-1992,” in R. Münz and M. Weiner (eds.), Migrants,
Refugees and Foreign Policy: US and German Policies towards Countries of
Origin, Oxford: Berghahn Books.
Zetter, R., Griffiths, D., Ferretti, S. and Pearl, M. (2003), “An Assessment of the Impact
of Asylum Policies in Europe, 1990-2000,” Home Office Online Report 17/03,
http://www.homeoffice.gov.uk/rds/horspubs1.html.

35

Table 1
Refugees by Region of Origin and Location, 1992 and 2001
(Thousands)
Region

Great Lakes Region of Africa
West and Central Africa
East and Horn of Africa
Southern Africa
North Africa
The Middle East
South West Asia
Central Asia
South Asia
East Asia and the Pacific
Eastern Europe
South Eastern Europe
Central Europe and the Baltic States
Western Europe
North America and the Caribbean
Central America
South America
Stateless/Other/Unknown
Total

Refugees by Origin
1992
2001
700.2
1055.3
960.1
540.4
1928.8
1364.7
1757.3
473.6
245.5
206.7
1454.4
901.4
4682.0
3914.4
60.0
63.4
503.6
396.6
731.6
667.4
708.8
372.9
700.5
897.2
60.1
62.8
0.0
1.8
23.8
26.7
129.1
30.9
19.4
27.9
3132.0
1025.7
17798.5
12029.9

Source: UNHCR (2002: 84, 88).

36

Refugees by Location
1992
2001
983.6
1190.7
950.5
570.1
1784.7
966.8
1506.0
365.4
257.2
183.6
266.3
463.4
5840.0
4066.8
3.0
97.8
579.0
322.7
473.0
616.1
546.0
294.3
954.4
459.6
147.8
18.7
1841.0
1731.5
769.7
646.1
853.4
25.8
22.1
10.5
20.7
-17798.5
12029.9

Table 2
Top 20 Sources and Destinations of Asylum Seekers 1982-2001

Source Country
Yugoslavia FR
Iraq
Turkey
Romania
Afghanistan
El Salvador
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Sri Lanka
Islamic Rep. of Iran
Guatemala
China
Somalia
India
Pakistan
Russian Federation
Dem. Rep. of Congo
Algeria
Bulgaria
Nigeria
Mexico

1992-2001
1982-1991
No.
per
No.
per
1000
1000
817.2
77.5 269.8
17.0
310.8
15.4
52.1
3.4
308.8
4.9 499.3
9.6
304.7
13.1 195.4
8.6
204.1
10.6
54.0
4.0
196.5
34.7
69.6
14.6
186.1
54.4
--168.9
9.5 176.8
11.3
161.1
2.6 195.5
4.0
154.8
15.5
38.1
4.9
149.7
0.1
21.9
0.0
147.6
20.1
51.1
7.7
124.4
0.1
63.2
0.1
113.2
0.9
67.9
0.7
105.2
0.7
25.0
0.2
103.9
2.3
97.5
3.0
92.6
3.3
--91.2
10.8
47.5
5.3
77.1
0.8
33.0
0.4
74.5
0.8
---

Destination Country
Germany
United States
United Kingdom
Netherlands
Canada
France
Switzerland
Sweden
Belgium
Austria
Denmark
Australia
Spain
Italy
Norway
Turkey
Czech Republic
Ireland
Hungary
Poland

1992-2001
1982-1991
No.
per
No.
per
1000
1000
1597.3
19.6 996.9
1.7
869.0
3.2 437.7
0.2
576.6
10.0 164.5
0.3
358.6
23.2
95.0
0.7
286.3
9.8 239.4
0.9
281.0
4.8 347.4
0.6
243.5
34.2 170.2
2.6
228.6
25.9 183.2
2.2
219.5
21.7
69.7
0.7
128.0
15.9 134.0
1.8
97.4
18.6
45.3
0.9
89.2
4.9
30.1
0.2
84.2
2.1
37.5
0.1
83.4
1.5
55.0
0.1
71.1
16.3
32.3
0.8
54.5
0.9
27.8
0.1
48.1
4.7
3.8
0.0
39.7
11.0
0.03
0.0
37.5
3.7
4.4
0.0
25.0
0.6
2.4
0.0

Source: Asylum seeker numbers from UNHCR (2002: 112-3, 115-6); Population totals for 1995 and 1985 from United Nations (2003: various tables).

37

Table 3 Explaining Refugee Displacements in Africa.

Refs/Pop = − 32.4 + 35.7 Coups + 18.3 Crises + 25.2 GuerWar + 35.4 CivWar
(4.8) (1.9)
(1.9)
(3.3)
(2.9)
+ 35.4 Deaths,
(4.4)

Pseudo-R2 = 0.07, Log Likelihood = − 595.6

Note: t statistics in parentheses.
Sample: Balanced panel of 41 countries in Sub-Saharan Africa by 6 years (1987-92).
Variable Definitions: Refs/Pop: number of refugees per thousand of source country population; Coups:
dummy = 1 for years when there was a political coup d’etat; Crises: dummy=1 for years of government
crisis; GuerWar; dummy =1 for years of guerilla warfare; CivWar: dummy =1 for years of civil war;
Deaths: number of military deaths in civil war per thousand of the population.
Method: Tobit regression on 246 country/year observations.
Source: Hatton and Williamson (2003), Table 2 where the data are discussed in more detail. The original
source for most of the variables is Robert Bates’ Africa project, available at http://africa.gov.harvard.edu//.

Table 4: Explaining Asylum Applications to the EU

Log Apps/Pop = −2.12 logGDPRatio −7.47 UDest + 17.17 Conflict + 0.51 PolRights
(4.4)
(3.6)
(2.9)
(2.7)
+ 0.26 logStock81 +0.77 EastEur90 −0.09 Policy + 0.20 Time
(5.8)
(1.9)
(2.0)
(8.9)
R2 = 0.78;

No. Obs. = 798

Note: ‘t’ statistics in parentheses calculated from robust standard errors.
Sample: Annual data for three source regions, Africa Asia and Eastern Europe by 14 EU destination
countries (EU-15 excluding Luxembourg), for 1981 to 1999.
Variable Definitions: Apps/Pop: asylum applications from source region to destination country/ source
region population (millions); LogGDPRatio: log ratio of GDP per capita, source region to destination
country; UDest: unemployment rate in destination country; Conflict = index of the scale and intensity of
conflict in source region; PolRights: Freedom house index of political rights in source region;
LogStock81: log population from source region living in destination country in 1981/source region
population; EastEur90: dummy =1 for Eastern European source from 1990; Policy: index of toughness of
asylum policy in destination country.
Method: Instrumental variables; Policy instrumented. Fixed effects for three source regions and 14
destination countries and dummy for Italy from 1990 (for Asia and Africa only) included but not reported.
Source: Hatton (2004), Table 8; see also the Appendix for details of the data sources.

38

Table 5
Decomposition of Change in Asylum Applications by Source Region, 1981-99
(Thousands)

Africa
Source region population
GDP per capita ratio
Unemployment in destination
Conflict index
Political rights index
Eastern Europe from 1989
Asylum Policy
Total above effects
Actual change, 1981-99

Asia
18.1
30.1
−7.7
−11.7
−14.2
-−25.5
−10.9
53.0

Source: Hatton (2004: Table 10).

39

28.6
−79.1
−28.6
−28.3
−11.6
-−66.4
−175.6
80.4

E. Europe
Total
2.7
49.4
17.7
−31.3
−23.6
−59.9
51.3
11.3
−138.5
−164.2
70.9
70.9
−63.4
−155.3
−82.8
−269.3
69.5
202.9

Figure 1
Worldwide Stock of Refugees
20000
18000
16000

World

Number (000s)

14000
12000
10000
8000
6000
4000

Europe

2000

North America

0
1972

1976

1980

1984

1988

1992

1996

2000

Year

Source: UNHCR (2001: Annex 3).

Figure 2
Asylum Applications to Industrialized Countries, 1982-2001
1000
900

Number (000s)

800

Total

700
600
500
400

Europe

300

European Union

200
100

North America

0
1982

1984

1986

1988

1990

1992
Year

Source: UNHCR (2002: 113-114).

40

1994

1996

1998

2000

Figure 3
Asylum Applications by Source Region, 1982-2001
900
800
Total

Number (000s)

700
600
500
400

Europe

300
200

Asia

100

Africa

0

1982

1984

1986

1988

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

Year

Source: Data kindly provided by Monty Marshall.

Figure 4
Global Warfare Index
200
180

Total Warfare

160
140
Index

120

Civil War

100
80
60
40
20
0
1970

1974

1978

1982

1986
Year

Source: Hatton (2004).

41

1990

1994

1998

Figure 5
World (Un)Freedom Index, 1975-6 to 1999-2000
5

Index

4.5

Political

4
Civil

3.5

3
1975-76

1979-80

1983-84

1987-88

1991-92

1995-96

1999-00

Year

Source: Hatton (2004)

Figure 6
Asylum Policy Index, EU Average, 1980-99
3

Average value

2.5

Procedure

2
1.5
Conditions

1

Access

Outcomes

0.5
0
1980

1982

1984

1986

1988

1990
Year

Source: Hatton (2004)

42

1992

1994

1996

1998

