                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            LAW AND FIRMS’ ACCESS TO FINANCE

                                             Thorsten Beck
                                           Asli Demirgüç-Kunt
                                               Ross Levine

                                          Working Paper 10687
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10687


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2004




The authors thank Andrei Shleifer and an anonymous referee for very helpful comments. This paper’s
findings, interpretations, and conclusions are entirely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent
the views of the World Bank, its Executive Directors, or the countries they represent. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2004 by Thorsten Beck, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Law and Firms’ Access to Finance
Thorsten Beck, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 10687
August 2004
JEL No. K4, G3, H1, O16

                                            ABSTRACT
This paper contributes to the literature on how a country's legal origin influences the operation of

its financial system by using firm-level survey data on the obstacles that firms face in raising

external finance. The paper assesses two channels through which legal origin may influence the

financial system. It finds that the adaptability of a country's legal system is more important for

explaining the obstacles that firms face in accessing external finance than the political

independence of the judiciary.

Thorsten Beck
World Bank
tbeck@worldbank.org

Asli Demirgüç-Kunt
World Bank
ademirguckunt@worlbank.org

Ross Levine
Finance Department, Room 3-257
Carlson School of Management
University of Minnesota
321 19th Avenue South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
rlevine@csom.umn.edu
1. Introduction

        Substantial research finds a robust relationship between the origin of a country’s

legal tradition and the operation of its financial system. La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes,

Shleifer, and Vishny (1997, 1998, henceforth LLSV) show that whether a country’s

Commercial/Company law is based on British, French, German, or Scandinavian legal

origins is important for explaining cross-country differences in aggregate measures of

financial development, such as the size of the banking sector and national stock market

capitalization.1 At the microeconomic level, empirical work suggests that legal systems

influence the external financing constraints faced by firms.2

        Hayek (1960) emphasizes two major differences across legal traditions that may

help account for the relationship between legal origin and the functioning of the financial

system: (1) the political independence of the judiciary and (2) the adaptability of the legal

system. The “political” --or “judicial independence” -- channel holds that (a) the

protection of private property rights forms the basis of financial activities and (b) legal

traditions differ in terms of the priority they attach to private property rights vis-à-vis the

rights of the State. According to Hayek (1960), Dawson (1960, 1968), Merryman (1985),

and others, the English Common law evolved as an independent institution that over time

protected private property owners against the crown. This made private agents more

confident about making financial transactions, with positive ramifications for financial

development.3 In contrast, LLSV (1999) argue that the French and German civil codes in

the 19th century were constructed to solidify state power. Over time, state dominance of

the judiciary produced legal traditions that focus more on the power of the state and less

on the rights of individual investors, with negative ramifications for financial




                                               1
development (Mahoney, 2001). Thus, the political channel argues that the degree to

which the judiciary is independent of the State is a legal system trait that substantively

shapes the financial environment, including the ease with which firms can contract to

raise external finance.

        Hayek (1960) also argues that legal systems differ in terms of their ability to adapt

to changing conditions. The “adaptability channel” stresses that (a) legal traditions that

adapt efficiently to minimize the gap between the contracting needs of the economy and

the legal system’s capabilities will more effectively foster financial development in

general and external finance in particular than more rigid systems and (b) legal traditions

differ in their ability to evolve with changing conditions. An influential, although not

unanimous, strand of the comparative law literature holds that the common law evolves

efficiently as judges respond case-by-case to unforeseen and changing conditions

(Posner, 1973). Several scholars argue that since the common law grants substantial

discretion to judges, inefficient laws are challenged in the courts and through repeated

litigation efficient rules replace inefficient ones.4 In contrast, Dawson (1960, 1968) and

Merryman (1985) argue that the French Revolution sought to change French law

radically by (i) eliminating jurisprudence, (ii) reducing judges to a purely administrative

role, and (iii) adhering to strict, formal legal processes that reduce judicial flexibility.

These scholars add that, since the more rigid aspects of the Napoleonic legal doctrine did

not work well in practice and conflicted with France’s long legal history, the French

courts eventually circumvented many of the inflexible characteristics of the doctrine.

Unlike France, however, Merryman (1985, 1996) argues that many French Legal Origin

colonies have been unable to shed the inefficient rigidity of the Napoleonic doctrine.




                                               2
Germany explicitly rejected the Napoleonic approach. Rather, building on Savigny’s

vision of legal science, Germany took a comparatively favorable view of jurisprudence

and sought to create a responsive legal doctrine. Similarly, the Scandinavian countries did

not follow the rigid Napoleonic approach (Zweigert and Kötz, 1998). The adaptability

channel, therefore, argues that the flexibility of the legal system – as characterized by the

level of jurisprudence and legal formalism -- will shape financial contracting and hence

corporate financing obstacles.

       This paper contributes to a growing empirical literature on why legal origin

matters by studying which legal system traits –judicial independence from the

government and the ability of courts to adapt to changing conditions -- influence the

obstacles that firms face in raising capital. Thus, this paper provides empirical evidence

on the linkages running from legal origin, to specific legal system traits, and on to

particular obstacles that firms report they confront in contracting for external finance.

While Beck et al. (2003a) examine the importance of the political and adaptability

channels in explaining cross-country differences in aggregate indexes of bank and stock

market development, this paper examines firm-level survey data on the obstacles that

firms face in raising external finance. One of the functions performed by a well-

functioning financial system is to facilitate the flow of credit to firms. Thus, to provide

additional evidence on why legal origin matters, we examine the comparative importance

of the political and adaptability channels in explaining specific barriers to firms obtaining

external finance.5

       To measure empirically the political and adaptability channels, we use indexes of

(1) the political independence of the judiciary and (2) the adaptability of legal systems.




                                              3
To measure political independence of the judiciary, we use information on the degree of

tenure of Supreme Court judges and the extent to which the Supreme Court has

jurisdiction over cases involving the government. To measure the adaptability of legal

systems, we use information on the extent to which judicial decisions are sources of law

and whether judicial processes are based on principles of equity rather than purely on

statutory law and legal formalities. Although we use the raw data from Djankov et al.

(2003) to construct the adaptability indexes, our adaptability indexes differ from the

Djankov et al. (2003) measure of legal formalism. Djankov et al. (2003) seek to measure

legal formalism broadly defined. In contrast, we focus narrowly on the Hayek (1960),

Dawson (1960, 1968), Posner (1973), and Merryman (1985) conception of legal system

adaptability, which highlights the role of case law and not adhering too rigidly to

statutory law in making judgments. Thus, the adaptability index is a subset of the

Djankov et al. (2003) legal formalism index that only uses information on the degree to

which rulings must be based solely on existing statutes and the extent to which judgments

may include general assessments of fairness.6 We then test whether these measures of

the political and adaptability mechanisms explain the obstacles that firms face in raising

external finance.

       To measure financing obstacles, we use firm-level survey data for over 4,000

firms across 38 countries. The data come from the World Business Environment Survey

(WBES), which was conducted in 1999. We include information on how firms respond to

questions about the general financing obstacles they face in raising capital, the degree to

which collateral requirements impede firms’ access to finance, the extent to which bank

bureaucracy and paperwork represents an important barrier to obtaining external finance,




                                             4
and difficulty in having access to long-term loans. Thus, we assess whether different

legal tradition traits – political independence of the judiciary and legal system

adaptability – explain specific obstacles that firms report they confront in obtaining

external finance.

       This paper is related to four recent papers seeking to discover which legal system

characteristics facilitate economic interactions. First, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Pop-

Eleches and Shleifer (2004) show that judicial independence and jurisprudence are

associated with greater economic and political freedom and that judicial independence is

a channel through which the Common law tradition influences economic freedom. Rather

than examining economic and political freedom, we examine the impact of judicial

independence and legal adaptability on firm financing obstacles. Second in a cross-

country study of former European colonies, Acemoglu and Johnson (2003) examine the

impact of legal formalism and the risk of expropriation of private foreign investors by the

government on income per capita, investment, and financial development. They find that

while legal formalism influences the form of financial contracting, expropriation risk

affects investment and income. In contrast, our firm-level study assesses which legal

system traits influence the financing obstacles reported by firms. Third, Djankov et al.

(2003) examine the influence of judicial formalism on the duration, efficiency and

fairness of judiciary proceedings. Thus, they examine the impact of judicial formalism on

the operation of the legal system. Djankov et al. (2003) show that Civil Code countries

have more formalistic legal systems than Common law countries and find that firms rate

the efficiency of the court system higher in countries with less formalistic legal systems.

In contrast, our paper concentrates on the effect of two legal system characteristics – the




                                              5
political independence of the judiciary and the adaptability of the judicial system -- on the

relationship between borrowers and lenders and thus the obstacles that firms face in

accessing external finance. Finally, as noted above, Beck et al. (2003a) find that the

adaptability channel is more important than the political channel in explaining aggregate

indexes of bank and stock market development. In this paper, however, we use firm-level

data to assess the importance of the political and adaptability channels in explaining

corporate financing obstacles.

       It is important to recognize that many researchers disagree with the reasoning

advanced in both the political and adaptability channel arguments, and these disputes

further motivate our analyses. In contrast to the contention that legal origin shapes

judicial independence and hence a country’s approach to private property, Pagano and

Volpin (2001) and Rajan and Zingales (2003) contend that the comparative powers of

different political interest groups, which are likely to vary over time, influence and reflect

national approaches to private contracting. Furthermore, some scholars reject the

contention that case law-based legal systems respond more effectively than more

statutory-based systems (e.g., see Cooter and Kornhauser, 1980; Cooter, Kornhauser, and

Lane, 1979; Blume and Rubinfeld, 1982; Rubin, 1982; Kaplow, 1992; and Coffee, 2000).

For instance, as exemplified by the law on contracts for the benefit of third parties,

English law has clung with remarkable tenacity to the principle that “only a person who

is a party to a contract can sue on it.” (ZK. 1998, p. 468) In contrast, the civil law

countries granted greater rights to third parties through statutory changes. This paper

focuses on assessing empirically the linkages running from legal origin, to legal system




                                              6
characteristics, to the financing obstacles faced by firms. We naturally, therefore, provide

evidence on these competing views regarding law and finance.

       Furthermore, some may argue that the political and adaptability channels are

inextricably intertwined. While the political and adaptability views of why legal origin

matters for finance are not mutually exclusive, they emphasize different mechanisms.

The political channel focuses on the political independence of the judiciary. The

adaptability channel focuses on the process of law making. Nevertheless, the two

channels may be so interrelated that neither exerts an independent impact on firm

financing obstacles. This is an empirical question that we address.

       A number of methodological concerns need to be noted. First, we use survey data,

where firms subjectively report financing obstacles. Thus a firm facing the same

obstacles in two different countries may report different obstacles for reasons that do not

depend on actual constraints. Although it is not clear that this would bias the results in

any particular direction, we discuss evidence on the validity of the survey information

below. A second and related methodological issue involves the measures of financing

obstacles. None of the four measures is ideal. The general financing obstacle indicator

captures a firm’s broad assessment about the degree to which external financing

constraints impede the operation and growth of the firm, but the indicator does not

measure a specific inefficiency in the contracting environment. Furthermore, while we

examine more specific financing impediments, such as collateral requirements, the

availability of long-term finance, and the extent of bank paperwork and bureaucracy,

each of these measures may miss crucial elements of how the legal system affects firms’

ability to contract for external finance. While fully recognizing these limitations, we




                                              7
believe that (a) moving from the aggregate measures of financial development used by

Beck et al. (2003a) to firm-level indicators of financing obstacles provides addition

evidence on how legal origin influences the operation of the financial system, (b)

measurement concerns are mitigated by using a range of firm responses regarding

different financing obstacles, and (c) there are material advantages to using firm level

responses rather than alternative measures of firm financing constraints, which we

discuss in the next section. Third, the adaptability channel is inherently dynamic in that it

focuses on the efficient flexibility of legal systems. We use purely cross-sectional data on

jurisprudence and legal formalism as proxies for adaptability, but we unfortunately do not

have time-series information on the comparative degree of efficient legal system

adaptability for a broad cross-section of countries. Pistor et al. (2000) and Keinan (2000)

provide detailed comparisons of the evolution of statutes regarding corporate law and the

law on secured transactions for a few key countries, but more research would be useful

along these lines.

       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the data

and section 3 describes the methodology. Section 4 gives the results and Section 5

concludes.




                                              8
2. Data

        To assess the relation between legal system traits and firms’ access to finance, we

combine firm-level survey data with country-level indicators on the operation of legal

systems. The intersection of these databases produces a sample of over 4,000 firms and

38 countries. Table 1 presents observations by country. Table 2 gives descriptive

statistics and correlations.

2.1. Firm’s access to finance

        The corporate finance literature has used different approaches for inferring the

degree to which firms that are financially constrained. Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen

(1988) use a priori reasoning to argue that low-dividend firms are constrained. Rajan and

Zingales (1998) use the external financing patterns of US firms as a benchmark for the

“natural” dependence of industries on external financing around the world. Demirguc-

Kunt and Maksimovic (1998) rely on a financial planning model to identify firms that

have access to long-term external financing.

        Rather than inferring financing constraints indirectly, we use direct measures of

the obstacles that firms report contracting for external finance. We use firm-level survey

data from the WBES for over 4,000 firms in 38 countries, both developed and

developing, for three reasons. First, the survey acquires direct information from firms

about perceived obstacles and therefore does not infer the existence of financing

constraints from other information. Second, the survey not only has information on

general financing obstacles. It also provides information on the specific types of obstacles

that firms face in financial contracting, such as collateral requirements, paperwork and

access to long-term financing. Third, the WBES database has excellent coverage of small




                                               9
and medium size firms (as well as large firms), while other cross-country studies use data

that focus heavily on large corporations. 40% of the firms in the sample are small

(between 5 and 50 employees), another 40% medium-sized (between 51 and 500

employees) and the remaining 20% large firms (over 500 employees).

       Although using data based on self-reporting by firms may produce concerns that a

firm facing the same obstacles will respond to questions differently in different

institutional and cultural environments, we do not believe the survey nature of the data is

distorting the results. First, if this were pure measurement error, it would bias the results

against finding a relationship between legal system traits and firms’ obstacles in financial

contracting. Also, Hellman et al. (2000) show that in a sub-sample of 20 countries there is

a close connection between responses and measurable outcomes, and they find no

systematic bias in the survey responses. Furthermore, Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and

Maksimovic (2005) show that reported financing obstacles slow firm growth. Thus,

firms’ responses to the survey on financing obstacles are capturing more than

idiosyncratic differences in how firms rank obstacles. Finally, legal system traits could

hurt economic growth opportunities without influencing firms’ access to capital. Firms

in countries with worse opportunities may blame this on financing obstacles. Thus, the

causal mechanism may run from legal characteristics to growth opportunities to reported

lack of access and not from legal characteristics to actual lack of access. Below,

however, we show that the results hold even when controlling for growth opportunities,

as measured by the overall level of economic development as well as recent rates of

economic growth.




                                              10
       General Financing Obstacle equals the response to the question: “How

problematic is financing for the operation and growth of your business?” Answers vary

between 1 (no obstacle), 2 (minor obstacle), 3 (moderate obstacle), and 4 (major

obstacle). Table 1 shows that perceived financing obstacles do not only vary across firms

within a country, but also across countries. Portuguese firms rate financing obstacles as

relatively insignificant (1.73), while firms in Haiti rate financing obstacles as more than

moderate (3.51).7

       Collateral Requirements equals the response to the question: “How problematic

are collateral requirements of banks/financial institutions for the operation and growth of

your business?: (1) no obstacle, (2) a minor obstacle, (3) a moderate obstacle, or (4) a

major obstacle?” Collateral has been shown to help overcome adverse selection and

moral hazard risks in credit markets (Stiglitz and Weiss, 1981; Bester, 1985). The ability

of the lender to effectively recover and re-sell collateral thus determines availability and

terms of credit. Legal systems across countries vary in the types of assets that can be used

as collateral and in the way the lender can recover collateral (Keinan, 2000). We will

assess whether collateral requirements as part of financial contracting constitute an

obstacle for firm growth across different legal traditions and whether judicial

independence and legal system adaptability help overcome this obstacle.

       Long-term Loans equals the response to the question: “How problematic is the

lack of access to long-term loans for the operation and growth of your business?: (1) no

obstacle, (2) a minor obstacle, (3) a moderate obstacle, or (4) a major obstacle?” One of

the major functions of financial intermediaries is to transform short-term savings into

long-term investment resources (Levine, 1997). Informational asymmetries with the




                                             11
resulting adverse selection and moral hazard risks, however, hamper this maturity

transformation. Previous research has shown that loans to firms in financially less

developed countries have significantly lower maturity (Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic,

1999). We assess whether difficulties in contracting for long-term finance vary across

legal traditions and whether judicial independence and legal system adaptability help ease

access.

           Paperwork and Bureaucracy equals the response to the question: “How

problematic is bank paperwork or bureaucracy for the operation and growth of your

business?: (1) no obstacle, (2) a minor obstacle, (3) a moderate obstacle, or (4) a major

obstacle?” Paperwork and bureaucracy constitute transaction costs for both borrower and

lender. We therefore assess whether the degree to which firms report paperwork as major

problem in financial contracting varies across legal traditions and is related to judicial

independence and legal system adaptability.

           The four firm-level financing obstacles indicators – General Financing Obstacle,

Collateral Requirements, Long-term Loans, and Paperwork/Bureaucracy -- are

significantly, positively correlated with each other (Table 2B). The correlation

coefficient ranges from 0.34 to 0.60. This suggests that each financial obstacle indicator

provides independent information on the barriers that firms report they face in raising

capital.

2.2. Firm-level Control Variables

           The regressions control for several firm characteristics. Specifically, the analyses

include dummy variables, indicating whether the firm is partially owned by the

government or a foreign entity. Similarly, the regressions include dummy variables




                                                12
indicating whether a firm (i) exports, (ii) is in the manufacturing sector, and (iii) is in the

services sector. The study controls for firm size by including the log of sales in United

States dollars (USD). The regressions control for the market structure by including the

number of competitors the firm faces. Finally, the investigation includes indicators of the

governance system for each firm. Specifically, the regressions include dummy variables

indicating whether the firm is (i) a single proprietorship or partnership or (ii) a

corporation. Cooperatives and other legal forms are captured in the constant. Further, the

analysis includes dummy variables indicating whether major decisions are primarily

made by (i) an individual or a family, (ii) its board of directors or (iii) its management.

The constant captures control by a conglomerate, a bank, workers or government.

         Government-owned firms constitute 5% of the sample, while foreign-owned

firms constitute 26%. 34% of the firms are controlled by its board, 13% by management

and 40% by an individual or family. 31% of the firms are single proprietorships or

partnership, while 46% are corporations. Manufacturing firms constitute 40% of the

sample and service firms 44%. On average, firms face 2.1 competitors. The correlations

in Table 2C indicate that government and foreign-owned firms, firms controlled by its

board, corporations, service firms and larger firms face lower financing obstacles, while

family-controlled firms, single proprietorships and partnerships and firms with more

competition face higher financing obstacles. Many of the firm characteristics are also

highly correlated with each other.

2.3. Indicators of Legal Origin, Judicial Independence and Legal Adaptability

        French Legal Origin equals one if the country’s Company/Commercial law has

French legal origin and zero otherwise.8 Similarly, we define the dummy variable British




                                              13
Legal Origin, which takes on the value one if the country has a British common law

tradition as defined by LLSV (1999) and zero otherwise (so that Sweden and Germany

have values of zero).

       Tenure of Supreme Court Judges ranges from zero to two, increasing in the

tenure of the Supreme Court judges. If tenure is for less than six years, then this variable

is coded as zero. If tenure is between six years and lifelong, then the Tenure of Supreme

Courts Judges variable is coded as one. If Supreme Court judges have lifelong tenure,

then the variable is coded as two. In a legal system that grants longer tenure to Supreme

Court judges, this increases the independence of the judiciary relative to the State.

According to the political channel, firms in countries with more independent judiciaries

will face lower obstacles in accessing and contracting for external finance. This indicator

of the tenure of Supreme Court judges and the next indicator regarding the relative power

of the judiciary vis-à-vis the executive and legislature is from La Porta, et al. (2004).

       Supreme Court Power combines the tenure of Supreme Court Judges with a

dummy variable indicating whether the Supreme Court has power over administrative

cases, i.e. cases involving the government. Thus, Supreme Court Power equals one if (1)

Supreme Court Judges have lifelong tenure and (2) the Supreme Courts has power over

administrative cases and equals zero if either of these two conditions does not hold. To

the extent that the Supreme Court is independent of the government as measured by

lifelong tenure and has control over cases involving the government, this represents

greater judicial power relative to the State. The political channel predicts that Supreme

Court judges who have life-long tenure and power over administrative cases are more




                                              14
independent from the State, with positive repercussions for firms’ access to external

finance.

        Case Law (La Porta et al., 2004) is a dummy variable that indicates whether

judicial decisions are a source of law. The adaptability channel predicts that countries in

which judicial decisions are a source of law will adapt more easily to changing economic

and financial circumstances with beneficial impacts on the operation of the financial

system.

        Legal Justification (Djankov et al., 2003) indicates whether the legal process is

based on statutory law rather than on principles of equity. 9 Specifically, Legal

Justification is the normalized sum of three dummy variables: (1) Complaint measures

whether the complaint is required to include references to the applicable laws, legal

reasoning or other formalities that normally require legal training or assistance, (2)

Judgment indicates whether the judgment must expressly state the applicable law or case

law for the decision, and (3) Law vs. Equity indicates whether judgment has to be based

on statutory law or can rather be motivated by general equitable arguments. Legal

Justification takes on values of 0, 0.33, 0.67, and 1, where higher values signify the legal

system imposes greater requirements that the legal process be based on statutory law. The

adaptability channel predicts that firms in countries where judicial decisions are based

purely on statutory law rather than principles of equity face greater rigidities in writing

contracts that facilitate the flow of external capital to firms.

           Firms in French legal origin countries report higher financing obstacles due to

collateral requirements, access to long-term loans and paperwork and bureaucracy (Table

2B). Also, firms face lower financing obstacles in countries where (i) judicial decisions




                                               15
are a source of law, (ii) court decisions are based on principles of equity rather than

solely on statutory law, and (iii) where Supreme Court judges enjoy longer tenures. There

is no correlation between Supreme Court Power and firms’ financing obstacles.

       British legal origin countries are more likely to have judicial decisions as a source

of law and to have judicial decisions based on principles of equity rather than based only

on statutory law (Table 2B). British legal origin countries also have Supreme Court

judges that have longer tenure and are more powerful. The opposite holds for French

Legal Origin countries. The correlations also indicate, however, that judicial

independence and adaptability of the legal system are highly correlated with each other,

which might make it difficult to distinguish the effect of the two.

3. Methodology

       To assess the relation between legal system characteristics – judicial

independence from the government and legal system adaptability -- and firms’ access to

finance, we assume that the enterprise’s underlying response can be described by the

following equation, where the j and k subscripts indicate firm and country respectively:



General Financing Obstaclej,k = β1 Governmentj,k + β2 Foreignj,k + β3 Exporterj,k + β4
Privatej,k + β5 Corporationj,k + β6 Familyj,k +β7 Boardj,k + β8 Managementj,k + β9
Manufacturingj,k + β10 Servicesj,k + β11 Salesj,k +β12 No. of Competitorsj,k +β13 GDP per
capitak +β14 Lawk + ε

       Law is either French Legal Origin, or one of our judicial independence from the

government or legal adaptability measures.

       Importantly, we control for GDP per capita in all of the regressions. To the extent

that a more independent judiciary and a more adaptable legal system reflect a generally

higher level of economic and institutional development, any relation between legal


                                             16
system traits and firms’ financing obstacles might be a spurious reflection of the level of

economic development. The regressions, therefore, include the log of GDP per capita. As

shown in Table 2B, firms in richer countries face lower obstacles raising external finance.

       Unlike the underlying variable, the observed variable General Financing Obstacle

is a polychotomous dependent variable with a natural order. Specifically, the enterprise

classifies the obstacle with k = 1, 2, 3, or 4 if the underlying variable is between αk-1 and

αk+1., with the α-vector being estimated together with the coefficient vector β. We

therefore use the ordered probit model to estimate equation (1). We use standard

maximum likelihood estimation with heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors. The

coefficients, however, cannot be interpreted as marginal effects of a one-unit increase in

the independent variable on the dependent variable, given the non-linear structure of the

model. Rather, the marginal effect is calculated as φ(β’x)β, where φ is the standard

normal density at β’x. We use the same estimation procedure when using (a) the

importance of collateral requirements in accessing finance, (b) the importance of the lack

of access to long-term loans and (c) the importance of bank paperwork and bureaucracy

for obtaining external finance as dependent variables.

4. Results

4.1. Legal Origin and Firms’ Access to Finance

       The results in Table 3 indicate that firms in French Legal Origin countries face

larger obstacles to accessing external finance than firms in Common law countries.

Specifically, firms in French Legal Origin countries report higher obstacles due to

collateral requirements, the lack of access to long-term loans and bank paperwork and

bureaucracy. While the French Legal Origin dummy enters significantly only at the 8%



                                             17
level in the General Financing Obstacle regression, it enters significantly at the 5% level

in the regressions of Collateral Requirements, Long-term Loans and Paperwork and

Bureaucracy. We get similar results when we (i) use the British Legal Origin dummy –

firms in Common Law countries face lower financing obstacles than firms in Civil Code

countries – and (ii) when we leave out Germany and Sweden and thus focus exclusively

on British Legal Origin versus French Legal Origin countries.

          The effect of legal tradition on firms’ access to finance is not only statistically,

but also economically significant. The probability that a firm in a French Legal Origin

country rates collateral requirements as major obstacle is two percentage points higher

than in other countries; the probability that it rates the lack of access to long-term loans as

major obstacle is 10 percentage points higher and the probability that it rates paperwork

and bureaucracy as major obstacle is seven percentage points higher.

          The results in Table 3 also indicate that foreign-owned and large firms face lower

financing obstacles than domestic or small firms, while incorporated and family-owned

firms face particularly high obstacles. Finally, firms in economically more developed

countries face lower obstacles than firms in countries with lower levels of GDP per

capita.




                                                18
4.2. Firms’ Access to Finance, Legal Adaptability and Judicial Independence

       Table 4 presents regressions that assess whether legal system adaptability and

judicial independence from the government influence the obstacles that firms face in

raising external finance. For each financing obstacles variable – General Financing

Obstacle, Collateral Requirements, Long-Term Loans, and Paperwork and Bureaucracy -,

we present four regressions. We present regressions with one of the two adaptability

channel indexes and one of the two political channel indexes. We present all

combinations. As noted, the regressions control for firm-level characteristics and the

level of GDP per capita. For brevity, we only report the country-level variables.

       The Table 4 regressions indicate that firms in countries with more adaptable legal

systems face lower financing obstacles than countries with more rigid legal systems. Case

Law and Legal Justification enter significantly at the five percent level and with the

expected sign in all but one regression; Legal Justification enters significantly at the 10%

level when controlling for Supreme Court Power. Thus, these results are consistent with

the adaptability channel view of why legal origin matters for financial development.

       In contrast, the Table 4 results do not lend strong support to the political channel

view of why legal origin matters for firm financing obstacles. There is not a robust

relation between judicial independence and firms’ access to finance. Supreme Court

Power either enters insignificantly or with the opposite sign of that predicted by the

political channel view. Supreme Court Tenure only enters significantly and negatively in

the regressions of Collateral Requirements. While we do not find evidence that judicial

independence explains firms’ access to finance, this does not imply that judicial

independence is an unimportant feature of legal systems. Our findings only focus on the




                                             19
impact of judicial independence on financial contracting, whereas legal system traits may

influence a wide array of economic and political outcomes (La Porta, et al. 2004).

       As in the case of legal tradition, the economic impact of legal adaptability on

firms’ access to finance is large. The probability that a firm reports financing as a major

obstacle is five percentage point lower in countries that use judicial decisions as sources

of laws. Similarly, the probability that a firm reports financing as a major obstacle to firm

growth is four percentage points lower in countries that base judicial decisions on

principles of equity rather than statutory law. The corresponding numbers for Collateral

Requirements, Long-term Loans and Paperwork and Bureaucracy are four, four, and six

percentage points for Case law and seven, 15 and 11 percentage points for Legal

Justification. These are conservative estimates since we report the results from the

regressions that yield the smallest economic impact. The results indicate that Case Law

has an especially strong impact on paperwork and bureaucracy as a financing obstacle,

while Legal Justification has an especially strong impact on access to long-term funding.

       In sum, there are three main findings in Tables 3 and 4. First, firms in French

Legal Origin countries face higher obstacles in accessing and contracting for external

finance. Second, firms in countries with more adaptable legal systems face lower

financing obstacles. Finally, variations in judicial independence do not explain a

significant amount of the cross-country variation in the external financing obstacles faced

by firms.




                                             20
4.3. Robustness Tests

        In Tables 5-8, we check the robustness of these results by controlling for (i)

creditor rights, (ii) rule of law, (iii) growth, (iv) inflation, (v) the measurement of the

financing obstacles, and (vi) the availability of finance.

        First, to assess the strength of the independent relationship between reported

financing obstacles and the adaptability channel, we control for specific legal codes that

protect the rights of creditors (La Porta et al., 1997, 1998). Specifically, we want to assess

whether broad legal system traits, such as adaptability and judicial independence, matter

or whether firms’ financing obstacles are driven by specific legal codes. Creditor Rights

measures the rights that secured creditors have vis-à-vis firms in restructuring and

liquidation.

        The results in Table 5 show that legal adaptability explains firms’ access to

finance even after controlling for the statutory rights of creditors. Case Law enters all

eight of the regressions in which it is included negatively and significantly. This is

consistent with the view that jurisprudence fosters efficient legal system adaptability and

reduces the gap between financial needs and legal system capabilities. As predicted by

the adaptability channel, Legal Justification enters all of the Collateral Requirements,

Long-term Loans, and Paperwork and Bureaucracy regressions significantly at the 5%

level. Consistent with the results noted earlier, the link between Legal Justification and

General Financing Obstacle is not as strong. In terms of the political channel, the

indicators of judicial independence enter significantly at the 5% level and with the

expected sign in only three out of 16 regressions. Finally, when controlling for legal




                                               21
system characteristics, Creditor Rights only enters significantly and negatively in the

regressions where the dependent variable is of Paperwork and Bureaucracy.

       Second, to provide additional information on the strength of the independent link

between reported financing obstacles and legal system adaptability, we control for a

general indicator of the efficiency of the legal system. We use the Rule of Law indicator

compiled by International Country Risk Guide (ICRG).

       The Table 6 results suggest that the earlier findings are robust: Case Law and

Legal Justification enter significantly at the 5% level and with the expected sign in 12 of

the 16 regressions, which is consistent with the earlier findings and supports the

adaptability channel. The indicators of judicial independence, on the other hand, enter

either insignificantly or with a sign opposite to the one predicted by the political channel.

Rule of Law enters significantly and negatively in 12 out of the 16 regressions, but does

not affect the significance of our legal adaptability indicators. This suggests that these

indicators capture specific legal system traits beyond the general efficiency of the legal

system as measured by the Rule of Law.

       Third, economic growth and inflation could influence the results and lead to

spurious findings. Perhaps the legal system influences growth but does not influence

access to finance. However, firms in growing countries may report that financing

obstacles are less of a constraint than firms in slow growing countries even though the

actual contracting environment is similar. Thus, we control for real per capita GDP

growth over the period 1995-1999. Furthermore, firms in low inflation environments

may face easier contracting conditions.10 Thus, we control for the rate of inflation.




                                             22
       The Table 7 results, however, show that the results are robust to controlling for

GDP growth and inflation. Case Law and Legal Justification enter significantly at the 5%

level and with the expected sign in 15 of the 16 regressions. However, the indicators of

judicial independence enter mostly either insignificantly or with the “wrong” sign.

Growth enters significantly and negatively in all regressions, while inflation enters

significantly only in the Collateral Requirements regressions, but surprisingly with a

negative sign. Again, these robustness checks are broadly consistent with the adaptability

channel but do not provide empirical support for the political channel.

       Fourth, the Table 8 results indicate that our findings are robust to the

measurement of the obstacles. Specifically, we reclassify responses according to whether

firms rate an obstacle (i) as minor or non-existing or (ii) as moderate or major. We

convert the obstacle variables into dummy variables, with the new variables taking the

value zero if the underlying obstacle is one or two and taking the value one if the

underlying obstacle is three or four. Then we run a probit regression. Again, the results

confirm the conclusions discussed above. When we use random effect probit estimations,

to control for a potential country-specific error term, the results are confirmed.

       Fifth, we were concerned that the results could be driven only by the supply of

intermediated funds, rather than financing obstacles. Thus, we used an additional firm-

level variable from the survey as a regressor in the analyses. The survey asked firms, “Is

banks' lack of money to lend: (1) no obstacle, (2) a minor obstacle, (3) a moderate

obstacle, or (4) a major obstacle?” Including this additional control variable, however,

did not change the results on the channels through which legal origin influences reported

financing obstacles. While we do not report these regressions to save space, the




                                             23
regression results are very similar to those reported above. Although the “lack of money”

indicator enters all of the obstacle regressions significantly and positively, we continue to

find that legal system adaptability is negatively associated with reported firm financing

obstacles, while the indicators of judicial independence are unrelated to the financing

obstacles.

       We ran two further robustness tests. Since the number of firms varies

substantially across countries, we assess the robustness of the results using a weighted

ordered probit. The weights are the inverse of the number of firms to correct for this

potential bias. The weighted regressions confirm the earlier conclusions. Also, excluding

Germany and Sweden from our sample, thereby focusing only on French and British

Legal Origin countries, confirms this paper’s findings.




                                             24
5. Conclusions

       This paper assessed the relationship between measures of two, key legal system

traits –judicial independence and the adaptability of the legal system -- and the obstacles

that firms report they face in contracting for external finances. First, the data indicate

that firms in French Legal Origin countries face higher obstacles in contracting for

external finance than firms in other countries, which suggests that legal heritage exerts a

powerful influence over firms’ access to finance. Second, as documented by Djankov et

al. (2003) and La Porta et al. (2004), French Legal Origin countries tend to have (a)

judiciaries that are less independent from the government and (b) judiciaries that less

likely to embrace jurisprudence and to base judicial decisions on principles of equity

rather than purely on statutory law than countries with a common law tradition. Thus,

consistent with Hayek (1960), Dawson (1960, 1968), and Merryman (1985), legal

heritage helps explain contemporary legal system characteristics. Third, cross-country

variation in legal system adaptability – the degree to which judicial decisions are a source

of law and are based on equity rather than statutory law – helps explain variation in the

obstacles that firms report they face in accessing external finance. Finally, cross-country

variation in judicial independence does not help explain differences in firms’ financing

obstacles. These findings provide empirical confirmation of the adaptability channel, but

do not lend much support for the political channel. In general, the results emphasize that

legal system adaptability is important for corporate finance.




                                             25
                                      References

Acemoglu, Daron, and Simon Johnson. 2003. “Unbundling Institutions,” National Bureau

       of Economic Research Working Paper, Number 9934.

Bailey, Martin J., and Paul H. Rubin. 1994. “A Positive Theory of Legal Change,” 14

       International Review of Law and Economics 467-77.

Beck, Thorsten, Ross Levine, and Norman Loayza. 2000. “Finance and the Sources of

       Growth,” 58 Journal of Financial Economics 261-300.

Beck, Thorsten, and Ross Levine. 2002. “Industry Growth and Capital Allocation: Does

       Having a Market- or Bank-based System Matter?,” 64 Journal of Financial

       Economics 147-80.

Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine. 2003a. “Law and Finance: Why

       Does Legal Origin Matter?,” 31 Journal of Comparative Economics 653-75.

Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine. 2003b. “Law, Endowments, and

       Finance,” 70 Journal of Financial Economics 137-81.

Beck, Thorsten, and Ross Levine. 2004. “Legal Institutions and Financial Development,”

       in Mary Shirley, ed., Handbook of New Institutional Economics. Norwell, MA:

       Kluwer Academic Press, forthcoming.

Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Vojislav Maksimovic. 2005. “Financial and

       Legal Constraints to Firm Growth: Does Size Matter?,” Journal of Finance,

       forthcoming.

Berkowitz, Daniel and Karen B. Clay. 2004. “The effect of judicial independence on

       courts: Evidence from the American states,” University of Pittsburgh, mimeo

Bester, Helmut. 1985. “Screening vs. Rationing in Credit Markets with Imperfect


                                          26
       Information,” 75 American Economic Review 850-55.

Blume, Lawrence E., and Daniel L. Rubinfeld. 1982. “The Dynamics of the Legal

       Process,” 11 Journal of Legal Studies 405-19.

Boyd, John H., Ross Levine, and Bruce D. Smith. 2001. “The Impact of Inflation on

       Financial Sector Performance,” 47 Journal of Monetary Economics 221-48.

Caprio, Gerard, Luc Laeven, and Ross Levine. 2003. “Governance and Bank Valuation,”

       World Bank mimeo.

Coffee, John. 2000. “Privatization and Corporate Governance: The Lessons from the

       Securities Market Failure,” Unpublished Working Paper 158. New York:

       Columbia Law School.

Cooter, Robert, Lewis Kornhauser, and David Lane. 1979. “Liability Rules, Limited

       Information, and the Role of Precedent,” 10 Bell Journal of Economics 366-81.

Cooter, Robert, and Lewis Kornhauser. 1980. “Can Litigation Improve the Law without

       the Help of Judges?,” 9 Journal of Legal Studies 139-63.

Dawson, John P. 1960. A History of Lay Judges. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University

       Press.

Dawson, John P. 1968. The Oracles of the Law. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan

       Law School (Reprinted in 1986 by William S. Hein & Co., Inc. Buffalo, New

       York).

Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, and Vojislav Maksimovic. 1998. “Law, Finance, and Firm

       Growth,” 53 Journal of Finance 2107-37.

Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, and Vojislav Maksimovic. 1999. “Institutions, Financial Markets

       and Firm Debt Maturity,” 54 Journal of Financial Economics 295-336.




                                          27
Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, and Vojislav Maksimovic. 2002. “Funding Growth in Bank-based

       and Market-based Financial Systems: Evidence from Firm Level Data,” 65

       Journal of Financial Economics 337-63.

Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer.

       2003. “Courts,” 117 Quarterly Journal of Economics 1-37.

Fazzari, Steven M., Robert G. Hubbard, and Bruce C. Petersen. 1988. “Financing

       Constraints and Corporate Investment,” 19 Brookings Papers on Economic

       Activity 141-95.

Hayek, Friedrich. 1960. The Constitution of Liberty. Chicago, IL: The University of

       Chicago Press.

Hellman, Joel, Geraint Jones, Daniel Kaufmann, and Mark Schankerman. 2000.

       “Measuring Governance and State Capture: The Role of Bureaucrats and Firms in

       Shaping the Business Environment,” European Bank for Reconstruction and

       Development, WP #51.

Johnson, Simon, Peter Boone, Alasdair Breach, and Eric Friedman. 2000. “Corporate

       Governance in the Asian Financial Crisis,” 58 Journal of Financial Economics

       141-86.

Johnson, Simon, John McMillan, and Christopher Woodruff. 2002. “Property Rights and

       Finance,” 92 American Economic Review 1335-56.

Kaplow, Louis. 1992. “Rules versus Standards: An Economic Analysis,” 42 Duke Law

       Journal 557-629.

Keinan, Yoram. 2000. “The Evolution of Secured Transactions,” Unpublished Working

       Paper, University of Michigan Law School.




                                           28
Klerman, Daniel M. and Paul G. Mahoney. 2004. “The Value of Judicial Independence:

       Evidence from 18th Century England,” American Law and Economic Review,

       forthcoming.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, Robert W. Vishny. 1997.

       “Legal Determinants of External Finance,” 52 Journal of Finance 1131-50.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny.

       1998. “Law and Finance,” 106 Journal of Political Economy 1113-55.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny.

       1999. “The Quality of Government,” 15 Journal of Law, Economics, and

       Organization 222-79.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny.

       2000. “Agency Problems and Dividend Policies around the World, 55 Journal of

       Finance 1-33.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W.Vishny.

       2002. “Investor Protection and Corporate Governance,” 57 Journal of Finance

       1147-70.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Cristian Pop-Eleches, and Andrei Shleifer.

       2004. “Judicial Checks and Balances,” 112 Journal of Political Economy 445-70.

Levine, Ross. 1997. “Financial Development and Economic Growth: Views and

       Agenda,” 35 Journal of Economic Literature 688-726.

Levine, Ross. 1998. “The Legal Environment, Banks, and Long-run Economic Growth,”

       30 Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 596-613.




                                           29
Levine, Ross. 1999. “Law, Finance, and Economic Growth,” 8 Journal of Financial

       Intermediation 36-67.

Levine, Ross. 2003. “Napoleon, Bourses, and Growth: With a Focus on Latin America,”

       in Azfar Omar and Charles Cadwell, eds., Market Augmenting Government:

       Essays in Honor of Mancur Olson. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.

Levine, Ross. 2005. “Finance and Growth: Theory, Evidence, and Mechanisms,” in

       Philippe Aghion and Steven Durlauf, eds., Handbook of Economic Growth.

       Amsterdam: North-Holland Elsevier Publishers, forthcoming.

Levine, Ross, Norman Loayza, and Thorsten Beck. 2000. “Financial Intermediation and

       Growth: Causality and Causes,” 46 Journal of Monetary Economics 31-77.

Mahoney, Paul. 2001. “The Common Law and Economic Growth: Hayek Might Be

       Right,” 30 Journal of Legal Studies 503-25.

Merryman, John H. 1985. The Civil Law Tradition: An Introduction to the Legal Systems

       of Western Europe and Latin America. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

Merryman, John H. 1996. “The French Deviation,” 44 The American Journal of

       Comparative Law 109-19.

Morck, Randall, Bernard Yeung, and Wayne Yu. 2000. “The Information Content of

       Stock Markets: Why Do Emerging Markets Have Synchronous Stock Price

       Movements?,” 58 Journal of Financial Economics 215-60.

Pagano, Marco, and Paolo Volpin. 2001. “The Political Economy of Finance,” 17 Oxford

       Review of Economic Policy 502-19.

Pistor, Katharina, Yoram Keinan, Jan Kleinheisterkamp, and Mark D. West. 2000. “The

       Evolution of Corporate Law,” Unpublished Working Paper, Harvard University




                                           30
       (Kennedy School of Government).

Posner, Richard A. 1973. Economic Analysis of the Law. Boston, MA: Little-Brown.



Priest, George L. 1977. “The Common Law Process and the Selection of Efficient

       Rules,” 6 Journal of Legal Studies 65-82.

Rajan, Raghuram G., and Luigi Zingales. 1998. “Financial Dependence and Growth,” 88

       American Economic Review 559-86.

Rajan, Raghuram G., and Luigi Zingales. 2003. “The Great Reversals: The Politics of

       Financial Development in the 20th Century,” 69 Journal of Financial Economics

       5-50.

Rubin, Paul H. 1982. “Common Law and Statute Law,” 11 Journal of Legal Studies 205-

       33.

Stiglitz, Joseph E., and Allan Weiss. 1981. “Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect

       Information,” 71 American Economic Review 393-410.

Wurgler, Jeffrey. 2000. “Financial Markets and the Allocation of Capital,” 58 Journal of

       Financial Economics 187-214.

Zweigert, Konrad, and Hein Kötz. 1998. An Introduction to Comparative Law. New

       York: Oxford University Press.




                                           31
1
  For more on the links between legal origin and financial development, see Levine (1998, 1999, 2003).
Moreover, research finds that legal institutions influence the efficiency with which financial systems
allocate capital (Wurgler, 2000; Beck and Levine, 2002), the valuation of firms (LLSV 2002 and Caprio et
al., 2003), the dividend payment policies of corporations (LLSV 2000), the efficiency of equity markets
(Morck, Yeung, and Yu, 2000), and the financial fragility of firms (Johnson, et al., 2000). Beck, Demirguc-
Kunt, and Levine (2003b) document the robust connection between legal origin and equity market
development and the property rights protection. Also, Levine, Loayza, and Beck (2000) and Beck, Levine
and Loayza (2000) establish that the component of financial development explained by legal origin
explains economic growth. See Beck and Levine (2004) for a survey of the law and finance literature.
2
  See Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic (1998, 2002), Rajan and Zingales (1998), and Beck and Levine
(2002).
3
  Johnson, McMillan, and Woodruff (2002) show that countries with strong private property rights
protection tend to have firms that reinvest their profits, but where property rights are relatively weakly
enforced, entrepreneurs are less inclined to invest retained earnings.
4
  See, Rubin (1977, 1982), Priest (1977), and Bailey and Rubin (1994).
5
  For two fascinating case-studies of the importance of judicial independence in England and the United
States, see Klerman and Mahoney (2004) and Berkowitz and Clay (2004) respectively. They do not,
however, consider the potential role of the adaptability channel.
6
  Thus, our adaptability index does not include information on the degree to which laymen are involved in
dispute resolution, the extent of oral versus written presentations in legal proceedings, and the number of
procedural steps, which are part of the formalism index. The correlation between our adaptability index and
Djankov et al.’s (2003) formalism index is 72% and statistically significant at the 1% level. Furthermore,
using the formalism index produces the same conclusions.
7
  Overall, 31% of the firms in our sample rate financing as major obstacle, 26% as a moderate obstacle,
21% as a minor obstacle, and 21% as no obstacle.
8
  Except for Sweden and Germany, LLSV (1998, 1999) classify the remainder of the countries in our
sample as Common Law countries. As discussed, Hayek (1960), Dawson (1960, 1968), and Merryman
(1985) emphasize the distinction between French Legal Origin countries and other countries, particularly
British common law countries. Hence, we include Sweden (Scandinavian law country) and Germany
(German law country) as zeros in the French legal origin dummy variable. Note, however, that eliminating
Germany and Sweden from the sample does not change this paper’s results. Since Germany and Sweden
are the only representatives of the German and Scandinavian legal traditions in the sample, we do not
capture them in separate dummies.
9
  Djankov et al. (2003) use survey data from law firms in 109 countries to construct indicators of the
functioning of the legal system when courts confront cases involving the eviction of tenants for non-
payments of rent and the collection of a bounced check.
10
   Boyd, Levine and Smith (2001) show that countries with higher and more volatile inflation have lower
levels of financial development, a relation that is robust to controlling for reverse causation and
simultaneity bias.




                                                    32
Table 1. Legal origin, judicial independence and legal adaptability across
countries
                                    General               Paperwork
                    GDP per       Financing    Collateral        and          Long-term         Legal         Supreme      Supreme
Country              capita        Obstacle requirements Bureaucracy             Loans Case law Justification Court Tenure Court Power       Legal Origin
Argentina                 8,000         3.02           2.75          2.80           3.18            1             1      2               1          F
Brazil                    4,492         2.69           2.89          3.01           2.91            0             1      2               1          F
Canada                   20,549         2.06           2.08          2.38           1.50            1             0      2               1          B
Chile                     5,003         2.47           2.37          2.36           2.43            0          0.67      2               1          F
Colombia                  2,381         2.69           2.81          2.67           2.92            0             1      1               0          F
Ecuador                   1,538         3.32           2.85          2.92           3.52            1          0.67      2               1          F
Egypt                     1,108         3.00           2.46          2.82                           0             1      2               1          F
Ethiopia                    109         2.94           3.11          2.79                           0                    2               1          F
France                   27,720         2.80           2.30          2.96           1.71            0             1      2               0          F
Germany                  30,794         2.53           2.71          2.55           2.14            1             1      2               0          G
Ghana                       393         3.08           2.33          2.52                           1             0      2               1          B
Haiti                       369         3.51           2.75          2.12           3.35            0                    1               0          F
Honduras                    708         2.86           2.84          2.58           3.18            1             1      0               0          F
India                       414         2.52           2.48          2.54                           1             1      2               1          B
Indonesia                 1,045         2.86           2.52          2.53           2.76            1          0.67      2               1          F
Italy                    19,646         2.11           2.44          2.49           1.88            0             1      2               0          F
Kenya                       339         2.85           2.35          2.27                           1          0.33      2               1          B
Malaysia                  4,536         2.66           2.66          2.39           2.27            1             0      2               1          B
Mexico                    3,395         3.37           2.87          2.96           3.56            0             1      1               0          F
Nicaragua                   435         3.17           2.97          2.94           2.89            0                    1               0          F
Nigeria                     254         3.11           2.26          2.33                           1          0.33      2               1          B
Pakistan                    506         3.33           3.21          2.95           2.94            1          0.67      2               1          B
Panama                    3,124         2.10           2.40          2.51           1.88            0             1      1               0          F
Peru                      2,335         3.03           2.71          2.91           3.40            1             1      2               1          F
Philippines               1,126         2.68           2.65          2.29           2.38            1             1      2               1          F
Portugal                 11,582         1.74           1.59          1.85           1.78            1             1      2               0          F
Singapore                24,948         1.86           1.98          1.78           1.62            1             0      2               1          B
South Africa              3,925         2.46           1.79          1.77                           1          0.33      2               1          B
Spain                    15,858         2.27           1.91          2.21           1.83            0             1      2               1          F
Sweden                   28,258         1.88           2.08          1.63           1.44            1          0.33      2               0          S
Thailand                  2,836         3.09           2.42          2.37           3.14            0          0.67      2               0          B
Turkey                    2,994         3.20           2.42          2.49           3.02            1          0.67      2               0          F
Uganda                      324         3.13           2.66          2.58                           1          0.67      2               1          B
United
Kingdom                  20,187         2.24           2.17          2.11           1.68            1          0.33      2               1          B
United States            29,250         2.29           2.11          2.40           1.66            1          0.33      2               1          B
Venezuela                 3,483         2.50           2.82          2.88           2.77            0             1      1               0          F
Zambia                      394         2.67           2.68          2.43                           1          0.33      2               1          B
Zimbabwe                    693         3.05           2.07          2.29                           1          0.67      2               1          B

Note: GDP per capita is real GDP per capita, averaged over 1995-99. General Financing Obstacle is the response to
question whether financing is an obstacle to the operation and growth of the firm. Answers vary between 1 (no
obstacle), 2 (minor obstacle), 3 (moderate obstacle), and 4 (major obstacle). Collateral requirements, Long-term
Loans and Paperwork and Bureaucracy are defined similarly. Tenure of Supreme Court Judges indicates the length of
tenure of Supreme Court judges. Supreme Court Power is a dummy variable that takes on the value one if Supreme
Court Judges have life-long tenure and jurisdiction over administrative cases. Case Law is a dummy variable that
takes on the value one if judges base their decision on case law. Legal Justification indicates whether judgments are
based on statutory law rather than on principles of equity. F indicates French legal origin, C Common legal origin, G
German legal origin and S Scandinavian legal origin.




                                                        33
Table 2. Summary Statistics and Correlations
Panel A: Summary Statistics
                                  Obs            Mean          Median         Std. Dev.         Min            Max
General Financing Obstacle        3704           2.69             3             1.12             1               4
Collateral                        3733           2.52             3             1.10             1               4
Long-term loans                   2743           2.52             3             1.22             1               4
Paperwork                         3760           2.52             3             1.03             1               4
Government                        4111           0.05             0             0.21             0               1
Foreign                           4111           0.26             0             0.44             0               1
Exporter                          4111           0.43             0             0.50             0               1
Board                             4111           0.34             0             0.47             0               1
Management                        4111           0.13             0             0.34             0               1
Family                            4111           0.40             0             0.49             0               1
Private                           4111           0.31             0             0.46             0               1
Corporation                       4111           0.46             0             0.50             0               1
Manufacturing                     4111           0.40             0             0.49             0               1
Services                          4111           0.44             0             0.49             0               1
Sales                             4111           15.79          15.79           4.65           -2.12          25.33
No. competitors                   4111           0.76            0.69           0.31             0             2.20
GDP per capita                     38            7,501          2,915           9,961           109           30,794
British Legal Origin               38            0.39             0             0.50             0               1
French Legal Origin                38            0.55             1             0.50             0               1
Caselaw                            38            0.63             1             0.49             0               1
Legal justification                35            0.68            0.67           0.36             0               1
Supreme Court Tenure               38            1.79             2             0.47             0               2
Supreme Court Power                38            0.63             1             0.49             0               1
Creditor rights                    29            2.34             2             1.56             0               4
Rule of Law                        38            4.05             4             1.29             2               6
GDP growth                         38            1.32            1.61           1.72           -2.46           4.24
Inflation                          38            10.78           6.89           12.67          -0.40          58.05

Note: General Financing Obstacle is the response to question whether financing is an obstacle to the operation and
growth of the firm. Answers vary between 1 (no obstacle), 2 (minor obstacle), 3 (moderate obstacle), and 4 (major
obstacle). Collateral requirements, Long-term Loans and Paperwork and Bureaucracy are defined similarly.
Government and Foreign are dummy variables that take the value 1 if the firm has government or foreign ownership
and zero if not. Exporter is a dummy variable that indicates if the firm is an exporting firm. Private and Corporation
are dummy variables that indicate whether the firm is (i) a single proprietorship or a partnership or (ii) a corporation.
Family, Board and Management are dummy variables that indicate whether the firm is controlled by (i) and
individual or family, (ii) its board, or (iii) its management. Manufacturing and Services are industry dummies. Sales
is the logarithm of sales in US$. Number of Competitors is the logarithm of the number of competitors the firm has.
GDP per capita is real GDP per capita, averaged over 1995-99. French legal origin and British legal origin are
dummy variables that take on the value one for countries with a French Legal Origin tradition and a British Legal
Origin tradition, and zero otherwise Tenure of Supreme Court Judges indicates the length of tenure of Supreme Court
judges. Supreme Court Power is a dummy variable that takes on the value one if Supreme Court Judges have life-
long tenure and jurisdiction over administrative cases. Case Law is a dummy variable that takes on the value one if
judges base their decision on case law. Legal Justification indicates whether judgments have to be based on statutory
law rather than on principles of equity. Creditor rights is an indicator of the rights of secured creditor in the
restructuring or liquidation of a company. Rule of Law is an indicator of the extent to which the population of a
country trusts in the legal system to uphold their legal rights. GDP growth is averaged over 1995 –99 and inflation is
based on the CPI.




                                                          34
Panel B: Correlations of financing obstacles with country variables
                         General
                         Financing                        Long-term                British Legal French Legal            Legal           Supreme      Supreme
                         Obstacle         Collateral      loans        Paperwork   Origin        Origin       Case Law   Justification   Court Tenure Court Power
Collateral               0.43***
Long-tem loans           0.51***          0.45***
Paperwork                0.34***          0.60***         0.38***
British Legal Origin     -0.03            -0.09***        -0.21***     -0.13***
French Legal Origin      0.07***          0.10***         0.28***      0.17***     -0.91***
Case Law                 -0.06**          -0.08***        -0.11***     -0.12***    0.24***      -0.33***
Legal Justification      0.06***          0.11***         0.26***      0.18***     -0.62***     0.62***      -0.39***
Supreme Court Tenure -0.07***             -0.11***        -0.18***     -0.07***    0.34***      -0.38***     0.26***     -0.29***
Supreme Court Power -0.02                 -0.01           -0.04*       0.02        0.25***      -0.12***     0.45***     -0.28***        0.44***
GDP per capita           -0.24***         -0.15***        -0.39***     -0.12***    0.07***      -0.08***     -0.02       -0.14***        0.23***      -0.17***

Panel C: Correlations of financing obstacles with firm-level variables

                 General
                 financing                     Long-term
                 obstacle        Collateral    loans     Paperwork Government       Foreign      Exporter     Board      Management       Family     Private     Corporation   Manufacturing Services   Sales
Collateral       0.43***
Long-term loans 0.51***          0.45***
Paperwork        0.34***         0.60***       0.38***
Government       -0.04**         -0.06***      -0.04*       -0.06***
Foreign          -0.15***        -0.14***      -0.10***     -0.08***    0.01
Exporter         -0.02           -0.06***      -0.04*       -0.05***    0.03*       0.22***
Board            -0.12***        -0.06***      -0.10***     -0.07***    0.09***     0.13***      0.11***
Management       0.03*           0.02          0.04**       0.03**      -0.03**     0.05***      0.01         -0.28***
Family           0.13***         0.11***       0.08***      0.09***     -0.15***    -0.30***     -0.17***     -0.58***   -0.31***
Private          0.13***         0.13***       0.14***      0.12***     -0.10***    -0.23***     -0.17***     -0.28***   -0.03**          0.38***
Corporation      -0.11***        -0.14***      -0.19***     -0.16***    0.00        0.23***      0.17***      0.17***    0.03**           -0.26***   -0.62***
Manufacturing 0.02               0.01          0.05**       0.03        -0.01       0.08***      0.31***      0.01       -0.00            -0.00      -0.05***    0.05***
Services         -0.07***        -0.03*        -0.07***     -0.03*      -0.01       -0.06***     -0.32***     0.00       0.03*            0.01       0.07***     -0.08***      -0.72***
Sales            -0.13***        -0.11***      -0.13***     -0.09***    0.02        0.13***      0.02         -0.01      0.11***          -0.11***   -0.08***    0.04**        -0.04**       0.12***
No. competitors 0.07***          0.00          0.05***      0.01        -0.01       -0.03*       0.05***      -0.07***   -0.02            0.05***    -0.01       0.15***       -0.03         -0.10***   -0.16***
Table 3. Financing Obstacles and Legal Origin
                        General
                        financing      Long-term      Collateral   Paperwork/
                        obstacle       loans          requirements bureaucracy
Government              -0.117         -0.026         -0.224        -0.228
                        (0.160)        (0.802)        (0.010)***    (0.013)**
Foreign                 -0.268         -0.146         -0.250        -0.075
                        (0.000)***     (0.010)***     (0.000)***    (0.086)*
Exporter                0.027          0.024          -0.035        -0.052
                        (0.502)        (0.625)        (0.381)       (0.178)
Private                 -0.011         -0.042         0.128         0.050
                        (0.850)        (0.598)        (0.027)**     (0.374)
Corporation             0.239          0.193          0.273         0.197
                        (0.001)***     (0.035)**      (0.000)***    (0.005)***
Family                  0.236          0.086          0.246         0.145
                        (0.000)***     (0.297)        (0.000)***    (0.016)**
Board                   0.135          0.074          0.059         0.045
                        (0.011)**      (0.216)        (0.241)       (0.363)
Management              -0.024         -0.110         -0.140        -0.187
                        (0.634)        (0.069)*       (0.005)***    (0.000)***
Manufacturing           -0.102         -0.200         -0.004        0.015
                        (0.050)*       (0.010)***     (0.935)       (0.770)
Services                -0.144         -0.246         -0.032        -0.060
                        (0.006)***     (0.001)***     (0.559)       (0.249)
Sales                   -0.012         -0.013         -0.015        -0.013
                        (0.005)***     (0.005)***     (0.000)***    (0.001)***
No. competitors         -0.065         0.049          -0.155        0.030
                        (0.318)        (0.557)        (0.016)**     (0.641)
GDP per capita          -0.176         -0.288         -0.114        -0.067
                        (0.000)***     (0.000)***     (0.000)***    (0.000)***
French Legal Origin     0.071          0.314          0.082         0.265
                        (0.078)*       (0.000)***     (0.045)**     (0.000)***
Observations            3704           2743           3733          3760

Note: The underlying model is: Obstacle = β1 Government + β2 Foreign + β3 Exporter + β4 Private + β5 Corporation + β6 Family +β7 Board + β8
Management + β9 Manufacturing + β10 Services + β11 Sales +β12 No. of Competitors +β13 GDP per capita + +β14 French legal origin + ε. Managers
were asked about the obstacles they face to the growth and operation of their firm. Answers vary between 1 (no obstacle), 2 (minor obstacle), 3
(moderate obstacle), and 4 (major obstacle). Government and Foreign are dummy variables that take the value 1 if the firm has government or
foreign ownership and zero if not. Exporter is a dummy variable that indicates if the firm is an exporting firm. Private and Corporation are
dummy variables that indicate whether the firm is (i) a single proprietorship or a partnership or (ii) a corporation. Family, Board and Management
are dummy variables that indicate whether the firm is controlled by (i) and individual or family, (ii) its board, or (iii) its management.
Manufacturing and Services are industry dummies. Sales is the logarithm of sales in US$. Number of Competitors is the logarithm of the number
of competitors the firm has. French legal origin is a dummy variable that takes on the value one for countries with French Legal Origin tradition
and zero otherwise. The regression is run with ordered probit. Detailed variable definitions and sources are given in the appendix. P-values are
reported in parentheses.
Table 4. Financing Obstacles, Legal Adaptability and Judicial Independence
Panel A:
                           General General General General
                           Financial Financial Financial Financial Collateral Collateral Collateral Collateral
                           Obstacle Obstacle Obstacle Obstacle requirements requirements requirements requirements
GDP per capita             -0.187      -0.188      -0.178     -0.176      -0.102       -0.111        -0.091       -0.094
                           (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)***
Case law                   -0.167      -0.137                             -0.142       -0.166
                           (0.001)*** (0.009)***                          (0.003)*** (0.001)***
Legal justification                                0.159      0.123                                  0.251        0.291
                                                   (0.022)** (0.098)*                                (0.000)*** (0.000)***
Supreme Court Tenure       0.023                   0.084                  -0.104                     -0.109
                           (0.650)                 (0.114)                (0.034)**                  (0.033)**
Supreme Court Power                    -0.063                 -0.034                   0.021                      0.034
                                       (0.174)                (0.485)                  (0.650)                    (0.479)
Observations               2925        2925        2754       2754        2959         2959          2790         2790



Panel B:
                           Long-term Long-term Long-term Long-term Paperwork/ Paperwork/ Paperwork/ Paperwork/
                           loans     loans     loans     loans     bureaucracy Bureaucracy Bureaucracy bureaucracy
GDP per capita             -0.344      -0.333      -0.333       -0.320      -0.065      -0.050       -0.059       -0.035
                           (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.001)*** (0.000)*** (0.039)**
Case law                   -0.138      -0.135                               -0.230      -0.296
                           (0.015)** (0.022)**                              (0.000)*** (0.000)***
Legal justification                                0.525        0.564                                0.455        0.551
                                                   (0.000)*** (0.000)***                             (0.000)*** (0.000)***
Supreme Court Tenure       0.067                   0.047                    0.039                    0.017
                           (0.285)                 (0.474)                  (0.449)                  (0.752)
Supreme Court Power                    0.023                   0.071                    0.175                     0.184
                                       (0.650)                 (0.216)                  (0.000)***                (0.000)***
Observations               2246        2246        2115         2115        2978        2978         2806         2806


Note: The underlying model is: Obstacle = β1 Government + β2 Foreign +β3 Exporter + β4 Private + β5 Corporation + β6
Family +β7 Board + β8 Management + β9 Manufacturing + β10 Services + β11 Sales +β12 No. of Competitors +β13 GDP per
capita + β14 Law + ε. Managers were asked about the obstacles they face to the growth and operation of their firm. Answers
vary between 1 (no obstacle), 2 (minor obstacle), 3 (moderate obstacle), and 4 (major obstacle). Government and Foreign are
dummy variables that take the value 1 if the firm has government or foreign ownership and zero if not. Exporter is a dummy
variable that indicates if the firm is an exporting firm. Private and Corporation are dummy variables that indicate whether the
firm is (i) a single proprietorship or a partnership or (ii) a corporation. Family, Board and Management are dummy variables
that indicate whether the firm is controlled by (i) and individual or family, (ii) its board, or (iii) its management.
Manufacturing and Services are industry dummies. Sales is the logarithm of sales in US$. Number of Competitors is the
logarithm of the number of competitors the firm has. Law is one of four variables. Tenure of Supreme Court Judges indicates
the length of tenure of Supreme Court judges. Supreme Court Power is a dummy variable that takes on the value one if
Supreme Court Judges have life-long tenure and jurisdiction over administrative cases. Case Law is a dummy variable that
takes on the value one if judges base their decision on case law. Legal Justification indicates whether judgments are based on
statutory law rather than on principles of equity. The regression is run with ordered probit. Detailed variable definitions and
sources are given in the appendix. P-values are reported in parentheses.
Table 5. Financing Obstacles, Legal Adaptability and Judicial Independence:
Controlling for Creditor Rights
Panel A:
                            General General General General
                            Financial Financial Financial Financial Collateral Collateral Collateral Collateral
                            Obstacle Obstacle Obstacle Obstacle requirements requirements requirements requirements
GDP per capita              -0.200     -0.215      -0.186      -0.215      -0.117       -0.119        -0.094       -0.100
                            (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)***
Creditor rights             -0.019     -0.021      -0.012      -0.025      -0.023       -0.035        -0.002       -0.021
                            (0.326)    (0.229)     (0.540)     (0.188)     (0.215)      (0.039)**     (0.933)      (0.247)
Case law                    -0.171     -0.150                              -0.119       -0.153
                            (0.003)*** (0.013)**                           (0.031)**    (0.008)***
Legal justification                                0.137       0.064                                  0.241        0.245
                                                   (0.085)*    (0.454)                                (0.002)*** (0.003)***
Supreme Court Tenure        -0.107                 -0.192                  -0.195                     -0.269
                            (0.349)                (0.084)*                (0.071)*                   (0.010)**
Supreme Court Power                    -0.094                  -0.125                   0.042                      0.040
                                       (0.081)*                (0.019)**                (0.429)                    (0.447)
Observations                2463       2463        2463        2463        2495         2495          2495         2495



Panel B:
                           Long-term Long-term Long-term Long-term Paperwork/ Paperwork/ Paperwork/ Paperwork/
                           loans     loans     loans     loans     bureaucracy Bureaucracy Bureaucracy bureaucracy
GDP per capita             -0.377       -0.397      -0.321       -0.340      -0.117      -0.089       -0.080        -0.048
                           (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.019)**
Creditor rights            -0.017       -0.024      0.052        0.027       -0.079      -0.078       -0.047        -0.049
                           (0.403)      (0.234)     (0.025)** (0.214)        (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.016)**        (0.005)***
Case law                   -0.204       -0.199                               -0.243      -0.297
                           (0.002)*** (0.003)***                             (0.000)*** (0.000)***
Legal justification                                 0.658        0.619                                0.394         0.493
                                                    (0.000)*** (0.000)***                             (0.000)*** (0.000)***
Supreme Court Tenure       -0.198                   -0.356                   0.139                    -0.001
                           (0.098)*                 (0.002)***               (0.209)                  (0.990)
Supreme Court Power                     -0.108                   -0.011                  0.201                      0.208
                                        (0.061)*                 (0.859)                 (0.000)***                 (0.000)***
Observations               1935         1935        1935         1935        2509        2509         2509          2509


Note: The underlying model is: Obstacle = β1 Government + β2 Foreign +β3 Exporter + β4 Private + β5 Corporation + β6
Family +β7 Board + β8 Management + β9 Manufacturing + β10 Services + β11 Sales +β12 No. of Competitors +β13 GDP per
capita + β14 Law + β15 Creditor Rights + ε. Managers were asked about the obstacles they face to the growth and operation of
their firm. Answers vary between 1 (no obstacle), 2 (minor obstacle), 3 (moderate obstacle), and 4 (major obstacle).
Government and Foreign are dummy variables that take the value 1 if the firm has government or foreign ownership and zero
if not. Exporter is a dummy variable that indicates if the firm is an exporting firm. Private and Corporation are dummy
variables that indicate whether the firm is (i) a single proprietorship or a partnership or (ii) a corporation. Family, Board and
Management are dummy variables that indicate whether the firm is controlled by (i) and individual or family, (ii) its board, or
(iii) its management. Manufacturing and Services are industry dummies. Sales is the logarithm of sales in US$. Number of
Competitors is the logarithm of the number of competitors the firm has. Law is one of four variables. Tenure of Supreme
Court Judges indicates the length of tenure of Supreme Court judges. Supreme Court Power is a dummy variable that takes on
the value one if Supreme Court Judges have life-long tenure and jurisdiction over administrative cases. Case Law is a dummy
variable that takes on the value one if judges base their decision on case law. Legal Justification indicates whether judgments
are based on statutory law rather than on principles of equity. Creditor Rights is an index of the extent to which secured
creditors are protected in the case of restructuring or liquidation of a company. The regression is run with ordered probit.
Detailed variable definitions and sources are given in the appendix. P-values are reported in parentheses.




                                                              38
Table 6.Financing Obstacles, Legal Adaptability and Judicial Independence:
Controlling for Rule of Law

Panel A:
                            General General General General
                            Financial Financial Financial Financial Collateral Collateral Collateral Collateral
                            Obstacle Obstacle Obstacle Obstacle requirements requirements requirements requirements
GDP per capita              -0.155     -0.155      -0.140      -0.144      -0.088       -0.091        -0.066       -0.063
                            (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.004)*** (0.007)***
Rule of Law                 -0.059     -0.057      -0.063      -0.050     -0.028        -0.036        -0.042       -0.050
                            (0.008)*** (0.007)*** (0.012)** (0.034)** (0.214)           (0.092)*      (0.093)*     (0.033)**
Case law                    -0.153     -0.113                              -0.137       -0.153
                            (0.002)*** (0.031)**                          (0.004)*** (0.002)***
Legal justification                                0.120       0.079                                  0.227        0.250
                                                   (0.087)*    (0.302)                                (0.001)*** (0.001)***
Supreme Court Tenure        0.061                  0.127                  -0.086                      -0.078
                            (0.259)                (0.024)**              (0.100)*                    (0.149)
Supreme Court Power                    -0.075                  -0.044                   0.014                      0.025
                                       (0.105)                 (0.367)                  (0.761)                    (0.606)
Observations                2925       2925        2754        2754        2959         2959          2790         2790



Panel B:
                           Long-term Long-term Long-term Long-term Paperwork/ Paperwork/ Paperwork/ Paperwork/
                           loans     loans     loans     loans     Bureaucracy Bureaucracy Bureaucracy bureaucracy
GDP per capita             -0.245       -0.231      -0.279      -0.275      -0.024       -0.013       -0.008        0.008
                           (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.204)           (0.503)      (0.709)       (0.724)
Rule of Law                -0.142       -0.141      -0.073      -0.059      -0.082       -0.068       -0.087        -0.071
                           (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.030)** (0.075)*         (0.000)*** (0.001)*** (0.000)*** (0.002)***
Case law                   -0.063       -0.035                              -0.216       -0.272
                           (0.284)      (0.568)                             (0.000)*** (0.000)***
Legal justification                                 0.454       0.490                                 0.406         0.493
                                                    (0.000)*** (0.000)***                             (0.000)*** (0.000)***
Supreme Court Tenure       0.102                    0.081                   0.095                     0.081
                           (0.110)                  (0.229)                 (0.080)*                  (0.153)
Supreme Court Power                     -0.030                  0.053                    0.163                      0.172
                                        (0.556)                 (0.367)                  (0.000)***                 (0.000)***
Observations               2246         2246        2115        2115        2978         2978         2806          2806

Note: The underlying model is: Obstacle = β1 Government + β2 Foreign +β3 Exporter + β4 Private + β5 Corporation + β6
Family +β7 Board + β8 Management + β9 Manufacturing + β10 Services + β11 Sales +β12 No. of Competitors +β13 GDP per
capita + β14 Law + β15 Rule of Law + ε. Managers were asked about the obstacles they face to the growth and operation of
their firm. Answers vary between 1 (no obstacle), 2 (minor obstacle), 3 (moderate obstacle), and 4 (major obstacle).
Government and Foreign are dummy variables that take the value 1 if the firm has government or foreign ownership and zero
if not. Exporter is a dummy variable that indicates if the firm is an exporting firm. Private and Corporation are dummy
variables that indicate whether the firm is (i) a single proprietorship or a partnership or (ii) a corporation. Family, Board and
Management are dummy variables that indicate whether the firm is controlled by (i) and individual or family, (ii) its board, or
(iii) its management. Manufacturing and Services are industry dummies. Sales is the logarithm of sales in US$. Number of
Competitors is the logarithm of the number of competitors the firm has. Law is one of four variables. Tenure of Supreme
Court Judges indicates the length of tenure of Supreme Court judges. Supreme Court Power is a dummy variable that takes on
the value one if Supreme Court Judges have life-long tenure and jurisdiction over administrative cases. Case Law is a dummy
variable that takes on the value one if judges base their decision on case law. Legal Justification indicates whether judgments
are based on statutory law rather than on principles of equity. Rule of law is a survey-based country-level variable of the
degree to which its citizen trust the legal system to uphold their rights. The regression is run with ordered probit. Detailed
variable definitions and sources are given in the appendix. P-values are reported in parentheses.




                                                               39
Table 7. Obstacles to Growth, Legal Adaptability and Judicial Independence:
Controlling for Growth and Inflation
.

Panel A:
                           General General General General
                           Financial Financial Financial Financial Collateral Collateral Collateral Collateral
                           Obstacle Obstacle Obstacle Obstacle requirements requirements requirements requirements
GDP per capita             -0.164     -0.154      -0.138       -0.105      -0.089      -0.097        -0.066      -0.044
                           (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.027)**
Growth                     -7.109     -7.183      -9.264       -9.857      -9.876      -10.014       -11.932     -13.414
                           (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)***
Inflation                  0.397      0.360       0.296        0.298       -1.103      -0.956        -1.137      -0.949
                           (0.068)*   (0.104)     (0.177)      (0.180)     (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)***
Case law                   -0.139     -0.136                               -0.068      -0.102
                           (0.006)*** (0.012)**                            (0.157)     (0.046)**
Legal justification                               0.192        0.228                                 0.257       0.359
                                                  (0.006)*** (0.003)***                              (0.000)*** (0.000)***
Supreme Court Tenure       0.087                  0.184                    -0.131                    -0.089
                           (0.096)*               (0.001)***               (0.011)**                 (0.098)*
Supreme Court Power                   0.029                    0.135                   0.032                     0.147
                                      (0.557)                  (0.015)**               (0.507)                   (0.007)***
Observations               2925       2925        2754         2754        2959        2959          2790        2790



Panel B:
                           Long-term Long-term Long-term Long-term Paperwork/ Paperwork/ Paperwork/ Paperwork/
                           loans     loans     loans     loans     Bureaucracy Bureaucracy Bureaucracy bureaucracy
GDP per capita             -0.271     -0.256      -0.248        -0.198       -0.056     -0.032       -0.039      0.017
                           (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.048)**          (0.024)**   (0.378)
Growth                     -10.063    -10.127     -9.139        -10.113      -4.608     -5.217       -7.304      -9.533
                           (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.002)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)***
Inflation                  0.328      0.384       0.402         0.605        -0.246     -0.017       -0.411      -0.164
                           (0.208)    (0.154)     (0.130)       (0.028)** (0.241)       (0.937)      (0.055)*    (0.451)
Case law                   -0.120     -0.133                                 -0.208     -0.292
                           (0.039)** (0.028)**                               (0.000)*** (0.000)***
Legal justification                               0.526         0.640                                0.471       0.635
                                                  (0.000)*** (0.000)***                              (0.000)*** (0.000)***
Supreme Court Tenure       0.077                  0.098                      0.046                   0.051
                           (0.227)                (0.138)                    (0.375)                 (0.352)
Supreme Court Power                   0.074                     0.203                   0.223                    0.310
                                      (0.166)                   (0.001)***              (0.000)***               (0.000)***
Observations               2246       2246        2115          2115         2978       2978         2806        2806

Note: The underlying model is: Obstacle = β1 Government + β2 Foreign +β3 Exporter + β4 Private + β5 Corporation + β6
Family +β7 Board + β8 Management + β9 Manufacturing + β10 Services + β11 Sales +β12 No. of Competitors +β13 GDP per
capita + β14 Law + β15 Growth + β16 Inflation + ε. Managers were asked about the obstacles they face to the growth and
operation of their firm. Answers vary between 1 (no obstacle), 2 (minor obstacle), 3 (moderate obstacle), and 4 (major
obstacle). Government and Foreign are dummy variables that take the value 1 if the firm has government or foreign
ownership and zero if not. Exporter is a dummy variable that indicates if the firm is an exporting firm. Private and
Corporation are dummy variables that indicate whether the firm is (i) a single proprietorship or a partnership or (ii) a
corporation. Family, Board and Management are dummy variables that indicate whether the firm is controlled by (i) and
individual or family, (ii) its board, or (iii) its management. Manufacturing and Services are industry dummies. Sales is the
logarithm of sales in US$. Number of Competitors is the logarithm of the number of competitors the firm has. Law is one of
four variables. Tenure of Supreme Court Judges indicates the length of tenure of Supreme Court judges. Supreme Court
Power is a dummy variable that takes on the value one if Supreme Court Judges have life-long tenure and jurisdiction over
administrative cases. Case Law is a dummy variable that takes on the value one if judges base their decision on case law.
Legal Justification indicates whether judgments are based on statutory law rather than on principles of equity. Growth is GDP
growth averaged over 1995-99. Inflation is the log difference in the CPI, averaged over 1995-99. The regression is run with
ordered probit. Detailed variable definitions and sources are given in the appendix. P-values are reported in parentheses
Table 8. Firms’ Obstacles to Growth, Legal Adaptability and Judicial
Independence: Probit regressions

Panel A:
                           General General General General
                           Financial Financial Financial Financial Collateral Collateral Collateral Collateral
                           Obstacle Obstacle Obstacle Obstacle requirements requirements requirements requirements
GDP per capita             -0.180      -0.183      -0.170     -0.174      -0.082       -0.106        -0.074       -0.093
                           (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)***
Case law                   -0.168      -0.130                             -0.157       -0.164
                           (0.004)*** (0.033)**                           (0.005)*** (0.005)***
Legal justification                                0.190      0.140                                  0.330        0.350
                                                   (0.019)** (0.103)                                 (0.000)*** (0.000)***
Supreme Court Tenure       0.019                   0.057                  -0.211                     -0.217
                           (0.769)                 (0.404)                (0.001)***                 (0.002)***
Supreme Court Power                    -0.085                 -0.072                   -0.062                     -0.046
                                       (0.120)                (0.213)                  (0.246)                    (0.419)
Observations               2925        2925        2754       2754        2959         2959          2790         2790



Panel B:
                           Long-term Long-term Long-term Long-term Paperwork/ Paperwork/ Paperwork/ Paperwork/
                           loans     loans     loans     loans     bureaucracy Bureaucracy Bureaucracy bureaucracy
GDP per capita             -0.389      -0.364       -0.376      -0.351      -0.064      -0.061        -0.061       -0.051
                           (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.000)*** (0.002)*** (0.013)**
Case law                   -0.173      -0.173                               -0.251      -0.314
                           (0.009)*** (0.012)**                             (0.000)*** (0.000)***
Legal justification                                 0.569       0.609                                 0.532        0.620
                                                   (0.000)*** (0.000)***                             (0.000)*** (0.000)***
Supreme Court Tenure       0.147                   0.125                    -0.059                    -0.090
                           (0.040)**               (0.091)*                 (0.354)                  (0.191)
Supreme Court Power                    0.066                    0.101                   0.129                      0.132
                                       (0.277)                  (0.122)                 (0.016)**                  (0.020)**
Observations               2246        2246         2115        2115        2978        2978          2806         2806


Note: The underlying model is: Obstacle = β1 Government + β2 Foreign +β3 Exporter + β4 Private + β5 Corporation + β6
Family +β7 Board + β8 Management + β9 Manufacturing + β10 Services + β11 Sales +β12 No. of Competitors +β13 GDP per
capita + β14 Law + ε. Managers were asked about the obstacles they face to the growth and operation of their firm. Answers
vary between 1 (no obstacle), 2 (minor obstacle), 3 (moderate obstacle), and 4 (major obstacle). We recode a dummy variable
that takes on the value zero if the respective obstacle takes the value one or two and one otherwise. Government and Foreign
are dummy variables that take the value 1 if the firm has government or foreign ownership and zero if not. Exporter is a
dummy variable that indicates if the firm is an exporting firm. Private and Corporation are dummy variables that indicate
whether the firm is (i) a single proprietorship or a partnership or (ii) a corporation. Family, Board and Management are
dummy variables that indicate whether the firm is controlled by (i) and individual or family, (ii) its board, or (iii) its
management. Manufacturing and Services are industry dummies. Sales is the logarithm of sales in US$. Number of
Competitors is the logarithm of the number of competitors the firm has. Law is one of four variables. Tenure of Supreme
Court Judges indicates the length of tenure of Supreme Court judges. Supreme Court Power is a dummy variable that takes on
the value one if Supreme Court Judges have life-long tenure and jurisdiction over administrative cases. Case Law is a dummy
variable that takes on the value one if judges base their decision on case law. Legal Justification indicates whether judgments
are based on statutory law rather than on principles of equity. The regression is run with probit. Detailed variable definitions
and sources are given in the appendix. P-values are reported in parentheses




                                                              41
                          Appendix Table: Variables and Sources

Variable                  Definition                                                     Original source
Bank paperwork and        Is bank paperwork/bureaucracy no obstacle (1), a minor         World Business Environment
bureaucracy               obstacle (2), a moderate obstacle (3) or a major obstacle (4)? Survey (WBES)

Banks lack money          Is banks' lack of money to lend no obstacle (1), a minor       World Business Environment
to lend                   obstacle (2), a moderate obstacle (3) or a major obstacle (4)? Survey (WBES)

Board                     Dummy variable that takes on value one if major decisions         World Business Environment
                          concerning the enterprise’s direction are taken by its board of   Survey (WBES)
                          directors, zero otherwise.
Caselaw                   Dummy variable that takes on value one if judicial decisions      La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes,
                          are a source of law, zero otherwise.                              Pop-Eleches and Shleifer
                                                                                            (2004)
Collateral requirements   Are collateral requirements of banks/financial institutions no World Business Environment
                          obstacle (1), a minor obstacle (2), a moderate obstacle (3) or a Survey (WBES)
                          major obstacle (4)?
Corporation               Dummy variable that takes on value one if the firm is a           World Business Environment
                          corporation, zero otherwise.                                      Survey (WBES)
Creditor Rights           Index of secured creditor rights during restructuring or          La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes,
                          liquidation. Ranges from zero to four, with higher values         Shleifer and Vishny (1997,
                          indicating better creditor right protection.                      1998)
Exporter                  Dummy variable that takes on the value one if firm exports,       World Business Environment
                          zero otherwise.                                                   Survey (WBES)
Family                    Dummy variable that takes on value one if major decisions         World Business Environment
                          concerning the enterprise’s direction are taken by an             Survey (WBES)
                          individual or a family, zero otherwise.
Foreign                   Dummy variable that takes on the value one if any foreign         World Business Environment
                          company or individual has a financial stake in the ownership      Survey (WBES)
                          of the firm, zero otherwise.
French legal origin       Dummy variable that takes on value one if the country’s legal La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes,
                          origin is French, zero otherwise                              Shleifer and Vishny (1998,
                                                                                        1999)
GDP per capita            Real per capita GDP in US dollars, average 1995-99                World Development Indicators

General Financing         How problematic is financing for the operation and growth of World Business Environment
Obstacle                  your business: no obstacle (1), a minor obstacle (2), a      Survey (WBES)
                          moderate obstacle (3) or a major obstacle (4)?

Government                Dummy variable that takes on the value one if any                 World Business Environment
                          government agency or state body has a financial stake in the      Survey (WBES)
                          ownership of the firm, zero otherwise.
Growth                    Growth rate of GDP, average 1995-99                               World Development Indicators

Inflation rate            Log difference of Consumer Price Index                         International Financial Statistics
                                                                                         (IFS), line 64
Legal justification       Sum of three dummy variables: (1) Complaint measures           Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-
                          whether the complaint is required to include references to the Silanes and Shleifer (2003)
                          applicable laws, legal reasoning or other formalities that
                          normally require legal training or assistance, (2) Judgment
                          indicates whether the judgment must expressly state the

                                                42
                       applicable law or case law for the decision, and (3) Law vs.
                       Equity indicates whether judgment has to be based on
                       statutory law or can rather be motivated by general equitable
                       arguments.
Long-term              Is the access to long-term finance no obstacle (1), a minor    World Business Environment
loans                  obstacle (2), a moderate obstacle (3) or a major obstacle (4)? Survey (WBES)

Management             Dummy variable that takes on value one if major decisions        World Business Environment
                       concerning the enterprise’s direction are taken by its           Survey (WBES)
                       management, zero otherwise.
Manufacturing          Dummy variable that takes on the value one if firm is in the     World Business Environment
                       manufacturing industry, zero otherwise.                          Survey (WBES)
No. of Competitors     Regarding your firm's major product line, how many               World Business Environment
                       competitors do you face in your market?                          Survey (WBES)
Private                Dummy variable that takes on value one if the firm is a single   World Business Environment
                       proprietorship or partnership, zero otherwise.                   Survey (WBES)
Rule of Law            Measure of the law and order tradition of a country. It is an    International Country Risk
                       average over 1995-97. It ranges from 6, strong law and order     Guide (ICRG).
                       tradition, to 1, weak law and order tradition.
Sales                  Logarithm of firm sales                                           World Business Environment
                                                                                         Survey (WBES)
Services               Dummy variable that takes on the value one if firm is in the World Business Environment
                       service industry, zero otherwise.                                 Survey (WBES)
Supreme Court Power    Dummy variable that takes on value one if administrative law La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes,
                       judges have lifelong tenure and if either the administrative      Pop-Eleches and Shleifer
                       court is the Supreme Court or if cases judged by                  (2004)
                       administrative courts can be appealed to the Supreme Court,
                       zero otherwise.
Supreme Court Tenure   Takes on the value two if tenure is lifelong, one if tenure is at La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes,
                       least six years but not lifelong and zero if tenure is less than Pop-Eleches and Shleifer
                       six years                                                         (2004)




                                             43
