NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE FISCAL BURDEN OF KOREAN REUNIFICATION:
A GENERATIONAL ACCOUNTING APPROACH
Alan J. Auerbach
Young Jun Chun
Ilho Yoo
Working Paper 10693
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10693
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2004

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2004 by Alan J. Auerbach, Young Jun Chun, and Ilho Yoo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The Fiscal Burden of Korean Reunification: A Generational Accounting Approach
Alan J. Auerbach, Young Jun Chun, and Ilho Yoo
NBER Working Paper No. 10693
August 2004
JEL No. H22, H55, H60
ABSTRACT
This paper uses Generational Accounting to assess the fiscal impacts of Korean reunification. Our
findings suggest that early reunification will result in a large increase in the fiscal burden for most
current and future generations of South Koreans. The Korean reunification's fiscal impact appears
much larger than that of German reunification, due to a wider gap in productivity between the two
Koreas and North Korea's much larger share of the unified country's population. The projected largescale fiscal burden on South Korea is attributable primarily to the rapid increase in social welfare
expenditure for North Korean residents, rather than to the direct reconstruction cost of the North
Korean economic system after the disintegration of its old economic regime.
Alan J. Auerbach
Department of Economics
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
auerbach@econ.berkeley.edu
Young Jun Chun
Department of Economics
University of Incheon
Incheon, Korea
yjchun@incheon.ac.kr
Ilho Yoo
KDI School of Public Policy and Management
Seoul, Korea
yoo@kdischool.ac.kr

1. Introduction
The relationship between South and North Korea in many fields, including politics,
economics, and social affairs, has substantially improved over the past decade. Even though
recent international developments surrounding North Korea do not presage a closer relationship
between the two Koreas in the near future, a great many South Koreans view these developments
as transitory and expect that the two Koreas will be reunified eventually.
A key issue of Korean reunification will be its cost. The reunification cost will depend
on the political process of reunification, the political, economic, and social structure of North
Korea after reunification, the productivity gap between the two Korean regions, and the fiscal
policies that will be implemented in a reunified Korea. As to the first two aspects, there is little
one can say at present, so we will work with simple assumptions and focus on the last two
aspects. We consider a hypothetical situation where the economic system of North Korea will
make the transition from central planning and the current fiscal policies of South Korea will be
implanted in the North Korean region of the newly unified country. We assess the cost of
reconstruction of the North Korean economic system after the disintegration of its old regime,
and estimate the taxes and transfers for North Korean residents and the cost of additional
government provision of public goods to the North Korean region.
Previous research on the subject has focused mainly on reconstruction cost, producing a
wide range estimates, from 6 percent (Lee 1993) to 25 percent (Park 1997) of South Korea’s
GDP for 10 years after reunification.1 This past research, though, did not attempt a thorough
investigation of the costs associated with other fiscal policy changes, even though the

1

Other previous research focusing on reconstruction cost includes An (1997) and Bae (1996). Differences among
the estimates are due primarily to differences in the assumed speed of convergence of North Korean productivity to
that of South Korea.

1

productivity gap between South and North Korea will inevitably increase expenditures on public
goods and social welfare and limit the collection of taxes from the North Korean region for a
considerable period after reunification.
The purpose of this paper is to assess the fiscal impact of the reunification of South and
North Korea, by taking explicit account of projected changes in social welfare expenditures,
government consumption, and the North Korean region’s tax bases, as well as direct
reconstruction costs. We use Generational Accounting (GA) to do so, as GA is a natural tool for
investigating how the costs of fiscal changes are distributed among different population cohorts.
GA covers all relevant government fiscal policies, and its forward-looking properties allow us to
explore how Korea’s public finances will be affected by future reunification.
Our findings suggest that early reunification will result in a large increase in fiscal
burden for most current and future generations of South Koreans. The overall magnitude of this
added fiscal burden is much larger than that of German reunification, because (i) the productivity
gap between South and North Korea is much larger than that between East and West Germany
before reunification and (ii) North Korea’s population is much larger, relative to the South, than
was the case for East Germany relative to West Germany. The findings also suggest that
increased spending on social welfare is much more important than direct reconstruction costs as
a determinant of the added fiscal burden.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 explains the basic concept
of GA and the GA calculation methods. Section 3 explains the GA calculation procedure and data
used to measure the fiscal impacts of reunification. Section 4 presents the accounts and discusses
their implications. Section 5 summarizes findings and draws conclusions.

2

2. GA Calculation Method
2.1. Basic Framework2
Generational Accounting is based on the government’s intertemporal budget constraint.
This constraint, written as equation (1), requires that the future net tax payments of current and
future generations be sufficient, in present value, to cover the present value of future government
consumption as well as service the government’s initial net debt.

(1)

D

∞

∞

s =0

s =1

s =t

∑ N t ,t − s + ∑ N t ,t + s = ∑ G s (1 + r ) −( s −t ) − Wt g
The first summation on the left-hand side of (1) adds together the generational accounts

(the present value of the remaining lifetime net payments) of existing generations. The term Nt,t-s
stands for the account of the generation born in year t-s. The index s in this summation runs from
age 0 to age D, the maximum length of life. The second summation on the left-hand side of (1)
adds together the present value of remaining net payments of future generations, with s
representing the number of years after year t that each future generation is born. The first term on
the right-hand side of (1) is the present value of government consumption. In this summation the
values of government consumption, Gs in year s, are discounted by the pre-tax real interest rate, r.
The remaining term on the right-hand side, Wt g , denotes the government’s net wealth in year t −
its assets minus its explicit debt.
Equation (1) indicates the zero sum nature of intergenerational fiscal policy. Holding the
present value of government consumption fixed, a reduction in the present value of net taxes

2

See Auerbach, Gokhale, and Kotlikoff (1991, 1992a, 1992b, 1994) and Kotlikoff (1992) for further discussion.

3

extracted from current generations (a decline in the first summation on the left side of (1))
necessitates an increase in the present value of net tax payment of future generations.
The term Nt,k in (1) is defined by:

(2)

N t ,k =

k +D

∑T

s,k
s = max( t , k )

Ps , k (1 + r ) −( s −t )

In expression (2), Ts,k stands for the projected average net tax payments to the government made
in year s by the generation born in year k. The term Ps,k stands for the number of surviving
members of the cohort in year s who were born in year k. For the generations who are born in
year k, where k>t, the summation begins in year k. Regardless of the generation’s year of birth,
the discounting is always back to year t. A set of generational accounts is simply a set of values
of Nt,k, one for each existing and future generation, with the property that the combined present
value adds up to the right-hand side of equation (1).
Note that generational accounts reflect only taxes and social insurance contributions
(taxes henceforth) paid less transfers received. The accounts do not impute to particular
generations the value of government’s purchases of goods and services because it is difficult to
attribute the benefits of such purchases.3 Therefore, the accounts do not show the full net benefit
or burden that any generation receives from government policy as whole, although they can
show a generation’s net benefit or burden from a particular policy change that affects only taxes
and transfers. Thus, generational accounting tells us which generations will pay for government
spending, rather than telling us which generations will benefit from that spending. Another

3

Bovenberg and ter Rele (2000) tried to incorporate the incidence of government consumption into generational
accounts, assuming that all current generations enjoy the same (per capita) benefits from both government
consumption and the public capital stock, with the latter benefits set at the imputed rent on the public capital stock.
However, their approach does not attempt to deal with the “public” nature of government-provided goods.

4

characteristic of generational accounting that should be understood at the outset is that, as its
name suggests, it is an accounting exercise that, like deficit accounting, does not incorporate
induced behavioral effects or macroeconomics responses of policy changes. As a corollary, it
does not incorporate the deadweight loss of taxation in its measure of fiscal burden, again
following the tradition of budget incidence analysis.
2.2. The Standard Method
The traditional Generational Accounts are calculated in two steps. The first step involves
calculation of the net tax payments of current generations (the first term on the left-hand-side of
equation (1)). This is done on the basis of current fiscal rules without being constrained by the
intertemporal budget constraint of the government. In the second step, given the right-hand-side
of equation (1) and the first term on the left-hand-side of equation (1), we determine, as a
residual, the value of the second term on the left-hand side of equation (1), which is the
collective payment, measured as a time-t present value, required of future generations.
Accordingly, whereas the fiscal burdens for current generations are based entirely on current
fiscal rules, the government budget constraint fully determines the fiscal burdens for future
generations. Future generations are thus assumed to absorb the entire adjustment that is required
to make the claims of various generations consistent with the intertemporal budget constraint.
Based on the collective amount required of future generations, we determine the average
present value of lifetime net tax payments for each member of each future generation under the
assumption that the average lifetime tax payments of successive generations rise at the
economy’s rate of productivity growth. Leaving out this growth adjustment, the lifetime net tax
payments of future generations are directly comparable with those of current newborns, since the
generational accounts of both newborns and future generations take into account net tax

5

payments over these generations’ entire lifetimes. Measuring the generational imbalance as the
difference between two lifetime tax burdens provides a measure for the sustainability of the
public finances. If future generations bear a heavier tax burden than the newly born do, current
fiscal rules will have to be adjusted in the future to meet the budget constraint.
The computation of the total net payment across generations requires information about
average tax burdens and transfer payments by age and sex. The standard calculation method used
to project the average values of particular taxes and transfer payments by age and sex starts with
government forecasts of the aggregate amounts of each type of tax and transfer payment in future
years. These aggregate amounts are then distributed by age and sex based on cross-sectional
relative age-sex-tax and age-sex-transfer profiles derived from cross-sectional micro-data sets.
For years beyond those for which government forecasts are available, age- and sex-specific
average tax and transfer amounts are set equal to those for the latest year for which forecasts are
available, with an adjustment for growth.
This procedure is based on the assumption that the age-sex-profiles of transfer payments
and tax burdens do not change over time. The standard procedure also assumes that government
purchases, transfer payments and tax revenues grow at the same rate as GDP, although in some
cases they are broken down into age-specific components, with the assumption that each
component remains constant per member of the relevant population, adjusted for the overall
growth of GDP per capita.
2.3. Extending the Standard Method
To reflect important characteristics of the Korean fiscal situation, we modify the
approach just described, by incorporating prospective changes in the age profiles of transfer
payments and tax burdens. There are two sets of factors underlying these prospective changes.

6

The first set would be present in South Korea even without reunification, while the other relates
to changes associated with reunification.
First, the maturation of the National Pension system (NPS) will change the age profiles
and aggregate levels of benefits and contributions in South Korea. The average National Pension
benefit per member of cohorts aged 70 and older is low compared with that for those between 55
and 70 at present, since a large proportion of the older age groups are not covered at all by the
NPS. Aggregate benefit amounts among older age groups are also restricted by the program’s
short history, which limits the number entitled to full benefits. However, maturation of the
system will increase the average benefit payments to old-age groups, which will flatten the age
profile of benefits and increase the number of pension recipients and the aggregate pension
benefit amount. We expect to observe a similar trend of maturation of the National Pension
system for North Korean residents after reunification.
Also, one can reasonably anticipate changes in social welfare expenditures, even if
South Korea remains separate. Though limited in the past, aggregate transfer payments in South
Korea by Medical Insurance and social welfare services and public assistance have increased
rapidly over the past decade due to recent structural changes in social welfare policies. Even the
current level of social welfare expenditure in South Korea, though, remains well below the
OECD average. Therefore, we project that social welfare expenditure will increase more rapidly
than other components of government expenditure for a considerable period. In particular, we
assume that the per capita amount of social welfare expenditure will increase more rapidly than
per capita GDP until it reaches the OECD average.4

4

The income elasticity of government expenditure on health care is based on estimates by Newhouse (1997), Leu
(1983, 1986), Gertham et al. (1998, 1992) and the OECD (1993), whose values range between 1.2 and 1.4.
Exceptionally low or high estimates are produced by Gerdtham (1991, 1992) (0.74), Moon (2000) (1.75) and the
OECD (1993) (1.6). In the case of government expenditure on social security and welfare services, Moon (2000)

7

Turning to factors associated with reunification, the National Pension benefit levels of
South Korean participants will be affected, since pension benefits consist of two parts, an
income-related part and flat part. The latter is computed based on the average income of all NPS
participants. The participation of North Korean residents, whose average income is currently less
than 10 percent of that of South Koreans, will lower the flat part of the NPS benefit substantially.
Analyzing reunification also requires another extension of the standard methodology, to account
for the heterogeneity of the two populations. Rather than just separating each age cohort by sex,
we also separate it by region, specifying different profiles for North and South Koreans. This will
have important effects, not only on the tax side, but also on the expenditure side. For example,
the Minimum Living Standard Security (MLSS) benefit, a social transfer program to aid lowincome households, will initially apply to many more North Korean residents under current rules.
Thus, we require not only distinct profiles for North and South Koreans, but also changing
profiles over time for North Koreans, as they make the assumed transition over time to income
parity with South Koreans.
Finally, we also modify the presentation of generational accounts. The standard
approach estimates the fiscal gap between current and future generations, assuming existing
policy for current generations.

It is also customary to express this fiscal gap using other

measures, such as the required changes in taxes and or transfer payments for current and future
generations together. Because it is likely that some of the burden will be placed on current
generations, we take this latter approach one step further and actually present alternative
estimates of the accounts for current generations, taking such projected increases in their fiscal
estimated a high income elasticity (1.54). We make a very conservative assumption about the income elasticity (1.2)
in order to avoid over-projection of government expenditure in these sectors. The upper bounds for expenditures on
social security and welfare and health care are assumed to be 4.12 percent and 5.94 percent, respectively, of GDP,
based on the OECD averages as of 1995. For detailed information about the future path of social welfare
expenditure, see Auerbach and Chun (2003).

8

burden into account. We denote as GA1 the accounts as conventionally presented, and refer to
the accounts incorporating the added taxes to restore fiscal balance as GA2.5

3. Calculation Procedure and Underlying Assumptions6
To produce generational accounts for North Korea, we require projections of population,
taxes, transfers, government expenditures, initial government debt, and a discount rate. We also
need to project the age-sex profiles of average income of North Koreans, since taxes and transfer
payments of individuals are dependent upon their income level. We ignore the current fiscal
policies of North Korea, based on the assumption that North Korean policies will be repealed.
Therefore, we consider a hypothetical situation where the current fiscal policies in South Korea
are implanted in North Korea after reunification.
The current fiscal policies in South Korea are classified into the following groups: social
welfare policies, tax system, seigniorage, and government consumption. The social welfare
policies are composed of public pensions, Medical Insurance (MI), Employment Insurance (EI),
Industrial Accident Compensation Insurance (IACI), and social welfare services and public
assistance (Minimum Living Standards Security System, MLSS, and other social transfer
programs, OSTP). Taxes are classified as labor income taxes, capital income taxes, consumption
taxes, taxes on asset holdings, taxes on asset transactions, and other taxes. Government
consumption is broken down into expenditure on education and other government consumption.
Except for public pensions (NPS), MLSS, and EI7, we follow standard procedure to compute the
age-sex distribution of the components of fiscal policies: we start by projecting the aggregate of
5

This presentation method has been used by others in the past, including Auerbach and Oreopoulos (2000) and
Bovenberg and ter Rele (2000).
6

For the detailed information about the GA calculation procedure for South Korea and its underlying assumptions,
see Auerbach and Chun (2003).

9

each component, and then distribute the aggregate by age and sex based on cross-sectional
relative age-sex-tax and age-sex-transfer profiles derived from cross-sectional micro-data sets.
3.1. Population Projection (North Korea)
We employ the 2001 population projection model of the National Statistics Office
(NSO) for South Korea’s population projections. We project current and future populations of
North Korea using information about base-year age-sex distributions, death rates, and fertility
rates, since neither the South Korean nor the North Korean government has published projections
of the future North Korean population. The baseline year for our projection is 1993, the most
recent year for which a North Korean government report is available. We convert the population
distribution of 5-year-age intervals into one with 1-year-age intervals by assuming that, within
each 5-year-age interval, the population is evenly distributed across ages.
We impute the age-sex-year profile of death rates based on the NSO projections of life
expectancy in South Korea, since the age-sex profiles have not been published. For the
imputation of age-sex profiles of North Korean death rates in a given year, we search for the
‘equivalent year’ when the life expectancy of South Korea is the closest to that of North Korea,
and then assume that the profiles for North Korea are the same as those in South Korea’s
equivalent year.
The total fertility rate in North Korea as of 1993 is 2.16, much higher than that in South
Korea (1.67 in 1993, 1.47 in 2000). We assume that the fertility rates as of 1993 are maintained
until reunification and that after reunification they will approach those of South Korea. Since the
total fertility rate of North Korea in 1993 is quite close to that of South Korea in 1983 (2.08), we
7

In the case of NPS contributions and benefits and MLSS benefits, the age-sex profiles as well as the growth rates
of the aggregate amounts are assumed to change over time while, in the case of EI, only the growth rate of the
aggregate benefit amount is assumed to change over time, with the age-sex profiles fixed.

10

assume that the fertility rates of North Korea after reunification follow the same path for South
Korea since 1983. The assumed sex ratio of newborns is 106, which is standard in population
projections.
3.2. Projection of Average Income Profile (North Korea)
We impute the age-sex-year profiles of average income of North Koreans based on the
information about the difference in per capita GDP between South and North Korea. We assume
that the average labor productivity of North Korea is about 11 percent of that of South Korea in
1993 based on the projection of Bank of Korea. To impute the productivity growth path, we
divide the period after 1993 into 5 sub-periods: (i) 1994-2001; (ii) 2002-the year of reunification;
(iii) stagnation period (for 5 years after reunification); (iv) a period of rapid growth (for 45 years
after the stagnation period); and (v) a period of balanced growth. For period (i) we use historical
data on the productivity growth reported by the NSO.8 The labor productivity growth in period
(ii) is assumed 1 percent per annum, which is slightly lower than that of South Korea (1.5
percent). For period (iii), we assume that the labor productivity will not grow, since in the
process of disintegration of the old North Korean economic system stagnation will be inevitable.
After the stagnation period, we expect a period of rapid growth, so that after the 45 years of
period (iv) the labor productivity of North Korea converges to that of South Korea, i.e., the
productivity of North Korean residents will catch up with that of South Koreans 50 years after
reunification.9 For period (v), we assume that labor productivity grows at the same rate as in

8

The labor productivity growth rates for the period 1993-2001 are –5.2 percent (‘93), -3.1 percent (‘94), -5.1 percent
(‘95), -4.6 percent (‘96), -7.3 percent (‘97), -2.1 percent (‘98), 5.2 percent (‘99), 0.3 percent (2000), and 2.7 percent
(2001).
9

The period assumed necessary for full integration of the two Koreas is much longer than that assumed by
Raffelhüschen and Walliser (1999) for the German unification (20 years), based on the much larger productivity gap
between the two Koreas (North Korea’s level is 8 percent of South Korea’s as of 2000, whereas East Germany’s was
37 percent of West Germany’s) and the fact that the ratio of North Korea’s population to South Korea’s (47 percent

11

South Korea. Given the path of labor productivity, we impute the age-sex profile of labor income
under the assumption that the profiles are the same as that of South Korea, except for the gap in
the absolute level of labor income.
Beginning with reunification, we require estimates of North Korea’s unemployment
rates to project expenditures on EI benefits. In period (iii), we assume that the unemployment
rate is 20 percent, since the skills of many North Korean residents will become obsolete
immediately after reunification. 10 During period (iv) the unemployment rate is assumed to
decrease gradually to reach the current unemployment rate of South Korea (3 percent), and this
level is assumed to be maintained in period (v).
The age-sex profile of capital income is the same as for South Korea, except for the gap
in the absolute level between the two Koreas. The gap is assumed the same as that in labor
productivity. The resulting path of the capital income share in the North Korean region for period
(iii) onward shows that share gradually rising from 38 percent to 40 percent.11
3.3. Projecting National Pension Contributions and Benefits (South and North Korea)
The public pensions in South Korea consist of two different plans: National Pension
(NPS) and Occupational Pensions. Since the Occupational Pensions cover a small portion of the
whole population, we assume that the North Korean residents will be covered by the NPS after
reunification. We project the NPS for South and North Korea in two steps. The first step is to
project the distribution of insurants and benefit recipients in North Korea; in the second step, we

as of 2000) is much larger than that of East to West Germany’s (26 percent as of 1989).
10

The unemployment rate in the former East Germany after Germany’s reunification was about 15 percent. We
expect the unemployment rate in the former North Korea after reunification to be much higher, since the
productivity gap between South and North Korea is much larger than that between East and West Germany when
they joined.
11

The capital income share of South Korea for the past decade is about 40 percent.

12

recalculate the contribution and benefit amounts by age-sex-year for both South and North
Korean residents.
In the first step, we assume that the distributions of insurants and benefit recipients of
North Korea follows the same trends as the distributions of South Korea since the NPS’s
introduction in 1988. In other words, we assume that the maturation of the NPS in the former
North Korea follows the same path as in South Korea with the time lag between 1988 and the
year of reunification. Therefore, we compute the ratio of South Korean insurants and benefit
recipients by age and sex to the population of the same cohorts for the period since 1988; we
then project the distribution of insurants and benefit recipients in North Korea by multiplying the
ratio by the North Korean population by age and sex in the years after reunification.
In addition, we adjust the distributions by taking into account the difference in
unemployment rates between South and North Korea, since we assume that the unemployment
rates will be much higher in the North Korean area for a considerable time post-reunification.
This adjustment is needed since the unemployment rates affect the contribution and benefit
amount of each cohort. 12 Instead of average income and benefit amount by age and sex, we
adjust the distribution of insurants and benefit recipients. The distribution of insurants is adjusted
by assuming that the number of insurants by age and sex in a given year is proportional to the
employment rate. For the distribution of new benefit recipients, we assume that the number of
new recipients by age and sex in a particular year is proportional to the average employment rate
during each cohort’s economically active period.
In the second step, we recalculate the contribution and benefit amounts of South and
North Korea. We compute the contribution amounts by taking into account average income
12

The benefits of a particular individual are affected by the employment rates over his lifetime, since the NPS
benefit amount is proportional to the period of his contribution to the NPS.

13

levels, number of insurants by age and sex and unemployment rates. Given the distribution of
benefit recipients and profiles of average benefit levels, the benefit amount of each cohort in
South and North Korea is recalculated based on the pension benefit formula. Note that the level
of pension benefits of South Korean recipients must be recalculated, since, as discussed above,
the flat part of benefits will fall with the inclusion of North Koreans in the calculation of average
income.
3.4. Projecting the Distribution of MLSS Benefits (North Korea)
We compute the MLSS benefit level by age-sex-year by subtracting the average income
of each group, including labor income and capital income, from the minimum living expense
guaranteed by the Korean government. The minimum living expense guaranteed is computed by
using the distribution of households and profiles of the minimum living expense guaranteed by
the number of household members, and the resulting value is about 230,000 won per month as of
2000. We assume that the minimum living expense guaranteed grows at the productivity growth
rate of South Korea, and allow the profiles for North Koreans to change over time, consistent
with their rising relative incomes.
3.5. Projection of Other Fiscal Components (North Korea)
Determining Generational Profiles
The profiles of taxes and transfers for North Korean residents, except for the NPS
contributions and benefits and the MLSS benefits, are assumed the same as those for South
Koreans, except for their absolute levels.13

13

For the age and sex profiles for South Korea, see Auerbach and Chun (2003).

14

Projection of Aggregates
The procedure for projecting aggregates of taxes, transfers and government consumption
for North Korean residents after the reunification is basically the same as that for South Koreans
described in Auerbach and Chun (2003). We assume the same scope of government activities,
and follow the same procedure of decomposing government consumption, contributions and
benefits of social insurance into (1) age-specific components and (2) non-age-specific
components. The scope of government covers the central government, local government, public
education institutions, social insurance programs, and non-profit organizations financed by the
government and providing services such as research on the economy, science and public
administration. The government consumption classified as age-specific includes government
expenditure on education, health, and social security and welfare services. 14 Social insurance
contributions and benefits, and government non-contributory transfer programs such as OSTP
are age-specific, and labor income taxes and capital income taxes are classified as age-specific.
The non-age-specific components of taxes, transfers and government consumption are
assumed to increase at the rate of productivity growth. In the case of the components classified
as age-specific, the amount per member of the relevant population grows at the rate of
productivity growth. The only exceptions are expenditure on health and social welfare, whose
amounts per member of the relevant age groups grows at a higher rate than productivity growth
until reaching the OECD average.15
For North Korea, a difference in the procedure for projecting aggregate fiscal
components is that we further classify the fiscal components into two groups: one in which the
14

Government consumption is classified as: general public service, defense, public order and safety, education,
health, social security and welfare services, housing and community amenities, recreation-culture-religion, fuel and
energy, agriculture-forestry-fishing, mining-manufacture-construction, transportation and communication, and other.
15

See footnote 4.

15

value per member of the relevant population grows at the productivity growth rate of South
Korea and the other in which the value grows at the productivity growth rate of North Korea
after reunification. The former group includes MI benefits and all components of government
consumption. The latter group includes IACI benefits, OSTP benefits, all taxes and social
insurance contributions, and seigniorage. Components of the latter group have benefit or tax
formulae based on income or assets. Components of the former group, on the other hand, are not
determined so mechanically, and we would not expect government to discriminate against North
Koreans in these areas. Not covered by this two-way classification is the EI benefit, since we
expect high unemployment rates during the transition period after reunification. We project the
aggregate EI benefit expenditure under the assumptions that the average benefit is proportional
to the average income of North Korean workers and the number of the recipients of EI benefits is
proportional to the unemployment rate.
We also must add to government expenditure the reconstruction cost of North Korea,
since after reunification the government and private sector of South Korea will inevitably
transfer resources to the North Korean region in order to cushion the transition. Since, as
discussed above, estimates of the reconstruction cost by previous researchers show a wide range,
we derive our own estimate of the value following the procedure described in the appendix. Our
estimate of the reconstruction cost is 10 percent of the GDP of South Korea for 20 years after
reunification. In the base case, we assume that 50 percent of the reconstruction cost is paid by the
government and the other half by the private sector. Therefore, government expenditure on the
reconstruction of the North Korean economy amounts to 5 percent of South Korean GDP for 20
years after reunification.

16

3.6. Government Net Wealth and Discount Rate (North Korea)
The North Korean government debt is assumed to be 14.9 trillion won as of 2000, based
on the projection by the Bank of Korea (2001). We also assume that the debt, evaluated in
present value, does not change until reunification.
We assume the same discount rate for government finance for the North Korean region
as for the South Korean region: a real discount rate of 3.5 percent, reflecting a nominal discount
rate of 6.5 percent and an inflation rate of 3 percent.

4. Findings
The benchmark year in the GA calculation is 2000. We regard generations alive in the
benchmark year as “current” generations and classify cohorts by age. We treat cohorts born in
2001 and later as “future” generations. For the computation of the net payments of North Korean
residents, we include the taxes and transfers from the time of reunification onward, i.e., we
completely ignore the fiscal burden under the current North Korean regime, which is difficult to
calculate. We consider a hypothetical situation where Korea is reunified in 2010.16
4.1. Generational Accounts Disregarding Reunification
Table 1 reports standard generational accounts (GA1) for South Korea, assuming no
reunification, under the base case assumptions for the productivity growth rate (1.5 percent) and
the nominal discount rate (6.5 percent).17 Following past studies, we report two variants of the
accounts: Net Payment I (NPI) which treats educational expenditures as government
16

There is much uncertainty about the timing of reunification. Changing the date does not change the qualitative
results, except for some redistribution of fiscal burdens across generations. Results of a sensitivity analysis with
respect to time of reunification are available upon request.
17

The accounts are expressed in thousands of won, the domestic currency of South Korea. As of August, 2004,
1,000 won were worth about US$0.86.

17

consumption; and Net Payment II (NPII), which treats educational expenditures as transfer
payments.
The table shows positive values of net payments for most cohorts alive in 2000 except
for cohorts aged 90 or older, indicating that most generations will, on balance, pay more in
present value than they receive. One reason for positive burdens even among the elderly is the
high taxes on consumption, capital income and assets, relative to taxes on labor income.18 The
age profile of the average tax burden on capital is more skewed to older age groups than that of
labor income taxes, and the consumption tax burden for older age groups is quite high.
The more important reason that even older generations have positive net payments is
that social welfare benefits such as public pension benefits, Medical Insurance (MI) benefits,
Minimum Living Standards Security (MLSS) Benefits and other social welfare services (OSTP)
were quite small in the aggregate as of 2000. Aggregate public pension and MI benefits were 1.1
percent and 1.7 percent of GDP respectively as of 2000 and those for the MLSS and the OSTP
were 0.5 percent and 0.6 percent of GDP respectively. However, maturation of the public pension
system and the projected increase in social welfare expenditures will increase transfer payments
to old-age groups. This maturation is shown in Figure 1, which displays the relative (to age-40
males) benefit profile in 2000 along with the corresponding profiles projected at other dates
through 2080. As a result, the accounts for a wider range of old-age groups will turn negative in
the future, given current policy.
Among current generations, net payments are largest around age 20, when people tend to
join the labor market and start work. Therefore, they will experience the longest economic
participation periods from this age. For example, the age-20 NPI (NPII) account is about 38
18

Revenues from consumption tax, capital income tax, taxes on asset holding, and labor income tax in South Korea
as of 2000 were 9.1 percent, 5.1 percent, 1.3 percent, and 2.2 percent of GDP respectively.

18

percent (126 percent) higher than the age-0 account. There is a sharp decrease in net payments
between ages 50 and 60, since around age 55 many workers tend to retire and acquire eligibility
for social welfare benefits, including public pension benefits.
The row labeled “Future Gen.” indicates the present value of amounts that those born in
2001 will, on average, pay, assuming that subsequent generations pay this same amount except
for the adjustment for growth. The NPI (NPII) account for future generations is about 118
percent (198 percent) larger than those for those aged 0, which implies that the current fiscal
policies are not sustainable and that a substantial fiscal burden is shifted to future generations.
Table 1 also reports the present value, rest-of-life transfer benefits and tax burdens by
category. The substantial negative entries for public pensions and Medical Insurance play a key
role in the large overall generational imbalance. On the tax side, three important characteristics
of the Korean tax system are: (i) the large share of consumption taxes; (ii) the relative
unimportance of labor income taxes; and (iii) the large proportion accounted for by taxes on asset
transactions. The largest present value (for age 0 and age 30) is the consumption tax, followed by
the capital income tax, the tax on asset transactions, labor income tax, other taxes, and taxes on
asset holdings. The present value of the tax burden on older age groups, relative to that on
younger age groups, is heaviest for consumption taxes, followed by capital income taxes, taxes
on asset holding, taxes on asset transactions, and labor income taxes.
Table 2 reports the magnitude of the adjustment of tax and social insurance contributions
(tax, henceforth) and transfer payments required to attain long-run government budget balance
under each of the scenarios discussed in the paper.19 The results for the base case simulation just
discussed, given in column [1], indicate that a substantial adjustment is required, even without
19

Long-run budget balance is defined as the situation where the sum of current government net wealth and the
present value of present and future flows of taxes and social insurance contributions equals that of transfer payments
and government consumption.

19

reunification. The required adjustment is a 59.2 percent increase in tax burden if the adjustment
is made only for generations born in 2001 and thereafter. If the adjustment is made to all cohorts
alive in 2004 and later, the required tax adjustment represents a 20.1 percent increase in tax
burden. If we delay the tax adjustment until 2010 (the assumed reunification year in subsequent
simulations), the required tax adjustment reaches 23.1 percent. If the proportional increase in the
tax burden is accompanied by the same percentage decrease in transfer payments to attain longrun government budget balance, the magnitude of the required adjustment decreases to 35-39
percent (if the adjustment is made only for the generations born in 2001 and later years), 12-13
percent (if the adjustment is made to all the cohorts alive in 2004 and later) and 14-15 percent (if
we delay the tax adjustment until 2010).
4.2. Incidence of the Fiscal Burden of Reunification
Table 3 reports the standard Generational Accounts for South and North Korean
residents by taking into account the fiscal impacts of reunification.20 The accounts for South
Korean residents indicate that the reunification will substantially increase the fiscal burden on
South Korean future generations, unless the current fiscal policies of South Korea are
substantially altered.21 The Net Payment I (Net Payment II) of South Koreans, born 2001 and
later, increases by 20.6 percent (30 percent) due to the reunification, if the additional burden is
completely shifted to cohorts born in 2001 and later.

20

Under reunification, the accounts for South and North Korea combined are simply the population-weighted
average of the two countries’ separate accounts. For the very old, the accounts are virtually the same as the accounts
for South Korea, given the much lower current life expectancy in North Korea.
21

The typical method to allocate the fiscal burden between subgroups of future generations is to assume the same
increase in the fiscal burden relative to age-0 individuals of each subgroup. We cannot adopt this method, since the
age-0 North Koreans have a negative account. Therefore, we allocate the net payments among future generations of
South and North Koreans based on relative present values of lifetime earnings. That is, we assume that each future
generation’s burden is fixed share of the present value of its lifetime earnings.

20

Tables 4 and 5 and provide a breakdown of the accounts for South and North Koreans,
respectively, into their components, for this base case reunification scenario.22 The increase in
the fiscal burden is primarily due to the increase in transfer payments to North Korean residents.
Table 5 shows that the net transfers to existing generations of North Koreans are accounted for
primarily by public pensions, MI, EI, and MLSS. The present values of lifetime net transfers
from MI, EI and MLSS for most existing North Korean generations are higher than those for
South Koreans. In particular, MLSS benefits for the cohort born in 2000 in North Korea is about
5.5 times as large as that for the same generation in South Korea. Even though the absolute level
of net transfers from NPS to most existing North Koreans is lower than that to current South
Koreans, its ratio to income is much higher for North Koreans.
Contrary to the high transfer payments to North Koreans, their tax burdens are very low.
Comparing the accounts for the cohorts born in 2000, the labor income tax burden of North
Koreans is 37.1 percent of that of South Koreans, the capital income tax 56.6 percent, the
consumption tax 32.3 percent, asset holding tax 52.2 percent, and the asset transactions tax 35.7
percent. As result, the accounts for all existing North Koreans (except for cohorts aged 90 and
older, which are essentially empty) are negative. This implies, not surprisingly, that reunification
will transfer resources to current North Koreans, unless fiscal policies toward existing
generations are substantially altered; most of the fiscal burden will be shifted to the future
generations of South Korea. The magnitude of adjustment needed to attain long run budgetary
balance will substantially rise. The required tax adjustment (see Table 2, column [2]) rises from
23 percent to 53-54 percent due to reunification, if we adjust the tax burden from the year of
reunification (2010). The required magnitude of increase in tax burden accompanied by the same
22

The components for South Korea given in Table 4 are the same as those in Table 1 for the no reunification case,
except for public pensions, which, as discussed above, must be recalculated once North Koreans are included in the
covered population.

21

decrease in transfers also rises substantially because of reunification, from 14-15 percent to 3032 percent.
Tables 6 and 7 show the alternative (GA2) generational accounts (for variant NPI) under
the assumption that the adjustment that we estimate to be necessary for long-run budget balance
is actually distributed to current and future cohorts in South and North Korea.23 These tables
reflect the scenario in which the government increases the tax burden on all cohorts alive in the
reunification year and later.24 The tax increase for South Koreans without reunification (column
[1] of Table 2) is 23.1 percent of net payments under current fiscal policies; under reunification
(column [2] of Table 2), the corresponding increase in net payments is 53.1 percent. Comparing
columns [1] and [2] in Table 6, we can compute the changes in net payments due to reunification,
given the assumed tax policy response. Under this scenario, the fiscal burden of reunification is
still substantially shifted to future generations of South Koreans. Yet, at least in percentage terms,
as shown in Figure 2, generations aged less then 75 as of 2000 would still bear a significant
burden, experiencing a more than 20 percent increase in lifetime net tax burden; thus, under this
realistic scenario, most of the generations alive in 2000 and thereafter will be much affected by
the economic cost of reunification. The percentage increase in lifetime net payments exceeds 40
percent for those born in 2051, 41 years after the reunification date.
The fiscal burdens of North Koreans after reunification are much lower for existing
generations than those of South Korean residents, since the productivity gap between the two
regions is still very large for a considerable time, and for the same period North Koreans will
receive large amounts of transfer payments from such benefits as MLSS, EI, and MI. However,

23

The accounts for future generations in these tables are discounted from the year of birth and deflated to offset
future productivity growth, so that they may be compared to the accounts for current generations.
24

See the corresponding columns of Table 2, in the row labeled “NPI, Reunif. Year (2010).”

22

the gap will decrease with the convergence in productivity between North and South. As can be
seen by comparing column [2] of Table 7 and column [1] of Table 6, generations of North
Koreans born after 2031 will face a higher lifetime net payment than would the same cohort of
South Koreans in the absence of reunification.
4.3. Policy Experiments and Sensitivity Analysis
We consider several other situations to investigate the relative importance of policy and
economic variables in determining the fiscal burdens of reunification: [3] MLSS benefit
reduction; [4] EI benefit reduction; [5] separate operation of NPS; and [6] higher cost of
reconstruction of North Korea. In situation [3] we assume that the government specifies an upper
limit (300 percent of the average wage of North Koreans) for MLSS benefits for North Korean
residents in order to prevent an excessively rapid increase in MLSS expenditures. In situation [4],
we assume that aggregate EI expenditure does not depend on the unemployment rate, under the
assumption that a substantial part of the unemployed will be covered by the MLSS system.
Scenario [5] assumes that the government maintains separate NPS systems in the two Korean
regions, in order to prevent a decrease in the benefit levels of South Korean residents. Except for
the separation, the same NPS system is assumed for the two regions. Case [6] assumes that the
reconstruction cost incurred by the government is 10 percent of GDP for 20 years after the
reunification instead of 5 percent, i.e., that government pays the whole cost of reconstruction of
the North Korean economy. The accounts for these scenarios are reported in the corresponding
columns of Tables 6 and 7, with summary measures reported in Table 2.
As these tables show, the reduction in MLSS benefits for North Koreans would have a
substantial impact on the fiscal burden. The fiscal impact of the adjustment of EI is much smaller
than that of MLSS. Imposing the restriction on MLSS benefits reduces the required tax

23

adjustment to attain long-term fiscal balance from 53-54 percent of the current tax burden to 4950 percent (see Table 2), while imposing the reduction in EI benefits reduces the tax adjustment
only by 0.3 percent.
Separate operation of the NPS raises overall fiscal burdens, since the benefit level of the
NPS for South Korean participants is not affected by reunification, while under the incorporated
system, the benefit levels fall considerably due to North Korean participation. But the fiscal
burden due to separate operation of the NPS is not very high. The required tax adjustment for
long-term fiscal balance increases by 0.7 percent of current tax burden.
Doubling the assumed reconstruction cost from 5 percent to 10 percent of GDP for 20
years after reunification substantially increases fiscal burdens. The required tax adjustment for
long-term fiscal balance increases from 53-54 percent of the current tax burden to about 59
percent. But the impact of this increase in reconstruction cost, equal in magnitude to the entire
reconstruction cost initially assumed, is small relative to the overall impact of reunification on
the required long-run tax adjustment, from 23 percent in case [1] to 53-54 percent in case [2],
because a larger part of the reunification cost is attributable to the increase in social welfare
expenditure, relative to the low taxes that North Koreans will pay.
Table 8 summarizes the sensitivity of our results, for variant NPI25 to variations in key
parameters (productivity growth of South Korea 26 and the interest rate 27 ), the length of the

25

Those for NPII exhibit similar patterns.

26

A higher growth rate in South Korea raises the reconstruction cost, since the required investment for the
productivity of North Korea to catch up becomes larger. In the case where South Korean productivity growth is 2
percent (1 percent), we assume that the reconstruction cost is 5.5 percent (4.5 percent) of South Korean GDP for 20
years after reunification, instead of the value of our base case (5 percent).
27

We try sensitivity analysis for higher interest rates than in the base case, since our base case interest rate is quite
low compared with values typically assumed in previous research.

24

transition process for North Korea, and the behavior of North Korean fertility after reunification.
The base case results already discussed are presented in bold in the table.
The generational imbalance is increasing with the interest rate and decreasing with
growth rate. The percentage difference is quite sensitive to the variations in the growth rate28 and
the interest rate, while the qualitative result that post-reunification fiscal policy in Korea is
imbalanced is sustained for a realistic range of growth and discount rates. The variation due to
these parameters in the tax (tax and transfer) adjustment required for fiscal balance, if imposed
on cohorts born in the year of reunification and later, spans a relatively narrow range, from 45
percent to 54 percent (from 29 percent to 32 percent).
The base case assumes 50 years for the period of complete convergence between the two
Koreas. This assumption that convergence can be achieved in 50 years is generally regarded as
optimistic. Therefore, we consider more pessimistic assumptions about the speed of convergence.
A lower speed of convergence between South and North Korean productivity levels will increase
generational imbalance and the fiscal burden of reunification. Table 8 indicates the quantitative
impacts of more pessimistic assumptions concerning the adjustment process. If the adjustment
process is completed in 70 years after the reunification instead of within 50 years, the required
tax (tax and transfer) adjustment for long-term fiscal balance increases to 60 percent (36 percent)
because of the delay. A higher speed of convergence thus significantly reduces the fiscal burden
of reunification.
Finally, we reconsider our assumptions about North Korean fertility. Thus far, we have
used the assumptions discussed above, that North Korean fertility will gradually fall from a rate
well above that in South Korea, eventually converging to the South Korean fertility rate. But, if
28

The irregular pattern of the required adjustment with respect to the growth rate is due to the fact that there are two
conflicting forces affecting fiscal burden. Increasing productivity increases government transfers and consumption
as well as the tax bases of future generations.

25

the post-unification experience in Germany is any guide, the pattern may be different. In the few
years after the collapse of the Berlin wall, the total fertility rate in East Germany fell sharply
from a value well above that in West Germany to a value well below, then gradually recovered to
the West German rate (Federal Statistical Office of Germany 2003).29 Given the economic and
social disruptions that would occur immediately after reunification, a sharper drop in the North
Korean birth rate than we have assumed is certainly a reasonable possibility. Thus, we consider
the alternative assumption that the North Korean fertility rate drops immediately upon
unification to the South Korean rate. The result of this alternative assumption, shown in the last
column of Table 8, is to increase the per capita burden of fiscal adjustment, if the entire burden is
placed on the now smaller future generations, but to slightly lower the per capita burden, if
current generations share in the burden. For no method of distributing the burden, though, does
the change in fertility have a particularly large impact.
4.4. Comparison with the Case of German Reunification
The fiscal burden of reunification is likely to be much heavier for Korea than for
Germany. According to estimates by Raffelhüschen and Walliser (1999) based on the NPII
variant, the generational imbalance for the base case was 156.1 percent, while that of the Korean
case under the same assumptions about the productivity growth rate (1.5 percent) and the real
discount rate (5 percent ) is 897.3 percent. The required tax adjustment for long-term fiscal
balance was much smaller in the German case. After Korean reunification, a 50.5 percent
increase in the overall tax burden30 would be required to restore fiscal balance, the bulk of which

29

We are grateful to a referee for calling this to our attention.

30

This percentage, for variant NPII, differs slightly from the value given in Table 8 for the same interest rate-growth
rate combination, 49.8 percent, which is based on the NPI variant.

26

is directly attributable to the added cost of reunification. In Germany, only a 9.5 percent increase
was estimated to be necessary to restore generational balance after reunification.
The difference in the reunification cost is mainly due to differences in the productivity
gap and in relative population magnitudes. Productivity in North Korea relative to that of South
Korea (8 percent of the South Korean level as of 2000) is much lower than that of East Germany
relative to West Germany before unification (37 percent of the West German level). The
population ratio of North to South Korea (47 percent as of 2000) is much larger than that of East
to West Germany the year before German unification (26 percent as of 1989). Therefore, a much
longer transition period for complete convergence will be needed in the Korean case, and the
Korean government will inevitably pay much more during the transition for social welfare
benefits and government consumption.
One other lesson from the German experience is that projections made prior to the
reunification process may be optimistic. Relatively early in the process of reunification, Gokhale,
Raffelhüschen and Walliser (1995) estimated a generational imbalance (based on variant NPI) of
26 percent. The comparable number reported by Raffelhüschen and Walliser (1999) just four
years later was 92 percent, reflecting the declining fiscal situation in Germany, at least part of
which appears attributable to the cost of reunification.

5. Conclusion
This paper has reevaluated the fiscal impacts of Korean reunification using Generational
Accounting, considering the inter- and intra-generational redistribution of fiscal burdens among
current and future generations of South and North Koreans that could result from reunification.
Our findings suggest that early reunification will result in large increases in the fiscal burden for
most current and future generations of South Korea. The magnitude of the fiscal impact of
27

Korean reunification appears much larger than that of German unification, as the productivity
gap between South and North Korea is much larger than existed between East and West Germany,
and because North Korea has a much larger population, relative to South Korea, than was true of
East Germany relative to West Germany. The findings also suggest that the fiscal burden due to
increased social welfare expenditure for the North Koreans (relative to their tax payments) is
much more important than the reconstruction of the North Korean economic system in
determining the fiscal burden of reunification.
Economic cooperation between the two Koreas, to help speed the growth of productivity
in North Korea, could alleviate some of the projected burdens. Reforms of South Korea’s fiscal
policies, needed to help restore fiscal balance even without reunification, take on added
importance in light of the large added burdens of reunification. Without such reforms, the total
fiscal burdens faced by South Koreans in the future will be substantially higher than at present,
making it likely that the government will face strong resistance from South Korean residents and
a difficult road to convergence of the two Korean economies.

Appendix. Estimation of the Reconstruction Cost
We assume that the production technology is represented by a Cobb-Douglas function:

(A1)

Y = F ( K , eN ) = K θ (eN )

1−θ

where Y, K, N, and θ are GDP, the aggregate capital stock, aggregate labor (represented by the
economically active population) and the capital income share. The term e accounts for the level
of multifactor productivity, expressed in labor-augmenting units.
Under the assumption of a competitive labor market, the South-North wage ratio is:

28

(A2)

wS  eS
=
wN  eN

θ

 K S / (eS N S ) 
e

 =  S
 K N / (eN N N ) 
 eN

1−θ





 KS

 K
 N

 N N

 N S

θ


 



(A2) indicates that the wage gap results from differences in multifactor productivity as
well as in capital intensity. We assume that, along path of convergence, the multifactor
productivity gap is reduced by technology spillovers from South Korea to North Korea, i.e., that
the reconstruction cost comes from paying for part of North Korea’s capital accumulation.
By assuming a balanced growth path, i.e.,

wS e S
=
, and solving (A2) for the ratio of aggregate
wN e N

capital stocks, we get:

(A3)

K S  w S  N S

=
K N  w N  N N





Using (A3), the paths assumed for the ratios of labor productivity (wS/wN) and
economically active populations (NS/NN), and the assumed capital-output ratio of 3 (which pins
down capital stock levels), we compute the path of North Korea’s aggregate capital stock
required for its labor productivity to reach South Korea’s by the end of the transition. We then
compute the corresponding path of (gross) investment in North Korea, under the additional
assumption that the annual economic depreciation rate is 5 percent. We assume that the rate of
investment by North Korea itself is the same as that of South Korea, and that the residual
investment must be financed by South Korean residents for a period of 20 years after
reunification.

29

References
An, Jong-Bum (1997), “Fiscal Policies in the Unified Korea,” Chapter VI of Jun, Hong-Taek and
Young-Sun Lee eds., Strategies for Economic Integration after Korean Reunification, Research
Report, Korea Development Institute.
Auerbach, Alan J. and Young Jun Chun (2003), “Generational Accounting in Korea,” NBER
Working Paper No. 9983.
Auerbach, Alan J., Jagadeesh Gokhale, and Laurence J. Kotlikoff (1991), “Generational
Accounts: A Meaningful Alternative to Deficit Accounting.” In D. Bradford, ed., Tax Policy and
the Economy, vol. 5, pp. 55-110, Cambridge, MIT Press.
Auerbach, Alan J., Jagadeesh Gokhale, and Laurence J. Kotlikoff (1992a), “Generational
Accounting: A New Approach to Understanding the Effects of Fiscal Policy on Saving,”
Scandinavian Journal of Economics 94(2), June, pp. 303-318.
Auerbach, Alan J., Jagadeesh Gokhale, and Laurence J. Kotlikoff (1992b), “Social Security and
Medicaid Policy from the Perspective of Generational Accounting,” In J. Poterba, ed., Tax Policy
and the Economy, vol. 6, pp.129-145. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Auerbach, Alan J., Jagadeesh Gokhale, and Laurence J. Kotlikoff (1994), “Generational
Accounting: A Meaningful Way to Evaluate Fiscal Policy,” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
Winter, pp.73-94.
Auerbach, Alan J. and Philip Oreopoulos (2000), “The Fiscal Impacts of U.S. Immigration: A
Generational-Accounting Perspective,” Tax Policy and the Economy 14, pp.123-156.
Bae, Jin-Young (1996), “Government Fiscal Burden after Reunification on Korean Peninsula,”
Joint U.S.-Korea Academic Studies 6.
Bank of Korea (2001), “Projection of 2000 GDP of North Korea,” A Policy Brief.
Bovenberg, A. Lans, and Harry ter Rele (2000), “Generational Accounts for the Netherlands: an
Update,” International Tax and Public Finance 7, pp.411-430.
Federal Statistical Office of Germany (2003), Population of Germany Today and Tomorrow,
Weisbaden.
Gerdtham, U-G (1991), Essays on International Comparison of Health Care Expenditure,
Linkoping Studies in Arts and Science 66, Linkoping University
Gerdtham, U-G (1992), “Pooling International Health Care Expenditure Data, Health Economics
1, pp. 217-231

30

Gerdtham, U-G., F. Andersson, J. Sogaad and B. Jonsson (1988), Econometric Analysis of Health
Care Expenditures: a cross-sectional study of the OECD countries,” Center for Medical
Technology Assessment (CMT), University of Linkoping, Sweden.
Gerdtham, U-G., F. Andersson, and J. Sogaad (1992), Econometric Analysis of Health Care
Expenditures: a Cross-Sectional Study of the OECD Countries,” in P. Zweifel and H. Frech ed.,
Health Economics Worldwide, Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Gokhale, Jagadeesh, Bernd Raffelhüschen and Jan Walliser (1995), “The Burden of German
Unification: A Generational Accounting Approach,” FinanzArchiv 52, pp. 141-165.
Kotlikoff, Laurence J. (1992), Generational Accounting−Knowing Who Pays, and When, for
What We Spend. New York: Free Press.
Kotlikoff, Laurence and Willi Leibfritz (1999), “An International Comparison of Generational
Accounts,” Auerbach, Alan, Laurence Kotlikoff and Willi Leibfritz ed., Generational Accounting
Around the World, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Lee, Young-Sun (1993), “The effects of Economic Integration of Korean Peninsula: A Cost and
Benefit Analysis,” North Korea’s Economic Reality and Policy Issues, Yonsei Institute of EastWest Political Affairs.
Leu, R. E. (1986), “The Public-Private Mix and International Health Care Costs,” in A. J. Culyer
and B. Jonsson ed., Public and Private Health Services, Basil Blackwell, Oxford.
Leu, R. E. and T. Schaub (1983), “Does Smoking Increase Medical Care Expenditure?” Social
Science of Medicine 17, pp.1907-1914
Moon, Hyung-Pyo (2000), “The Projection and Evaluation of Social Development Expenditure
Level in Korea,” 2000 Government Budget and Policy Goals, Korea Development Institute.
National Statistics Office (2000), Economic and Social Comparison between South and North
Korea
National Statistics Office (2001), 2001 Population Projection of the Future.
Newhouse, J. P. (1977), “Medical Care Expenditure: a Cross-National Survey,” Journal of
Human Resources 12, pp.115-162
OECD (1993), OECD Health Systems: Facts and Trends 1960-1991, Health Policy Studies No. 3,
Paris.
Park, Tae-Gyu (1997), “Projection of Korean Reunification Cost and Fund Raising Method,
Chapter VIII of Jun, Hong-Taek and Young-Sun Lee eds., Strategies for Economic Integration
after Korean Reunification, Research Report, Korea Development Institute.

31

Raffelhüschen, Bernd and Jan Walliser (1999), “Unification and Aging in Germany: Who Pays
and When?”, in Auerbach, J. Alan, Laurence J. Kotlikoff and Willi Leibfritz eds. Generational
Accounting around the World, National Bureau of Economic Research.

32

Table 1. Generational Accounts (GA1)
(No Reunification, S. Korea, 1,000 won)
Age
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
99
Future
Gen.

0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
99
Notes:

Net
Payment
I1)
56,025
62,689
67,649
67,707
77,218
73,675
64,700
39,226
36,720
32,425
22,226
12,788
14,370
8,448
6,407
5,837
2,818
541
-2,543
-1,508
-485

Net
Payment
II2)
33,221
37,207
48,149
56,834
74,950
73,611
64,667
39,195
36,691
32,399
22,202
12,767
14,352
8,432
6,394
5,827
2,810
535
-2,547
-1,510
-486

122,341

99,060

Labor
Income
Tax
7,265
8,174
8,982
9,815
10,624
10,788
9,951
9,535
7,761
6,169
4,033
1,985
588
54
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Capital
Income
Tax
12,769
14,788
16,849
19,160
22,412
23,492
23,057
21,978
20,860
20,016
17,248
15,181
11,291
8,582
6,323
4,101
2,239
974
131
49
28

Public
Pensions

Medical
Ins.

Employ.
Ins.

IACI

MLSS

OSTP

-9,349
-8,914
-9,174
-14,596
-11,430
-15,271
-18,117
-35,332
-27,882
-23,520
-22,910
-21,396
-8,371
-6,317
-3,756
-1,366
-990
-626
-324
-223
-10

-5,100
-4,164
-3,793
-3,687
-3,746
-4,433
-5,248
-5,936
-6,834
-7,514
-8,034
-8,219
-7,764
-6,864
-5,476
-4,185
-3,243
-2,376
-1,635
-1,022
-384

-684
-765
-844
-933
-958
-819
-706
-625
-590
-512
-450
-411
-324
-245
-233
-181
-136
-98
-67
-42
-16

186
220
244
260
261
238
166
143
15
-9
-16
95
17
19
-54
-43
-33
-25
-18
-11
-4

-2,544
-2,501
-2,431
-2,364
-2,281
-2,183
-2,145
-2,104
-2,098
-2,076
-1,995
-1,958
-1,894
-1,742
-1,468
-979
-665
-340
-260
0
0

-3,344
-3,349
-3,231
-3,162
-3,136
-3,106
-3,056
-2,927
-2,832
-2,716
-2,593
-2,475
-2,381
-2,287
-1,889
-1,491
-1,144
-864
-612
-392
-149

Consumption Tax
37,745
38,513
38,963
39,601
40,150
39,102
36,440
33,071
29,603
26,144
22,862
19,278
15,834
12,681
9,893
7,975
5,453
3,198
52
33
13

Tax on
Asset
Holding
3,935
4,404
4,856
5,368
5,952
6,207
6,186
5,939
5,569
5,318
4,689
3,830
2,957
2,082
1,517
908
566
233
31
3
1

Asset
Transactions Tax
8,745
9,540
10,199
10,889
11,680
11,901
10,837
8,902
7,275
5,925
4,895
3,243
1,601
393
38
0
0
0
0
0
0

Other
Taxes

Seigniorage

Edu.
Exp

6,227
6,549
6,813
7,113
7,417
7,495
7,077
6,344
5,638
4,989
4,299
3,459
2,655
1,963
1,404
1,023
708
422
125
76
29

172
194
217
244
275
264
258
239
236
211
198
175
163
130
108
74
63
42
33
19
6

-22,803
-25,482
-19,500
-10,873
-2,269
-64
-33
-31
-29
-26
-24
-21
-18
-15
-13
-10
-8
-6
-4
-3
-1

1)

Educational expenditure treated as government consumption

2)

Educational expenditure treated as government transfers

Table 2. Required Adjustments for Long-Term Budgetary Balance
(unit: %)
Scenario:9)

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

1)

Generational Imbalance
NPI

2)

NPII

3)

NPI
NPII

S. and N.
Korea
combined

-

124.1

156.3

121.2

123.7

142.0

-

453.0

281.0

434.9

438.9

504.4

S. Korea
only

118.4

164.5

156.3

163.9

166.9

185.6

198.2

284.1

270.2

283.0

287.3

504.4

4)

Required Tax Adjustment for Long-Term Budgetary Balance
Current5)
Future6)
20047)
Reunif. Year
(2010) 7)
Current
Future
2004
Reunif. Year
(2010)

NPI

NPII

26.9
59.2
20.1
23.1

73.8
111.4
53.1

68.7
103.7
49.4

73.5
110.9
52.8

74.8
113.0
53.8

81.7
123.4
58.7

26.9
59.2
20.1
23.1

74.7
112.8
53.7

69.6
105.0
50.0

74.4
112.2
53.4

75.7
114.3
54.4

82.6
124.7
59.4

Required Tax and Transfer Adjustment for Long-Term Budgetary Balance8)
Current
Future
2004
Reunif. Year
(2010)
Current
Future
2004
Reunif. Year
(2010)

NPI

NPII

Notes:

17.8
39.1
13.1
14.6

46.9
69.3
32.0

44.5
65.7
30.4

46.7
69.0
31.8

47.1
70.5
32.2

51.9
76.7
35.4

17.2
34.5
12.3
13.8

45.8
61.5
30.1

43.4
58.3

45.6
61.3
30.0

46.0
62.5
30.4

50.6
68.0

28.6

33.3

1)

Percentage difference in net payment between 2000 newborns and future generations

2)

Net Payment I

3)

Net Payment II

4)

Percentage increase in tax burden to attain long-run budgetary balance

5)

Tax burden and benefits of current generations (as of 2000) are adjusted, while those of
future generations not changed.

6)

Tax burden and benefits of future generations are adjusted, while those of current
generations not changed.

7)

Adjust tax burden and benefits for all the age groups from the respective year.

8)

Percentage increase in tax burden and (the same) percentage decrease in benefits to
attain long-run budgetary balance.

9)

[1] No reunification; [2] Base case; [3] MLSS benefit reduction; [4] EI benefit reduction;
[5] Separate operation of NPS; [6] Higher cost of reconstruction of North Korea

Table 3. Generational Accounts (GA 1)
(Unit: 1,000 won, %)
No Reunification
S. Korea

Age

Unified Korea
S. and N. Korea
combined
Net
Net
Payment Payment
I
II
30,265
10,531
37,556
18,049
38,944
26,263
42,509
35,437
53,622
52,019
51,802
51,749
45,183
45,153
25,085
25,058
25,197
25,171
19,837
19,814
11,605
11,585
1,759
1,743
4,184
4,170
1,729
1,718
3,361
3,353
3,751
3,745
1,717
1,712
536
530
-2,542
-2,546
-1,507
-1,510
-484
-485

0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
99

Net
Payment
I1)
56,025
62,689
67,649
67,707
77,218
73,675
64,700
39,226
36,720
32,425
22,226
12,788
14,370
8,448
6,407
5,837
2,818
541
-2,543
-1,508
-485

Net
Payment
II2)
33,221
37,207
48,149
56,834
74,950
73,611
64,667
39,195
36,691
32,399
22,202
12,767
14,352
8,432
6,394
5,827
2,810
535
-2,547
-1,510
-486

Future Gen.

122,341

99,060

67,820

Generational
Imbalance(%)

118

198

124

Notes:

S. Korea

N. Korea

Net
Payment
I
55,804
63,011
69,025
70,435
80,097
77,398
68,465
44,428
39,181
33,354
22,551
13,067
14,381
8,456
6,411
5,838
2,815
541
-2,543
-1,508
-485

Net
Payment
II
33,001
37,529
49,525
59,562
77,828
77,334
68,432
44,397
39,152
33,327
22,527
13,046
14,363
8,441
6,398
5,827
2,807
535
-2,547
-1,510
-486

Net
Payment
I
-7,731
-8,208
-8,923
-9,086
-9,072
-11,559
-14,719
-15,070
-13,656
-15,719
-16,698
-16,880
-13,379
-9,928
-1,937
-572
-169
-147
-150
0
0

Net
Payment
II
-22,899
-16,972
-10,754
-9,137
-9,098
-11,583
-14,741
-15,090
-13,673
-15,734
-16,710
-16,890
-13,386
-9,933
-1,938
-572
-169
-147
-150
0
0

58,237

147,617

126,758

40,982

35,190

453

165

284

-

-

1)

Educational expenditure treated as government consumption

2)

Educational expenditure treated as government transfers

Table 4. Composition of Generational Accounts
(base case, S. Korea, 1,000 won)
Age
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
99
Future
Gen.

Net
Payment
I1)
55,804
63,011
69,025
70,435
80,097
77,398
68,465
44,428
39,181
33,354
22,551
13,067
14,381
8,456
6,411
5,838
2,815
541
-2,543
-1,508
-485

Net
Payment
II2)
33,001
37,529
49,525
59,562
77,828
77,334
68,432
44,397
39,152
33,327
22,527
13,046
14,363
8,441
6,398
5,827
2,807
535
-2,547
-1,510
-486

147,617

126,758

Labor
Income
Tax
7,265
8,174
8,982
9,815
10,624
10,788
9,951
9,535
7,761
6,169
4,033
1,985
588
54
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Capital
Income
Tax
12,769
14,788
16,849
19,160
22,412
23,492
23,057
21,978
20,860
20,016
17,248
15,181
11,291
8,582
6,323
4,101
2,239
974
131
49
28

0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
99
Notes:

Public
Pensions

Medical
Ins.

Employ.
Ins.

IACI

MLSS

OSTP

-9,569
-8,592
-7,798
-11,868
-8,552
-11,548
-14,352
-30,131
-25,421
-22,591
-22,585
-21,117
-8,360
-6,309
-3,752
-1,366
-993
-626
-324
-223
-10

-5,100
-4,164
-3,793
-3,687
-3,746
-4,433
-5,248
-5,936
-6,834
-7,514
-8,034
-8,219
-7,764
-6,864
-5,476
-4,185
-3,243
-2,376
-1,635
-1,022
-384

-684
-765
-844
-933
-958
-819
-706
-625
-590
-512
-450
-411
-324
-245
-233
-181
-136
-98
-67
-42
-16

186
220
244
260
261
238
166
143
15
-9
-16
95
17
19
-54
-43
-33
-25
-18
-11
-4

-2,544
-2,501
-2,431
-2,364
-2,281
-2,183
-2,145
-2,104
-2,098
-2,076
-1,995
-1,958
-1,894
-1,742
-1,468
-979
-665
-340
-260
0
0

-3,344
-3,349
-3,231
-3,162
-3,136
-3,106
-3,056
-2,927
-2,832
-2,716
-2,593
-2,475
-2,381
-2,287
-1,889
-1,491
-1,144
-864
-612
-392
-149

Other
Taxes

Seigniorage

Edu.
Exp

6,227
6,549
6,813
7,113
7,417
7,495
7,077
6,344
5,638
4,989
4,299
3,459
2,655
1,963
1,404
1,023
708
422
125
76
29

172
194
217
244
275
264
258
239
236
211
198
175
163
130
108
74
63
42
33
19
6

-22,803
-25,482
-19,500
-10,873
-2,269
-64
-33
-31
-29
-26
-24
-21
-18
-15
-13
-10
-8
-6
-4
-3
-1

Consumption Tax
37,745
38,513
38,963
39,601
40,150
39,102
36,440
33,071
29,603
26,144
22,862
19,278
15,834
12,681
9,893
7,975
5,453
3,198
52
33
13

Tax on Asset
Asset TransacHolding tions Tax
3,935
8,745
4,404
9,540
4,856
10,199
5,368
10,889
5,952
11,680
6,207
11,901
6,186
10,837
5,939
8,902
5,569
7,275
5,318
5,925
4,689
4,895
3,830
3,243
2,957
1,601
2,082
393
1,517
38
908
0
566
0
233
0
31
0
3
0
1
0

1)

Educational expenditure treated as government consumption

2)

Educational expenditure treated as government transfers

Table 5. Composition of Generational Accounts
(base case, N. Korea, 1,000 won)
Age
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
99
Future
Gen.

Net
Payment
I1)
-7,731
-8,208
-8,923
-9,086
-9,072
-11,559
-14,719
-15,070
-13,656
-15,719
-16,698
-16,880
-13,379
-9,928
-1,937
-572
-169
-147
-150
0
0

Net
Payment
II2)
-22,899
-16,972
-10,754
-9,137
-9,098
-11,583
-14,741
-15,090
-13,673
-15,734
-16,710
-16,890
-13,386
-9,933
-1,938
-572
-169
-147
-150
0
0

40,982

35,190

Labor
Income
Tax
2,694
2,340
1,949
1,577
1,238
867
609
462
269
121
34
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Capital
Income
Tax
7,231
6,962
6,339
5,510
4,607
3,484
2,735
2,242
1,655
1,219
812
538
322
161
21
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
99
Notes:

Public
Pensions

Medical
Ins.

Employ.
Ins.

IACI

MLSS

OSTP

-14,054
-14,319
-12,995
-10,356
-7,102
-4,833
-5,191
-4,210
-293
-286
-81
-63
-43
-13
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

-6,729
-7,657
-8,249
-8,716
-8,894
-9,090
-9,028
-8,781
-8,329
-7,651
-6,611
-5,301
-3,836
-2,418
-364
-3
0
-15
0
0
0

-1,057
-1,157
-1,161
-1,046
-917
-771
-644
-527
-397
-287
-190
-115
-81
-53
-7
0
0
0
0
0
0

48
41
33
20
11
-10
-14
-4
-4
3
-1
0
-3
-2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

-14,053
-11,280
-9,635
-8,715
-8,445
-9,341
-9,407
-8,951
-10,014
-11,265
-12,289
-12,956
-10,363
-7,991
-1,645
-570
-169
-131
-150
0
0

-1,529
-1,517
-1,423
-1,292
-1,123
-965
-769
-571
-422
-311
-230
-166
-108
-68
-9
0
0
0
0
0
0

Other
Taxes

Seigniorage

Edu.
Exp

2,275
2,124
1,875
1,610
1,333
1,037
798
610
449
316
213
136
82
49
7
0
0
0
0
0
0

87
86
80
71
61
51
42
32
24
18
14
9
6
3
1
0
0
0
0
0
0

-15,168
-8,764
-1,831
-51
-26
-24
-22
-20
-17
-15
-12
-10
-7
-5
-1
0
0
0
0
0
0

Con
sumption Tax
12,182
11,455
10,193
8,839
7,390
6,013
4,644
3,443
2,541
1,833
1,287
860
549
359
53
0
0
0
0
0
0

Tax on Asset
Asset TransacHolding tions Tax
2,056
3,118
1,970
2,744
1,782
2,289
1,551
1,861
1,307
1,461
999
1,000
782
724
644
541
483
382
345
228
237
105
149
25
93
2
46
0
7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

1)

Educational expenditure treated as government consumption

2)

Educational expenditure treated as government transfers

Table 6. GA 2 for South Korea
(Tax Adjustment1), unit: 1,000 won)
[1]2)
Age
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
99
Year of
birth
2001
2006
2011
2016
2021
2026
2031
2036
2041
2046
2051
Notes:

78,213
86,595
93,105
93,125
100,687
95,177
83,229
55,231
49,463
42,015
28,907
17,574
17,699
10,608
7,576
6,313
2,842
546
-2,543
-1,508
-485

[2]
[3]
[4]
Current Generations (as of 2000)
106,768
103,221
106,523
117,909
114,088
117,645
127,457
123,390
127,176
128,750
124,691
128,469
133,947
130,199
133,688
126,751
123,316
126,514
111,002
108,042
110,798
81,158
78,601
80,981
68,439
66,402
68,298
55,375
53,842
55,269
37,895
36,827
37,821
24,058
23,293
24,005
22,025
21,493
21,989
13,417
13,072
13,393
9,096
8,909
9,083
6,929
6,853
6,924
2,870
2,866
2,870
553
552
553
-2,543
-2,543
-2,543
-1,508
-1,508
-1,508
-485
-485
-485

[5]

[6]

107,672
118,336
126,902
126,875
131,847
123,726
107,830
76,481
66,383
54,747
37,779
23,929
22,118
13,476
9,128
6,944
2,874
553
-2,543
-1,508
-485

112,229
123,792
133,718
134,999
139,718
132,040
115,561
85,094
71,574
57,734
39,539
25,236
22,844
13,949
9,383
7,047
2,876
554
-2,543
-1,508
-485

Future Generations (born after 2000)3)
78,792
78,951
80,013
80,064
81,146
81,462
81,495
81,627
81,570
81,433
81,398

107,593
109,064
111,239
111,658
113,032
113,618
113,958
114,411
114,641
114,766
114,936

104,015
105,319
107,353
107,724
109,059
109,607
109,908
110,319
110,516
110,607
110,751

107,345
108,805
110,970
111,386
112,756
113,340
113,678
114,126
114,356
114,479
114,647

108,508
110,058
112,276
112,732
114,139
114,767
115,134
115,598
115,838
115,976
116,153

113,102
114,831
117,219
117,714
119,148
119,791
120,195
120,707
120,995
121,170
121,380

1)

Tax adjusted proportionally to attain long-run budgetary balance

2)

[1] No reunification; [2] Base case; [3] MLSS benefit reduction;
[4] EI benefit reduction; [5] Separate operation of NPS;
[6] Higher cost of reconstruction of North Korea

3)

For comparison purposes, accounts for future generations discounted
from year of birth and deflated to offset productivity growth

Table 7. GA 2 for North Korea
(Tax Adjustment1), unit: 1,000 won)
[2] 2)
Age
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
99
Year of
birth
2001
2006
2011
2016
2021
2026
2031
2036
2041
2046
2051
Notes:

12,378
10,064
6,920
4,218
1,715
-3,400
-8,579
-10,387
-10,307
-13,417
-15,200
-15,935
-12,802
-9,595
-1,890
-572
-169
-147
-150
0
0

[3]
[4]
[5]
Current Generations (as of 2000)
21,428
13,090
13,368
17,554
10,896
11,102
13,069
7,792
7,658
9,598
5,019
6,116
6,877
2,430
4,226
2,434
-2,790
-590
-2,939
-8,062
-4,736
-5,174
-9,956
-6,963
-4,078
-9,981
-9,923
-5,884
-13,181
-13,117
-6,439
-15,045
-15,116
-6,234
-15,843
-15,870
-5,133
-12,737
-12,757
-3,965
-9,553
-9,579
-1,391
-1,884
-1,889
-569
-572
-572
-168
-169
-169
-108
-147
-147
-150
-150
-150
0
0
0
0
0
0

[6]
14,532
12,022
8,618
5,644
2,871
-2,525
-7,921
-9,886
-9,949
-13,171
-15,040
-15,834
-12,740
-9,560
-1,885
-572
-169
-147
-150
0
0

Future Generations (born after 2000)3)
13,509
19,597
24,923
40,408
55,709
69,163
80,746
90,483
97,777
103,148
107,197

23,151
32,171
40,523
51,192
61,728
71,128
79,671
87,487
94,089
99,310
103,247

14,218
20,269
25,522
40,899
56,060
69,351
80,755
90,327
97,535
102,880
106,923

14,121
20,283
25,665
41,223
56,550
70,040
81,713
91,484
98,812
104,210
108,287

15,759
22,378
28,255
44,271
60,110
74,046
86,025
96,059
103,553
109,088
113,289

1)

Tax adjusted proportionally to attain long-run budgetary balance

2)

[1] No reunification; [2] Base case; [3] MLSS benefit reduction;
[4] EI benefit reduction; [5] Separate operation of NPS;
[6] Higher cost of reconstruction of North Korea

3)

For comparison purposes, accounts for future generations discounted
from year of birth and deflated to offset productivity growth

Table 8. Sensitivity Analysis
(NPI, Unit: %; base case in bold)
Growth Rate, %
Real Discount
Rate, %
Transition (years)
North Korean
fertility

1
3.5

1.5

5

7

3.5

5

50

2
7

3.5

50

1.5

5

7

50

3.5
60

70

baseline

50
low

Generational Imbalance
S. and N. Korea
combined
S. Korea only

167.3

229.2

336.2

124.1

191.7

309.5

90.7

158.1

280.5

166.0

202.3

153.0

208.9

274.5

343.7

164.5

241.1

326.0

126.1

208.7

305.7

193.9

216.8

178.5

78.1
120.5
56.9

81.2
129.1
60.1

70.3
114.3
52.3

49.5
73.9
34.0

51.5
78.3
35.7

44.6
71.6
31.6

Required Tax Adjustment for Long-Term Budgetary Balance
Current
Future
Reunif. Year
(2010)

65.4
128.6
53.7

44.9
169.3
49.6

30.8
226.7
44.7

73.8
111.4
53.1

48.8
152.4
49.8

33.6
213.8
46.1

88.4
96.3
53.0

53.9
136.1
50.0

36.7
199.1
47.2

Required Tax and Transfer Adjustment for Long-Term Budgetary Balance
Current
Future
Reunif. Year
(2010)

41.6
80.2
32.1

30.3
110.6
31.0

22.0
146.8
28.9

46.9
69.3
32.0

32.9
99.9
31.3

24.0
139.6
29.9

55.7
59.1
31.8

36.2
89.1
31.5

26.1
131.0
30.7

Figure 1. South Korean Public Pension Benefit Profile
(no reunification, relative to age-40 males)
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

age
2000

2010

2030

2050

2080

Figure 2. Percent Change in Net Payment due to Reunification
(South Korea, Tax Adjustment)
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
-100

-75

-50

-25

0

Year of Birth (relative to 2000)

21

46

