                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    WHAT DID THE “ILLEGITIMACY BONUS” REWARD?

                                           Sanders Korenman
                                               Ted Joyce
                                            Robert Kaestner
                                            Jennifer Walper

                                          Working Paper 10699
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10699


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2004




An earlier version of this paper was presented to the 2004 meetings of the Population Association of America,
Boston, April 2. This research was supported by R01 HD40834-03 from NIH/NICHD to NBER. We thank
Danielle Ferry for research assistance, Stan Henshaw for his efforts in compiling the abortion data, and Saul
Hoffman for comments.The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research or NICHD.

©2004 by Sanders Korenman, Ted Joyce, Robert Kaestner, and Jennifer Walper. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
What Did the “Illegitimacy Bonus” Reward?
Sanders Korenman, Ted Joyce, Robert Kaestner, and Jennifer Walper
NBER Working Paper No. 10699
August 2004
JEL No. I3, J1

                                             ABSTRACT

The “Illegitimacy Bonus,” part of 1996 welfare reform legislation, awarded $100 million in each
of five years to the five states with the greatest reduction in the nonmarital birth ratio. Three “states”
– Alabama, Michigan, and Washington DC – won bonuses four or more times each, claiming nearly
60% of award monies. However, in none of these three states was the decline in the nonmarital birth
ratio linked to increases in proportions married, and only in Michigan was it linked to declines in
nonmarital (relative to marital) fertility within demographic groups, behavioral changes that the
Illegitimacy Bonus was presumably intended to reward. Shifts in the racial composition of births
accounted for 1/3 (Michigan), 2/3 (DC) or all (Alabama) of the decline in the nonmarital birth ratio.
The non-marital birth ratio fell most in DC, averaging 1.5 percentage points per year over the award
period. However, the number of black children born in DC fell by nearly one half from 1991 to
2001. Changes in population composition alone – primarily a decline in the number of black women
aged 15 to 34 – can account for the entire decline in the nonmarital birth ratio in DC between 1990
and 2000.

Sanders Korenman                                         Robert Kaestner
School of Public Affairs                                 Institute of Government and Public Affairs
Baruch Colege CUNY                                       University of Illinois at Chicago
135 E. 22nd Street, Box D-0901                           815 West Van Buren Street, Suite 525
New York, NY 10010                                       Chicago, IL 60607
and NBER                                                 and NBER
sanders_korenman@baruc.cuny.edu                          kaestner@uic.edu

Ted Joyce                                                Jennifer Walper
Zicklin Scool of Business                                School of Public Affairs
Baruch College CUNY                                      Baruch College, CUNY
17 Lexington Avenue, Box 10-225                          135 E. 22nd Street, Box D-0901
New York, NY 10010                                       New York, NY 10010
and NBER                                                 jwalper@prodigy.net
ted_joyce@baruch.cuny.edu
Introduction

         Several provisions of the 1996 Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation

Act (PRWORA) were intended, directly or indirectly, to reduce non-marital fertility among the

populations at highest risk of welfare use. One of these provisions, the Out-of-Wedlock Birth Reduction

Bonus (“The Illegitimacy Bonus”), has awarded $100 million in each of five fiscal years to the five

states that achieved the largest reduction in out-of-wedlock births, provided abortions did not increase.

There are few analyses of the impact of The Illegitimacy Bonus1, and there are no ex post analyses of its

effects on fertility or abortion. Inattention to the behavioral effects of the Illegitimacy Bonus is

understandable since it is a small component of an enormously complex piece of legislation that was

implemented nationally over a short period (1996 to 1997). Credible estimation of its impact on fertility

and family behaviors would be difficult if not impossible (Moffitt 2003).2 Therefore, in this paper we

pursue the more modest goal of answering the question of the title: What did the Illegitimacy Bonus

Reward?

         Twenty-three Illegitimacy Bonuses of approximately $20 to $25 million were awarded over the

five years 1999 to 2003. Table 1 summarizes the awards. Three “states” (Alabama, Michigan and

Washington DC) were awarded 13 of the 23 Illegitimacy Bonuses, accounting for nearly 60 percent of

the bonus funds awarded. Alabama and Michigan were each awarded the Illegitimacy Bonus four times,

and DC won it five times; no other state received it more than twice.

         The Illegitimacy Bonus was, presumably, intended to reduce the proportion of unmarried births

either by reducing the chance that an unmarried woman has a birth or by increasing the proportion of

women who are married. However, the non-marital birth ratio (nonmarital births/total births), which is


1
 Donovan 1999, Dye and Presser 1999, Lewin and Associates 2003 are the main exceptions
2
 There is more hope of estimating the effects of provisions such as the Family Cap that were implemented in different states at
widely differing times through administrative “waivers” to AFDC (which PRWORA replaced with TANF, the Transitional
Assistance for Needy Families program). See Joyce et al. (2004) for an example.


                                                                                                                                  4
the measure used to award states, can fall for a variety of reasons such as an increase in the birth rate for

married women, or because of changes in population composition (i.e., a decline in the relative size of

populations with high non-marital birth ratios). For example, black women tend to have lower marriage

rates and higher non-marital fertility rates than white women. A decrease in the share of the population

that is black in a state, all else the same, will tend to reduce the non-marital birth ratio. We believe,

however, that the demographic explanation most consistent with the legislation having had its intended

behavioral effect would be a decline within specific populations in the proportion of births that is non-

marital brought about either by an increase in marriage or by a decrease in the birth rate of unmarried

women relative to that of married women in those populations. In contrast, the Illegitimacy Bonus was

not, presumably, intended to reward states for changes in the racial composition of their populations.

       In this paper, we examine changes in the non-marital birth ratio between 1994 and 2000 or 2001

for the three states that have won the award most often: Alabama, Michigan and Washington DC.

Clearly, these multiple winners were not rewarded for minor or random fluctuations. By focusing on

these multiple winners, we avoid awards that may have resulted from random fluctuations and provide a

best case for testing whether the actual awards seem consistent with the spirit and intention of the

legislation. We describe the demographic changes responsible for the decline in the non-marital birth

ratio and assess whether these demographic changes likely resulted from behavioral changes that were

the goals of the legislation. Because the law also stipulated that the abortion/birth ratio could not rise

after 1995, we examine (in a more limited way) changes in abortion to investigate whether or not non-

marital fertility appeared to be controlled through increased use of abortion among groups at highest risk

of welfare use.




Fertility-Related Provisions of PRWORA



                                                                                                      5
        PRWORA potentially affected non-marital fertility in a number of ways. First, it reduced the

lifetime value of welfare benefits by imposing work requirements and limiting federal assistance to

adults to five years (half the states adopted shorter time limits). PRWORA also allowed great flexibility

in the use of federal and state welfare funds, which permitted states to use TANF or state Maintenance

of Effort (MOE) funds to finance programs and services to prevent pregnancy or encourage marriage.

Examples of such programs include abstinence education, two-parent family polices, individual

responsibility agreements, child support and paternity establishment enforcement, and education and

training on statutory rape prevention (Lewin and Associates, 2003). The provision that appeared most

directly to address recipients’ fertility incentives was The Family Cap, which permits states to reduce or

deny benefits to women who have additional births while on welfare. The Family Cap has been widely

studied, and appears to have been ineffectual (see, for example, Joyce, et al. 2004). Welfare reform re-

authorization legislation currently pending in the US House and Senate has also emphasized marriage

promotion, and considers the reduction of non-marital fertility an explicit goal (Parke 2003). The

Senate and House bills include $1.5 billion for “healthy marriage” promotion.

        Illegitimacy Bonuses were awarded to states with the largest proportionate decreases in the out-

of-wedlock birth ratio: the ratio of non-marital to total births to state residents, with a requirement that

the abortion “rate” (the ratio of abortions to live births in the state) not increase after 1995. For

calculation of the abortion “rate,” HHS regulations required states that were potentially eligible for the

bonus to report either the number of abortions performed in the state, or the number performed in the

state on in-state residents.




                                                                                                        6
Previous Literature

       In this section we summarize reports, media coverage, congressional testimony, scholarly journal

articles, and position papers by concerned organizations. Few attempted to analyze the effects of the

Illegitimacy Bonus on fertility and abortion behavior. The literature can be grouped broadly into three

categories: 1) moral and ethical objections; 2) criticisms of data or measures used to determine bonus

winners; and 3) descriptions of state reactions to the bonus (i.e., the effect of the bonus on state and sub-

state policies, programs and services, including uses of award monies). A fourth strand of the literature,

which we take up in the final section of this paper, describes the future of the bonus and related

provisions in TANF reauthorization proposals.



Goals, Ethics, Morals

       Section 401(a)(3) of the Social Security Act states that the purpose of the Illegitimacy Bonus is

to "prevent and reduce the incidence of out-of-wedlock pregnancies and establish annual numerical

goals for preventing and reducing the incidence of these pregnancies…" and to “…encourage the

formation and maintenance of two-parent families.” To achieve these goals, Congress sought a bonus

to “provide greater impetus to State efforts in this area and encourage state creativity in developing

effective solutions” (USDHHS 1999). The underlying logic of the bonus is simple: if states succeed in

reducing non-marital births, poverty and welfare dependency should decrease, and child and family

well-being should improve. Opinion pieces leading up to welfare reform demonstrate the wide range of

positions and beliefs regarding non-marital childbearing. For example, Charles Murray, who for many

years has criticized public assistance programs for encouraging nonmarital childbearing and family

dissolution, wrote in an influential OP-ED piece in Wall St. Journal that, "… illegitimacy is the single




                                                                                                     7
worst social problem of our time – more important than crime, drugs, poverty, illiteracy, welfare, or

homelessness because it drives everything else" (Murray 1993).3

             Putting aside the question of whether illegitimacy causes the ill effects with which is it

associated, the proposal to fight illegitimacy through welfare reform would be strengthened by the

existence of a causal relationship between welfare and non-marital births. Some leading social scientists

have contributed to the long debate over the evidence on this issue (see for example, Murray 1984;

Ellwood 1988; Moffitt 1992 and 1998; McLanahan and Sandefur 1994; Ellwood and Jencks 2002). The

most recent scientific consensus seems to be that, although there is some evidence of an effect of the

availability of welfare benefits on non-marital fertility, the evidence is mixed and the range of estimates

is very large (Moffitt 1998 and 2003). Recent studies that explicitly examine PRWORA find no

evidence of a link between welfare policy and fertility (Joyce et al. 2003).

             Representative of strong objections to the fertility and marriage provisions in welfare reform is

an editorial in The Journal of Blacks in Higher Education (1996) that argued that supporters of marriage

promotion in welfare reform ignored the falling rates of non-marital fertility among blacks in the early

1990s.4 The use of welfare reform to fight illegitimacy and family decline despite a decline in non-

marital fertility rates among blacks indicated to the author that “[t]he driving force behind the nation’s

Draconian welfare reform has been a widespread belief that throughout the current welfare system hard

working and tax-paying white folks have been underwriting an explosion of illegitimate births among

blacks.”




3
  Murray’s op-ed piece was entered into the Congressional Record as part of Sen. Dole’s testimony (p. S15314 of
the Congressional Record: 103rd congress) and again in Sen. Murkowski's testimony (CR - Senate - November 01,
1993- Page: S14718).

4
    The editorial acknowledges, however, that he non-marital birth ratio increased in the early 1990s.


                                                                                                                  8
        Others opposed the use of welfare policy to influence sexual and family behaviors of American

society more broadly (Boonstra 2002). Specifically, several critics (Dye and Presser 1999; Maryland

Department of Human Resources 1998) objected to the potential use of TANF funds to target behavior

among the non-TANF population (or those not at high risk of TANF use). A related charge was that

changes in behaviors of non-poor residents might disqualify a state that successfully reduced non-

marital fertility among its TANF or low-income populations. Provisions that created incentives for states

to develop broadly-targeted fertility and marriage initiatives were among the major objections of

Democrats to welfare reform (Haskins 2001).


Objections to Measures or Data

        The bonus provided $100 million annually to up to five states or territories that achieved the

largest percent reduction in the non-marital birth ratio without experiencing an increase in the

abortion/birth ratio. Donovan (1999), Dye and Presser (1999) and others criticized these measures

because they: 1) are based on an inappropriate period, 2) can be influenced by demographic shifts

unrelated to the program’s behavioral goals, and 3) are based on a flawed indicator of non-marital

fertility control.

        Dyer and Presser (1999) argued that the measurement periods were inappropriate for measuring

behavioral changes, particularly for the first two award years, because changes between 1994 and 1997

would reflect the impact of programs or policies implemented before welfare reform. Donovan (1999)

expected any effects of the 1996 law on non-marital births not to appear for at least a year.


        Dye and Presser (1999) further predicted that the bonus would at times reward demographic

fluctuations unrelated to declines in non-marital fertility among women at risk of entering poverty or

using welfare. Consistent with this prediction, Ron Haskins noted “the District of Columbia has won the




                                                                                                   9
bonus twice, but the most significant factor contributing to this success appears to be that the non-

marital birth rate has been declining faster among blacks than any other group, and Washington, D.C.,

has the highest percentage of blacks nationwide” (quoted by Anderson 2001). As we shall see, Haskins

is partly correct. DC was not awarded a “blackness” bonus, but rather a “whiteness” bonus; the non-

marital birth ratio fell in D.C. not so much because the black non-marital birth rate was falling nationally

and DC has a large African American population, but primarily because of a decline in the black female

population aged 15 to 34, and secondarily because of the general fertility decline in black birth rates,

both marital and non-marital. (As we shall see, non-marital birth rates did not decline relative to marital

birth rates.) We describe these changes in more detail below.


       Dye and Presser (1999) demonstrated a number of potential flaws in the measures by analyzing

data from 1991 to 1995 to simulate bonus winners for 1996 (based on data for 1991 through 1994) and

1997 (based on data 1992 through 1995). Actual bonuses were based on births from 1994 to 2001. Their

simulations showed that Utah and Virginia would have been awarded Illegitimacy Bonuses based on the

decline in their non-marital birth ratios over 1991-1994; and California, Georgia, Massachusetts,

Montana and North Carolina would have won based on data from 1992-1995.


       These simulations indicated to Dye and Presser (1999) that the non-marital birth ratio did not

accurately gauge control of non-marital fertility. For example, they found that Georgia would have been

awarded the bonus despite an increase in the absolute number of non-marital births in the state; the

illegitimacy ratio showed a decline because marital births increased more than non-marital births. Dye

and Presser (1999) also predicted that variation in data quality and collection methods across states

would complicate and obscure comparisons of rates across states.




                                                                                                  10
         In addition to showing a decrease in the non-marital birth ratio, to qualify for the bonus, states

needed to show a decline in the ratio of abortions to live births to state residents occurring in the state.

Initially, the legislation required states to submit data on births and abortions occurring in the state.

During the call for comments, however, critics noted that counts of abortions performed in a state could

be affected by “abortion migrants” from neighboring states, flows of which could be affected greatly by

policies of neighboring states. It was then recommended that the rate be defined by abortions to state

residents occurring within and outside the state. This was deemed impossible because the federal

government could not mandate states to document abortions performed on women from other states. In

the final legislation, the preferred abortion measure was defined as the ratio of abortions performed on

state residents to total live births in the state, although states were allowed to report by state of

occurrence if those were the only data available.5, 6


         The Department of Health and Human Services used abortion data that the states routinely

submit to the federal government to determine the bonus winners. Dye and Presser (1999) questioned

the quality of that data, and noted that the AGI surveys of abortion providers generally record more

abortions and are considered more complete and accurate, and that completeness and accuracy vary

across states. Others pointed to disincentives the bonus created for states to increase completeness of

abortion reporting or availability, or improve the quality of abortion services (Boonstra 2000; Dye and

Presser 1999).


5
  Comments were submitted suggesting that this flexibility would lead to data shortcomings, and that data collection should be
more standardized.
6
  From PRWORWA Final Rules: One commenter objected to the definition of "number of out-of-wedlock births" and "number
of total births" because she interpreted the definitions to mean the number of births occurring in the State. The commenter
recommended that the number of births be measured according to the state of residence rather than the state of occurrence. HHS
Responded: We agree that the number of out-of-wedlock and total births will be measured according to state of residence rather
than state of occurrence, and the definitions proposed in the NPRM for out-of-wedlock and total births already reflect this.
Therefore, no changes were needed in the final rule. We retained the two pertinent definitions proposed in the NPRM as follows:
"Number of out-of-wedlock births for the State" means the final number of births occurring outside of marriage to
residents of the State, as reported in NCHS vital statistics data. "Number of total births for the State" means the final
total number of live births to residents of the State, as reported in NCHS vital statistics data.


                                                                                                                            11
       Finally, welfare reform may have raised the abortion rate among at-risk single women (contrary

to the law’s intention), but such increases may have been offset by decreases in the abortion rates among

low-risk women residing in the same state (e.g., from increased condom use among college students or

fewer abortions to married women). For example, Utah would have been one of the 1996 bonus winners

in Dye and Presser’s simulations, yet 40% of the abortions obtained in Utah in 1993-1994 were to

married women, a far higher proportion than in any other state. Therefore, the potential for abortions to

married women to account for the decline in abortions may be greater in Utah than in other states.




Evidence of State Efforts to Win the Bonus

          Even if measures are flawed and motivations and goals questionable, one might judge the

Illegitimacy Bonus at least a partial success if it stimulated the growth of beneficial activities or

programs. Two studies provide information on this issue.

          Surveys of officials of state health and social service agencies found that 34 states (including

DC) reported taking steps to reduce out-of-wedlock births in response to PRWORA initiatives, though

only a few indicated new efforts in response to the Illegitimacy Bonus (Boonstra 2000). The Lewin

Group (2003, p. 33) concluded:


         Based on our discussions with officials within the nine study states, we found that the potential
         availability of the bonus had little influence on nonmarital birth prevention policies within the
         states, even among bonus winners. We also found no clear relationship between bonus receipt
         and amount of effort expended by states, and we found that among the three states receiving
         the bonus (i.e., Alabama, Arizona and Massachusetts), only Alabama has directed bonus funds
         toward additional nonmarital birth prevention activities. Finally, we found that most states
         were critical of the outcome measure used to award the bonus.




                                                                                                    12
       The Lewin Group (2003, p. 33) also reported that “among the three bonus states [in their

sample], two (Alabama and Arizona) reported making no special effort to win the bonus (prior to first

receipt), and each of the six non-bonus states reported that they made no sustained efforts to win the

bonus…and the potential receipt of bonus money had little effect on program design, intensity, or

implementation of efforts to reduce out-of-wedlock childbearing.”

       However, some state officials indicated that the Illegitimacy Bonus stimulated a discussion of

how to use TANF dollars, even if the state did not make an explicit decision to compete for the bonus.

Moreover, after winning the bonus for the first time, several state officials reported feeling motivated to

win again (particularly in Alabama). In Michigan, which qualified for the Illegitimacy Bonus for four

consecutive years (1999 to 2002), the Engler administration proposed that a substantial portion of the

first bonus award of $20 million be dedicated to adolescent pregnancy prevention. A bipartisan

committee recommended that $15 million of the $20 million bonus be directed to the Teen Pregnancy

Prevention Project (TP3), which targeted communities with high teen birth rates. Smaller portions of

the second and third rounds of bonus winnings were also used to support the TP3 project as well as a

Paternity Establishment Project (Costello, 2003).

       In short, although The Lewin Group (2003) report concluded that bonus winning bore little, if

any, relation to a state’s efforts to reduce non-marital births (p. 42), and only sometimes were bonus

winnings directed toward non-marital pregnancy prevention, some states were motivated to compete for

the bonus, which may have resulted in longer-term increases in funding (and effort) for non-marital birth

reduction programs.




                                                                                                 13
Data on Births, Abortions and Populations7

           To document what the Illegitimacy Bonus has rewarded, we use three data sources. Our initial

estimates examine information on births from national natality files (NCHS), which record every birth in

the United States and are available to the public. These are the data upon which the Illegitimacy

Bonuses were based. For our purposes, there is one major measurement issue of concern with these data,

which relates to marital status recording on births certificates in Michigan. In 1994, Michigan

implemented a revised imputation of marital status that resulted in a discrete jump in the proportion non-

marital.8

          Identification of the demographic changes responsible for the decline in the non-marital ratio

requires additional information on population sizes and marital status of the population. Ideally, we

would examine the role of changes in population composition, marital status (proportions married), and

marital and non-marital fertility rates in the decline in the non-marital birth ratio (proportion unmarried)

over the award period, 1994 to 2000 (for Alabama and Michigan) or 2001 (for DC). Since we need to

calculate populations, fertility rates and marriage proportions for small sub-state populations, we must

rely on the 1990 and 2000 Censuses. Although Censuses permit more thorough demographic analyses

than are possible with the birth records alone, their use limits analyses to changes between 1990 and

2000, rather than 1994 to 2001.

          Two other limitations require additional explanation. First, race classifications in the 2000 Census

are not strictly comparable with those in the 1990 Census. Rather than require respondents to indicate a

primary race from a choice of four, as in the past, the 2000 Census permitted up to five different racial

7
    This section draws heavily from Joyce et al. 2003.
8
  Personal communication with Cathy Humphries, Michigan Department of Health. Prior to 1993 the birth
certificate had two marital items: 1) one parent (assumed unmarried) and 2) both parents. A third item was added
for 1993: 3) 1 parent but an acknowledgement of paternity was received. Thus, beginning in 1994, a birth was




                                                                                                                   14
identifications from an expanded pool of five classifications. The National Center for Health Statistics

(NCHS, 2003) has released a bridged-race version of the Census 2000 Modified Race Data Summary

File, where multiple-race categories are mapped to the four single-race counts of prior Censuses. Since

this file contains demographic information on race, age and sex only, we use it only for descriptive

purposes and to check the robustness of our results that do not account for the changing race items.

Because our main analyses require education and marital status, we draw our population figures from

the Five-Percent Public Use Microdata (PUMS) files, which contain individual, state-level records for a

five percent sample of the 1990 or 2000 Census. We assume that the first race specified in the 2000

Census corresponds to the primary race that would have been selected for the 1990 Census race item.

For analyses that did not require education and marital status information, we found that using either the

bridged-race file or Five-Percent PUMS for 2000 produced similar results.

        A second limitation regards matching birth records with missing information on education to

PUMS files in which missing education data have been imputed by the Census Bureau. We report

results that reflect our imputation of missing education in birth records based on the distribution of

reported schooling categories by state, year, age, race, and marital status. However, we obtained similar

results whether we used (our) imputed education, dropped births with unknown education from the

sample, or used allocation flags to reset education to unknown in the Census data.

        Abortion data were collected by the authors.9 We canvassed state health departments between

October 2001 and September 2002 in order to obtain induced termination of pregnancy files (ITOP)

without personal identifiers. Of the three multiple bonus winning states, only Alabama provided

detailed characteristics required for our analyses, the most important being age, race, marital status, and



considered delivered by an unmarried women if items (1) or (3) were checked, resulting in reclassification of some
“paternity established” births from married to unmarried.
9
 The National Bureau of Economic Research and the Alan Guttmacher Institute collaborated to collect the data,
which are abortion certificates, similar to birth certificates, from state vital statistics departments


                                                                                                                     15
completed schooling of the mother, and the month and year of termination (see Joyce et al. 2003 for

details).

        The number of abortions reported by state health departments tends to be lower than estimates

 based on surveys of abortion providers conducted by the Alan Guttmacher Institute. The State Health

 Department count for Alabama in 1996 was 8.7 percent lower than the count of abortions in the AGI

 provider survey (Joyce et al. 2004, Table 1). Henshaw (2000) offers various explanations for the

 differences in total abortions between AGI and state health departments. Most explanations pertain to

 staff turnover or inexperience as well as provider fear of harassment. However, without additional

 information, it is not possible to determine whether the discrepancy in the number of abortions between

 AGI and the state health departments is related to characteristics of the women, and how this might

 vary over time.

        Missing data in abortion records from Alabama is a minor problem, with the exception of

 education of mother. The proportion missing for age, race, marital status and parity (number of

 previous births) are, respectively, 1.3%, 1.1%, 1.5% and 0.9%. About 12% of records are missing

 educational status of mother. In our analyses of abortion and birth data, we treat missing education as a

 separate category. Some of our regressions with data from birth records include controls for

 race/Hispanic identification (non-Hispanic white, non-Hispanic black, Hispanic and other/unknown)

 and education (categories for: less than HS graduate, HS graduate but no college, any college,

 unknown).



Results

        Figure 1 shows the non-marital birth ratio in the three multiple bonus-winning states (AL, MI

and DC). Although the bonuses were awarded on the basis of changes in two-year averages from 1994




                                                                                                  16
to 2001, we show data for the years 1990 to 2001 because we will later introduce population data from

the 1990 and 2000 Censuses.

         The first point to notice in Figure 1 is that, over the period 1994 to 2000, Alabama and

Michigan experienced only slight declines in the proportion of births that is non-marital. In fact,

Alabama’s ratio is slightly higher in 2000 (and 2001) than in 1994, despite winning bonuses in

four out of five years based on data from 1994 to 2000. The ratio is more than four percentage

points higher in 2000 than in 1990. In Michigan, there is more evidence of a downward trend,

though the trend appears to end with an upturn in 2000 and 2001.10 In contrast, Washington DC

experienced a pronounced decline in the non-marital birth ratio over 1994 to 2001, particularly

after 1994. Moreover, although the proportion non-marital increased somewhat in DC from

1990 to 1994, by 1996 the ratio in DC was well below the 1990 ratio.

         Table 2 summarizes these trends with a simple regression of the proportion non-marital

on a time trend from 1994 to 2000 for Alabama and Michigan, and from 1994 to 2001 for DC.

These are the data years upon which their Illegitimacy Bonuses were based (Table 1), four for

Alabama and Michigan, and five for DC. The first row of Table 2 indicates that, in Alabama,

the proportion non-marital fell by a miniscule 0.061 percentage points per year (i.e., the ratio fell

0.00061 per year) on average from 1994 to 2000. In Michigan, the decline averaged about one-

quarter percentage point per year over that period. DC averaged a remarkable 1.4 percentage

point per year decline in the proportion non-marital from 1994-2001, or more than 23 times the

rate of decline in Alabama.

         However, in DC and Alabama, the decline in the non-marital ratio in the award period is

largely explained by a shift in the racial composition of births. As shown in row 2 of Table 2,


10
   As noted, the jump in percent single in Michigan in 1994 results from a change the way Michigan imputed marital status from
information recorded on birth certificates.


                                                                                                                           17
adjusting for race of mother (black, white, Hispanic, or other race), the proportion nonmarital

increased by about 0.0264 percentage points per year in Alabama; in Michigan it declined by

0.18 percentage points per year, and in DC, the proportion single decreased by nearly one half

percentage point per year (0.463 percentage points). Thus, about 2/3 of the substantial decline in

the non-marital ratio in DC is explained by the changing racial composition of births; in

Alabama the entire decline is explained by this demographic shift, and in Michigan about a third

of the decline is due to changes in racial composition of births.

       These changes may be seen in Figures 2 through 4, which show the number of births by

race and state. In Alabama (Figure 2), the number of births fell modestly among blacks and

whites over the decade, but increased slightly after 1995, and appears to have fallen again in

2001 (a pro-cyclical pattern). Hispanic births rose steadily, though from a tiny base. In DC

(Figure 3) the number of black births began a precipitous decline in 1991, and fell by nearly half

over the decade: births to black women fell from a peak of 9,112 in 1991 to 4,808 in 2001, a

decline of 47%. The number of births to whites and Hispanics in DC increased slightly from

1996 onward. But well over half the decline in births to black mothers occurred before 1996.

The figure for Michigan (Figure 4) resembles that for Alabama in that births to blacks and whites

fell modestly in percentage terms (though by a larger absolute number in Michigan), and births

to Hispanics rose modestly.

       Since the proportion non-marital is highest among black women in all three states, a

decline in the percent of births to black women, all else the same, lowers the proportion non-

marital. Figures 5 through 7 show the proportion of births to black, white and Hispanic women

respectively in the three states. The proportion black declines noticeably in Alabama and

Michigan, and markedly in DC. Only in DC did the proportion of white births increase




                                                                                                  18
substantially. The proportion Hispanic rose steadily in the three states, though again from a

small base percentage.

          Figures 8 through 10 show the proportion of births that is non-marital by race of mother

in the three states. These figures correspond to the “within race” regressions summarized in the

second row of Table 2. In Alabama, the percent single increased substantially among whites and

Hispanics to (roughly) 20% each, and declined slightly among blacks after 1995. Figure 9 for

DC indicates (aside from what appears to be an anomaly for whites in 1990) little overall trend

over the decade in the percent non-marital for any group, though there is an inverse U-shape

pattern for all groups. Still, by 2001, nearly 80% of black births and over 50% of Hispanic births

are non-marital. Nonetheless, especially compared to the enormous decline in black births

overall in DC in this period, the trend in the percent non-marital within racial/ethnic groups is

slight.

          The dominant feature of the figure for Michigan (Figure 10) is the break in the series

after 1993 caused by the change in marital status recording. After the series break, there is very

little trend in the proportion non-marital among whites and Hispanics, and a steady decline in

percent non-marital from 1994 to 1999 among blacks. The percent non-marital among blacks

turns up again in 2000 and 2001.

          The figures so far suggest that the decline in the percent of births to black women,

especially in Alabama and DC, is a more important contributor to the decline in the non-marital

birth ratio than is the reduction in non-marital proportions within race. Logically, the decline in

the number of births to black women could have two sources: fewer births per woman or fewer

women. We next examine, therefore, whether the decline in the non-marital birth ratio that

resulted from changes in the number of births to specific groups (especially the decline in the




                                                                                                    19
number of births to black mothers) resulted from population changes (e.g., a decline in the black

population) or changes in birth rates (i.e., births per woman). We later consider the role of

marital status. For population data at the state level, especially for small subpopulations and

those that are undergoing rapid change, we must rely on the decennial censuses; therefore, we

examine changes between 1990 and 2000 in the Census.

         We begin our exploration of the role of population composition with a description of the

major population changes in the three states. 11 Figures 11 through 13 show the population of

women aged 15 to 54 by race for the three bonus winning states. In Alabama (Figure 11) and

Michigan (Figure 13), the black, white and Hispanic populations all grew steadily. In DC (Figure

12), the Hispanic and “other race” populations grew, but the black female population fell

substantially at these ages (about 15%, from 124,173 to 105,164), while the white population fell

slightly. Clearly, the changes in the female black population in DC alone would tend to reduce

the non-marital birth ratio.

         Figures 14 through 16 show female populations by race and age. Figure 15 for DC

reveals a striking change: the largest decline in the 15 to 54 year old age group was at ages 15 to

34, the peak ages of fertility. The number of black 35 to 54 year olds increased slightly, and the

number under 35 decreased substantially (by nearly thirty percent, from 70,764 to about 50,595).

This change is clearly not the result solely of population aging because, for example, the number

of 25 to 34 year olds in 2000 (25,929) is about a fifth smaller than the number of 15 to 24 year

olds in 1990 (32,033).




11
  Population data used for the figures are from the NCHS bridged-race files that adjust for changes in race questions
between the 1990 and 2000 Census. Because cross-walk files do not include education and marital status breaks, we
used the 5% PUMS for our standardizations (presented below). In analyses that did not require education or marital
breaks, the 5% PUMS and cross-walk files yielded very similar results.


                                                                                                                  20
        In Alabama (Figure 14), the white population aged 15 to 34 declined, and the black

population aged 15 to 24 increased, while the black population aged 25 to 34 increased slightly,

as did the Hispanic population. In Michigan, the white population aged 15 to 35 declined, the

black population held about steady at those ages, and the Hispanic population grew. Thus, in

Michigan and Alabama, population shifts alone would have increased non-marital birth ratios.

We now turn to a more detailed demographic standardization to determine the influence of these

demographic changes on the non-marital ratios.



Demographic Standardizations

        As noted, births records can yield only limited insights regarding the sources of change in

the non-marital birth ratio.12 In particular, the analyses described in Table 2 do not help

differentiate between changes in births that come about from changes in population composition

versus those that come about from changes in martial status or in marital or non-marital birth

rates. Therefore, we conduct two sets of standardizations. We first use the five-percent PUMS

for 1990 and 2000 and a demographic standardization to estimate the contributions of

compositional changes and changes in demographic-group-specific birth rates and non-marital

birth ratios to changes in the state’s non-marital birth ratio over the 1990s. In our second set of

standardizations we focus on the role of marital status and estimate the contributions of changes

in demographic-group-specific proportions married and their relative rates of non-marital and

marital fertility.

        The overall non-marital birth ratio in a state in a given year may be written as a weighted

average of the non-marital ratios of subpopulations, where the weights are the shares of births

contributed by those populations. Further, the number of births contributed by a population is




                                                                                                      21
determined by the size of the population and the birth rate (births per woman). For this analysis,

we use the following definitions:

              NMRt = non-marital birth ratio for a state in year t.
              POPit = population of group i in year t
              Bit = number of births to the group i in year t, and
              Bt = the total number of births in the state in year t.

We define “group” variously as race, race-by-age, race-by-education, or race-by-age-by-

education.

Then, we may write

NMRt = Σi (Bit /Bt) * NMRi t

where NMRi t are the group specific non-marital birth ratios, t = 1990 or 2000 and i indexes the

group.

Multiply and divide by the group population size, and rearrange to get

NMRt = (1/Bt) * Σi POPi t * (Bit/POPi t) * NMRi t

Thus, we can examine the impact on the states NMR from:

           1. changes in the group-specific NMRs;

           2. changes in group-specific fertility rates (Bit/POPit);

           3. and changes in population sizes; i.e., the sizes of the different groups.

To compute the impact from changes in NMRs, we hold births, the Bit (=POPit*Bit/POPit), constant at

their 1990 values, but allow the NMRit to change to their 2000 level (i.e. standardize on 1990 births). To

compute the impact from changes in fertility, we hold POPit and NMRit constant at their 1990 values, but

allow the Bit/POPit to change to 2000 values. To compute the impact of changes in population sizes, we

hold Bit/POPit and NMRit constant at 1990 values but allow POPit to change between 1990 and 2000.

Population counts are taken from the 5-Percent PUMS.


12
     In a nutshell, exclusive reliance on birth data is the crux of the problem with the Illegitimacy Bonus.


                                                                                                               22
       Table 3 shows the results of this standardization used to examine components of change from

1990 to 2000 in the non-marital birth ratios for Alabama and DC, and in modified form, for Michigan.

Due to the break in the series of non-marital ratios for Michigan caused by the change in procedure for

imputing marital status from information on births certificates, we substituted 1994 values of the group-

specific non-marital ratios for the 1990 values, but used population data for 1990 and 2000. Thus, the

figures for Michigan should be regarded as approximations.

       The first panel of the table shows the overall decline in the non-marital fertility ratio between

1990 and 2000. Each subsequent panel shows the results of carrying out the standardization described on

the previous page for different definitions of demographic group, increasing in detail from race, to race-

by-education, race-by-age, or race-by-education-by-age.

       As can be seen from the first panel of the table, despite the slight decrease in Alabama’s non-

marital birth ratio between 1994 and 2000, the proportion non-marital rose by nearly one-half

percentage point per year for the decade as a whole. For DC, the average annual decline in the

proportion non-marital is about one-third as large over the decade 1990 to 2000 as between 1994 and

2001, but is still nearly half a percentage point per year. For Michigan the decline is similar to that

estimated from the birth data for 1994 to 2000, about one quarter percentage point per year.

       The last (fifth) panel of the table presents the results of the standardization exercise where we

have defined demographic “group” in the most disaggregated way (race/Hispanic by age by education).

This is our preferred estimate since we believe it is appropriate to adjust for changes in the age, race and

educational attainment of the population that are largely (if not entirely) exogenous to welfare reform.

However, as noted, we also present results for less detailed disaggregations. The first row of the fifth

panel shows what the annual change in the non-marital birth ratio would have been had only the race-

specific non-marital birth ratios changed between 1990 and 2000 (i.e., birth rates and populations within




                                                                                                   23
each race group are held constant at the mean of their values in 1990 and 2000). For example, the

number 0.27 in the first row of the last panel for DC indicates that the non-marital birth ratio would have

risen by 0.27 percentage points per year (or nearly 3 percentage points over the decade) based on the

increase in the “within-group” non-marital birth ratios alone!

       In Michigan, on balance the ratio also increased within group (with the only exception being

when group is defined on the basis of race alone, the first row of second panel). Thus, on average in

these bonus winning states, the proportion of births that is non-marital increased with demographic

groups defined by race, race and age or race, age and education. In other words, the non-marital birth

ratios did not fall because non-marital birth ratios fell within demographic groups. This further suggests

that the propensity of a given woman to have a non-marital birth did not decline in the big bonus

winning states between 1990 and 2000.

       The number of births could change within groups either because the group size changed

(population changed) or because birth rates changed for each group. To gauge the importance of each of

these factors to the overall change in the non-marital birth ratio, we allow only fertility rates (births per

woman) to change for each group, but we hold the group-specific populations and non-marital ratios

constant at their 1990 levels. These results are presented in the second row of each panel. This

standardization shows that the change in group-specific birth rates reduced the overall non-marital birth

ratio by about 0.3 percentage points per year in DC (middle row of each panel), or by nearly three

percentage points over the decade. In Michigan, the decline in birth rates accounts for more than the

entire decline; in Michigan falling group-specific birth rates alone would have reduced the non-marital

birth ratio by nearly five percentage points over the decade.

       What if population sizes were allowed to change, but the group-specific birth rates and non-

marital ratios were held constant at their 1990 levels? The third row of each panel shows the results of




                                                                                                    24
this exercise. Focusing on the final panel, in DC, the non-marital ratio would have fallen 0.57 per year,

or 5.7 percentage points over the decade. Thus, in DC, changes in the race-by-age-by-education

distribution of the population alone can (more than) account for the decline in the overall non-marital

ratio in DC over the 1990s. (We reach the same conclusions if we examine figures in the other panels

of the table where we carry out the exercise using more aggregated demographic groups.). In Michigan,

population changes alone would have increased the non-marital ratio between one and one and one-half

percentage points over the decade.

        So far we have neglected the role of marital status. As some have argued, we might expect

welfare reform to affect the non-marital birth ratio in two ways. First, it would increase the proportion

of women who are married. Second, it would decrease the non-marital fertility rate (births per unmarried

women) at least relative to the marital fertility rate.

        To understand better the role of changes in marital status and martial-status-specific fertility

rates, we conducted an additional standardization. Note again that the non-marital birth ratio is the ratio

of non-martial births to total births. Marital births (MB) are the product of the married population

(MPOP) and the married birth rate (MB/MPOP). And the married population is simply the product of

the population (POP) and the proportion married (MPCT). So we may write for births to married

women in demographic group i and year t:

        MBit = POPit * MPCTit * (MBit / MPOPit)

and, for births to unmarried women:

        UBit = POPit * (1- MPCTit) * (UBit / UPOPit)



        Thus, we can calculate the contributions of changes in (group-specific) population sizes,

proportions married, and marital and non-marital fertility rates to the change in the number of married




                                                                                                   25
and unmarried births. The following table shows the means of the variables used to carry out the

standardization.


Means of Variable Used in the Standardization Summarized in Table 4
           Female Population                                    Martial Birth Rate         Nonmarital Birth Rate
           A 15-44 (millions)         Percent Married           (per 1,000)                (per 1000)
State      1990          2000         1990           2000       1990         2000          1990           2000
AL         1.161        1.278         59.7           57.0       63.8          57.1         40.2           39.1
DC         0.199        0.185         31.8           31.3       65.5          52.4         56.0           36.1
MI*        2.698        2.854         55.7           54.1       59.7          58.8         40.1           34.5
*For Michigan, the non-marital and marital birth rates are estimated using 1994 births and 1990 populations.

        Overall, the percent married and the marital birth rate declined in the three bonus-winning states.

All else the same, each of these changes would have raised the non-marital birth ratio. In all three

states, the non-marital birth rate fell, slightly in Alabama, and substantially in both MI and DC.

However, only in MI was the decline in the non-marital rate much greater than the decline in the marital

rate. In DC, the changes in the marital and non-marital birth rates were roughly equal (about 13 per

thousand), though the decline in the non-marital rate was proportionately larger.

        However, in order to judge better whether these changes were consistent with the kinds of

behavioral changes the Illegitimacy Bonus was intended to reward, we would like to know if, within

demographic groups, the proportion married increased or the non-marital fertility rate fell (relative to

the marital fertility rate). In Table 4 we carry out this standardization for the most disaggregated groups

(race by age by education), corresponding to the last panel in Table 3.13

        For example, the first entry of the first row shows that, in Alabama, the non-marital birth ratio

was 0.298 in 1990. Changes in population composition (race-by-age-by-education shares) alone

increased the non-marital ratio by 0.003 over the decade; changes in marital status within groups raised



13
  Results for less disaggregated analyses are available from the authors. Appendix Table 1 shows a group-by-group
version of the standardization for DC that demonstrates the contributions of each of the demographic changes
(population, proportions married and marital and nonmarital birth rates for 16 age-race groups). The standardization
was conducted using 48 race-age-education groups, but for ease of presentation we have summed across the
education categories for each of the 16 age-race group. Similar tables are available for Michigan and Alabama.


                                                                                                                   26
the ratio an additional 0.033 (3.3 percentage points), and changes in marital and non-marital births rates

within groups increased the non-marital ratio by another 0.7 percentage points. In DC, population

composition changes alone decreased the non-marital ratio by 4.2 percentage points; group-specific

proportions married and marital-specific birth rates raised the ratio by about 0.3 and 0.4 percentage

points respectively. Finally, in Michigan, the entire decline in the non-marital ratio is explained by

changes in the group-specific marital and non-marital fertility rates. On balance, population shifts and

group-specific proportions married increased the non-marital ratio in Michigan.

       In sum, in none of the bonus winning states did the non-marital birth ratio fall because of

increases within demographic groups in the proportion married. And only in Michigan did the non-

marital birth ratio fall because of a decline within demographic groups in the non-marital fertility rate

relative to the marital fertility rate. Hence, only in Michigan did the Illegitimacy Bonus appear to

award a behavioral change related to (relative) decreases in nonmarital fertility.



Abortion

       A final question has to do with the role of abortion in controlling non-marital fertility in bonus-

winning states. Due to data availability, most of our analysis is limited to Alabama. Figure 17 shows

the ratio of abortions to births and the ratio of abortions to “pregnancies” (abortions plus births) for 1994

to 2000. Both series show a substantial decline over the period, as required by the Illegitimacy Bonus.

We would like to be able to determine, however, if abortion might have been used to control non-marital

fertility among women most likely to be affected by welfare reform. Since, historically, younger women

and black women were more likely to use welfare than other women, we examine the trends in abortions

and births by race and age. Due to small samples, we do not break out Hispanics from blacks and whites




                                                                                                  27
(and we are unable to do so for abortions), nor do we present separate estimates for women of races

other than black or white.

       Figures 18 and 19 show abortions for single and married women, respectively, by race and age.

These figures show a marked, steady decline in abortion among whites over the entire period. For

blacks, there is a u-shaped pattern for single women under age 35, and for married women aged 25 to

34. Figures 20 and 21 show the corresponding figures for births. For white women, the number of births

to single women rose substantially, so clearly the abortion/pregnancy ratio fell markedly for single white

women in this period, suggesting an increased propensity to bring non-marital pregnancies to term

among whites. Births to married white women fell, and births to black women generally followed the

same u-shaped pattern as abortions, so the trend in the abortion to pregnancy ratios is not obvious from

these figures. Births to single, black teenagers fell markedly, suggesting an increased propensity to

terminate pregnancies among this group.

       Figure 22 shows the abortion/pregnancy ratios by race and marital status. Again, the number of

pregnancies is estimated as the sum of births and abortions. The proportion of pregnancies terminated

(aborted) fell markedly among single white women, and fell somewhat among married white and black

women. Initially, the abortion to pregnancy ratio fell among single black women but then increased after

1997. Finally, Figure 23 shows abortions/pregnancy by race and age for single women. Again, there is

a marked decline for white single women at every age. Among black single women, the propensity to

abort a pregnancy increased throughout the period for 25 to 34 year olds, and increased after 1997 for

teens and 35 to 54 year olds.

       We also quantified these trends in Alabama by simple regressions of the abortion/pregnancy

ratio on a time trend, overall and for various groups; results are summarized in Table 5. As the figures

suggested, the ratios fell markedly among whites and black married women. However, the




                                                                                                28
abortion/pregnancy ratio fell much less rapidly among single black women, and increased for some age

groups. In short, there a hint in these numbers that groups of women likely to be affected by welfare

reform may have increased their relative propensity to abort pregnancies over the period of welfare

reform implementation.



Summary and Discussion

       We have now presented sufficient information to answer the title question “What did the

Illegitimacy Bonus Reward?” The answer differs for each of the three big bonus winners. In Alabama,

the Illegitimacy Bonus rewarded a tiny decline in the non-marital birth ratio. However, the non-marital

birth ratio did not decline (on average) within demographic groups defined by race, from 1994 to 2000;

controlling for race, the non-marital birth ratio increased in Alabama. In general, Alabama was awarded

the bonus because births to blacks fell, and, on average, blacks have high non-marital birth ratios.

Within the white and Hispanic populations, the non-marital birth ratios rose substantially; within the

black population, the non-marital birth ratio fell slightly.

       Insights for Alabama from analyses that incorporate 1990 and 2000 Census data are more limited

since Alabama experienced a substantial increase in the non-marital ratio from 1990 to 2000. From

1990 to 2000, within demographic groups, declining marriage, increased non-marital birth ratios, and

increased relative non-marital fertility rates all served to raise the non-marital birth ratio in Alabama.

The effects of these changes were only partially offset by declines in the overall fertility rates of

demographic groups with relatively high non-martial birth ratios (“high-risk” groups).

       In DC, over the period 1994 to 2001, the decline in the non-marital birth ratios within

race/ethnicity groups did contribute to the overall decline (Table 2), though most of the decline (two-




                                                                                                   29
thirds to 90%) was due to a shift in population composition and fertility (births per woman) away from

demographic groups with relatively high non-marital birth ratios.

       Analyses that incorporate Census data show that the decline in the non-marital birth ratio in DC

between 1990 and 2000 was largely the result of changes population composition, and secondarily, the

result of decreases in overall birth rates among “high-risk” demographic groups (groups with high non-

marital birth ratios). In other words, the decline in the non-marital birth ratio in DC did not result either

from increases within demographic groups in proportions married or from a decrease within

demographic groups in non-marital fertility rates (relative to marital fertility rates). Changes in

demographic composition (group population sizes) were more important than changes in birth rates. The

relative decline of “high-risk” populations, especially the number of younger black women, is large

enough to account for the entire decline in the non-marital birth ratio in DC from 1990 to 2000.

       In Michigan, the most important factor in the decline in the non-marital birth ratio from 1994 to

2000 is the decline in birth rates among groups that traditionally had high non-marital birth ratios.

Increases in non-marital birth ratios within demographic groups defined by race and age or race and

education increased the non-marital birth ratio from 1994 to 2000.

       Our analyses using Census data were necessarily more approximate for Michigan due to changes

in marital status recording procedures in Michigan that took place between 1993 and 1994. Although

population composition changes and declining proportions married within demographic groups raised

the non-marital birth ratio, the effects of these changes were more than offset by declines within

demographic groups in non-marital fertility rates (relative to marital fertility rates), and by the decline

more generally in fertility of “high-risk” groups.

       In sum, our results suggest that, despite a desire to reward states where a woman’s risk of non-

marital birth declined, the Illegitimacy Bonus appears to have rewarded a variety of demographic




                                                                                                   30
changes. Of the three big bonus winners, Michigan appears the most “deserving” although even there

the record was mixed. Decreases in marriage within demographic groups raised the non-marital birth

ratio, but decreases within demographic groups in rates of non-marital fertility relative to marital fertility

lowered the non-marital birth ratio. Washington DC appears to have been rewarded primarily for

changes in the racial composition of its population. Within demographic groups, marriage declined and

rates of nonmarital fertility increased (relative to marital fertility).

        Although this is the first study to our knowledge to investigate the demographic explanations for

the Illegitimacy Bonus, Dye and Presser’s ex ante simulation anticipated some of our results. For

example, Dye and Presser’s simulation demonstrated that the Illegitimacy Bonus could be awarded in

cases where the number of non-marital births increased (if the increase in the marital births is

sufficiently larger).

        The contributions of welfare reform, and the Illegitimacy Bonus in particular, to these

demographic changes are questionable. For example, teen fertility rates, especially among blacks, began

a downward trend in the early 1990s, several years before the implementation of welfare reform (see

Kaestner, Korenman and O’Neill 2003; Colen et al. 2003). Because a high proportion of births to teens

is non-marital, continuation of the decline in teen fertility after 1994 would, all else the same, reduce

non-marital fertility ratios, even in the absence of an effect of welfare reform.

        What, then, has been learned from our experience with the Illegitimacy Bonus, and for marriage

promotion through welfare reform more generally? A natural place to begin to look for an answer is

with TANF reauthorization. First, it is clear that the Illegitimacy Bonus will not be re-authorized in

anything resembling its current form.14 On May 16, 2002, the House passed H.R. 4737, which would

eliminate the Illegitimacy Bonus and instead fund a “Healthy Marriage Promotion Grant” (Section




                                                                                                   31
103), a Department of Health and Human Services program of grants for state efforts to encourage

marriage (Parke, 2003). The Senate version, the Personal Responsibility and Individual Development

for Everyone Act of 2003, which passed out of the Finance Committee Sept. 10, 2003, is similar. The

legislation would allocate $500 million for demonstration and pilot programs that include rigorous

evaluation of marriage promotion activities. In addition, $1 billion would be authorized for marriage

promotion activities, despite the lack of evidence as to the effectiveness of such activities (Haskins,

2003).

         The shift away from the Illegitimacy Bonus in reauthorization is a welcome development since,

in our view, the evidence presented here indicates that that the measure used to determine bonus winners

was influenced by demographic changes other than the targeted behaviors.

         Despite the failure of the Illegitimacy Bonus, discouraging non-marital childbearing and

promoting marriage remain prominent in the reauthorization debate. For example, in their congressional

testimonies Robert Rector (2001), Ron Haskins (2001, 2002), and Isabel Sawhill (2002), all credited

PRWORA with some limited success in achieving marital and fertility goals, though they acknowledge

the absence of evidence for an effect of welfare reform on fertility and marriage.15 In their view, the

legislation brought greater national attention to problems associated with illegitimacy; it demonstrated

that federal and state governments could devise policies to fight illegitimacy and promote marriage (or

at least eliminate anti-family biases in existing programs); and it created opportunities for private groups

and faith-based organizations to help strengthen families.



14
   However, an additional round of Illegitimacy Bonuses is scheduled to be awarded under the TANF and Related
Programs Continuation Act of 2004; we thank Sharon Parrott of the Center for Budget and Policy Priorities for
bringing this to our attention.
15
   “Changes in such behaviors as divorce and out-of-wedlock childbearing are likely to respond only slowly to a
shift in the policy environment and it would be premature to attribute all or even most of these changes to the 1996
law. But it would also be wrong, in my view, to say that it has not had an effect simply because evaluations of some
of the specific provisions such as family caps or the illegitimacy bonus or abstinence education programs have not
shown clear impacts (Sawhill 2002).”


                                                                                                                  32
         Although there is little evidence for effects of specific provisions, the whole of welfare reform

may have accomplished more than the sum of its parts.16 This observation may explain the relatively

broad interest in continuing to create incentives for marriage promotion within welfare reform.17 For

example, Charles Murray (2001) has argued “…that reducing illegitimacy must be restored to the central

position it held during the deliberations that led to the passage of the 1996 welfare reform legislation.”

And even though some supporters argue that it is too early or too difficult to conclude that welfare

reform (more broadly) deserves credit for family change18, reauthorization bills provide considerable

funding for marriage promotion, as noted. It is, therefore, unfortunate that there is so little evidence from

previous welfare reform efforts to guide the formulation of marriage promotion policies. The provision

in current reauthorization bills for significant funding of pilot programs and evaluation is, therefore, a

welcome addition.19 Given the failure of the Illegitimacy Bonus to hit its target, and given the lack of

evidence as to the effectiveness of marriage promotion programs, it would seem prudent to delay broad

funding of marriage promotion efforts, at least until evaluations of pilot programs can be completed.

16
   “After several generations of unrelenting growth, all the measures of illegitimacy leveled off in the mid-1990s
…and have remained stable for five years. In addition, the non-marital birth rate measure for blacks is actually
declining, and recent data show that the percentage of children in two-parent families, an explicit goal of the 1996
reforms, is increasing. Finally, the teen birth rate has declined every year since 1991” (Haskins 2001).
17
   However, some critics have proposed that the Illegitimacy Bonus be replaced with a Child Poverty Reduction
Bonus. For example, in September of 2001, Congresswoman Mink (D) of Hawaii proposed H.R. 3113, TANF
Reauthorization Act in which the Illegitimacy Bonus would be replaced with “a $150,000,000 annual bonus to
reward states that significantly reduce the amount and depth of child poverty. [Sec. 103]” The National Association
of Social Workers also advocated shifting the goals of TANF to poverty reduction (2001) and has opposed
government promotion of marriage (Brown 2000). Of course, a “poverty reduction bonus” shares some undesirable
features with the Illegitimacy Bonus, particularly, that child poverty rates could fall or rise through no effort by the
state. Especially perverse is the situation in which states are awarded poverty reduction bonuses when child poverty
rates fall as the result of an improving regional economy, but similar states where child poverty rates rise due to a
regional economic downturn receive no additional funds.
18
   “Given the evidence five years later, it would be a stretch to claim that these innovative policies on family
formation have caused big changes in the mating or marriage behaviors of young, low-income Americans…. While
these felicitous outcomes are likely due in part to welfare reform, caution is required until these trends continue and
even intensify.” (Haskins 2002)
19
   “The federal government's primary roles at this point should be to gather better data and encourage states to
launch demonstration programs, as they did with welfare recipients in the decade before TANF…Following the
precedent set by the many years of high quality experimentation with welfare-to-work programs, the marriage
programs should be carefully evaluated to determine whether they produce their intended effects…If we follow this
strategy, five years from now this Committee will have the advantage of good research information that will help



                                                                                                                     33
members decide whether these programs hold promise and should be continued” (Haskins 2003 Reauthorization
Testimony).


                                                                                                            34
References

Anderson, Eloise; Blum, Barbara B; Haskins, Ron; Primus, Wendell E. 2002. Five Commentaries:
Looking to the Future. The Future of Children (Children and Welfare Reform) 12(12). Winter/Spring.

Blank, Rebecca. 2002. Evaluating Welfare Reform in the United States. Journal of Economic Literature
40(4): 1105-1166.

Boonstra, Heather. 2000. Welfare Law and the Drive To Reduce 'Illegitimacy’. The Guttmacher Report
on Public Policy 3(6): 7-8. December.

Boonstra, Heather. 2002. Teen Pregnancy: Trends And Lessons Learned. The Guttmacher Report on
Public Policy 5(1): 10. February.
Brown, Steve. 2003. Marriage Would Replace Illegitimacy as Focus of New Welfare Bill.
CNSNews.com. October 2. Retrieved March 11, 2004 from
http://www.cnsnews.com/ViewCulture.asp?Page=%5CCulture%5Carchive%5C200310%5CCUL20031
002c.html
Census of Population and Housing, 1990. Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS). Washington, DC:
U.S. Census Bureau, 1992.

Census of Population and Housing, 2000. Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS). Washington, DC:
U.S. Census Bureau, 2003.

Colen, Cynthia, Arline T. Geronimus and Maureen G. Phipps. 2003. Getting a piece of the pie?
Declining teen birth rates in the 1990s. Paper presented to the 2003 Meeting of the Population
Association of America.

Costello, Cindy and Henry, J., Eds. 2003. Across America: Preventing Teen Pregnancy in California,
Georgia, and Michigan. Washington, DC: National Campaign to Prevent Teen Pregnancy.

Donovan, Patricia. 1999. The 'Illegitimacy Bonus' and State Efforts To Reduce Out-of-Wedlock Births.
Family Planning Perspectives 31(2). March/April

Dye, Jane Lawler and Harriet B. Presser. 1999. Comment: The State Bonus to Reward a Decrease in
‘Illegitimacy’: Flawed Methods and Questionable Effects. Family Planning Perspectives, Vol. 31(3).
May/June

Ellwood, David. 1988. Poor Support. New York: Basic Books.

Ellwood, David and Christopher Jencks. 2002.The spread of single parent families in the United States
since1960. Russell Sage Foundation. October.

Haskins, Ron. 2001. Testimony Before the Subcommittee on 21st Century Competitiveness, Committee
on Education and the Workforce. September 20. Retrieved March 14, 2004 from
http://edworkforce.house.gov/hearings/107th/21st/welfare92001/haskins.htm



                                                                                             35
Haskins, Ron. 2002. Ending Entitlements Works for the Poor. The Philanthropy Round Table, May/June
http://www.philanthropyroundtable.org/magazines/2002/may/haskins.html

Haskins, Ron. 2003. Testimony Before the Committee on Finance, U.S. Senate, February 20.

Journal of Blacks in Higher Education (1996). “Black Out-of-Wedlock-Births.” Editorial Autumn, p.
13.

Joyce, Ted, Robert Kaestner, Sanders Korenman and Stanley Henshaw. 2004. Family cap provisions and
changes in births and abortions. NBER Working Paper No. 10214. January.

Joyce, Ted, Robert Kaestner and Sanders Korenman. 2003. Welfare Reform and Non-Marital Fertility in
the 1990s: Evidence from Birth Records. Advances in Economic Analysis & Policy Vol. 3, No.1, Article
6, 2003. (Berkeley E-Journals in Economic Analysis and Policy).

Kaestner, Robert, Sanders Korenman and June E. O’Neill. 2003. The effect of welfare reform on welfare
use, fertility and marriage of disadvantaged teenage girls Journal of Policy Analysis and Management
22(2): 225-48. Spring 2003.

Kaestner, Robert, Neeraj Kaushal and Gregg Van Ryzin. 2003. Migration Consequences of Welfare
Reform. Journal of Urban Economics 53:357-376.

Laracy, Michael. Making TANF Work Better for Children. News & Issues - Spring/Summer 2002 -
Framing the PRWORA/TANF Debate, National Center for Children and Poverty. Retrieved March 14,
2004 from http://www.nccp.org/pub_ssu02c.html

Lewin Group, Inc. 2003. (Mark W. Nowak, Michael E. Fishman, Mary E. Farrell.) State Experience and
Perspectives on Reducing Out-of-Wedlock Births, Prepared for the Assistant Secretary for Planning and
Evaluation, Department of Health and Human Services. February.

Maryland State Department of Human Resources, Community Services Administratin. 1998..
Comments on Implementation of Section 403(a)(2) of Social Security Act Bonus To Reward Decrease
in Illegitimacy.” May 1.Retrieved March 14, 2004 from
http://www.acf.hhs.gov/HyperNews/get/wedlock/wedlock/9.html

McLanahan, Sara and Gary S. Sandefur. 1994. Growing Up With a Single Mother: What Hurts, What
Helps. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Mink, The Honorable Patsy, D- Hawaii. (2001, Nov 27). H.R. 3113, TANF REAUTHORIZATION
ACT; 147 Cong Rec H 8402 , Vol. 147, No. 161.
Retrieved March 14, 2004 from
http://www.brynmawr.edu/Acads/GSSW/schram/repminksremarks.html

Moffitt, Robert A. 1992. The Incentive Effects of the US Welfare System. Journal of Economic
Literature. 30(1): 1-61.



                                                                                           36
Moffitt, Robert A. 1998. The Effect of Welfare on Marriage and Fertility. In Robert A. Moffitt, ed.
Welfare, the Family and Reproductive Behavior. Washington D.C.: National Academy Press.

Moffitt, Robert A. 2003. The Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Program. In Robert Moffitt, ed.
Means Tested Transfer Programs in the United States. NBER/Chicago.

Murray, Charles. 1984. Losing Ground. New York: Basic Books.

Murray, Charles. 1993. The Coming White Underclass. Wall Street Journal. Oct. 29.

Murray, Charles. 2001. Family Formation. In Rebecca Blank and Ron Haskins, eds. The New World of
Welfare. Washington DC: Brookings Institution Press. p. 137-168.

National Center for Health Statistics. 2003. Estimates of the April 1, 2000, United States resident
population by age, sex, race, and Hispanic origin. Prepared under a collaborative arrangement with the
U.S. Census Bureau. Available on the Internet at:
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/about/major/dvs/popbridge/popbridge.htm.

Parke, Mary. 2003. Marriage-Related Provisions in Recent Welfare Reform Reauthorization Proposals.
Center for Law and Social Policy. June. www.clasp.org

Rector, Robert. Rector R. 1996. Causes of Poverty with a Focus on Out-of-Wedlock Births. Testimony
before the U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Ways and Means, Subcommittee on Human
Resources, Serial 104-52:21-45.

Sawhill, Isabel V. 2002. Testimony Before the Subcommittee on Human Resources, Committee on
Ways and Means, U.S. House of Representatives. April 11.
Retrieved March 14, 2004 from
http://www.teenpregnancy.org/about/staff/pdf/testimonyivs.pdf

Thompson, Tommy G. 2002. “Promote Child Well-Being and Healthy Marriages” Statement of on
Welfare Reform and Child Care before the House Committee on Education and the Workforce.
Retrieved March 11, 2004 from http://www.hhs.gov/asl/testify/t20020409.html

USDHHS. 1998. Federal Register: Implementation of Section 403(a)(2) of Social Security Act Bonus
To Reward Decrease in Illegitimacy; Proposed Rule 45 CFR Part 283.” Federal Register: 63:40.
Proposed Rules Page 10263-10272. March 2. Retrieved March 14, 2004 from
http://www.acf.dhhs.gov/HyperNews/get/wedlock/wedlock.html

USDHHS. 1999. (1999, Oct. 1). Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, Volume 2, Parts 200 to 499. Oct.
1. Retrieved March 11, 2004 from www.acf.dhhs.gov/programs/cse/pol/cfr/98/304-29.htm

USDHHS. 2003.Administration for Children’s Services, Office of Family Assistance “Temporary
Assistance to Needy Families (TANF) Fifth Annual Report to Congress.” Sec. VIII. Feb, 2003.




                                                                                               37
Figure 1
                                 Percent Nonmarital Births 1990 to 2001
           .8       .6
 Proportion Nonmarital
          .4
           .2
           0




                         0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 91011 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 91011 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 91011
                                  AL                      DC                       MI

Note: Marital status recording changed in MI for 1994. See text.

Figure 2
                          Number of Births by Race 1990 to 2001 ALABAMA
           40,000
               30,000
 Count of Births
   20,000  10,000
           0




                         012345 67891011 01234567891011 01234 567891011 012345678 91011
                              White             Black           Hispanic            Other




                                                                                                   38
Figure 3
                              Number of Births by Race 1990 to 2001 DC
           10,000
           8,000
  Count of Births
 4,000    6,000
           2,000
           0




                         012345 67891011 01234567891011 01234 567891011 012345678 91011
                             White           Black         Hispanic         Other




Figure 4
                          Number of Births by Race 1990 to 2001 MICHIGAN
           150000
                100000
      Count of Births
 50,000    0




                         012345 67891011 01234567891011 01234 567891011 012345678 91011
                             White           Black         Hispanic         Other




                                                                                          39
Figure 5
                  Percent Black Births By Bonus State 1990 to 2001
       .8
       .6
 mean of black
    .4 .2
       0




                 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 91011 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 91011 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 91011
                          AL                      DC                       MI




Figure 6
                      Percent White By Bonus State 1990 to 2001
       .8
       .6
 mean of white
    .4 .2
       0




                 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 91011 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 91011 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 91011
                          AL                      DC                       MI




                                                                                           40
Figure 7
                     Percent Hispanic By Bonus State 1990 to 2001
       .15  .1
 mean of hisp
       .05
       0




                  0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 91011 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 91011 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 91011
                           AL                      DC                       MI




Figure 8
                      Percent Single Births 1990 to 2001 ALABAMA
       .8
       .6
 mean of single
     .4.2
       0




                  0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 91011 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 91011 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 91011
                         White                    Black                 Hispanic




                                                                                            41
Figure 9
                              Percent Single Births 1990 to 2001 DC
         .8     .6
 mean of single
     .4  .2
         0




                     0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 91011 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 91011 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 91011
                            White                    Black                 Hispanic




Figure 10
                         Percent Single Births 1990 to 2001 MICHIGAN
         .8
         .6
 mean of single
     .4  .2
         0




                     0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 91011 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 91011 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 91011
                            White                    Black                 Hispanic

Note: Marital status recording changed in MI for 1994. See text.




                                                                                               42
Figure 11
                           Women 15 - 54 in AL by Race 1990 and 2000
          800000
           600000
  sum of popn
 400000   200000
          0




                        1990    2000    1990   2000   1990   2000   1990   2000
                          Whi te          Black       Hispanic        Other


Figure 12
                               Women 15-54 in DC By Race 1990 and 2000
          150000
               100000
       sum of popn
 50,000   0




                        1990    2000    1990   2000   1990   2000   1990   2000
                          Whi te          Black        Hispanic       Other




                                                                                  43
Figure 13
                                              Thous. Women 15-54 in MI 1990 and 2000
          1,500  2,500
                 2,000
    sum of popn
 1,000           500
                 0




                                      1990    2000     1990    2000           1990   2000      1990     2000
                                        Whi te             Black              Hispanic            Other




Figure 14
                                             Women in AL by Race & Age 1990 and 2000
 100000 200000 300000 400000 500000
          sum of popn
                 0




                                      15-24 25-34 35- 54      15-24 25-34 35-54          15-24 25-34 35-54
                                              Whi te                  Black                  Hispanic
                                                                   1990              2000




                                                                                                               44
Figure 15
                           DC Women By Race and Age 1990 and 2000
          60,000
              40,000
      sum of popn
 20,000   0




                       15-24 25-34 35- 54   15-24 25-34 35-54      15-24 25-34 35-54
                             Whi te               Black                Hispanic
                                               1990             2000




Figure 16
             Thous. Women 15-54 in MI by Race and Age 1990 and 2000
        1,500
         1,000
 sum of popn
        500
        0




                       15-24 25-34 35-54    15-24 25-34 35-54      15-24 25- 34 35-54
                            Whi te                Black                Hisp anic
                                               1990             2000




                                                                                        45
Figure 17
                     Abortions per Birth or Pregnancy: Alabama 1994 to 2000
  .3
  .2
  .1
  0




                          1994     1995       1996         1997       1998          1999     2000
                                           mean of abrat                  mean of apreg


Note: abrat = abortions per birth; apreg = abortions / (abortions + births)



Figure 18
                             Abortions in AL 1994 to 2000 By Race and Age
                                                     Single Women
  500 1,000 1,500 2,000
    sum of abortions
            0




                           15-19   20-24   25-34     35-54        15-19    20- 24    25-34   35-54
                                      White                                    Black
                                                      1994                 1995
                                                      1996                 1997
                                                      1998                 1999
                                                      2000




                                                                                                     46
Figure 19
                       Abortions in AL 1994 to 2000 By Race and Age
                                               Married Women
         800
  sum of abortions
 200  4000    600




                     15-19     20-24   25-34   35-54    15-19   20- 24    25-34   35-54
                                  White                             Black
                                                1994            1995
                                                1996            1997
                                                1998            1999
                                                2000




Figure 20
                             BIrths in AL 1994 to 2000 By Race and Age
                                                Single Women
            6,000
     sum of births
   2,000    4,000
            0




                     15-19     20-24   25-34   35-54    15-19   20- 24    25-34   35-54
                                   White                               Black
                                                 1994           1995
                                                 1996           1997
                                                 1998           1999
                                                 2000




                                                                                          47
Figure 21
                                    BIrths in AL 1994 to 2000 By Race and Age
                                                         Married Women
   5,000 10,000 15,000 20,000
       sum of births
               0




                                15-19   20-24   25-34    35-54      15-19   20- 24    25-34     35-54
                                           White                                   Black
                                                             1994           1995
                                                             1996           1997
                                                             1998           1999
                                                             2000




Figure 22
                                Abortions/Pregnancy by Race and Marital Status
                                                    Alabama 1994 to 2000
           .5.4
 mean of apreg
  .2   .3  .1
           0




                                  Single           Married             Single              Married
                                           White                                Black
                                                             1994           1995
                                                             1996           1997
                                                             1998           1999
                                                             2000




                                                                                                        48
Figure 23

                          Abortions/Pregnancy by Race and Age
                                 Alabama Single Women 1994 to 2000
        .8
  mean of apreg
     .4 .2
        0    .6




                  15-19   2024      2534   3554    15-19   2024      2534   3554
                             White                            Black
                                            1994           1995
                                            1996           1997
                                            1998           1999
                                            2000




                                                                                   49
        Table 1: Bonus winning states and award amounts

                                   Winning           Each state’s
Award year        Data Years       States            award amount
1999              1994-97          AL, CA, DC
                                   MA, MI            $20 million
2000              1995-98          AL, AZ, DC, IL,
                                   MI                $20 million
2001              1996-99          AL, MI, DC        $25 million
                                   AL, CO, DC,
2002*             1997-00          MI, TX            $19.8 million
                                   CO DC, MD,
2003              1998-01          TX, WY            $20 million


Source: DHHS. TANF Report to Congress, 2003.

*In 2002, Virgin Islands was awarded a bonus of approximately $900,000. Consequently, award amounts were
reduced by nearly $200,000 for the other five states awarded bonuses that year.




                                                                                                 50
Table 2: Regression Estimates of the Trend in the Non-Marital Birth Ratio (in %) for
                                      AL, DC, MI 1994 to 2000 or 2001 1

                        Coefficient x 100 (robust t-stat) from Linear Probability Models

                                    Dependent Variable = Unmarried Birth

                                           Alabama           D.C.            Michigan
Birth years                              1994 to 2000     1994 to 2001     1994 to 2000
                   2
Model / Controls
1. Trend only                               -0.061            -1.432           -0.254
                                             (1.7)            (17.7)           (10.5)

2. Trend + race                              0.026            -0.463           -0.180
                                             (0.8)             (6.9)            (8.2)

3. Trend + race + age                        0.238            -0.350            0.069
                                             (8.4)             (5.5)            (3.6)

4. Trend + race + ed                         0.239            -0.151            0.002
                                             (8.2)             (2.4)            (0.1)

5. Trend + race + ed + age                   0.302            -0.158            0.111
                                             (10.8)            (2.5)            (5.9)

Number of births                            428,266           65,359          941,085

Data: NCHS birth records. Births to women aged 15 to 54.


1. Michigan and Alabama were awarded the out-of-wedlock birth reduction bonus four years,
and D.C. was awarded it five years. The bonuses for Alabama and Michigan were based on
births from 1994 to 2000. The bonuses for DC were based on births from 1994 to 2001. See text
for details.

2. Controls: linear trend (1994 to 2000 for AL and MI, 1994 to 2001 for DC), and, as indicated,
dummy variables for race (Hispanic, non-Hispanic white, non-Hispanic black, other non-
Hispanic); age (<18, 18-19, 20-24, 25-34, 35-54); and education (less than HS graduate, HS
graduate, beyond HS graduate; missing).




                                                                                              51
         Table 3: Contributions to the Changes in the Total Non-Marital Birth Ratio of
  Group-Specific: Population Sizes, Fertility Rates and Non-Marital Fertility Ratios AL, DC, MI,
                                             1990-2000

                                                  Alabama        D.C.      Michigan*

Total Change in nonmarital birth ratio, 1990 to    0.043        -0.045      -0.022 to
2000                                                                         -0.037

Group = race (4)
1. Change group-specific nonmarital ratios only     0.054        0.001       -0.010
2. Change group-specific birth rates only          -0.011       -0.018       -0.019
3. Change group population size only                0.002       -0.031        0.015

Group = raceXage (16)
1. Change group-specific nonmarital ratios only     0.058        0.016        0.038
2. Change group-specific birth rates only          -0.028       -0.024       -0.049
3. Change group population size only                0.006       -0.044        0.019

Group = raceXed (12)
1. Change group-specific nonmarital ratios only     0.073        0.027        0.003
2. Change group-specific birth rates only          -0.021       -0.036       -0.025
3. Change group population size only               -0.005       -0.048        0.002

Group = raceXageXed (48)
1. Change group-specific nonmarital ratios only     0.069        0.027        0.009
2. Change group-specific birth rates only          -0.029       -0.030       -0.047
3. Change group pop. size only                      0.003       -0.057        0.012

Data: NCHS birth records and Census 5% PUMS.

* For Michigan, 1994 group specific non-marital birth ratios are substituted for their 1990
counterparts due to a change in marital status coding on birth certificates in 1993. As a result,
“actual changes” vary between disaggregations. This occurs because the simulated 1990 non-
marital birth ratio is a weighted average of the group-specific ratios for 1994, whereas the weight
for each group is the group’s share of 1990 births.




                                                                                                52
Table 4: Contributions of changes in group-specific population size, percent married, and
marital and non-marital birth rates to changes in the nonmarital birth ratios, 1990 to 2000.
                                     AL, DC, and MI
                        Change in Nonmarital Birth Ratio Due
                        Only to Changes in Group-Specific:

          Nonmarital                                Marital and                     Change in
          Birth Ratio   Population    Percent       Nonmarital                      Nonmarital
             1990          Size       Married       Birth Rates   Sum of cols.      Birth Ratio
 State        (1)           (2)         (3)             (4)       (2), (3) & (4)   1990 to 2000
  AL         0.298         0.003       0.033           0.007           0.043           0.043
  DC         0.647        -0.042       0.003           0.004          -0.035          -0.045
 MI*         0.348         0.005       0.031          -0.052          -0.017          -0.016

Demographic groups are 48 race-by-age-by-education cells.

* For Michigan, 1994 group specific non-marital birth ratios are substituted for their 1990
counterparts due to a change in marital status coding on birth certificates in 1993.




                                                                                                  53
Table 5: Trends in Abortion/Pregnancy Ratio for Alabama, 1994 to 2000

                                     Coefficient of Linear Trend*


                               All                  Whites             Blacks

All                          -.0051                 -.0067             -.0024

Single women                 -0.0078               -0.0189            -0.0011
  15-19                      -0.0060               -0.0179             0.0003
  20-24                      -0.0129               -0.0235            -0.0063
  25-34                      -0.0041               -0.0145             0.0027
  35-54                      -0.0105               -0.0214            -0.0049

Married women                -0.0018               -0.0017            -0.0031
 15-19                       -0.0007               -0.0008            -0.0004
 20-24                       -0.0022               -0.0019            -0.0052
 25-35                       -0.0016               -0.0017            -0.0019
 35-54                       -0.0041               -0.0038            -0.0045



* All effects are significant at conventional levels.

The sample is restricted to Alabama residents who are black or white, married or single, and with
non-missing age from 15 to 54.




                                                                                              54
Appendix Table 1: Standardized Changes in nonmarital (NM) or marital (M) births for 16 raceXage group,
                  Wasington DC 1990-2000*

                                   Nonmarital births                                    Marital births
                                Change due to change in:                           Change due to change in:
                                                    NMar                                                Mar
                      Births             Percent     birth     Total      Births            Percent     birth
                     in 1990    Pop      married     rate     change     in 1990    Pop     married     rate
Totals                7,614    -1,863       58      -1,203    -3,008      4,154     -398      -30       -712
15-19 White             46       -22        -4        -12       -39         10       -79      102        -97
15-19 Black           1,754     -316        -9       -536      -861         78       -12       12        -57
15-19 Hispanic          82       31        -23        23         32         29        2        12         0
15-19 Other             23        28        -2        -48       -22          8        1         2         0
20-24 White             99       -10       -15        -38       -64         75        -8       85       -104
20-24 Black           2,177     -799       -53         63      -790        458      -126       71       -233
20-24 Hispanic         175        58        18        -99       -23        146       55         9       -113
20-24 Other             19         6         2        -11        -2         28       11       -19         4
25-34 White            124       -35         7        -39       -68        800       -54      -93        130
25-34 Black           2,582     -886        94       -484     -1,276      1,289     -430     -120        -79
25-34 Hispanic         148        46       -25        -19         2        228       96         5        -99
25-34 Other             21        17         5        -23        0         132      109       -33       -114
35-54 White             32        -3         0         1         -3        463       -55       -4        103
35-54 Black            294        -4        65         22        84        329        31      -65        -13
35-54 Hispanic          31        20        -2          7        24         47        36        9        -23
35-54 Other              7         6         1        -10        -3         34       24        -4        -16

* The standardization was carried out using 48 race-by-age-by-education groups. However, to facilitate presenta
figures have been summed across education groups for each age-race group shown.
The racial identification categories Black, White and “Other” excludes Hispanics who may be of any race.
See text for details.




                                                                                            55
