                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     CORPORATE TAX EVASION WITH AGENCY COSTS

                                             Keith J. Crocker
                                              Joel Slemrod

                                          Working Paper 10690
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10690


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2004




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2004 by Keith J. Corcker and Joel Slemrod All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Corporate Tax Evasion with Agency Costs
Keith J. Crocker and Joel Slemrod
NBER Working Paper No. 10690
August 2004
JEL No. H25, H26, D82

                                        ABSTRACT
This paper examines corporate tax evasion in the context of the contractual relationship between

the shareholders of a firm and a tax manager who possesses private information regarding the

extent of legally permissible reductions in taxable income, and who may also undertake illegal

tax evasion. Using a costly state falsification framework, we characterize formally the optimal

incentive compensation contract for the tax manager and, in particular, how the form of that

contract changes in response to alternative enforcement policies imposed by the taxing authority.

The optimal contract may adjust to offset, at least partially, the effect of sanctions against illegal

evasion, and we find a new and policy-relevant non-equivalence result: penalties imposed on the

tax manager are more effective in reducing evasion than are those imposed on shareholders.

Keith J. Crocker
Smeal College of Business
The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16802
krocker@psu.edu

Joel Slemrod
University of Michigan Business School
701 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
and NBER
jslemrod@umich.edu
I. Introduction

         Recent high-profile cases of corporate accounting fraud and tax evasion have generated

substantial changes in the rules governing corporate governance and accounting, and in the

process spawned an extensive debate regarding changes in tax rules and the enforcement of

existing tax law.1 In the accounting sphere, the Sarbanes-Oxley bill passed on July 31, 2002

established a regulatory board appointed by the SEC to oversee the accounting industry, created

new legal standards for prosecuting corporate wrongdoing, required top management to certify

their firms’ financial statements and internal controls, set forth long prison sentences for

executives convicted of fraud, and gave new protections to corporate whistle blowers.2 And,

corporate tax noncompliance is by no means a trivial issue. In 1998, a year in which (federal)

corporate tax receipts were $204.2 billion, the IRS has estimated that corporate underreporting

was $37.5 billion.3 Recently an IRS contractor estimated the tax revenue loss from abusive tax

shelters in 1999 to be between $14.5 to $18.4 billion, which is 50 percent higher than the level

for 1993.4 In spite of these recent policy developments and the apparent increases in corporate

tax evasion, there is little theoretical guidance as to the impact of alternative penalty structures,

or the appropriate structure of penalties, for either accounting misconduct or tax evasion.

         This paper examines corporate tax evasion in the context of the contractual relationship

between the shareholders of a firm and the chief financial officer (CFO), who determines the

firm’s deductions from taxable corporate income. The CFO is assumed to possess private


1
   Throughout the paper we use the term “evasion” to refer to corporate tax reporting behavior that would, if
discovered, be subject to civil or criminal sanctions.
2
  In the tax area, the Internal Revenue Service announced in 2002 that it will reallocate more enforcement resources
toward wealthy taxpayers suspected of hiding income from their businesses, partnerships, and investments.
3
   Underreporting is only one of the three components of the total tax gap, the other two being nonfiling and
underpayment. There is no estimate for corporate nonfiling, and underpayment is a quite different issue.
4
   U.S. General Accounting Office (2003, p. 13). The GAO (2003, p.1) defines abusive shelters to be “very
complicated transactions promoted to corporations and wealthy individuals to exploit tax loopholes and provide
large, unintended tax benefits.”
information regarding the extent of legally permissible reductions in taxable income, and may

also inflate the size of the firm’s tax shield through illegal evasion. The incentives of the CFO to

engage in tax evasion are affected by the nature of her compensation arrangement. Using a

costly state falsification framework, we characterize formally the optimal (informationally-

constrained) incentive compensation contract for the CFO and, in particular, how the form of that

contract changes in response to alternative enforcement policies imposed by the taxing authority.

We find that penalties imposed on the CFO directly are more effective in reducing evasion than

are those imposed on shareholders, and that the optimal contract may adjust to offset, at least

partially, the incentives generated by increased sanctions against illegal evasion.

        A key difficulty in achieving a solid theoretical understanding of the determinants of

corporate tax evasion is the flexible contractual relationship that affects the behavior of the

corporate managers. In a corporation, the shareholders, or the Board of Directors acting on the

shareholders’ behalf, will structure the compensation packages of managers to provide incentives

for them to act in the interest of shareholders. Consider, for example, the compensation contract

for the officer in charge of corporate taxes. It is in the shareholders interest for the tax director to

reduce the company’s effective tax burden, net of any costs of doing so, which would include

any expected penalties incurred due to detected tax evasion. To align incentives, it may be

appropriate for the tax officer’s salary to depend (inversely) on the effective tax rate achieved.

Designing this contract is complicated by the fact that the tax director is likely to have private

information about the availability of legal avenues for tax reduction, and may also lower the

effective tax rate through illegal tax evasion. If detected by the taxing authority, however, such

illegal evasion my generate costs to both the tax officer and the corporation.




                                                   1
        There is abundant evidence that the focus of corporate tax departments has changed to

that of passive compliance with the tax laws to active, aggressive, and often arguably illegal tax

planning. Fortune magazine recently reported that “with encouragement from shelter hustlers, a

new attitude is spreading: that the corporate tax department is a profit center all its own, and that

a high effective tax rate is a sign of weakness. ‘A potential client once said he would hire the

firm if we could get their tax rate down, because it was higher than their competitors' and they

were embarrassed,’ says one accountant.”5 The idea of tax departments changing from being

tolerated as necessary cost centers to being counted on as innovative profit centers is consistent

with evidence from a 2001 survey of corporate tax departments in the manufacturing sector.6 Of

the various measures used to evaluate the performance of tax departments, the most often cited

was the savings, or value added, they provided: 86 percent cited this performance measure, up

from 75 percent in 1997. Of those 86 percent, 63 percent said that this measure affected the

compensation of tax department personnel. The effective tax rate relative to goal was cited as a

measure used to evaluate performance by 58 percent, up from 48 percent in 1997; of those that

use the effective tax rate to evaluate performance, 58 percent said it affects compensation. The

number of mentions of each of three possible performance measures that included the word

“accuracy” declined substantially between 1997 and 2001.7

        The government, acting in the interest of the taxpayers generally, is another party with a

clear stake in tax compliance. The Internal Revenue Service formulates an enforcement policy

regarding tax evasion and fraud with the objective of maximizing its perception of the public

interest. The goal of a benevolent government would be, ceteris paribus, to minimize the real


5
  Novack (1998).
6
  Hollingsworth (2002, pp. 67-8).
7
  See Douglas, Ellingsworth, and McAndrews (1996) for an earlier survey of tax department executives that finds
that effective tax rates are one of the most frequently used formal performance measurements.


                                                      2
resources used up in the compliance process, and would value revenue collections at a shadow

price reflecting the fact that they represent transfers rather than the creation of resources. The

enforcement policy will likely involve penalties, directed either at the company or the corporate

officer, for detected noncompliance.

            The modern literature on tax evasion began with Allingham and Sandmo (1972), who

model (individual) taxpayers as completely amoral, deciding whether and how much to evade

taxes in the same way they would approach any risky decision or gamble, as an expected utility

maximizing choice. Successful tax evasion benefits the taxpayer because it saves on taxes, but

detected tax evasion results in a penalty. Optimal tax evasion, from the individual’s standpoint,

depends on the (assumed to be fixed) chance of getting caught and penalized, the size of the

penalty for evasion, and the individual’s degree of risk aversion. Thirty years of subsequent

analysis has extended this model in a number of dimensions, including allowing an endogenous

probability of detection, analyzing evasion jointly with the labor supply decision, incorporating

sources of uncertainty other than the chance of audit, and general equilibrium considerations.

            The overwhelming majority of tax evasion research has followed Allingham and Sandmo

by addressing tax evasion decisions made by individuals. There is, to be sure, a much smaller

literature that addresses tax compliance by firms, the basic framework of which is the

Allingham-Sandmo setup with a unitary decision-maker.8 The new twist in this strand of the

literature is to examine how the tax rate, probability of detection and penalty rate affect the two

choices of evasion (usually expressed as the fraction of sales concealed from an output tax) and

output, when there is a costly concealment technology. Some of the models in this tradition

assume that the firm is risk-averse, while in others the firm is assumed to behave in a risk-neutral



8
    This literature is nicely reviewed in Cowell (2004).


                                                           3
way.9 More recently, Chen and Chu (2002) investigate corporate tax evasion with a standard

principal-agent model in which a risk-neutral owner of a firm hires a risk-averse manager.10

They focus on the efficiency loss due to the separation of management and control, and do not

address the relative efficacy of penalties on the principal and agent, a key focus on the model we

present below.

         Aside from Chen and Chu (2002), all of the preceding literature assumes that the firm

owner, or residual claimant, makes the tax reporting decision with no agency considerations.11

This assumption makes sense when one is analyzing small, closely-held businesses. However, in

a large, publicly-held corporation, decisions about taxes (and accounting) are not made by the

shareholders directly but, rather, by their agents, whether that is the chief financial officer or the

vice president for taxation. In order to align the incentives of the decision makers and the

shareholders, the corporation has the incentive to tie the agent’s compensation to observable

outcomes that affect after-tax corporation profitability.

         In this setting the insights generated by the Allingham-Sandmo model may not apply.

For example, if penalties for evasion apply to the agent, the principal can alter its compensation



9
  In the latter case, Lee (1998) shows that profit taxes need not be neutral in the presence of tax evasion. The firm
may be operating in a perfectly competitive model, or be a monopoly; in the latter case, under some conditions,
there can be overshifting, where the product price rises more than the increase in tax.
10
   The basic framework is that of Holmstrom (1979) in which the owner (principal) designs a wage contract to
incentivize the manager (agent) to engage in (privately) costly effort that increases firm profit. The traditional
model is modified to permit the owner to engage in tax evasion. Their primary conclusion is that, when the manager
is penalized for (detected) tax evasion, the optimal wage contract results in an inefficient (relative to the second-
best benchmark in which evasion is not possible) level of managerial effort. This distortion arises because of the
maintained assumption that the manager’s compensation cannot be based on the owner’s chosen level of evasion,
since such a contract would be predicated on an illegal act and, therefore, would not be enforceable in court. Desai,
Dyck, and Zingales (2003) analyze another interaction between corporate taxation and corporate governance. They
posit that unreported income is more easily expropriated by managers, and show that in this situation a higher tax
rate may increase the level of managerial diversion, while stronger tax enforcement may reduce it.
11
   A literature in the law and economics field investigates the socially optimal division of sanctions on corporations
and individual employees for social harms generally. For example, Kraakman (1984) emphasizes the possibility that
the corporation’s assets are inadequate to pay for the harm. Polinsky and Shavell (1993) argue that the total
magnitude of public sanctions may exceed the sanctions that a firm can impose on its employees.



                                                          4
contract with the agent, possibly offsetting the intended consequences of the IRS policy. More

generally, enforcement strategies directed at the tax director and at the corporation itself may

have different impacts on corporate behavior. Because each of these policies is available to the

government,12 it is valuable to know whether there is a theoretical reason to prefer one to the

other. The model we develop below provides a framework for analyzing this and other related

questions.

         The paper proceeds as follows. We begin in the next section by providing a formal

characterization of the contract that the shareholders will want to offer to the tax officer within

the corporation. Our model draws on the costly state falsification framework that was first

considered by Lacker and Weinberg (1989), and developed by Crocker and Morgan (1998) to

characterize the optimal insurance contracts in a setting where claimants can engage in

fraudulent behavior to inflate their apparent losses.13 Next, we show how the form of that



12
    The U.S. tax law has provisions that impose criminal and civil penalties on both the corporation and corporate
officers. Individuals who sign false tax returns may be subject to criminal penalties under Code section 7206(1).
Section 7206(1) imposes criminal liability in the case of a willfully false declaration. Because sections 6062 and
6065 combine to require a corporate officer to sign the corporation’s tax return under penalties of perjury, section
7206(1) means that a corporate officer may face criminal liability for signing a tax return that is inaccurate if the
officer knows the return is inaccurate and intends to violate the law in signing the return. Criminal tax prosecutions
are, however, fairly rare. In fiscal year, there were 512 such prosecutions, about half of the 1993 total.
          Separate Internal Revenue Code provisions impose civil liability for violations of tax reporting rules.
Section 6694 provides for monetary penalties for return preparers who file returns (i) showing an understatement of
tax liability that has no realistic possibility of being sustained on the merits or (ii) with the willful attempt to
understate tax liability or the reckless or intentional disregard of tax rules. Sections 6700 and 6701 impose penalties
for promoting abusive tax shelters and aiding and abetting understatements of tax liability. Section 6707 imposes
civil fines on persons who are required but fail to register or disclose tax shelter transactions. Corporate officers in
theory could be subject to any of these penalties, but the penalties are more likely to be imposed on outside
professionals.
          More broadly, taxpayers that understate their tax liability may be subject to penalties for the
understatement. Section 6662 of the Code imposes a penalty on taxpayers for, among other things, any “substantial
understatement” of income tax. For corporate taxpayers a substantial understatement typically is an understatement
that exceeds 10 percent of the tax required to be shown on the return for the year in question. The penalty for a
substantial understatement is 20 percent of the amount of the understatement. The substantial understatement
penalty can therefore be significant, but the penalty is not imposed on corporate officers, but rather on corporations
themselves.
13
   In the insurance environment, the optimal indemnity contract results in underpayment of claims at the margin, and
reflects a tension between the benefits of underpayment (reduced incentives of the insured to expend resources in
claims inflation) and the costs (less income smoothing for the risk averse insured). Fraud has value in the optimal


                                                           5
contract will change in response to IRS enforcement policies, and examine to what extent that

response may counteract the intention of the IRS. We do this first in a fairly general setting in

which the tax officer has access to a costly concealment technology and then, in the following

section, in the context of a specific parameterization of the problem.                          We find that, as a

consequence of the informational asymmetry enjoyed by the CFO, penalties levied directly on

the tax officer are more likely to be effective in reducing tax evasion than penalties directed at

the corporation’s shareholders. The intuition behind this “non-equivalency” result is that the

incentive effects of sanctions levied on the shareholders are imperfectly transmitted to the tax

officer through a second-best compensation contract, so that penalties directly applied to the tax

officer have more impact. A final section contains concluding remarks.



II. The Model

         We consider an environment in which the risk-neutral owners of a firm (the

"shareholders") contract with the vice president for taxation or chief financial officer ("CFO") to

manage the firm's tax liability.14 The CFO, who is also risk-neutral, is assumed to possess


contract because it provides a mechanism by which the informationally constrained insurer can sort the claimants
based on their underlying private information (that is, the magnitude of the loss actually suffered).
          Crocker and Morgan also consider a model of contracting between a risk neutral principal, and a risk
neutral agent who may engage in costly state falsification. The precise setting considered is that of sharecropping,
where the absentee landlord (principal) contracts with the sharecropper (agent) over the division of a crop. Costly
state falsification arises because the sharecropper can, at some resource cost to himself, hide part of the crop from
the absentee landlord. In this setting, the incentives to engage in falsification may be mitigated by “flattening” the
sharecropping contract (as a function of the observed crop), which reduces the marginal return to the sharecropper of
falsification. This strategy, however, hinders the principal’s ability to extract surplus from the relationship, since the
optimal contract must respect the sharecropper’s bankruptcy constraint. As a result, the optimal contract reflects a
tradeoff between mitigating falsification (which increases total surplus) and surplus extraction by the principal. In a
taxation setting, the Crocker and Morgan model is equivalent to the problem facing a risk-neutral taxing authority
attempting to maximize the revenue yield from a risk-neutral taxpayer who may expend resources in hiding income
through tax evasion. Our concern in this paper, however, is different, as it concerns the modeling of the
employment relationship between the shareholders of the firm, and the administrative officer handling the firm’s tax
avoidance strategy, who has the ability to evade taxes through costly state falsification.
14
   One can imagine a more complicated model in which the shareholders hire the CEO, who in turn hires the CFO,
with the CFO possessing information that is hidden to the CEO and the CEO possessing information that is hidden
to the shareholders.


                                                            6
private information regarding the level of permissible legal reductions in taxable income, x.15

The shareholders know only that the actual value of x is distributed according to the density f,

and the cumulative distribution F, on the interval [ x, x ] . While x is not observable to the

shareholders, they do know the actual reductions in taxable income, R, claimed by the CFO, who

may engage in tax evasion by claiming illegal deductions, R-x.16 Such tax evasion may result in

penalties levied on either the shareholders of the firm, on the CFO personally, or on both, in a

fashion that we will describe below.

         A compensation agreement between the shareholders and the CFO is a contract C≡ {S,

R} consisting of the payment S and the level of deductions from taxable income R, both of which

may be conditioned upon x if certain incentive conditions are satisfied.17 We may write the

profit accruing to shareholders as

                   Π (C | x) ≡ I − t ( I − R) − S − αh( R − x)                                                     (1)

where I is the (observable) income of the firm before either avoidance or evasion, t is the

corporate tax rate, and αh embodies the expected costs to shareholders of illegal tax evasion.18

The payoff to the CFO is denoted


15
   The assumption of risk neutrality of the CFO is one key difference between this model and the one offered by
Chen and Chu (2002), whose results require risk aversion on the part of the firm’s manager. We consider the risk-
neutrality case not as a simplifying assumption but, rather, to demonstrate that explicit differences in risk
preferences between the principal and the agent are not necessary in order for a rational agent to engage in tax
evasion.
16
   To be precise, the distinction between x and R-x is that the latter are subject to penalties and the former are not.
Note that, in reality, even taxable income and tax payment are not generally known to shareholders of large public
corporations who do not have access to the tax returns themselves; the financial statements do not reveal this
information. See Hanlon (2003) for a discussion of this issue. What is essential for this model is that there are
contractable elements of tax reporting behavior.
17
   Note that we are ultimately interested in the form of the optimal CFO compensation contract, S(R). Since this is
an environment with private information, however, we will proceed in the usual fashion to characterize the optimal
“truth-telling” contract {S(x), R(x)} that satisfies the incentive constraint (3) below, from which S(R) may be
recovered by inverting R to obtain x, and substituting the result into S.
18
   Note that we are assuming that the level of permissible reductions, x, is independent of income I. This assumption
is innocuous since we have also assumed that I has been realized (so any production has already occurred) prior to
the CFO is making the tax evasion decision. We also address here the point made first by Yitzhaki (1974) that if the
penalty is proportional to the tax evaded rather than, as here, the income evaded, the implications of the effect of a


                                                          7
                   V(C|x) ≡ S - βg(R - x)                                                                            (2)

where βg are the expected costs to the CFO of engaging in tax evasion. We assume that, for

each party, to commit no illegal tax evasion (R=x) is costless, and that the penalties for such

evasion are increasing in the amount of evasion, R-x.19

Assumption 1: h(0) = g(0) = h'(0) = g'(0) = 0; and h', g', h'', g'' > 0 for R-x > 0.

In the analysis that follows, we will assume that the penalties for tax evasion are symmetric, so

g(.) = h(.) This assumption allows us to focus our attention on the implications of differential

severity of the two types of penalties, and not be distracted by issues of the optimal functional

form of the penalty structure. Moreover, we will interpret the parameters α and β , each of

which is, without loss of generality, restricted to be in the unit interval [0, 1], to be "enforcement

parameters" that are ultimately selected by the taxing authority.20

         Since this is an environment of private information, the revelation principle (Myerson,

1979) implies that any implementable contract must satisfy the incentive constraint

                   V ( S ( x), R ( x) | x) ≥ V ( S ( xˆ ), R( xˆ ) | x)                                              (3)




tax rate change on evasion are qualitatively different. The effect of the tax rate on evasion is not, though, a focus of
this research. We abstract from the fact that S would generally be deductible from the taxable income of the firm
and taxable to the tax officer. (Penalties are not, though, deductible business expenses.) Finally, note that the
penalty functions could be generalized, so that for example h(R-x) could be h(I, R, x). This would allow, inter alia,
the expected cost to depend on the ratio of evasion to true income, leading to a prediction that bigger firms would
evade more. Our basic conclusions would be neither affected nor enriched by this generalization. See Slemrod
(2001) for a discussion of the importance of the functional form of the cost function, or the technology of tax
avoidance and evasion, for understanding the impact on behavior of changes in the tax rate.
19
    This is a setting of costly state falsification because the CFO has possesses an immutable informational
asymmetry (the knowledge of the actual value taken by x), and can “misrepresent” the allowable tax deductions (by
selecting R > x) by incurring the private cost βg. This is in contrast to the costly state verification approach that was
first developed by Townsend (1979). In that setting, the uninformed agent can perform a (privately costly) audit to
obtain the private information.
20
   One interpretation would be to think of α (β) as being the probability that tax evasion is detected and the penalty h
(g) is levied on shareholders (the CFO). The size of the parameters α and β is determined by the level of (costly)
enforcement activities selected by the taxing authority. The relative effectiveness of these two tools is the object of
our analysis below. Note that we also abstract from whether it is optimal for the tax enforcement agency to
condition the probability of detection (that is, the parameters α and β) on the reported income of the corporation.


                                                                  8
for every x, xˆ ∈ [ x, x ] in order to generate truthful revelation by the CFO. When this incentive

constraint is satisfied, a CFO who possesses the private information x would always prefer the

contract {S ( x), R( x)} over the alternatives {S ( xˆ ), R( xˆ )} for every xˆ ≠ x . This obtains when the

first-order condition for a contract to be incentive-compatible is satisfied, which is given by

                      dV ( S ( xˆ ), R( xˆ ) | x)
                                                  = VS S '+VR R' = 0                                                  (4)
                                 dxˆ

at xˆ = x . Total differentiation of V with respect to x, and substituting from (4), yields the result

that

                      dV
                         = Vx .                                                                                       (5)
                      dx

            An efficient contract between the shareholders and the CFO is a solution to the problem

that maximizes the expected payoff to the shareholders

                                         x
                        Max
                      S ( x ), R ( x )   ∫ Π (S ( x), R( x) |x) f ( x)dx
                                         x
                                                                                                                      (6)


subject to the incentive compatibility constraint (3) and a participation constraint for the CFO,

which requires

                     V(S(x), R(x) |x) ≥ 0                                                                             (7)
                                 21
for every x ∈ [ x, x ].




21
     This constraint requires that the contract respect the participation constraint for any possible private information,
                                                                                            x
x, that the CFO may have. As an alternative, one could impose the weaker constraint         ∫ Vfdx≥ 0 , so that the CFO,
                                                                                             x
prior to receiving her private information, expects to satisfy the participation constraint (7). Such an approach
would permit the attainment of full information optimal levels of tax evasion (see the discussion below), since the
firm could be effectively “sold” to the CFO, and all the expected surplus extracted by a lump sum transfer to the
shareholders. The problem with this approach is that, since Vx > 0, the resulting contract would provide the CFO
with the incentive to exit the agreement for lower values of the private information parameter, x.


                                                                           9
         Before proceeding to characterize the optimal contract in this informationally-

constrained environment, it is insightful to consider first the baseline case in which there is no

incentive problem caused by private information. This would be the case were the shareholders

to observe x and select their preferred level of R, subject to the participation constraint (7). In

this case, the tax reporting behavior would not be constrained by the incentive condition (3), and

the compensation of the CFO would be a lump-sum payment that satisfied the participation

constraint (7). Under these circumstances, tax evasion behavior would maximize shareholder

profit Π for every x, subject to (7), and the resulting full information optimal amount of tax

evasion is characterized by the condition

                   t = (α + β)g' (R – x).                                                                           (8)

We shall denote a solution to (8) by R*(x).

         In the environment considered in this paper, however, the selection of R must be

delegated to the CFO, who possesses private information regarding the legally permissible

deductions from taxable income, x. Since the actual value of x is unknown to the shareholders,

the full information outcome violates the incentive constraint (3) and, therefore, cannot be

achieved. To see this, note that, since evasion generates costs to the CFO, with the lump-sum

contract described above the CFO would engage in no evasion at all.                              Alternatively, the

shareholders could induce the CFO to choose R* by offering the compensation plan S(R) = tR –

αh(R – x), which is the net gain to the shareholders from evasion, but such an approach would

drain all of the surplus from the shareholders and leave them with after-tax profits of only (1-

t)I.22 The shareholders could do better by offering the optimal incentive-compatible contract that




22
  Of course, any contract of the form S(R)=tR-αh-K, where K is a (lump sum) constant would induce the CFO to
choose the full information optimal level of tax evasion. Substituting this contract into the CFO utility yields V = tR-


                                                          10
we characterize in the analysis below, but under such a contract R* is generally not attainable.

The optimal incentive-compatible contract maximizes the expected after-tax payoff to the

shareholders, subject to the condition that the contract must be incentive-compatible, and that the

CFO must receive at least her reservation level of utility in any state of the world, x.

         The Hamiltonian expression associated with the problem of maximizing (6) subject to (3)

and (7) may be written as

                   H = Π(S, R|x) f + φ(x)Vx ,

where we define the state variable to be V(x) ≡ V(S(x), R(x)|x), the control variable to be R(x),

and φ(x) to be the costate variable for the equation of motion Vx.

Theorem 1:         An optimal contract must satisfy the following (necessary) conditions:

         (a)       f[t-(α + β)g'] + φβg'' = 0 ; and

                                   x
         (b)       S(x) = βg + ∫ βg '( R(m) − m) dm ,
                                   x



         where φ = F-1.

                                                                                   •
Proof: The Pontryagin conditions for a maximum are HR=0 and φ = ∂H / ∂V , which yield

                             ∂S                          ∂S
                    f (Π S      + Π R ) + φ (V xR + V xS    ) = 0 ; and                                                 (9)
                             ∂R                          ∂R

                    •                         ∂S
                    φ = −( f Π S + φV xS )       ,                                                                    (10)
                                              ∂V




                                                                                           dV
(α+β)g(R-x)-K, and the utility maximizing choice of R satisfies VR=0.               Since       = VR R x + V x = V x > 0 ,
                                                                                           dx
constraint (7) implies that the maximum value that can be taken by K is the surplus generated at x , and the CFO
would retain all of the incremental surplus for larger values of x. As we shall see below, the optimal contract in this
setting is necessarily second-best, so that the shareholders are better off by sacrificing a little bit of efficiency at the
margin in order to extract more of the surplus from the CFO.


                                                            11
respectively. Since, by definition, V(S, R |x) – V ≡ 0, we know that ∂S/∂R = -VR/VS and ∂S/∂V =

1/VS . Taking the appropriate derivatives from (1) and (2), and substituting the results, yields

 •
φ = f , and f[t - (α + β)g'] + φg'' = 0. Since the transversality condition is φ ( x ) = 0 , we obtain φ

= F-1, which yields (a).

          Finally, the total surplus from the contract, which is I(1-t) + tR – (α + β)g, is divided

between the shareholders and the CFO. The shareholders' portion of the surplus is then written

as

                                                                 x
                   Π ( S , R | x) = I (1 − t ) + tR − (α + β ) g − ∫ Vx (m)dm.                                (11)
                                                                 x



Noting that Vx = βg', and substituting from (1), yields (b).

                                                                        QED

          Part (a) of the theorem characterizes the optimal reductions in taxable income, R, as a

function of the permissible deductions, x. Since the costate variable φ represents the shadow

cost of the constraint imposed by the informational asymmetry, in the absence of any private

information about x we would have φ = 0 and the optimal contract would result in the full

information level of tax evasion characterized by (8). When the CFO enjoys an informational

advantage regarding the permissible level of deductions, however, φ is nonzero and the resulting

contract is necessarily second-best.

          The conditions of the theorem characterize an optimum as long as the contract is

implementable, which in this setting requires that R'(x) ≥ 0.23 While the monotonicity of R is not



                                      ∂  VR  dR
23
                                            
     A contract is implementable if           dx ≥ 0 (Guesnerie and Laffont (1984), Theorem 1).
                                      ∂x  V S
                                                                                                         Taking the
                                             
appropriate derivatives yields the implementability condition βg'' R' ≥ 0, which requires that R' > 0.


                                                        12
guaranteed, the following conditions that place restrictions on the higher-order derivatives of g

and on the hazard rate, f/(1-F), are sufficient for this result.24

                                  d  f 
Assumption 2: g ' ' ' ≥ 0 and                ≥ 0.
                                  dx  1 − F 

         Under this assumption, the function R(x) is necessarily invertible, and we will use the

notation x(R) to indicate this inverse function. The optimal incentive contract, as a function of

the observed reductions in taxable income, is S(x(R)), which we will denote as S(R) in the

discussion that follows. The optimal incentive contract S(R) is depicted in Figure 1.

         The amount of reported deductions from taxable income, R, varies with x, as does the

compensation, S, received by the CFO. Since Vx > 0, the participation constraint is binding only

at x , and is slack for larger values of x. The CFO receives a level of compensation higher than

her reservation wage if she inherits a large draw of x, because the shareholders cannot distinguish

between a favorable tax situation due to circumstances out of the CFO’s control from a favorable

tax situation due to the CFO’s willingness to incur costs. At the lowest possible draw of x, the

CFO receives no more than her reservation wage, so (7) holds with equality at x.25

         The shareholders’ after-tax return is also state-dependent, and is highest when x = x . As

is generally the case in these types of problems, there is no distortion in the contract at x

(so R ( x ) = R * ( x )) , but R(x) < R* (x) for every x < x because of the incentive constraint (3), so

that the full information outcome is achieved only when x = x . Finally, the incentive constraint


24
   See Fudenberg and Tirole (1991), pp. 263-267 for a discussion of those sufficiency conditions. The first condition
(g''' ≥ 0) corresponds to their assumption (A8), while the second is referred to in the literature as a "monotone
hazard rate.” In the absence of Assumption 2, optimal contracts may still be characterized by using the "ironing"
technique that was first discussed in Mussa and Rosen (1978), and described in detail by Guesnerie and Laffont
(1984).
25
   Note that we are formally modeling the efficient contract in a single-period environment in which there is only
uncertainty regarding a single “draw” of the informational parameter, x. This approach would, however, be equally
applicable to a multi-period setting in which the CFO received a new value of x in each period, drawn independently
from the distribution F.


                                                        13
guarantees that, when presented with the incentive contract S(R), a CFO of type x prefers the

contractual allocations {S(x), R(x)} over all the alternatives.              Put differently, an x-type’s

indifference curve V ( x) is tangent to S(R) at R(x) for every x ∈ [ x, x ] , as depicted in Figure 1.

         We seek to characterize the impact of alternative penalties levied by the taxing authority

on the structure of the CFO compensation arrangement, S, as a function of the observed

reductions in taxable income, R. Accordingly, the impact of changes in the enforcement

parameters α and β on the shape of the compensation profile S(R) is of interest. We begin by

presenting a preliminary result.

Lemma:          S'(R) = βg'(R-x(R)).

Proof:            From part (b) of the theorem, an application of Leibnitz's Rule yields

                   dS                    d                                                 dR
                      = βg ' ( R( x) − x) ( R( x) − x) + βg ' ( R( x) − x) = βg ' ( R − x)    .     (13)
                   dx                    dx                                                dx

                               dS dS dR
Then, after recognizing that     =      , substitution generates the desired result.
                               dx dR dx

                                                                      QED.

         We now present our main result, which characterizes the impact of the taxing authority's

enforcement parameters on the level of tax evasion, R, and on the form of the optimal CFO

compensation package, S(R).

Theorem 2:        Under Assumptions (1) and (2), a solution to problem (6) has the following

                  characteristics.

                         ∂R( x) ∂R( x)
                  (a)          <       < 0;
                          ∂β     ∂α

                          ∂                          ∂x( R) 
                  (b)       ( S ' ( R)) = − β g ' '           < 0;
                         ∂α                          ∂α 




                                                       14
                            ∂                            ∂x( R) 
                  (c)         ( S ' ( R)) = g '− βg ' '         ;
                           ∂β                            ∂β 

                                                  dx( R) 
                  (d)      S ' ' ( R ) = β g ' ' 1 −       > 0.
                                                     dR 

Proof: Recalling that φ = F-1, and total differentiation of Theorem 1 (a), yields



                   dx(∆ 1 + ∆ 2 ) − dα ( fg ' ) − dβ [ fg ' − φ g ' ' ] − dR (∆ 1 ) = 0 ,    (14)

where

                   ∆ 1 ≡ (α + β ) fg ' ' ( R − x) − φ g ' ' ' ( R − x) β ; and

                   ∆ 2 ≡ f '[t − (α + β ) g ' ] + fβ g ' ' .

Solving Theorem 1(a) for t − (α + β ) g ' , and substituting the result into ∆2, yields

                                 f ' (1 − F )       
                   ∆ 2 = βg ' '               +   f .
                                       f            

Both ∆1 and ∆ 2 are positive under Assumption 2. From (14), by setting dx and dβ equal to zero,

we obtain

                   dR fg ' ( R − x)
                      =             ,                                                        (15)
                   dα     − ∆1

while setting dx and dα equal to zero yields

                   dR fg ' ( R − x) − φ g ' ' ( R − x)
                      =                                ,                                     (16)
                   dβ             − ∆1

from which part (a) of the Theorem follows directly. To obtain parts (b) and (c) of the Theorem,

first recall that the Lemma implies S'(R) = βg'(R-x(R)), and differentiating with respect to α and

β yields the expressions on the right-hand sides. Also, note that setting dR = dβ = 0 in (14)

implies


                                                           15
                  dx fg ' ( R − x)
                     =             > 0;                                                       (17)
                  dα   ∆1 + ∆ 2

while dR = dα = 0 yields

                  dx fg ' ( R − x) − φ g ' ' ( R − x)
                     =                                > 0,                                    (18)
                  dβ            ∆1 + ∆ 2

so that part (b) of the Theorem is negative, and the sign of part (c) is indeterminate.

Finally, part (d) of the Theorem follows directly from differentiation of S’(R) with respect to R,

and noting that

                  dx    ∆1
                     =         .                                                              (19)
                  dR ∆ 1 + ∆ 2

                                                               QED



        Increasing either the shareholder or the CFO penalty will reduce tax evasion since, for

every level of permissible reductions (x), the deductions claimed by the CFO (R) decline as α

and β are increased.    Moreover, part (a) of the Theorem indicates that a penalty levied on the

CFO through the enforcement parameter β is more effective in reducing tax evasion than would

be an equivalent penalty assessed on the shareholders through α. This non-equivalency result,

which does not depend on the particular function forms of f or g, is a direct consequence of the

CFO’s private information. This can be seem most easily by observing that equations (15) and

(16) differ only when φ is nonzero. In contrast, were this a full information setting so that the

incentive constraint (3) did not apply, then φ would be zero and the penalties (α and β) would

have a symmetric effect on tax evasion.

        The intuition behind this result is that the binding incentive constraint (3) results in a

CFO compensation contract S(R) that is necessarily second-best. In this setting, the ability of the


                                                    16
optimal contract to influence the actions of the CFO is hindered by the fact that the contract must

also elicit, in an incentive-compatible fashion, the private information regarding the permissible

level of deductions from taxable income. As a result, the incentive effects of any sanctions

levied on the shareholders by α are imperfectly communicated to the CFO through the incentive-

compatible contract, so that the penalty β directly applied to the CFO is more effective.26

         This result has normative implications for IRS enforcement policies targeting tax

evasion. While determining the optimal level of evasion from a societal perspective would

require the evaluation of a social welfare function that included the social costs of evasion and

enforcement as well as the social benefit from tax revenues, Theorem 1(a) does provide guidance

regarding the cost-minimizing way of achieving the resulting enforcement targets.27 On the one

hand, were the enforcement parameters to have the same constant marginal resource costs, so

that c’(α) = c’(β) = c , then the policy prescription would be to use only the more effective CFO

penalty. On the other hand, were the enforcement parameters to exhibit increasing marginal

costs, so that c' ' (⋅) > 0 , then the cost-minimizing enforcement policy would be to use both α and

β. The precise mix, of course, would depend on the marginal costs and marginal effectiveness of

each policy tool.

         Part (b) of the Theorem states that increasing the penalties for tax evasion on

shareholders by increasing α has the effect of flattening the optimal compensation contract, as

26
   Put differently, the optimal contract is incomplete, so that incentives (such as those resulting from sanctions being
imposed on the shareholders) are imperfectly transmitted through the agreement. The contractual incompleteness in
our model is a direct artifact of the private information possessed by the CFO regarding the level of permissible
deductions, x. Of course, contractual incompleteness could enter this relationship in other ways, involving different
types of hidden information, or hidden actions, that permit manipulation by the CFO of observable variables that
impact on compensation. To the extent that the non-equivalency of penalties in our model is a consequence of an
incomplete contract between the shareholders and the CFO, we would expect that other sources of contractual
incompleteness may generate similar non-equivalency results. Alternatively, we would expect equivalency of
penalties in environments with complete contracts.
27
   Note that in this paper we have examined the optimal level of tax evasion from the perspective of the CFO and the
shareholders, and have not considered the larger question of the socially optimal level of tax evasion. The latter
would, of course, require an examination of both the costs and the benefits of raising tax revenues.


                                                          17
shareholders reduce the incentive of the CFO to engage in evasion. This is the mechanism by

which the reduction in evasion is achieved.

       Part (c) of the Theorem demonstrates that the effect of increasing CFO penalties through

β on the slope of the optimal compensation arrangement is indeterminate, although we

demonstrate in an example below that more precise results can be obtained using specific

functional forms for g and f.       Finally, part (d) of the Theorem indicates that the optimal

compensation contract S is a strictly convex function of the observed reductions in taxable

income, R. As a result, the compensation contract exhibits progressivity in the sense that the

CFO is paid at the margin a bonus, S'(R), which is increasing in the level of deductions from

taxable income, R. This reflects the fact that evasion costs, g, are increasing in the amount of

evasion, so that incentivizing the CFO to increase evasion requires increasing bonuses, at the

margin. The following result is straightforward.

                                                                        β2 
Corollary:       If g is quadratic and f is uniform, then S ' ' ( R) =          g ' '.
                                                                       α + 2 β 

       Since g'' is constant in the case of a quadratic function, it is easy to demonstrate that the

convexity of S(R) is increasing (decreasing) in β (α).             Consequently, the optimal contract

becomes more progressive in response to increases in the penalty β , resulting in larger bonuses

(at the margin) to incentivize the CFO.



III. An Example

       For the purposes of this example, we will assume that x is uniformly distributed on the

interval [0, t], so F(x) =x/t and f(x) = 1/t. In addition, we will assume that the penalty for tax

evasion is quadratic and increasing in the amount of illegal evasion, such that g(R-x)=(R-x)2 /6.




                                                    18
Then, by (8), we know that R*(x)=x+3t/(α+β), so that the optimal amount of evasion, R – x, is

3t/(α+β). Not surprisingly, the full-information optimal level of evasion is independent of the

actual value of x, is higher when the tax rate is higher, and is lower when the expected costs of

evasion are higher. From Theorem 1 (a), we obtain

                                          β (t − x)
                   R ( x) = R * ( x) −              = x + (3t – β(t – x))/(α + β)                   (20)
                                           α+β

which implies that R(x) < R*(x) for every x < t, as depicted in Figure 2. In all but the corner

situation where x=t, evasion is lower in the informationally-constrained situation.

         Note also that R'(x) is monotonic, which was assured because Assumptions (1) and (2)

are satisfied by f and g, so that the conditions of Theorem 1 are sufficient to characterize an

optimum. Furthermore,

                         β  t (3 − β ) + βx 
                  Vx =                       >0                                                    (21)
                         3  α + β          

for β ≤ 1, so that the participation constraint holds with equality (strict inequality) for x = 0

(x > 0).

         Condition (b) of Theorem 1 implies that

                              β [t (3 − β ) + βx ] 2 β [t (3 − β ) x + βx 2 / 2]
                   S ( x) =                         +                            .                  (22)
                                  6 (α + β ) 2               3(α + β )

Solving (20) for x and substituting the result into (22) yields S(R), and by differentiation we

obtain

                                β [ β ( R − t ) + 3t ]
                   S ' ( R) =                          > 0,                                         (23)
                                    3(α + 2 β )




                                                          19
since R ≥ t for α , β ≤ 1 . Differentiation of (23) with respect to the parameters α and β yields28

                         d                 β (3t + β ( R − t ))
                           [ S ' ( R)] = −                      < 0 ; and                                        (24)
                        dα                    3(α + 2 β ) 2

                         d               2 β 2 ( R − t ) + α (2 β ( R − t ) + 3t )
                           [ S ' ( R)] =                                           >0.                           (25)
                        dβ                            3(α + 2 β ) 2

           Expressions (24) and (25) indicate that increasing the tax evasion penalty on shareholders

(increasing α) results in a flatter compensation contract. In contrast, increasing the penalty borne

by the CFO (increasing β) generates a steeper compensation contract that provides larger

bonuses at the margin to the CFO for reducing taxable income. In essence, the response by the

shareholders to larger penalties levied on the CFO for tax evasion in this example is to adjust the

compensation arrangement to sharpen the incentives for the CFO to engage in such evasion. Put

differently, an increase in β generates a restructuring of S(R) that partially offsets the

disincentive for the CFO to engage in tax evasion.

           Finally, we can also examine the effects of the policy tools (α and β) on the amount of

illegal tax evasion. Letting e* ≡ R* - x denote the amount of evasion that results from the full

information contract, it is straightforward to demonstrate that

                              de*/dα = de*/dβ = -3t/(α+β)2 < 0                                            (26)

so both tools are equally effective at deterring evasion in the absence of an informational

asymmetry. Alternatively, letting e ≡ R – x denote the amount of evasion that results from the

optimal informationally-constrained contract, we find that

                              de/dα = (-3t + β(t-x)) /(α+β)2 > de*/dα ; and                               (27)

                              de/dβ = (-3t – α(t-x)) /(α+β)2 < de*/dβ                                     (28)


28
     The results that follow may also be obtained through a direct application of the conditions identified in Theorem
2.


                                                            20
so the β (α) tool becomes more (less) effective as a result of the informational asymmetry. Put

differently, since de/dα - de/dβ =(α+β)(t-x) > 0 for every x < t, it follows that β has a larger

effect on evasion than does α.29 A penalty levied directly on the CFO will be more effective at

reducing evasion than an otherwise-equivalent penalty levied on the shareholders.



IV. Conclusions and Future Research Directions

            Tax evasion by large, public corporations is apparently widespread, and the appropriate

policy response is widely debated. One set of responses is to change the tax code to facilitate

detection and successful prosecution of certain classes of evasion. Another possible response is

to strengthen the penalties—on the corporation or on the corporate officers--for those acts of

evasion that are detected. Existing economic theory offers little guidance to policy makers.

There is, to be sure, a large positive and normative literature about tax evasion, but nearly all of

it pertains to individuals. The small literature that addresses firms focuses on the joint output-

evasion decision, and ignores the separation of ownership and control that characterizes such

corporations.

            This paper begins the task of developing an economic theory of corporate tax evasion

that addresses the fact that corporate tax officers will either have explicit compensation contracts

in which their success at tax minimization is rewarded, or will have this success reflected

implicitly via performance review procedures. Our results suggest that, in this setting, the effect

of policies depends on whether the corporation or the officer is penalized, and the extent to

which the corporation can offset any penalty regime by restructuring its compensation contract

with the tax officer. From the tax agency’s point of view, penalties assessed on the tax officer

are more effective tools against evasion because they exacerbate the conflict between the
29
     Recall that both de/dα and de/dβ are negative, so the absolute value of the latter is greater than that of the former.


                                                              21
shareholders and the tax officer, resulting in what is a less efficient outcome for the two taken

together, but that reduces evasion more than the same penalty assessed on the corporation. The

normative implications of this finding are fairly straightforward.         If implementing the two

penalties has equal and constant marginal social costs, then our results suggest using only the

agent penalty. If they have equal cost functions but increasing marginal costs, our results

suggest using both penalties, but using the agent penalties more. More generally, the results

push the optimal enforcement policy toward favor agent penalties more than would be true if

they were equally effective in combating corporate tax evasion.

           We can think of several fascinating and important questions that can be addressed using

the framework we introduce here. One is the effect of the differing horizons of the typical CEO

and the typical tax officer. Given the often several-year lag between a tax report and the

completion of an audit, it is common that by the time a penalty is assessed the CEO is no longer

with the firm; this introduces another conflict of interest to the tax evasion decision. Another is

the effect of public disclosure of corporate taxable income and tax payments. Although the

advocates of this favor it because they think it will, through public pressure and corporate

embarrassment, reduce tax avoidance, the model we have outlined here suggests that there is an

offsetting effect. Note, though, that public disclosure also implies disclosure of the effective tax

rate of a firm’s competitors.             For this reason it may facilitate the benchmarking of the

performance of the CFO, and enable more effective compensation contracts, which would

increase evasion and force down effective tax rates.30           Finally, this type of model can be

extended to address accounting misrepresentation in addition to tax evasion, for which the

enforcement agency is the Securities and Exchange Commission, rather than the Internal

Revenue Service.
30
     We thank Dan Silverman for suggesting this extension.


                                                         22
References

Allingham, Michael and Agnar Sandmo. 1972. “Income Tax Evasion: A Theoretical Analysis.”

   Journal of Public Economics 1 (3-4): 323-338.

Chen, Kong-Pin and C.Y. Cyrus Chu. 2002. “Internal Control vs. External Manipulation: A

   Model of Corporate Income Tax Evasion.” Working paper. Institute for Social Sciences and

   Philosophy, Academia Sinica, Taipei.

Cowell, Frank. 2004. “Sticks and Carrots.” In Henry Aaron and Joel Slemrod (eds.), The Crisis

   in Tax Administration, Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press, pp. 230-258.

Crocker, Keith J. and John Morgan. 1998. “Is Honesty the Best Policy? Curtailing Insurance

   Fraud through Optimal Incentive Contracts.” Journal of Political Economy 106 : 355-375.

Desai, Mihir, Alexander Dyck, and Luigi Zingales. 2003.         “Corporate Governance and

   Taxation.” Harvard Business School working paper.

Douglas, Raymond F., Patrick J. Ellingsworth, and James P. McAndrews III. 1996. “What

   Management Expects: Evaluation of the Tax Department and its Executives.” The Tax

   Executive (Jan./Feb.): 29-32.

Fudenberg, Drew and Tirole, Jean. 1991. Game Theory. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Guesnerie, Roger and Laffont, Jean-Jacques.1984.       “A Complete Solution to a Class of

   Principal-Agent Problems with an Application to the Control of a Self-Managed Firm.”

   Journal of Public Economics 25: 329-369.

Hanlon, Michelle. 2003. “What Can We Infer about a Firm’s Taxable Income from its Financial

   Statement?” National Tax Journal 56(December): 831-863.

Hollingsworth, Tracy. 2002. Manufacturers Alliance/MAPI Survey of Corporate Tax

   Departments—4th Edition. Arlington, VA: Manufacturers Alliance/MAPI.




                                              23
Holmstrom, Bengt.    1979. “Moral Hazard and Observability.”      Bell Journal of Economics

   10(Spring): 74-91.

Kraakman, Reinier. 1984. “Corporate Liability Strategies and the Costs of Legal Controls.”

   Yale Law Journal 93: 857-898.

Lacker, Jeffrey M. and John A. Weinberg.       1989. “Optimal Contracts under Costly State

   Falsification”. Journal of Political Economy 97: 1345-63.

Lee, Kangoh. 1998. “Tax Evasion, Monopoly, and Nonneutral Profit Taxes.” National Tax

   Journal 51, 333-8.

Mills, Lillian, Merle Erickson, and Edward Maydew. 1998. “Investments in Tax Planning.”

   Journal of the American Taxation Association 20: 1-20.

Mussa, Michael and Rosen, Sherwin. 1978. “Monopoly and Product Quality.” Journal of

   Economic Theory 18 (August): 301-317.

Myerson, Roger B. 1979. “Incentive Compatibility and the Bargaining Problem.” Econometrica

   47 (January): 61-73.

Novack, Janet. 1998. “The Hustling of X-Rated Shelters.” Fortune (December 14).

Polinsky, A. Mitchell, and Steven Shavell. 1993. “Should Employees Be Subject to Fines and

    Imprisonment Given the Existence of Corporate Liability?” International Review of Law and

    Economics 13: 239-257.

Slemrod, Joel.    2001.    “A General Model of the Behavioral Response to Taxation.”

   International Tax and Public Finance 8(2): 125-38.

Townsend, Robert M. 1979. “Optimal Contracts and Competitive Markets with Costly State

   Verification.” Journal of Economic Theory 21:265-93.

U.S. General Accounting Office. 2003. Challenges Remain in Combating Abusive Tax Shelters.
    Testimony before the Senate Finance Committee on Finance. Washington, D.C., October


                                              24
21.




      25
  S
                                                               (x < x < x)

                            V ( x) = 0
                                                       V (x)                           V (x )




                                                                               i



                                                      S(R)          Π (x )
S(x)                                     i

             i                  Π (x)
       x   R( x )                        R(x)                                R( x )
                                                                                       R

                                              R*(x)                          R*( x )


                    S(R): The Optimal CFO Bonus Scheme

                                 Figure 1


                                         26
t(α+β+3)
  (α+β)




               R*


    3t
  (α+β)             R




  t(3-β)
  (α+β)

      t




           0                            t   x




                        Figure 2



                                   27
