NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FIXED EXCHANGE RATES AND TRADE
Michael W. Klein
Jay C. Shambaugh
Working Paper 10696
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10696
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2004

We thank Eric Edmunds, Jim Feyrer, Andrew Rose, Douglas Staiger, and participants at the Dartmouth Junior
Lunch and Dartmouth International Macro Summer Camp for helpful suggestions. All errors are ours. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2004 by Michael W. Klein and Jay C. Shambaugh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Fixed Exchange Rates and Trade
Michael W. Klein and Jay C. Shambaugh
NBER Working Paper No. 10696
August 2004
JEL No. F3
ABSTRACT
A classic argument for a fixed exchange rate is its promotion of trade. Empirical support for this,
however, is mixed. While one branch of research consistently shows a small negative effect of
exchange rate volatility on trade, another, more recent, branch presents evidence of a large positive
impact of currency unions on trade. This paper helps resolve this disconnect. Our results, which use
a new data-based classification of fixed exchange rate regimes, show a large, significant effect of
a fixed exchange rate on bilateral trade between a base country and a country that pegs to it.
Furthermore, the web of fixed exchange rates created when countries link to a common base also
promotes trade, but only when these countries are part of a wider system, as during the Bretton
Woods period. These results suggest an economically relevant role for exchange rate regimes in
trade determination since a significant amount of world trade is conducted between countries with
fixed exchange rates.
Michael W. Klein
Fletcher School
Tufts University
Medford, MA 02155
and NBER
michael.klein@tufts.edu
Jay C. Shambaugh
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
jay.c.shambaugh@dartmouth.edu

I. Introduction
Until recently, the idea that a fixed exchange rate promotes trade was both well
understood and not credible. Exchange rate policy has been influenced by the argument that
pegging to, say, the US dollar fosters bilateral trade both with the United States and with all
other countries that have a dollar peg. This argument is most compelling for trade with
countries whose currencies’ values cannot be hedged in forward markets. But, despite the logic
of this view, and its use in policy debates, the empirical literature fails to present strong
evidence that a reduction in exchange rate volatility is associated with an increase in trade.1
Those uncomfortable with this dissonance between received wisdom and statistical
results may have taken some comfort by a newer branch of empirical research that uses gravity
models to study the determinants of bilateral trade. Some of this research finds a big effect of
currency unions on trade flows in the modern era.2 Other work shows that the pre-World War I
gold standard had an important role in promoting trade, and its demise contributed in an
important way to the reduction in world trade in the interwar period.3
Yet a careful reading of the results from this research employing gravity models is less
supportive than one might suspect of the policy argument that a country can promote its trade
by establishing a fixed exchange rate.4 The regressions on the effects of currency unions on
trade use a dummy variable representing the presence of a currency union as well as a separate
variable representing exchange rate volatility. While the coefficient on the currency union
dummy variable is large and highly significant, the coefficient on exchange rate volatility tends
to suggest that the effect of limiting exchange rate volatility, through a means other than the
establishment of a currency union, is small.5 Furthermore, results on fixed exchange rates
1

There is a literature in which exchange rate volatility is used as a regressor in import and export equations and,
generally, the coefficients on exchange rate volatility are either insignificant or small enough to suggest that a
reduction in exchange rate volatility has a small effect on trade. See, for example, Cushman (1983, 1986, 1988),
Gotur (1985), Hooper and Kohlhagen (1978), IMF (1984), Kenen and Rodrik (1986), Klein (1990), and Thursby
and Thursby (1987).
2
See, for example, Rose (2000), Rose and Van Wincoop (2001), Glick and Rose (2002), and Frankel and Rose
(2002).
3
See Estevadeordal et al. (2003) and Lopez-Cordova and Meissner (2004).
4
Frankel and Wei (1993) used a gravity model that included exchange rate volatility as a regressor, but their
results suggest a limited role of exchange rate volatility on trade.
5
Rose (2000) makes a distinction between the effects on trade of a currency union and of a fixed exchange rate,
and distinguishes between these systems, writing “Sharing a common currency is a much more durable and serious
commitment than a fixed rate.” (pp. 10 – 11) Tenreyro (2003) writes “…the findings from currency unions do not
generalize to other regimes with lower variability”.

1

(rather than a currency union) drawn from the gold-standard period may not translate to the
modern era because bilateral fixed exchange rates at that time were part of a more pervasive
exchange rate system. Thus, these considerations, along with results from the earlier literature
cited above, may raise doubts about the trade effects of a fixed exchange rate in the modern era
since the empirical results that suggest a large effect of a currency union or the gold standard
on trade also suggest a minor effect, at best, of limiting exchange rate volatility per se.
But the feasible policy set may not include the choice of a currency union, nor
membership in a widespread fixed-exchange rate system, and unilateral dollarization is a
drastic step. Rather, the realistic choice facing many policy-makers is whether or not to peg
their currency to one of the major industrial countries. The question then arises of the effect of
this choice on bilateral trade with the country to which they peg, with other countries that also
peg to the same country, and with countries that do not share a common peg.
In this paper we address these questions, using a new dataset from Shambaugh (2004)
that classifies de facto bilateral exchange rate arrangements in the post-Bretton Woods era.
This data set enables us to create a fixed exchange rate series for use in a gravity model that is
comparable to the currency union and gold-standard membership series used in research cited
above.6 We find a fixed exchange rate between two countries raises the amount of their
bilateral trade, and that this effect is of the same order of magnitude (though smaller) as a
currency union or a regional free trade arrangement. These results are especially relevant for
policy since they speak to the effects of a policy choice less dramatic than the abandonment of
the national currency and more attainable than the institution of a widespread fixed exchange
rate system.

II. Methodology
II.1 Estimation technique
The gravity model has been heralded as one of the most successful empirical
frameworks in international economics.7 A series of recent papers has augmented the standard
gravity model to investigate the effect of a range of variables on bilateral trade, including
6

We also include exchange rate volatility as a regressor to ensure that fixed rates are not simply picking up the
effect of reducing overall macroeconomic volatility. As will be shown, our core results are robust to the use of
another de facto exchange rate classification scheme, the one developed by Reinhart and Rogoff (2004).
7
Anderson and van Wincoop (2003) begin their article with the statement “The gravity equation is one of the most
empirically successful in economics.” (p. 170) Anderson (1979) and Bergstrand (1985) provide early theoretical
justifications for the gravity model.

2

membership in a currency union. We adopt this technique by regressing bilateral trade on a
standard set of gravity model variables, as well as dummy variables that indicate whether two
countries have a direct or indirect fixed exchange rate, a dummy variable that indicates whether
one country has formed a currency union with its trading partner, and a variable representing
the volatility of the exchange rate between the trading partners. Each observation in the
regressions we run represents, for a particular year, a dyad, that is, a country-pair observation.
The specification of the core regressions takes the form
(1)

ln(Ti , j ,t ) = α1 X i , j ,t + α 2 Z i , j + β1 F1,i , j ,t + β 2 F2,i , j ,t + β 3CU i , j ,t + β 4 vi , j ,t + β 5 vi2, j ,t + ε i , j ,t

where ln(Ti,j,t) is the natural logarithm of trade between countries i and j in year t, X i , j ,t
represents a set of variables that vary over time, such as the product of the natural logarithm of
income of countries i and j at time t, Z i , j represents a set of variables that do not vary over
time, such as the natural logarithm of the distance between countries i and j, F1,i , j ,t is a dummy
variable equal to 1 if there was a fixed exchange rate (but not a currency union) between the
two countries at time t, F2,i , j ,t is a dummy variable equal to 1 if there was an indirect peg
(discussed below), CU i , j ,t is a dummy variable equal to 1 if one of the countries had a currency
union with the other at time t, vi , j ,t is a measure of volatility of the exchange rate between
countries i and j at time t, and ε i , j ,t is an error term.8 Other specifications add additional
exchange rate regime variables discussed below.
This specification differs from the one used in research that considers the effect of a
currency union on bilateral trade only by the inclusion of the terms β1 F1i , j ,t and β 2 F2i , j ,t . This,
however, marks an important distinction between the manner in which we estimate the effect of
8

The actual set of variables that constitute X i , j ,t used in the regressions in this paper include the product of the

natural logarithm of income of countries i and j in period t, the product of the natural logarithm of income per
capita of countries i and j in period t, a dummy variable indicating whether the two countries had a free trade
agreement at time t, and another a dummy variable indicating whether one country was a colony of the other
country at time t. The variables used in the regressions that do not vary over time, represented by Z i , j in (1),
include the natural logarithm of the distance between countries i and j, the product of the natural logarithm of the
land areas of countries i and j, dummy variables representing whether or not countries i and j share a common
border or share a common language, and other dummy variables indicating whether one country had been a colony
of the other, whether either country is landlocked, whether either country is an island, whether both countries had a
common colonizer, and whether one of the countries was, at one time, a dependency, territory or colony of the
other.

3

a fixed exchange rate on trade and the manner in which that effect has been estimated both in
the context of gravity models as well as in the older literature that estimates import or export
equations. In both of those cases, the estimated effect of a fixed exchange rate on trade is
calculated by multiplying the estimated coefficients on the exchange rate volatility terms, β 4
and β 5 in specification (1), by a given change in exchange rate volatility and exchange rate
volatility squared, respectively. Results obtained in this fashion suggest only a minor effect of
a fixed exchange rate on trade.
In contrast, the estimated effect of a currency union on trade from a gravity model,
calculated as exp(β 3 ) − 1 in a specification like that in (1), is reported as very large (as much as
tripling trade, ceteris paribus) and highly statistically significant.9 Quah (2000), in his comment
on the original Rose (2000) paper, notes that this implies a large discontinuity in the effects on
trade of restricting exchange rate volatility. In this paper, we estimate the effect of a fixed
exchange rate on trade as exp(β1 ) − 1 , in a manner completely analogous to way that the
coefficient on the currency union dummy variable has been interpreted in gravity models that
investigate that issue. This method recognizes reducing volatility from, say, 5% to zero may be
qualitatively different than a reduction in volatility from 20% to 15%, even when allowing for
non-linearities in the relationship between exchange rate volatility and trade. In fact, we find
the response of trade to a fixed exchange rate to be much closer to, and in many cases
statistically indistinguishable from, its response to a currency union.10 Fixed rates may have an
effect beyond that of volatility for a number of reasons, most notably, the certainty a peg
generates. Most fluctuations in volatility are not known to participants ahead of time, so even
if a pair of countries has low volatility in a given year, this probably does not increase trade
while a fixed rate provides a certainty which may be helpful in forming trading relationships.
One concern with the estimates from an equation like (1) is that, despite the plethora of
controls included in the gravity model, there may be omitted variables that affect bilateral trade.
9

For example, Frankel and Rose (2002) present an estimated coefficient on the currency union dummy variable of
1.38 with an associated standard error of 0.19 (see their Table 1) which implies that membership in a currency
union triples bilateral trade, ceteris paribus, since e1.38 – 1 = 2.97.
10
The partial derivative of trade with respect to either a fixed exchange rate or a currency union could include
both the direct effect, exp β1 −1 or exp β 3 − 1 , respectively, and the separately estimated effect of a reduction

( )

( )

in exchange rate volatility, involving the coefficients

β4

and

β5 .

In practice, however, the estimated effect of

exchange rate volatility on trade is small and we only refer to the estimated direct effects.

4

Anderson and van Wincoop (2001) show that omitting a variable that reflects each country’s
(time-invariant) resistance to international trade leads to an inflation of the estimated effect of
the reduction of trade due to national borders. A solution to the presence of such “multilateral
resistance” is to include country fixed effects (CFE) when estimating the gravity model. As
predicted by their theory, the empirical results presented in their paper demonstrate that the
estimated effect of a border is significantly reduced when CFE are included. Following this
insight, we present CFE estimates in this paper in which we effectively include about 140
dummy variables in the regression, one for each country, and any observation will have each of
the two dummy variables representing the countries in its trade dyad equal to 1 while all the
other country dummy variables will equal 0.
In the context of the issue we study, however, the CFE estimation approach may fail to
provide estimates that enable us to make a policy-relevant argument on the likely bilateral trade
consequences of a fixed exchange rate. The problem is that unobserved variables could be
correlated with both the error term of a gravity model and the likelihood that two countries
have a fixed exchange rate. 11 In this case, the estimated effect of fixed exchange rates on trade
will be too large when using CFE estimation. Recognizing this, Rose and Glick (2002) argue
for using country-pair fixed effects (CPFE) estimation, rather than OLS or CFE estimation.
The CPFE estimates effectively include a dummy variable for each of the roughly 10,000
country pairs in the data set. Thus, any particularly strong bilateral tendency to trade is
captured in the fixed effect and statistical identification comes after controlling for the average
level of trade for a given pair. This can be seen as a generalization of the Anderson and van
Wincoop (2003) approach by assuming bilateral resistance to trade at the country-pair level,
rather than the multilateral resistance to trade at the country level. Thus, while presenting CFE
estimates, we focus our discussion on the estimates we obtain from gravity models that include
CPFE.
A first glance at the tables of results using CPFE estimation may be disconcerting since
this method does not offer estimates of the effect of variables that do not vary over the sample
period (e.g. distance), and, therefore, the “gravity” (as represented by the distance term)
disappears from the gravity model when it is estimated using CPFE estimation. In fact, the
11

On a related note, Eichengreen and Irwin (1995) show that the estimated effect of trade blocs on trade is
overstated when one does not control for the fact that, even before these trade blocs were instituted, there was
significantly more trade between countries in a trade bloc in the inter-war period.

5

impact of distance is still in the regression, but it is captured by the fixed effect.12 The more
significant aspect of this issue for our paper is that any country pair that has a fixed exchange
rate for the entire sample period will not yield information in the estimate of the impact of a
fixed exchange rate on trade. Rather, CPFE estimates identify the effect of fixed exchange rate
on trade only from those country pairs that switch exchange rate status during the sample
period. But, as it turns out, most fixed exchange rate regimes do not last for the entire sample,
so we lose information from relatively few country pairs when we use CPFE estimation rather
than CFE estimation.
Section II.2a: Exchange Rate Regime Classifications
The methodology outlined above differs from previous research studying the effect of
fixed exchange rates on trade primarily through the variable used to assess the presence of a
fixed exchange rate. As mentioned, our contribution is distinguished by its use of a dummy
variable representing the presence of a fixed exchange rate between two countries. In this
section we discuss the exchange rate classification scheme used in this paper and present some
statistics on the number of fixed exchange rates as well as the characteristics of countries that
peg their currencies.13
The de facto classification scheme described here, and used in our first set of results, is
drawn from Shambaugh (2004) and is based on the behavior of countries’ official exchange
rates. A particular country is judged to have a direct peg with a certain base country in a given
year if their bilateral exchange rate stays within a +/- 2 percent band.14 In addition, if a country
maintains a perfectly flat peg to the currency of a base country for 11 out of 12 months within a
year, but then has a single change in its bilateral exchange rate, this “single change”
observation is also coded as a direct peg . The logic in this case is that the currency of the
country is pegged for the entire year but, at some point in that year, there is a realignment to a

12

As Quah (2000) notes, the entire gravity model is in a sense a large nuisance parameter in projects of this kind
as we are trying to estimate an effect that is not theoretically embedded in the gravity model, and are simply using
the gravity model to generate our controls.
13
To test the robustness of these results, we also employ the de facto exchange rate classification scheme from
Reinhart and Rogoff (2004) and the de jure regime classification scheme based on information published by the
IMF in its Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions. These alternative classification
schemes are discussed in more detail below in the section that presents results using them. Shambaugh (2004)
provides more extensive commentary on different choices of exchange rate regime classifications.
14
We have a separate category for currency unions and, therefore, there is no overlap between those dyads that are
classified as having a currency union in a particular year and any dyad classified as having a fixed exchange rate in
that year.

6

new peg.15 Finally, exchange rates that are maintained within a +/- 2 percent band for only one
year are not coded as a direct peg since a single year of stable exchange rates may be a random
lack of volatility rather than a policy-driven peg. It is reasonable to think that the market
responses to these single year pegs are distinct from those to longer-lived pegs.
A crucial aspect of this classification scheme is the identification of a base country.
Base countries may include those that have a major currency, such as the United States, France,
the United Kingdom, or Germany, as well as those that are important within a given region,
such as India or Australia. Base countries can often be determined by reference to the official
declarations, or by historical relationships. In addition to the countries already mentioned,
Belgium, Spain, Portugal, Italy, New Zealand, South Africa, India, and Malaysia are all bases
at some point in time.16
Countries engaged in a direct peg with a base will also be involved in a number of

indirect pegs with other countries. The range of indirect pegs is illustrated in Figure 1. The
“family tree” mapped in this figure shows that two countries pegged to the same base will also
be pegged to one another in a “sibling” relationship. For example, India and South Africa had
this type of indirect peg when both were pegged to the US dollar. Another type of indirect peg
is a “grandchild” relationship that exists between a base country, such as the United States, and
another country pegged to a country that is itself pegged to the base. Bhutan had this type of
exchange rate relationship with the United States during those years that its currency was
pegged to the Indian rupee and the rupee was pegged to the dollar. In this case, there is also the
indirect “aunt/uncle” relationship between Bhutan and South Africa , and the indirect “cousin”
relationship between Bhutan and Lesotho, whose currency was pegged to the South African
rand. In our regressions, we include an indirect peg dummy variable that equals 1 for a dyad
that has any of the family of indirect pegs described in this paragraph along with a separate
dummy variable that represents direct pegs. Currency unions, direct pegs, and indirect pegs are

15

See Shambaugh (2004) for more discussion. Changing the definition of bands from +/- 2% to +/- 1% had little
effect on the number of observations coded as pegs. “Single change” pegs represent a small fraction of total pegs.
16
The biggest challenge in choosing a base country comes when considering the Bretton Woods era since most
potential base countries were pegged to the US dollar. We rely on the few revaluations and devaluations that
occurred during the Bretton Woods period, as well as the small variations in exchange rates during that time, to
identify base countries. For example, a country that devalued against the dollar at the same time as the British
pound in 1967 is judged as having Britain as its base country. A country would also be judged as having Britain as
its base if it maintained a strict peg with the pound sterling while exhibiting some fluctuation with the United
States dollar .

7

all mutually exclusive. Observations can only be coded as one type of exchange rate regime.
While currency union observations naturally generate direct pegs or indirect pegs in the coding
due to their stable exchange rates, those observations are only considered currency unions, not
pegs.
Table 1 presents some statistics on the number of direct pegs, the number of indirect
pegs, and the number of currency unions in the data set we use. This data set is based on
information on 181 countries over the period 1973 – 1999, yielding 4381 country-year
observations (rather than 181 × 27 = 4887 because some countries, like Estonia, did not exist
for the entire sample period) As indicated in the second row of Table 1, there are 11,805
separate country pairs (rather than (181 × 180)/2 = 16,290 because of missing observations)
and, over the 27 years of the sample, there are 168,868 observations. The third row of Table 1
shows that there are 1562 direct pegs in this sample, and 90 percent of these observations are
industrial country / developing country dyads.17 Given the fact that most countries
contemplating pegging are developing countries considering pegging to an industrial base, it is
useful that most of the data used to generate our results comes from that type of relationship.
We also note that while the overall number of direct pegs may seem small in relation to the
total number of observations, the number of direct pegs in a bilateral trade data set will
necessarily be a small proportion of the number of overall observations since any country can
have a direct peg with only one other country while it can trade with as many as 100 other
countries. The relevant statistics regarding the frequency of pegs, therefore, are that roughly
half the 4381 country year observations are coded as pegs, even in the post Bretton Woods era,
and 135 countries are involved in a peg at some point. The fact that almost 50 percent of the
countries peg at any one time helps explain why there are 13,679 indirect peg observations, as
indicated in the third panel of Table 1, since any direct peg can create a large number of
indirect pegs,
The bottom panel of Table 1 indicates that 2005 observations include a currency union
in the post-1972 sample. This number is not directly comparable to the number of observations
with either a direct peg or an indirect peg since it includes all intertwining relationships within
a multilateral currency union (e.g. among the countries in the CFA), but not dyads in which two

17

Industrial countries are defined as those countries with an IFS number under 199 with the exception of Turkey.
This includes the US, Canada, Japan, Australia, New Zealand, and Western European nations.

8

countries have both, unilaterally, adopted the currency of a third country (e.g. the dyad of
Panama and Liberia would not be coded as a currency union, even when both had a currency
union with the United States). As shown in the table, 88 percent of these currency union
observations are dyads between two developing countries.
As noted above, CPFE estimation identifies coefficients on direct pegs, indirect pegs,
and currency unions from country pairs that switch regimes during the sample period. Of the
144 country pairs that ever have a direct peg from 1973-1999, 118 show a change in regime
with 56 of these switching once, 25 switching twice (that is, both on and off a peg), and 37
switching more than twice. Thus, we are not simply identifying off a single break in most
cases, but a more rich history of regime transitions. The multiple switches per pair result in a
total of 257 switches over the period, comprised of 141 switches off of a peg and 116 switches
onto a peg. 18
Section II.2b: Pegged Country Characteristics
Statistics on the ratio of average trade between dyads with pegs or currency unions to
the average trade for all dyads are also presented in Table 1.19 Trade of direct peg dyads is
1,253 percent of average trade. Thus, while dyads with a fixed exchange rate are a relatively
small proportion of all dyads, they comprise a meaningful portion of the volume of world trade.
Direct peg dyads account for 11% of average annual world trade in the post-Bretton Woods
period, with a range of 7 percent to 19% percent of trade in these years (the maximum value
during the Bretton Woods era was 33% of world trade). This reflects the fact that a typical
direct trade dyad includes one large, industrial country and that base country is ten times the
size of the average country (and six times the size of the average industrial country) in a given
year. The non-base country in a direct peg dyad is, on average, about 30 percent the size of the
18

2673 country pair have an indirect peg at some time during the sample, and 146 country pairs are engaged in a
currency union at some time during the sample. 2357 dyads switch indirect peg status and this relatively high
proportion of switches to indirect pegs, as compared to the case with direct pegs, reflects the fact that when a
country changes from non-pegged to a peg, it triggers one regime switch for a direct peg, but it often creates many
indirect peg switches. 62 country pairs switch currency union status in the post-Bretton Woods era, and all of
these switch only once, with 42 of these observations representing the dissolution of a currency union and 20
representing the establishment of a currency union. Because of the intertwining relationships in currency unions,
not all of these switches represent independent events, unlike the case with direct pegs. For example, 10 of the
creations come from Mali joining the CFA and thus creating a currency union with each existing member.
19
Results are based on taking the average size of base countries divided by the average size of all countries by
year and then averaging those results across years. This procedure gives equal weight to information from all
years regardless of the number of pegs in a given year, but it also removes any problems associated with changes
in the number of pegs over time as countries have grown richer.

9

average country, with pegged (non-base) industrial countries about 40 percent the size of all
industrial countries and pegged developing countries about half the size of other developing
countries
We have already noted the relative preponderance of direct peg observations among
dyads that include an industrial country and a developing country and the policy relevance of
focusing on the possible trade-creating effects for this subsample of the data. Table 1 indicates
that this subsample already represents a significant proportion of world trade. The statistics in
the first panel of this table show that trade between industrial and developing countries
accounts for 38 percent of overall annual trade in the post-Bretton Wood era.20 Thus, the
policy option we study is one that is frequently used and involves a meaningful portion of
world trade.21

III. Results:
III.1: Core Results
The statistic cited above, that the average dyad with a fixed exchange rate trades ten
times more than the average dyad without a fixed exchange rate, is striking. But this
unconditional statistic can only suggest a role for fixed exchange rates in influencing trade.
Compelling evidence must control for a range of determinants of bilateral trade. In this section,
we use the gravity model to determine the effect of fixed exchange rates on trade, conditional
on the role of other factors. As will be shown, results from estimating gravity models imply
that fixed exchange rates have a statistically significant and economically important role in
influencing trade.
Most of the results presented in this section are based on a sample of annual data from
the post Bretton Woods period of 1973 to 1999. 22 We focus on this period because we are

20

That percentage is the same if the sample is restricted to be rectangular and is 32% if trade involving “oil
exporters” (as defined by the World Bank) is dropped.
21
These results concerning the amount of trade represented by direct peg dyads contrast with the amount of trade
represented by currency union dyads. The majority of currency unions observations consist of dyads with two
developing countries. Consequently, the average amount of trade for these dyads is only 35 percent of the average
trade for all dyads. Moreover, developing countries in currency unions are typically only 10% the size of a typical
developing country in the post Bretton Woods sample.
22
The exchange rate classification data comes from Shambaugh (2004). His post-Bretton Woods data was
extended to the 1960-72 period for this paper. The exchange rate volatility data is the standard deviation of the
monthly percentage change in the bilateral exchange rate; this is calculated using IMF exchange rate data (period

10

interested in relevant policy lessons for the present day, when the decision to peg a currency is,
in most cases, a unilateral choice concerning a single bilateral relationship. In contrast, a
country that pegged its currency to the dollar during the Bretton Woods era necessarily chose
membership in a wide, multilateral system of pegged rates. Such a system neither exists today
nor is likely to be instituted in the foreseeable future. However, results presented towards the
end of this section draw on the experience of the Bretton Woods era in order to consider the
possibility of systemic effects of a fixed exchange rate.
The first set of results is presented in Table 2. The differences in the three sets of
estimates presented in this table highlight the sensitivity of results to the inclusion of countrylevel fixed effects (CFE) and country-pair-level fixed effects (CPFE). As mentioned in Section
II, OLS estimation, like that presented in Column 1 of Table 2, may misstate the true effect of
fixed exchange rates on trade due to the presence of omitted variables. This omission can be
corrected by country-level fixed effects if one assumes multilateral resistance to trade, as is
done by Anderson and van Wincoop (2001). In fact, the coefficient on the direct peg variable
is about half as big in the country-fixed effects estimate (Column 2) as in the OLS estimate
(Column 1). The alternative assumption, of bilateral resistance to trade, demands country-pair
fixed effects, rather than country-level fixed effects, as discussed in Section II. This estimate is
the one that most thoroughly isolates the fixed-exchange rate effect from other, unobserved,
effects that may contribute to trade between two countries and may also be positively correlated
with the likelihood of those countries having a fixed exchange rate. Accordingly, the estimate
of the coefficient on the direct peg dummy variable in Column 3 is one-third the value of the
OLS estimate and two-fifths the value of the CFE estimate, but it is statistically significantly
different from zero at better than the 95 percent level of confidence.23

end). We gratefully acknowledge that the trade data, gravity regressors, and currency union dummies from Rose
(2004) were made available on Rose’s website.
23
The standard errors reported in the regressions are clustered at the country pair level. This both allows for
different variance across the pairs and, more importantly, for an unstructured covariance within the clusters
allowing for correlation across time. Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan (2004) suggest clustering as the
appropriate way to handle autocorrelation in panel differences-in-differences estimation techniques. They note
that clustering in this manner is similar to a Newey-West setup but allows all lags to be potentially important.
They also argue that clustering outperforms parametric corrections to the autocorrelation (such as AR(1) models)
in simulations. Kezdi (2002) makes a number of similar points in a more general panel fixed effects setup, and
again strongly recommends clustering as the appropriate correction. When country-pair fixed effects are not
included, it seems quite clear that the level at which one should cluster is the country pair, as the country pair
means are still in the error and require correction. On the other hand, once these means have been removed with
the dummies, it is less clear whether clustering should be at the country pair level or a more general level. We

11

The estimates of the effect of a fixed exchange rate on trade that are presented in Table
2 are economically meaningful, as well as statistically significant. The coefficient on the direct
peg in Column 1, estimated with OLS, implies an 80% increase in trade for country pairs that
have a fixed exchange rate compared to those that do not.24 This result holds despite the fact
that we control for exchange rate volatility in addition to all the standard gravity controls.25
The CFE estimate (which also includes fixed year effects) of the coefficient is 0.32 (an impact
of 38%), and, the CPFE estimate of 0.19 implies a 21% increase in trade. These effects are
broadly comparable to (and statistically indistinguishable from) the estimated effects of
currency unions when one uses country-pair fixed effects to control for bilateral trade
resistance.26 For example, the CPFE estimates suggest a pair of countries in a currency union
trade 38 percent more than an otherwise similar pair; but the confidence intervals for the fixed
exchange rate and the currency union coefficients clearly overlap (we can only reject that they
are different at the 60 percent level of confidence).27 The indirect pegs are statistically
insignificant in this sample once CFE or CPFE are introduced.
One interpretation of these results is that 11 percent of world trade (the proportion in the
sample that includes trade between countries with a direct peg) would be reduced by 20 percent
(using the most conservative, but also most convincing, CPFE estimate) if countries were to
cannot cluster at the country level as two countries appear in each observation. Therefore, we have experimented
with clustering on the larger country in the pair (so all US pairs would be in one cluster, etc.) and also separately
clustering on the smaller country. The small country clusters produce standard errors quite similar to country pair
clusters. Often, though, big country clustering yields smaller standard errors than those reported implying some
negative correlation across the individual country pair clusters. In theory, given that this correlation exists, we
should cluster at that level in the CPFE regressions, but we take the more conservative approach and report the
larger country pair cluster standard errors and simply note where the clustering technique affects the interpretation
of the results. We also note that other approaches: uncorrected standard errors, heteroskedasticity consistent
standard errors, or Newey West standard errors are always smaller (with the Newey West standard errors
approaching those reported as we increase the lags included), and thus our choice has made significant results less
likely.
24
Trade is 1.8 times higher for country pairs with fixed rates (80% larger) because e0.59 =1.80.
25
As would be expected from previous studies, the impact of exchange rate volatility is low over the various
specifications in Table 1. Reducing exchange rate volatility from the mean to zero suggests only a -1 to -2%
impact on trade. Removing the exchange rate volatility measure slightly increases the coefficients on all exchange
rate regime variables. The volatility used is nominal because this is consistent with looking at a fixed nominal
exchange rate. We use official rates because, again, this is consistent with the way the exchange rate regime
variables are generated.
26
But, as noted above, the currency union dummy variable is not strictly comparable to the direct peg dummy
variable. See Levy-Yeyati (2003) for differences across types of currency unions.
27
It is important to note the impact of the number of country pairs that switch regimes over a particular time
period when using country pair fixed effects. Glick and Rose’s (2002) results which first explored the impact of
currency unions using country pair fixed effects had a longer time series and show 146 switches. In the post-1972
era, there are only 62 country pairs that have a regime switch for currency unions. Thus, we are leery of viewing
our results as retesting the currency union effect, it is included more as a control than a test variable.

12

abandon pegged exchange rates. This might reduce trade by 2 – 3 percent. But this calculation
obviously masks the effects across different countries. In particular, it understates the extent to
which trade between industrial and developing countries, which represents approximately 40
percent of world trade, could be affected by a change in the pattern of fixed exchange rates
since the bulk of our fixed rate observations occur in industrial / developing country dyads.
We are also interested in whether these results are widely applicable across groups of
countries. We address this question in Table 3 which presents CPFE estimates (in columns 1 –
3) and CFE estimates (in Columns 4 – 6) of the effect of fixed exchange rates, and currency
unions, on bilateral trade between industrial countries and developing countries, as well as
bilateral trade among industrial countries and bilateral trade among developing countries.
The country fixed effects regressions show that the effect of direct pegs seems to be
coming from the industrial and developing pairs. Looking at the CPFE regressions (columns 13), we see that none of the groups yield a significant coefficient. By splitting the sample, we
have reduced the number of pairs that switch regimes in any given sample. Thus, there is very
little data to identify industrial-industrial or developing-developing pairs, making effects
difficult to estimate. 28 For the industrial-developing sample, we note that any other form of
clustering generates a significant result in column 2. The CPFE results indicate that a direct
peg raises trade between an industrial country and a developing country by 15 percent, ceteris

paribus, while the CFE result, which does not control for unobserved pair-specific factors,
indicates an increase in trade of 50 percent. These results suggest that the significant effects
presented for the full sample in Table 2 reflect the effect of trade between industrial and
developing countries. The results in Table 3 are distinguished from those in the preceding table
in that an indirect peg has a significant and positive effect on trade between industrial countries,
when controlling for country pair fixed effects (Column 1) and between industrial and
developing countries, when controlling for country fixed effects (Column 5). Finally, we also
note that the significant role that currency unions play in promoting trade that is evident from

28

As shown in Table 1, there are 102 switches among the industrial – developing dyads, but only 14 among the
industrial – industrial dyads and 2 among the developing – developing dyads. The situation with currency unions
differs in that there are 52 currency union switches among the dyads including two developing countries, but only
9 among those representing industrial –developing dyads and 1 among the industrial – industrial dyads.

13

the results in Table 2 seems to arise as a result of bilateral trade among developing countries
(Columns 3 and 6).29
Section III.2 Potential Diversion and System Effects
It is conceivable that the effect of a fixed exchange rate between two countries on the
level of their bilateral trade depends upon the broader environment in which that policy choice
is made. In particular, one might suspect that there is a bigger effect of an indirectly fixed
bilateral exchange rate on trade, due to its credibility or perceived permanence, when that
indirect peg is part of a broader web of fixed exchange rates, such as during the Bretton Woods
period or within the European Monetary System of the 1980s and 1990s. This suspicion is
fostered by previous work on the Gold Standard that shows how that exchange rate system
promoted world trade (Taylor et al., 2003). We investigate the possibility of systemic effects
of fixed exchange rates on trade in Table 4 by including, along with country-pair fixed effects
and the regressors described above, interaction terms that are the product of a systems dummy
variable and the indirect peg dummy variables. The system dummy variable equals 1 for
observations in which the two countries are both members of the Bretton Woods system (for
the period 1960 to 1970) or, in the post-Bretton Woods era, if both countries in a dyad with a
pegged exchange rate are in Western Europe.30
Another consideration is that the overall trade-promoting effects of a peg could be
mitigated if it simply redirects trade towards the base country and away from other countries.
In Table 4 we consider possible trade diversion effects by examining the role of unlinked pegs.
A dummy variable representing an unlinked peg is set to 1 if one, but not both, of the countries
in the dyad has a fixed exchange rate with another country, or if both countries have fixed
exchange rates but there is no indirect peg between them.31 There are over 90,000 observations
for which this dummy variable is equal to 1, a statistic that illustrates the potential economic
relevance of this effect. We also test whether diversion effects are more pronounced when one

29

Recently, some studies have taken preliminary looks at the progress of trade under EMU, providing evidence on
industrial / industrial trading pairs in currency unions. Micco et al (2003) find an impact of roughly 10%.
30
We include all Western European post Bretton Woods countries as part of this “system” even though this
includes a variety of systems (the Snake, early EMS, late EMS) and includes countries such as Austria which were
not formal members at all times, but shadowed these systems.
31
For example, the pair India / Japan is marked an “unlinked peg” when India pegs to the US and Japan is not
pegged. Also, the pair India / France is an unlinked peg when India pegs to the US and France to Germany.

14

a peg is part of a larger system by including, in the regression, the interaction between the
system variable and the unlinked peg variable.32
The first column of Table 4 presents a CPFE estimate that is comparable to the one in
Column 3 of Table 2, in that it includes the same sample period, but the estimate in Table 4
includes three new regressors; the interaction term between the system dummy variable and the
indirect peg dummy variable, an unlinked peg dummy variable, and the interaction of the
unlinked peg dummy variable and the system dummy variable. Among the coefficients on
these new regressors, only the one on unlinked peg is significant, and it is positive, indicating
that countries that have a fixed exchange rate trade more, even with countries to which they are
not pegged. Thus, rather than diverting trade away from other trading partners, pegging
significantly increases trade with the both the base country by 23 percent (the coefficient on the
direct peg dummy variable of 0.205 is significant) and other countries not pegged to the same
base by 5 percent.33 Given the large number of dyads for which unlinked peg equals 1, as
compared to the number for which the direct peg dummy variable equals 1, this result on
unlinked peg is nearly as economically important to the level of world trade as the larger
coefficient on direct peg.34
The second column of Table 4 demonstrates the sensitivity of the results presented in
Column 2 to an extension of the sample period to include the Bretton Woods era. Comparing
the results in Columns 1 and 2 of Table 4 shows that the addition of the observations from the
Bretton Woods period has little impact on the coefficient on the direct peg variable.35 But these
additional observations result in a significant and relatively large effect of indirect pegs within
a system of fixed exchange rates, with an estimated effect of an increase in trade of 29 percent.

32

We do not include an interaction between the direct peg dummy variable and the system dummy variables since
we think system effects would be manifested in the effects of indirect pegs and diversion. In fact, the coefficient
on the interaction between the direct peg dummy variable and the system dummy variable (in an estimate not
reported here) is not significant.
33
Rose (2000) also explores diversion and also finds that potentially diverted pairs show more trade not less.
34
The unlinked peg observations represent 28% of world trade, and, therefore, increasing that portion by 5% could
increase trade 1-2%. Added to the direct peg impact, the total impact on trade flows is as much as 5%.
35
A number of caveats about the pegged exchange rate data for this pre-1973 period should be acknowledged.
Pegging is pervasive in the Bretton Woods era, with 90% of the observations classified as direct pegs, indirect
pegs, or currency unions. This leaves few excluded observations to separately identify the time dummies that are
also included and, therefore, the time dummies themselves may proxy for the system effects. We also note that if
one does not include controls for the Bretton Woods system effects the time dummies increase in value during the
Bretton Woods time period making the direct peg observations of that era appear weaker and lowering the
coefficient on direct peg

15

The positive unlinked peg effect is also significant within a system of fixed exchange rates,
with an estimated effect of an increase in trade of 9.6 percent.36
We may suspect that there are a number of important differences between the Bretton
Woods era and more recent times that result in instability across these periods in the value of
coefficients in the gravity model. For example, the changing role of developing countries in
the world economy, changes in the relative price of commodities, and a change in policy
towards a more outward orientation could all alter the results The CPFE estimates presented in
the third column of Table 4 allows us to consider this possibility by presenting results that
allow for different effects of GDP and GDP per capita in the Bretton Woods era as compared to
the later period.37 The estimates presented in Column 3 suggest that there is, in fact, a
significantly smaller effect on bilateral trade of both of these variables in the earlier period as
compared to the later period. But most notably, for the question of interest for us, the inclusion
of these additional interactive regressors has a big effect on the estimated values of the
coefficients on both the direct peg and the indirect peg. The direct peg coefficient more than
doubles, from 0.161 to 0.370, and the estimated increase in bilateral trade due to the presence
of a fixed exchange rate is 45 percent. The indirect peg coefficient increases and the estimated
effect when the dyad represents two countries within an exchange rate system is 10.5 percent,
with the combined coefficient of 0.10 significantly different from zero at better than the 99
percent level of confidence. The CPFE estimates in Column 3 also indicate a positive,
insignificant unlinked peg effect when a dyad is not part of a broader exchange rate system and
8.3 percent when it is in a system (the combined effect is significantly different from zero at the
99% confidence level). While the instability of the coefficients across the estimates presented
in Columns 2 and 3 may make specific point estimates somewhat suspect, the broader result
that fixed exchange rate countries trade more, and indirect pegs matter more in systems than in
isolation, is preserved across specifications.
We have noted the prevalence of developing industrial observations in our sample. We
cannot consider the effects of a system of fixed exchange rates on industrial – developing trade
36

The estimates that include the Bretton Woods era data in Columns 2 and 3 include coefficients on the currency
union dummy variable that are much larger than the estimate presented in Column 1, and, therefore, are closer to
the value reported by Glick and Rose (2002). This difference implies that either the number of switches in the post
1972 sample is insufficient or the country pairs that show the largest change in trade had already dissolved by
1972 and thus do not show up as pairs that dissolve a currency union when the sample is limited.
37
Most of the other controls are time invariant and thus, we cannot observe their impact, or changes in it, with a
CPFE regression. Thus we do not try to estimate the changing role of distance over time.

16

using the post Bretton Woods sample, though, since there is no broad exchange rate system
during that time that includes both industrial and developing countries. Therefore, we present,
in columns 4-6, CPFE estimates that allow for possible system effects in industrial –
developing trade (as well as in industrial – industrial trade and developing – developing trade)
that use data spanning the Bretton Woods and later periods. These regressions are
disaggregated versions of the regression presented in Column 2 in Table 4.
The Bretton Woods sample includes many more direct peg switches among industrial –
industrial dyads than the post-Bretton Woods era. This may be one reason that the coefficient
on the direct peg variable is significant (and equal to 0.10) in Column 4 of Table 4, whereas it
was insignificant and equal to 0.036 in the comparable regression in Table 3 (Column 1). The
effect of an indirect peg is significant and indicates an increase in trade of 12.7 percent for
industrial – industrial dyads when both countries are part of a broader exchange rate system
(adding the system and non-system coefficients), but there is not a similar significant effect
outside of a system. There is evidence of significantly negative trade diversion in bilateral trade
among industrial countries in the longer sample period when the countries are not part of a
broader exchange rate system, but this estimate switches to a significant positive effect when
the countries are part of a system of fixed exchange rates.
While the longer sample period has a marked effect on the estimated effect of a direct
peg on bilateral trade between industrial countries, a comparison of the second column in Table
3 and the fifth column in Table 4 shows less of a distinction between the estimates on bilateral
trade between an industrial country and a developing country though the result is now
significant regardless of the type of clustering. The longer sample does show, however, a
significant effect of an indirect peg on trade for the industrial –developing dyads of 10.5
percent outside of a system and 18.4 percent within a system. In addition, the coefficients on
the unlinked peg dummy variables for this set of trading relationships is significant and equal to
0.115 outside of a system (indicating an increase in trade of 12.2 percent) and 0.201 within a
system (indicating an increase in trade of 22.3 percent).
The estimated effect of a direct peg on bilateral trade between two developing countries
does not change much with different sample periods, as can be seen by comparing the third
column in Tables 3 and sixth column in Table 4. As with the estimates from the post-1973
sample presented in Table 3, the estimates using the longer sample that are presented in Table 4

17

show no significant evidence that either a direct peg or an indirect peg affects bilateral trade
among developing countries, even though there are a great many indirect peg observations in
this sample period. There is some evidence, however, of trade diversion in the set of dyads
involving two developing countries. This negative result on the unlinked peg dummy is small
and insignificant outside of a system of fixed exchange rates, but, when one or both countries is
part of a system of fixed exchange rates, the effect of diversion is to reduce bilateral trade to
75.8 percent of what it would otherwise be. Since all the system observations come from the
Bretton Woods era, this negative diversion result suggests that bilateral trade among
developing countries that were not indirectly pegged to each other was quite low during that
time.
Overall, then, the results presented in Tables 2 through 4 suggest that direct pegs make
a statistically and economically significant impact on trade flows. Rather than divert trade,
they seem to create trade and even increase trade amongst other countries (the exception being
developing countries during Bretton Woods). In addition, when the fixed exchange rate comes
as part of a system, the indirect fixed exchange rates that result seem to increase trade as well.
In the post Bretton Woods era, the limited number of direct pegs seem to increase world trade
by 2-3% and the positive impact on unlinked peg pairs adds another 1-2%. In the longer
sample, the direct peg share of trade is higher (16%) and indirect and unlinked peg observations
are both more prevalent and have stronger positive impacts, implying an even bigger impact on
trade.
It is notable that these results differ so much from those presented in other research that
indirectly addresses the role of fixed exchange rates on trade by considering the estimated
effect of exchange rate volatility on trade. In fact, there is one way in which our results are
consistent with this literature since we, too, find a quantitatively small (albeit statistically
significant) effect of exchange rate volatility on trade. But our results also suggest that the
channel through which a fixed exchange rate relationship affects trade goes beyond the
diminution of exchange rate volatility, even when controlling for country-pair fixed effects that
may be correlated with both the level of trade and the choice of exchange rate regime. The
certainty of a fixed rate simply means more than reduced volatility.

18

IV. Robustness
This section presents results that address the robustness of the estimates presented
above. We begin with an investigation of the robustness of our results to the use of alternative
exchange rate classification schemes since the identification of a peg is at the center of our
empirical analysis. Section IV.2 presents instrumental variables estimates that consider the
endogeneity of the exchange rate regime. We then turn to an issue that is important for policy,
in Section IV.3, the effect on trade of a transition from a fixed exchange rate to a flexible
exchange rate, or from a flexible exchange rate to a fixed exchange rate. This is followed by a
consideration of the robustness of our estimates to the use of alternative econometric
methodologies in Section IV.4, and Section IV.5 concludes with estimates based on subsamples
of the data.
IV.1 Alternate classifications
We argue in section II.2 that using fixed exchange rate dummy variables based on the

de facto classification of Shambaugh (2004) is a more appropriate way to test the impact of
fixed exchange rates on trade than relying on exchange rate volatility measures. There are,
however, other available classification schemes, and in this section we consider results obtained
when using two of them; the de facto classification of Reinhart and Rogoff (2004), and a de

jure classification based on countries’ declared exchange rate status. The estimates obtained
from a de facto classification different from the one used in Section III enables us to test the
sensitivity of our results to the classification scheme. A comparison of results obtained with
the Shambaugh (2004) de facto classification to those obtained with a de jure classification
addresses the important question of whether the effects on trade of declaring a fixed exchange
rate differ from those of actually maintaining a fixed exchange rate.
The de facto classification scheme of Reinhart and Rogoff (2004) is based on the
probability that a market-determined exchange rate remains within a band over a five year
window.38 This classification scheme has five categories (fourteen in the detailed taxonomy)
which, for comparability to Shambaugh’s classification used in Section III, we collapse into
two, the pegged category, and a non-pegged category that ranges from crawling pegs to freely
38

A central part of the Reinhart and Rogoff (2004) system is their identification of the market-determined
exchange rate. They define the market-determined exchange rate as either the official exchange rate, in a unified
exchange rate system where no black market premium exists, the parallel rate (if it is determined in a market) in a
multiple exchange rate system, or the black-market exchange rate, when it exists. We are grateful to Carmen
Reinhart who makes the Reinhart Rogoff classification publicly available her website.

19

floating countries.39 The classification is available for 143 countries in our sample for a total of
3341 country / year observations, generating 123393 country pair year observations in our data
set in the post Bretton Woods era (158893 total observations in the full post 1959 sample).
The Reinhart-Rogoff classification, based on five year windows, exhibits more stability
than the Shambaugh (2004) classification. Combined with the smaller country coverage, in the
post-1972 data, this leads to only 76 country pairs coded as switches, while there are 118
switches under the Shambaugh classification.40 One might expect, therefore, a less significant
coefficient on the Reinhart-Rogoff direct peg dummy than on the Shambaugh direct peg
dummy since the latter captures the possible effect on trade of year-to-year instability while, in
the former, this instability may not alter the pegged status of a country. On the other hand, we
might expect a more significant coefficient on the direct peg dummy based on the Reinhart –
Rogoff classification if their market-based exchange rates better capture the relevant exchange
rate used in international transactions than the official rate used by Shambaugh. Thus, there is
not a strong a priori expectation on the relative size and significance of coefficients based on
these two de facto classification schemes.
In addition to these two de facto classification schemes, we also use a de jure
classification based on countries’ declared exchange rate status, as reported to the IMF and as
published, over time, in its Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange

Restrictions (AREAER). We classify an exchange rate arrangement as pegged if the AREAER
lists it as a single currency peg, as having limited flexibility to one currency, or if the country is
in a cooperative exchange rate arrangement (like the EMS). We classify all other AREAER
categories, including those ranging from basket pegs to freely floating, as non-pegged.41 We
might expect that coefficients on direct peg dummy variables based on these de jure codes to be
less significant than coefficients on direct peg dummy variables based on a de facto
classification since the de jure classification is misleading at times. For example, Brazil
declared a peg in the 1970’s but did not maintain it, and South Korea maintained a tight peg for
years in the 1980s and 1990s, but its government did not declare it as having a fixed exchange
rate at that time. In these cases, the divergence between declared exchange rate status and
39

Base countries are determined by declared status or by observing exchange rate behavior.
This disparity in the number of switchers suggests that we use some care when comparing results based on
regressions that employ country pair fixed effects.
41
Base countries are determined by country’s declarations, with the exception of the EMS for which we code
Germany as the base country.
40

20

actual exchange rate behavior may weaken the estimated link between identified de jure fixed
exchange rates and trade.42
Table 5 shows the results using alternative classifications. We report CFE estimates in
odd-numbered columns, and CPFE estimates in even-numbered columns (all estimates also
include year dummy variables). For comparison purposes, this table includes, in Columns 3
and 4, the results using the Shambaugh classification but with the smaller sample that is
available when using the Reinhart-Rogoff classification.
The estimates obtained with the Reinhart-Rogoff classification are presented in
Columns 1 and 2 of Table 5. A comparison of the results in Columns 1 and 3, and in Columns
2 and 4, shows that the coefficients on the direct peg dummy variables are very similar across
the two classification schemes. The smaller data set has led to a slightly increased standard
error for the Shambaugh codes, pushing it past standard confidence intervals. Again, we note
that this is one place where less conservative standard errors generate a statistically significant
result. There is a bit more of a difference in the value of the coefficient on the indirect pegs,
but in the case of CFE (Columns 1 and 3), neither coefficient is significant and in the case of
the CPFE (Columns 2 and 4), the confidence intervals overlap, even at relatively low levels of
significance. Thus, overall the results are robust to using either of these two de facto exchange
rate classification schemes.43 Both sets of results support the contention that fixed exchange
rates can increase trade, and the quantitative estimate of this effect is in the 15-20% range
(based on the CPFE results), or about 30% (using the CFE estimates).44 Both classification
schemes estimate a negative and significant effect on trade of indirect pegs when CPFE are
included, but this puzzling result seems to be a consequence of the smaller sample used to
generate the results in this table since, in Table 2, the comparable coefficient, while negative,
has a t-statistic of less than 1.

42

There are 112 switches in the post-1972 period for direct pegs based on this de jure classification, a number
comparable to that of the number of switches from the Shambaugh (2004) classification used in Section III.
43
A comparison of the results in Columns 3 and 4 to those in Columns 2 and 3 of Table 2 shows that restricting
the sample size, as is necessary when using the Reinhart – Rogoff classification, tends to make the results weaker.
44
The similarity in results is not simply a consequence of a similarity in the two de facto classifications. In fact,
the Reinhart-Rogoff and Shambaugh classification schemes have a substantial amount of disagreement. For
example, there is disagreement on the status of 19% of the country-year observations in the post-1972 sample. In
the subset of the country-pair observations where one or both countries are classified as having a direct peg by
either Shambaugh or by Reinhart and Rogoff, there is disagreement on 43% of the observations.

21

As predicted above, the results obtained using the de jure classification, presented in
Columns 5 and 6 of Table 5, are much weaker than those that use either of the two de facto
classifications.45 The estimated effects of a de jure direct peg are both smaller than the
respective results for either of the de facto pegs, and the coefficients on the de jure direct pegs
are not significant.46 This suggests that simply declaring an exchange rate peg will not generate
an increased trade flow, rather actually maintaining it is the important thing. 47
While the results in Table 5 show little difference between estimates based on the two

de facto classifications, especially as compared to the estimates obtained with the de jure
classification, there is more divergence between the Reinhart – Rogoff classification and
Shambaugh classification estimates when the sample is expanded to include observations from
the Bretton Woods era. The reason for this is that there is a greater divergence between these
two classification schemes in the Bretton Woods era than in the subsequent period. The
Reinhart-Rogoff classification codes fewer fixed exchange rates than Shambaugh in the Bretton
Woods era since extensive capital controls at that time caused more instances of a divergence
between official rates (used by Shambaugh) and market rates (used by Reinhart and Rogoff)
than in the post-1972 period. The two classification schemes also differ more often in the
Bretton Woods era because of disagreements on the base country, with Reinhart-Rogoff using
the UK as a base for a number of former British colonies that Shambaugh coded as having the
US as a base.48
Table 6 presents estimates for each of the two de facto classification schemes using a
sample that includes the Bretton Woods period. As with the estimates presented in Table 4, the
specification used in this table allows for system effects on indirect pegs and unlinked pegs.
Estimates using the Reinhart-Rogoff classification and including country pair fixed effects are
45

For comparison purposes, we limit the de jure sample to the same used in columns 1-4. In fact, de jure codes
are available for most observations used in the full post 1972 sample. There is very little difference between the
results shown here and the larger sample results.
46
It is worth noting that these results are indistinguishable from zero when one does not cluster at all and
significant at 10% when big country clusters are used.
47
These results might be viewed as somewhat surprising given that the Shambaugh de facto codes agree with the
de jure codes 87% of the time, when simply examining the annual series, but this statistic masks the fact that most
of the agreements are on nonpegs. There are disagreements on 28% of the observations where either the
Shambaugh de facto classification or the de jure classification reported to the IMF reports a peg.
48
Shambaugh used information on the behavior of countries in the wake of the 1967 British devaluation to
determine whether they were pegged to the US or to the UK. Countries that did not change their dollar exchange
rate when the pound devalued were judged to be pegged to the US. It is this set of observations that appears to
drive the difference in results between the Shambaugh and Reinhart-Rogoff classifications in the full sample.

22

presented in Column 1, and those including country fixed effects are presented in Column 2.
Comparable estimates based on the Shambaugh classification, and using the same set of
country pairs, are presented in Columns 3 and 4.49 A comparison of the estimates in Columns 1
and 3 shows that the Reinhart – Rogoff classification yields a larger coefficient on the direct
peg dummy variable than the one obtained with the Shambaugh classification.50 This is also
true of the estimates that use the country fixed effects, though in this case the difference
between the two estimates is smaller. Thus, estimates based on the Reinhart – Rogoff
classification support the conclusion that the direct effect of a pegged exchange rate is to
increase trade. Likewise, both classification systems lead one to the conclusion that an indirect
peg, when it is part of a broader exchange rate system, significantly promotes trade.
IV.2 Instrumental Variables Estimation
The next concern that we address is the possible endogeneity of exchange rate regimes
to trade. Of course, the use of country pair fixed effects already controls for the possibility that
there are omitted variables that affect both the level of trade between two countries and their
choice of their exchange rate regime. But one might argue that there are time-varying effects
and, rather than bilateral trade responding to a change in the exchange rate regime, the
exchange rate regime responds to an anticipated change in bilateral trade. We address these
concerns by undertaking estimation using instrumental variables to explore the extent that these
issues may be affecting our results.51
Previous research on the effects of currency unions on trade reports results obtained
with instrumental variables estimates that are consistent with those obtained using OLS,
namely that currency unions increase trade and there is only a weak effect of exchange rate
volatility on trade. Rose (2000) uses inflation and monetary quantity variables as instruments
and obtains results consistent with those from OLS. Alesina, Barro, and Tenreryo (2002) use,
as an instrument, a dummy that indicates whether two countries share a common base country
or the probability of that two countries share a common base, and find a strong effect of
currency unions on trade. Tenreyro (2003) uses the same triangular approach to generating
49

We do not include results using the de jure classification since it is not available before 1973 in a consistent
fashion.
50
Even without controlling for system effects, the direct peg is large and significant in the sample that includes
Bretton Woods era observations when using the Reinhart-Rogoff codes. Again, the coefficient on direct peg in
column 3 is significant at 99% with big country clusters and 95% with no clustering.
51
Rose (2000) argues that “trade considerations seem irrelevant when a country decides whether to join or leave a
common currency area,” and as such, IV should not be necessary.

23

instruments in her work on exchange rate volatility and finds negligent impacts of volatility.52
Frankel and Wei (1993) and find a negative and significant effect of exchange rate volatility on
trade when they instrument for this regressor using the standard deviation of relative money
supplies, but the size of this effect is smaller when using IV than when using OLS.53
Estevadeordal et al. (2003) raise the possibility that membership in the gold standard is more
likely to be endogenous than the choice of the exchange rate regime in the modern era. They
find, however, that the bilateral trade estimates obtained with OLS are robust to estimation in
which membership in the gold standard is instrumented by a function that includes both
countries’ average distance from all the countries on the gold standard at the time.54
An appropriate instrument for our study will predict whether a country pegs its
currency, but this variable itself will have no direct impact on trade, outside of its indirect effect
through the channel of exchange rate regime choice. Our construction of an instrument draws
on the insights of Estevadeordal et al. (2003) and Tenreyro (2003), and uses information about
whether neighboring countries peg and, if so, to whom. We calculate, for a given pair of
countries, country i and country j, the percentage of countries in country j’s region that are
directly pegged with country i. This percentage serves as our instrument.55 Thus, we assume
that sometimes a country will choose to peg to a base to help stabilize its exchange rate with its
neighbors who may also have a peg. Such a decision is not related to trade with the base, but
through the peg, may affect trade with the base. To employ this strategy, we calculate the
percentage of each region pegged to each potential base. Then, for any pair where a potential
base is a member, the percentage of the other country’s region (excluding it) which is pegged to
52

Such triangular approaches require eliminating observations with the base country. This would make examining
direct pegs impossible. That is not a problem with currency unions because so many currency union observations
are the interlocking relationships of countries sharing a currency union with one base (e.g. the bilateral
relationships among CFA countries).
53
Tenreyro (2003) raises the possibility that the relative money supplies will be moved by factors that also affect
trade flows.
54
One could try to look to the determinants of exchange rate regimes literature, but unfortunately, a large number
of the variables considered in that literature are already being used as regressors in the gravity model (GDP, per
capita GDP), or are trade related (terms of trade, openness), or could be related to trade (capital mobility, political
stability), or finally, are more likely outputs of exchange rate regimes rather than exogenous predictors (reserves
level, inflation). See Juhn and Mauro (2002) for a recent example in this literature. In addition, Rogoff et al
(2003) note that “it is difficult to find empirical regularities between a large set of potential determinants of regime
choice – including standard measures of the broader policy context – and countries actual regime choices.” (p. 25)
This makes it even more difficult to find proper instruments, but also makes one somewhat less worried about
reverse causation.
55
If country j is in fact a potential base and country i is not, then the percentage of country i's region that is pegged
to country j is used.

24

the base is used as the instrument for whether there is a direct peg.56 A simple regression of
direct peg on the instrument yields a positive coefficient and an R2 of .36. Adding in all the
other exogenous regressors increases the R2 to .38.
The instrumental variable results presented in the three columns of Table 7 should be
compared to the respective columns in Table 2. In both tables, the estimates in the first column
include time dummy variables, those in the second column include time dummy variables and
country fixed effects, and those in the third column include time dummy variables and countrypair fixed effects. A comparison of the results in Tables 2 and 7 shows that the coefficient on
direct peg goes up when the IV regression is used.57 In the third column, when pair fixed
effects are used, the standard error rises enough such that the coefficient is no longer
statistically different from zero at 95%, but it is significant at 90%. Thus, to the extent that one
accepts the exogeneity of the instrument, these IV regressions appear to support the core
specifications by showing that eliminating endogeneity does not weaken our results.
IV.3 Entry and exit of pegs
Estimates based on coding a country as a having either a pegged exchange rate or a
flexible exchange rate may raise concerns that some important links between the exchange rate
regime and trade are not captured. In particular, one concern is that an increased level of
bilateral trade may prompt a country to institute a fixed exchange rate with its trading partner.
In this case, the estimated link between a fixed exchange rate and bilateral trade reflects the
influence of the latter on the former. While we have tried to address these issues with IV
estimation, we can also look at the dynamic patterns. Beyond this possibility, we are also
interested in knowing whether the effects of a change in exchange rate status on trade are
manifest immediately, or only with time.
We explore these issues by including four new dummy variables in the specification,
representing the first year of a peg, the last year of a peg, the first year after abandoning a peg,
56

If the other countries are pegging and this choice is correlated with other measures designed to increase trade,
and these measures are correlated with unobserved measures in the local country, then this percentage is not a
good instrument. We do, though, see many instances where a country has switched bases to be more like the other
countries in the region (Ireland switching to a German base within the EMS, former British colonies in the
Western Hemisphere switching to the US, and former Portuguese colonies switching to a French base to be more
like their neighbors.). In addition, a regression that includes the instrument directly in the regression with all the
other variables and country pair and year fixed effects, the coefficient on the instrument is not statistically different
from zero, see table 7, column 4)
57
If one instead instruments for currency unions, the coefficient on currency unions go up as well, but the standard
error rises to the point that the result is not statistically significant when CPFE are included.

25

and the last year before adopting a peg. Results are reported in table 8. The hypothesis that a
peg is used to lock in a higher level of trade would be consistent with a finding of a positive
coefficient on the dummy variable representing the last year before adopting a peg. The
hypothesis that trade is significantly different in the immediate wake of adopting or abandoning
a peg can be tested by considering the sign and significance of the coefficients on the dummy
variables representing the first year of a peg and the first year after a peg is abandoned,
respectively. In fact, however, we find that only the dummy for a last year of a peg is
statistically significantly different from zero indicating perhaps the impending end of the peg is
forseeable. The fact that the other coefficients on these dummy variables are not significant
suggests odd dynamics are not generating the results presented above. In particular, trade is not
higher right before a peg begins, suggesting the concerns above do not show up in the data.58
Also, trade in the year immediately after a peg ends is not different from any other year of
where there is no peg, suggesting crises or messy exits do not drive our results.59
IV.4 Alternate Econometric Techniques
Our central results are robust to varying the econometric methods used to obtain
estimated effects of fixed exchange rates on trade. These results are not presented in a table, in
order to save space, but can be summarized as follows. First we consider using random effects
at the country pair level instead of fixed effects. Including random effects strengthens the
direct peg and moves the indirect peg to a negative significant coefficient. However, the
Hausman specification test rejects the hypothesis that there is no systematic difference between
the random and fixed effects coefficients suggesting that fixed effects are appropriate. Second,
results are largely unchanged when using data from every fifth year rather than annual data, an
exercise undertaken in an effort to remove some of the serial correlation Third, employing an
AR(1) correction still results in large and significant effects of fixed exchange rates on trade,
albeit smaller than the simple OLS results reported above.60 Finally, we include a lagged

58

Because the classification only codes full year pegs as a peg, most years coded as the last year before a peg will
also incorporate a number of months of the beginning of the peg (assuming not all pegs begin on January 1).
Thus, we would expect the coefficient on the last year before a peg to be marginally positive, and despite that, it is
still statistically insignificant.
59
None of the insignificant coefficients become significant under big country clusters or even no clustering.
60
As noted above, alternate means of handling autocorrelated errors, such as Newey-West standard errors only
strengthen the results from those reported. The standard errors when just one lag is included are almost identical
to heteroskedasticity robust standard errors and as lags included approach the maximum lags of the sample, the
errors approach the reported results using country pair clusters.

26

dependent variable to control for possible unobservable omitted variables, a strategy that seems
to us to be less promising than the use of country pair fixed effects. But, as it turns out, there is
a close correspondence to the OLS results presented in Section III and those obtained with a
lagged dependent variable. The coefficient on direct peg is .10 and significant at 99% when a
lagged dependent variable is included, and the coefficient on the lag is .8. This suggests a long
run impact of roughly .5, not far from our original OLS estimates with time controls.
These results suggest that the estimates presented in Section III are not merely a
reflection of spurious correlations.
IV.5 Alternate sub-samples
Finally, we look at two other subsets of the data, trade with base countries and non-oil
trade. For the former, we may worry that non-pegged trade between, say, Ivory Coast and
Thailand is simply not a relevant comparison to the pegged observations because most of our
pegs are to large countries. We thus restrict our sample to trade with a country that is a base
country (i.e. someone else pegs to this country) somewhere in the sample. This has little effect
on the results; the coefficient on direct peg actually goes up slightly. We consider non-oil
based trade because oil based trade may be atypical of other trade flows and because many oil
exporters are pegged to the dollar and the price of oil is denominated in dollars.61 Again, we
find that eliminating oil exporters does not dramatically change the results. These more limited
samples also do not have an impact on the results when we include unlinked pegs or allow
indirect pegs that are part of systems to have different effects.
V Conclusion:
Countries peg for many reasons. Often the concern is macroeconomic stability and the
provision of a nominal anchor. Still, one of the presumed benefits of a fixed exchange rate is
that it should expand trade, at least with the base country. Empirical backing for this
presumption, though, has proved elusive. This paper shows that when one focuses on bilateral
exchange rate regimes as coded from de facto performance, rather than proxying for regimes by
using bilateral exchange rate volatility, there are statistically and economically significant
impacts on trade from a fixed exchange rate.
We find that with few controls pegging appears to increase trade by as much as 80%.
These are clearly over-estimates and when more appropriate controls are included, the results
61

Oil exporters are defined by the World Bank as countries with more than 50% of their exports in the form of oil.

27

are 40% with country effects or 20% with country pair fixed effects. These results seem robust
to a variety of econometric checks, considerations of start and stop years, and alternate de facto
classifications. We find that indirect pegs do not appear to have strong impacts on trade unless
they come as part of an exchange rate system, in which case they seem to have a positive
impact on trade. Finally, we do not see evidence of trade diversion. Instead, pegged countries
seem to trade more with all other countries (though the increase is smaller than with the base).
The magnitudes, on the order of 20%, may or may not be sufficient to offset some of
the costs of fixing the exchange rate, but they are both statistically and economically relevant.
Countries hoping to expand trade may choose the less restrictive and permanent fixed rate as
opposed to a currency union. In addition, countries already pegged may have already captured
some of the gains of increased trade that appear available from creating a currency union. On
the other hand, the difficulty of maintaining a peg in the face of market pressure may lead
countries to prefer the permanent link that a currency union can provide. Finally, we note that
the rapid expansion of trade in the post-Bretton Woods era is even more surprising than we
may have already thought. Not only has trade expanded rapidly, it has done so despite the
collapse of an exchange rate system that was fostering it.

28

References
Alesina, Alberto, Robert J Barro, and Silvana Tenreyro, “Optimal Currency Areas,” NBER
Working Papers: 9072, 2002
Anderson, James E., “A Theoretical Foundation for the Gravity Equation,” American Economic
Review, vol. 69, no. 1, March 1979, pp. 106-16.
Anderson, James E. and Eric van Wincoop, “Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to the Border
Puzzle,” American Economic Review, vol. 93, no. 1, March 2003, pp. 170-92.
Bergstrand, Jeffrey H., “The Gravity Equation in International Trade: Some Microeconomic
Foundations and Empirical Evidence,” Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 67, no. 3,
August 1985, pp. 474-81.
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan, “How Much Should We Trust
Differences-in-Differences Estimates?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 119, no. 1,
February 2004, pp. 249-75.
Cushman, David O., “The Effects of Real Exchange Rate Risk on International Trade,” Journal
of International Economics, August 1983, vol. 15, pp. 45 – 63.
________________, “Has Exchange Rate Risk Depressed International Trade? The Impact of
Third-Country Exchange Risk,” Journal of International Money and Finance, September 1986,
vol. 5, pp. 361 – 379.
________________, “U.S. Bilateral Trade Flows and Exchange Rate Risk During the Floating
Period,” Journal of International Economics, May 1988, vol. 24, pp. 317 – 330.
Eichengreen, Barry and Douglas A Irwin, “Trade Blocs, Currency Blocs and the Reorientation
of World Trade in the 1930s,” Journal of International Economics, vol. 38, no. 1-2, February
1995, pp. 1-24
Estevadeordal, Antoni, Brian Frantz, and Alan M Taylor, “The Rise and Fall of World Trade,
1870-1939,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 118, no. 2, May 2003, pp. 359-407
Frankel, Jeffrey and Andrew K. Rose, “An Estimate of the Effect of Common Currencies on
Trade and Income,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2002, vol. 117, issue 2, pp. 437 –
466.
Frankel and Wei Trade and Currency Blocs, National Bureau of Economics Working Paper no.
4335. April 1993.
Glick, Reuven, and Andrew K. Rose, “Does a Currency Union Affect Trade? The Time Series
Evidence,” European Economic Review, June 2002, vol. 46, issue 6, pp. 1125 – 1151.

29

Gotur, Padma, “Effects of Exchange Rate Volatility on Trade: Some Further Evidence,” IMF
Staff Papers, September 1985, vol. 32, pp. 475 – 512.
Hooper, Peter, and Steven Kohlhagen, “The Effect of Exchange Rate Uncertainty on the Prices
and Volumes of International Trade,” Journal of International Economics, November 1978,
vol. 8, pp. 483 – 511.
International Monetary Fund. Various dates. Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and
Exchange Restrictions.
International Monetary Fund, “Exchange Rate Variability and World Trade,” Occasional Paper
28, 1984.
Juhn, Grace, and Paolo Mauro, “Long-Run Determinants of Exchange Rate Regimes: a Simple
Sensitivity Analysis,” IMF Working Paper, WP/02/104, June 2002.
Kenen, Peter and Dani Rodrik, “Measuring and Analyzing the Effects of Short-term Volatility
in Real Exchange Rates,” Review of Economics and Statistics, May 1986, vol. 68, pp. 311 –
315.
Kezdi, Gabor, “Robust Standard Error Estimation in Fixed-Effects Panel Models,” Working
Paper, University of Michigan, 2002.
Klein, Michael W., “Sectoral Effects of Exchange Rate Volatility on United States Exports,”
Journal of International Money and Finance, September 1990, vol. 9, pp. 299 – 308.
________________, “Dollarization and Trade” Journal of International Money and Finance forthcoming
Levy Yeyati, Eduardo, “On the Impact of a Common Currency on Bilateral Trade,” Economics
Letters, vol. 79, no. 1, April 2003, pp. 125-29
Lopez-Cordova, J Ernesto and Christopher M Meissner, Exchange-Rate Regimes and
International Trade: Evidence from the Classical Gold Standard Era,” American Economic
Review, vol. 93, no. 1, March 2003, pp. 344-53
Micco, Alejandro, Ernesto Stein, and Guillermo Ordonez, “The Currency Union Effect on
Trade: early evidence from EMU,” Economic Policy, October 2003
Quah, Danny, “One Money, One Market: The Effect of Common Currencies on Trade:
Discussion,” Economic Policy: A European Forum, vol. 0, no. 30, April 2000, pp. 35-38
Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2004. The Modern History of Exchange Rate
Arrangements: A Reinterpretation. Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (February): 1-48.

30

Rose, Andrew, “One Money, One Market: The Effect of Common Currencies on Trade,”
Economic Policy: A European Forum, April 2000, vol. 30, pp. 7-33.
________________, “Do We Really Know That the WTO Increases Trade?” American
Economic Review, vol. 94, no. 1, March 2004, pp. 98-114
____________ and Eric van Wincoop “National Money as a Barrier to International Trade: The
Real Case for Currency Union,” American Economic Review, May 2001, vol. 91, no. 2, pp. 386
– 390.
Shambaugh, Jay C. 2004. The Effects of Fixed Exchange Rates on Monetary Policy. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 119 (February): 301-52.
Tenreyro, Silvana, “On the trade impact of nominal exchange rate volatility,” Federal Reserve
Bank of Boston, Working Papers: 03-2, 2003
Thursby, Marie C. and Jerry G. Thursby, “Bilateral Trade Flows, the Linder Hypothesis, and
Exchange Risk,” Review of Economics and Statistics, August 1987, vol. 69, pp. 488 – 495.

31

Figure 1.
A Family Tree: Example

US

Guatamala

India

Bhutan

South Africa

Lesotho

Botswana

Guatamala, India, South Africa are “direct pegs” to the US
Bhutan is a “direct peg” to India, Lesotho and Botswana to South Africa
Guatamala, India, South Africa are “siblings” amongst themselves
Lesotho and Botswana are “siblings”
Bhutan, Lesotho, and Botswana are “grandchildren” of the US

all
considered
indirect pegs

Bhutan is “cousin” with Lesotho and Botswana
Bhutan to Guatamala and South Africa is an “aunt/uncle” relationship

32

Table 1. Sample Descriptions
Total
sample

Post 1972

Industrial /
Industrial
pairs post
1972

Industrial /
Developing
pairs post
1972

Developing /
Developing
pairs post
1972

Observations

213391

168868

6349

68108

94411

# of country pairs

11857

11805

276

3569

7960

% world trade

100%

100%

52%

38%

9%

Observations

2753

1562

130

1407

25

% of world trade

16%

11%

7%

5%

0%

# switchers

162

118

14

102

2

Average trade / average for
all dyads

1151%

1253%

715%

573%

6136%

Indirect peg # of obs.

45591

13679

332

1730

11617

Indirect peg # of switches

5896

2357

59

315

1983

System indirect # obs.

29669

329

329

0

0

System indirect # switchers

4953

59

59

0

0

Unlinked peg # of obs.

103845

94614

2075

39819

52720

Unlinked peg # of switches

10183

6164

191

2113

3860

3055

2055

6

193

1806

% of world trade

2%

<0.5%

<0.5%

<0.5%

<0.5%

# switchers

129

62

1

9

52

Average trade / average for
all dyads

71%

35%

252%

231%

23%

Total

Direct Pegs

Currency Unions

Observations

Note: % of trade results are the average of annual results for the relevant time sample

33

Table 2. Core Results

direct peg
indirect peg
currency union
exch rt volatility
(exch rt volatility)2
ldist
lrgdp
lrgdppc
comlang
border
regional
landl
island
lareap
comcol
curcol
comctry
colony
Constant

1
OLS, time
0.586
0.124**
-0.351
0.050**
1.341
0.158**
-0.262
0.046**
0.007
0.001**
-1.212
0.025**
0.968
0.010**
0.392
0.015**
0.342
0.046**
0.582
0.126**
1.050
0.139**
-0.25
0.035**
0.007
0.040
-0.106
0.009**
0.337
0.073**
0.741
0.383+
-0.511
0.877
1.403
0.120**
-29.862
0.390**
168868
0.64

2
CFE, time
0.324
0.145*
-0.031
0.04
1.231
0.155**
-0.271
0.039**
0.007
0.001**
-1.431
0.026**
0.059
0.066
0.322
0.063**
0.302
0.050**
0.360
0.123**
0.529
0.163**
-0.155
0.322
2.168
0.228**
0.628
0.045**
0.547
0.070**
0.104
0.480
0.472
0.558
1.398
0.120**
-6.797
1.344**
168868
0.71

3
CPFE, time
0.194
0.089*
-0.015
0.028
0.323
0.132*
-0.205
0.032**
0.006
0.001**

Observations
R2
Number of country pairs FE
Impact of reducing volatility
-1.3%
-1.3%
from mean to zero
+ significant at 10% * significant at 5%; ** at 1%
standard errors clustered at country pair level

0.445
0.061**
0.007
0.058

0.265
0.072**

-0.032
0.452

-11.603
2.007**
168868
0.87
11805
-1.0%

34

Table 3 Different country types
direct peg
indirect peg
currency union
exch rt volatility
(exch rt vol)2
ldist
lrgdp
lrgdppc
comlang
border
regional
landl
island
lareap

1
indind
0.036
0.055
0.109
0.037**
-0.039
0.043
-3.998
1.518**
39.065
22.218+
-0.401
0.236+
0.907
0.248**
0.280
0.053**

2
inddev
0.137
0.100
-0.034
0.036
0.209
0.223
-2.184
0.263**
3.446
0.783**
0.007
0.092
0.617
0.090**
0.225
0.19
-0.006
0.459

3
devdev
-0.260
0.140+
0.008
0.033
0.302
0.160+
-0.158
0.032**
0.004
0.001**
0.519
0.095**
0.050
0.092
-0.019
0.137

4
indind
-0.211
0.132
-0.054
0.063
-0.359
0.221
-8.821
2.908**
96.004
37.873*
-1.108
0.068**
-0.516
0.251*
0.977
0.260**
0.237
0.107*
-0.107
0.137
0.102
0.075
4.036
0.700**
6.956
1.073**
1.287
0.214**

comcol
curcol
comctry
colony
Constant

0.804
0.216**
-8.273
2.540**
0.95
6349

5
inddev
0.403
0.085**
0.177
0.058**
0.590
0.359
-2.598
0.302**
4.652
0.906**
-1.412
0.053**
-0.017
0.090
0.601
0.088**
0.431
0.060**
-0.078
0.341
2.63
0.227**
-5.011
0.384**
-3.821
0.319**
0.272
0.044**
0.065
0.214
0.225
0.483
0.133
1.006
1.155
0.104**
12.157
2.512**
0.83
68108

6
devdev
0.240
0.909
0.081
0.046+
0.967
0.177**
-0.192
0.037**
0.005
0.001**
-1.621
0.034**
0.170
0.103+
0.369
0.098**
0.166
0.068*
0.514
0.128**
1.628
0.189**
-2.489
0.366**
-2.153
0.919*
0.473
0.056**
0.704
0.082**

0.091
0.161
-1.584
2.426
0.57
94411

18.147
0.167
-16.48
8.089*
3.021
3.084**
R2
0.98
0.91
0.80
Observations
6349
68108
94411
Number of CPFE
276
3569
7960
+ significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** at 1% standard errors clustered at country pair level
Note: indind is industrial only pairs. inddev is industrial / developing pairs. devdev is developing only pairs.
Time fixed effects in all regressions. Country pair fixed effects in 1-3. Country effects in 4-6.

35

Table 4. System Effects
1
post 72
0.205
0.089*
0.029
0.033
0.361
0.134**
-0.200
0.032**
0.005
0.001**
0.449
0.061**
-0.001
0.059
0.258
0.073**
-0.023
0.452
0.054
0.017**
0.040
0.064
0.017
0.020

2
3
4
5
6
full sample full sample ind ind
ind dev
dev dev
direct peg
0.161
0.370
0.100
0.183
-0.295
0.064*
0.065**
0.050*
0.079*
0.314
indirect peg
-0.041
0.044
-0.14
0.100
-0.013
0.029
0.029
0.125
0.040*
0.039
currency union
0.758
0.599
0.877
0.681
0.458
0.121**
0.116**
0.297**
0.138**
0.164**
exch rt volatility
-0.244
-0.234
-1.918
-2.161
-0.179
0.033**
0.033**
0.768*
0.252**
0.033**
(exch rt volatility)2
0.007
0.006
6.920
3.232
0.005
0.001**
0.001**
2.743*
0.827**
0.001**
lrgdp
0.448
0.632
-0.112
0.645
0.698
0.049**
0.048**
0.227
0.075**
0.081**
lrgdppc
0.184
0.006
0.873
0.154
0.027
0.048**
0.047
0.213**
0.076*
0.079
regional
0.459
0.438
0.395
0.462
0.280
0.068**
0.067**
0.059**
0.224*
0.126*
curcol
0.208
0.085
0.251
0.231
0.207
0.202
0.236
0.219
unlinked peg
0.009
0.056
-0.145
0.115
-0.040
0.017
0.017**
0.039**
0.021**
0.027
system indirect
0.293
0.056
0.256
0.069
0.005
0.041**
0.042
0.135+
0.05
0.133
system unlinked
0.083
0.024
0.275
0.086
-0.525
0.023**
0.023
0.047**
0.025**
0.139**
BW*lrgdp
-0.138
0.008**
BW*lrgdppc
-0.095
0.015**
Constant
-11.683
-14.217
-20.291
3.406
-23.423
-23.907
2.008**
1.694**
1.664**
8.4
2.566**
2.725**
Indirect + system indirect
.070
.251
.100
.116
.169
-.077
.056
.035**
.035**
.046*
.039**
.133
unlinked + system unlinked
.071
.092
.080
.129
.201
-.564
.019
.022**
.022**
.032**
.024**
.140**
Observations
168868
213391
213391
9318
90011
114062
R2
0.87
0.86
0.86
0.98
0.9
0.78
Number of CPFE
11805
11857
11857
276
3569
8012
Country pair and time fixed effects included in all regressions, therefore cannot include ldist, comlang,
border, landl, island, lareap, comcol, comctry or colony as regressors.
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
standard errors clustered at the country pair level

36

Table 5. Results across different classifications
code
direct peg
indirect peg
currency union
exch rt volatility
(exch rt vol)2
ldist
lrgdp
lrgdppc
comlang
border
regional
landl
island
lareap
comcol
curcol
colony
Constant
Observations
R2
Number of CPFE

1
RR
CFE, time
0.284
0.157+
0.048
0.058
1.371
0.176**
-0.224
0.040**
0.006
0.001**
-1.292
0.028**
0.022
0.081
0.355
0.076**
0.352
0.057**
0.555
0.135**
0.137
0.179
-3.45
0.357**
-1.380
0.262**
0.624
0.054**
0.605
0.084**
0.093
0.524
1.258
0.125**
0.220
1.724
123393
0.73

2
RR
CPFE, time
0.155
0.078*
-0.121
0.046**
0.174
0.171
-0.188
0.034**
0.005
0.001**

0.346
0.078**
0.103
0.074

0.344
0.068**

0.391
0.125**

3
Shambaugh
CFE, time
0.262
0.161
-0.047
0.046
1.354
0.176**
-0.228
0.040**
0.006
0.001**
-1.294
0.028**
0.008
0.081
0.371
0.076**
0.355
0.056**
0.551
0.135**
0.144
0.179
-3.484
0.357**
-1.419
0.263**
0.631
0.054**
0.605
0.084**
0.113
0.538
1.258
0.125**
0.494
1.727
123393
0.73

4
Shambaugh
CPFE, time
0.174
0.109
-0.068
0.032*
0.195
0.167
-0.191
0.035**
0.005
0.001**

0.347
0.077**
0.102
0.074

0.333
0.067**

0.411
0.132**

5
De Jure
CFE, time
0.106
0.170
-0.080
0.047+
1.335
0.176**
-0.228
0.040**
0.006
0.001**
-1.297
0.029**
-0.001
0.081
0.380
0.076**
0.357
0.056**
0.549
0.135**
0.153
0.179
0.411
0.393
1.892
0.251**
0.637
0.054**
0.604
0.084**
0.100
0.539
1.282
0.127**
-5.947
1.614**
123276
0.73

-8.261
-8.299
2.574**
2.568**
123393
123393
0.88
0.88
8163
8163
+ significant at 10% * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
standard errors clustered at country pair level

6
De Jure
CPFE, time
0.069
0.120
-0.148
0.035**
0.156
0.169
-0.191
0.034**
0.005
0.001**

0.329
0.078**
0.121
0.074

0.350
0.068**

0.417
0.132**

-7.700
2.583**
123276
0.88
8163

37

Table 6. System effects across classifications (full time sample)
1
rr
CPFE, time

direct peg

2
rr
CFE, time
0.425
0.121**
0.111
0.048*
1.345
0.145**
-0.263
0.041**
0.007
0.001**
-0.047
0.027+
0.142
0.061*
0.106
0.038**
-8.679
1.279**
.253
.046**
.059
.032+
158893
0.73

3
js
CPFE, time

4
js
CFE, time
0.364
0.110**
-0.069
0.042+
1.321
0.147**
-0.269
0.042**
0.007
0.001**
-0.052
0.025*
0.203
0.059**
0.137
0.036**
-9.036
1.277**
.134
.046**
.085
.031**
158893
0.73

0.305
0.114
0.068**
0.072
indirect peg
0.020
-0.031
0.038
0.033
currency union
0.740
0.749
0.155**
0.155**
exch rt volatility
-0.218
-0.217
0.035**
0.036**
(exch rt volatility)2
0.006
0.006
0.001**
0.001**
unlinked peg
0.040
0.034
0.021+
0.020+
system indirect
0.218
0.220
0.049**
0.045**
system unlinked
0.017
0
0.031
0.026
Constant
-11.31
-11.591
1.951**
1.953**
Indirect + system indirect
.238
.189
.040**
.037**
unlinked + system unlinked
.058
.034
.027*
.024
Observations
158893
158893
R2
0.86
0.86
Number of CPFE
8194
8194
+ significant at 10% * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
standard errors clustered at country pair level
Standard gravity controls are included as in all other tables. The coefficients are omitted here to save space.

38

Table 7. IV regressions (instrument is percentage of region pegged to base)
1
IV with time
direct peg
indirect peg
currency union
exch rt volatility
(exch rt volatility)2
ldist
lrgdp
lrgdppc
comlang
border
regional
landl
island
lareap
comcol
curcol
comctry
colony

1.436
0.216**
-0.343
0.050**
1.352
0.157**
-0.253
0.046**
0.007
0.001**
-1.211
0.025**
0.966
0.011**
0.389
0.015**
0.328
0.046**
0.577
0.128**
1.031
0.141**
-0.251
0.035**
0.006
0.040
-0.108
0.009**
0.340
0.073**
0.733
0.368*
-0.446
0.822
1.297
0.122**

2
IV with CFE,
time
0.656
0.284*
-0.027
0.040
1.249
0.155**
-0.268
0.039**
0.007
0.001**
-1.43
0.026**
0.058
0.066
0.322
0.063**
0.299
0.050**
0.358
0.124**
0.523
0.164**
-2.785
0.375**
-1.216
0.226**
0.630
0.045**
0.548
0.070**
0.093
0.465
0.505
0.542
1.349
0.129**

3
IV with
CPFE, time
0.495
0.288+
-0.015
0.017
0.334
0.096**
-0.204
0.021**
0.006
0.001**

4
CPFE, time

0.444
0.029**
0.008
0.027

0.444
0.061**
0.008
0.058

0.265
0.055**

0.265
0.071**

-0.078
0.197

-0.037
0.452

% region pegged to base
Constant

-29.73
0.393**
168868
0.64

-0.011
1.433
168868
0.71

-11.538
0.989**
Observations
168868
R2
.50
Number of CPFE
11805
+ significant at 10% * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
R2 in column 3 is the “overall” R2

0.179
0.087*
-0.015
0.028
0.32
0.132*
-0.205
0.032**
0.006
0.001**

0.156
0.147
-11.567
2.008**
168868
0.87
11805

39

Table 8: Controls for Dynamics
direct peg
indirect peg
currency union
exch rt volatility
(exch rt volatility)2
lrgdp
lrgdppc
regional
curcol
Last year before a peg
First year pegging
Last year pegging

1
0.198
0.094*
-0.015
0.028
0.323
0.132*
-0.205
0.032**
0.006
0.001**
0.445
0.061**
0.007
0.058
0.265
0.072**
-0.032
0.452
0.036
0.069

2
0.211
0.096*
-0.015
0.028
0.322
0.132*
-0.205
0.032**
0.006
0.001**
0.445
0.061**
0.007
0.058
0.265
0.072**
-0.032
0.452

3
0.203
0.093*
-0.015
0.028
0.324
0.132*
-0.205
0.032**
0.006
0.001**
0.445
0.061**
0.007
0.058
0.265
0.072**
-0.033
0.452

4
0.222
0.097*
-0.015
0.028
0.323
0.132*
-0.205
0.032**
0.006
0.001**
0.445
0.061**
0.007
0.058
0.264
0.072**
-0.035
0.452

-0.111
0.073
-0.138
0.070*

First year after a peg

0.07
0.053
Constant
-11.603
-11.599
-11.6
-11.599
2.007**
2.007**
2.007**
2.007**
Observations
168868
168868
168868
168868
R2
0.87
0.87
0.87
0.87
Country pair and time fixed effects included in all regressions, therefore cannot include ldist, comlang,
border, landl, island, lareap, comcol, comctry or colony as regressors.
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
standard errors clustered at the country pair level

40

