                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         RETIREMENT FLOWS




                         Alan L. Gustman
                       Thomas L. Steinmeier




                      Working Paper No. 1069




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138


                           January 1983




The authors are Research Associate and Research Economist respec-
tively at the National Bureau of Economic Research. This material
results in part from tax—supported research (U.S. Department of
Labor Contract No. J—9—P--l—OOTT). It nay be freely reprinted with
the customary crediting of the source. We would like to thank
Barbara Angus for her able research assistance. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Labor
Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                           NBER Working Paper #1069
                                                January 1983




                        Retirement Flows




                             Abs tract

    .This paper considers labor market flows of older workers among

the states of nonretirement, partial retirement and full retirement.

Statistics are presented which describe entry, exit and continuation

rates for each state by age, duration dependence, and "reverse flows."

One important finding which has implications for the structure of

utility functions embedded in life cycle retirement models is the

relatively high incidence but short duration of partial retirement.

These implications are discussed.




                                     Alan L. Gustman
                                     Department of Economics
                                     Dartmouth College
                                     Hanover, NH 03755
                                         (603) 646—2641
                                     Thomas L. Steinmeier
                                     Department of Economics
                                     Texas Tech University
                                     Lubbock, TX 79409
                                         (806) 742—2203
                           I.   Introduction



      The economics literature has generally conceived of the retirement

 process as a one—way flow from an "in the labor force" status to a "not

 in the labor force" status. This paper considers a more detailed de-

 scription of the retirement process—-one involving full—time work, par-

 tial retirement, and full retirement. The primary interest is in describ-

 ing the flows of older workers among   these   three states, both the

 principal flows from full-time work to full retirement either directly

 or indirectly through partial retirement, and the much smaller flows

 in the opposite direction. Information about these flows is useful not

only in providing a richer description of the retirement process, but

it may also help in establishing values for parameters which are im—

portarit to the retirement decision and thereby in understanding the nature

of that decision.

     In the next section of the paper we describe an analytical framework

which is sufficient to generate transitions among full-time work, partial

retirement, and full retirement. A particularly important point here

is that partial retirement is more than simply a reduction in hours below

full-time, since it usually is associated with a reduction in the wage

rate and frequently is accompanied by a change in employers as well.

The following section examines various descriptive statistics related

to the retirement process. These include probabilities of older workers

being in particular states at given ages, transition rates among the

various states, and continuation rates in the states. A final section

discusses potential implications of the descriptive statistics for the
                                   2




estimation of retirement models.



                   II. The Analytical Framework

     The analytical framework used in this paper reflects a number of

relevant findings presented in our previous work. One of these findings

is that partial retirement is indeed a widespread phenomenon (Gustman

and Steinmeier, 1981). Between the ages of 65 and 69, partial retire-

ment is as likely as continued full—time work on the individual's main

job) More than one—third of the older white males who are not self—

employed in the Retirement History Survey indicate that, during at least

one of the four sample years up to 1975, they are partial1yretired.

Moreover, the probability of partial retirement remains high even for

those who are in good health, do not face mandatory retirement, and

are not covered by a pension.

     A second important finding is that partially retired workers have

significantly lower wage rates than full-time workers (Gustman and

Steinmeier. 1982). These lower wage rates may come about for at least

two reasons. In a majority of jobs, an individual does not seem to be

able to reduce hours below full—time, as indicated both in surveys of

individuals and of firms (Gustman and Steinmeier, forthcoming). Under

such circumstances, if an older worker wishes to reduce his work effort

below full-time, he must quit his main job and take a job that does

permit part-time work, and which usually also pays a lower wage rate.

In other jobs, the worker can reduce his time below full time without

changing jobs.2 Even here, though, workers who choose to work part-time
                                         3




 report siginificantly lower wage rates than those who continue working

 full—time.

       These findings may be incorporated into a formal life—cycle model

 as follows. An individual is presumed to choose a time path for con-

 sumption and labor supply so as to maximize lifetime utility:

                    T
              U    I    u [C(t), L(t), t;    ] dt


 where C(t) is consumption at time t, L(t) is leisure at time t, and

 is a vector of parameters which determine the nature of the utility

 function u at any      time   t. The maximization of the utility function is

 subject to the lifetime budget constraint


 (1)              d(t) WN[HN(t), t] + w      [i-i(t) t]} dt + Ao =    d(t)C(t)   dt


where d(t) is the discount factor to time t, WN[HN(t) ,t] is the total

compensation includiig changes in pension and Social Security asset values,

from working HN(t) in the nonretirement job, W[H(t) ,t] is the correspond-

ing compensation for H(t) hours in the partial retirement job, and         A is
the discounted value of exogenous assets. 4         Further constraints limit the

potential quantities of labor supply and relate labor supply to leisure:

(2)        H (t) [h — H (t)) = a
              N         N      N

(3)        0< H(t) <
                               hN


(4)       H(t)H(t)=O
           N   P


(5)        L(t) = 1 — H (t) — H (t) —
                                    > 0
                       N       P

The first contraint specifies that the individual must work either full
                                 4




time (where full-time work is a fraction hN of available time) or not

at all in the non—retirement job, while the second specifies that the

labor supplied to the second job can range between none and full—time.5
The third constraint specifies that the individual cannot work on both

jobs simultaneously, and the last constraint defines leisure as the

time not supplied as labor.

     Within the context of this model, the paths of wages in the two

types of jobs (i.e. tenure dependence) will induce bunching of hours.

Most people will spend the first part of their working lives in non—

retirement jobs, where the wage rate is higher than in the partial

retirement job. With increasing age, however, the utility function is

likely to change in such a manner that full-time work generates in-

creasing disutility, and at some point individuals will quit working on

the non—retirement job. Some of these people will find it advantageous

to spend some of the remaining time on a partial retirement job where

they can work less than full—time, albeit at a lower wage rate, while

others will elect to bypass the stage of partial retirement entirely

and move directly to full retirement. Even for those who partially

retire, the within-period utility function will continue to shift over

time to make work increasingly onerous. Eventually these people too

will wish to retire fully. Hence, the sequences that we expect to find

most often are nonretirement, possibly followea by partial retirement,

and then followed by full retirement.

      It is possible that some people may find it desirable to move in

the reverse direction from the sequences indicated above.   That is,

they may work in a partial retirement job after being fully retired,
                                      5



 or    they may work in a non—retirement job after being partially or

 fully retired. Such "reverse" flows may be generated by very sub-

 stantial   jumps in   wages in an indiviual's later years, but this is

 not   very convincing as an explanation   for many such flows. A more

plausible explanation involves unexpected changes in       circumstances

which induce an individual to change his mind and return to work in a

period when he had anticipated being partially or fully retired. Several

possibilities come to mind. An individual may suffer unexpected and

large losses in the financial markets and now find he has fewer assets

than anticipated. His spouse may suffer from a serious and expensive

illness which increases the household's desire for income. Alter-

natively, he may retire and subsequently find that his enjoyment from

retirement is not as great as he anticipated. Any of these circumstances

can lead the individual to recalculate the optimal path of labor supply

over the remaining lifetime, and the recalculated path may cause the

individual to move in the reverse direction from the typical sequences

described in the previous paragraph.



                       III. Descriptive Statistics

       In this section we concentrate on some statistical evidence bearing

on the magnitudes of the labor force flows associated with the model

described in the last section. The data which form the basis of this

analysis are from the Retirement History Survey. They pertain only to

white males who were not self-employed in a job held while not retired.

Four waves of the survey are included -——1969, 1971, 1973, and 1975.
                                 6




Those included in the sample were 58 to 63 years old in 1969.

     Since we are looking at flows, the number of observations in some

categories is relatively small. Accordingly, in some cases we have

pooled observations for different cohorts and years of the survey.

There are two problems with this procedure which the reader should bear

in mind. First, the unemployment rate differed widely among the four

survey years. It was 3.5%, 5.9%, 4.9%, and 8.5% in 1969, 1971, 1973,

and 1975 respectively. Second, there has been a downward trend in male

labor force participation rates which, although possibly caused by

secular changes in many of the explanatory variables included in a

life cycle model, might also include true cohort effects.    When we

pool these observations, these differences are either hidden or, where

we focus on calendar age, may be correlated to some extent with the

age variable.

State Probabilities. We first examine the simple percentages of the

sample who are not retired, are partially retired, or are fully retired.

Table 1 indicates these percentages by survey year and by age.6 Three

aspects of this table would appear to be particularly noteworthy.

     First, the departure from the non—retirement state is indeed

pervasive between the ages of 58 and 68.   The percentage of individuals

not retired at all falls from 85% to 8% during this 10-year age span.
                                                   the fraction of the
This is accompanied by a very large increase ifi

sample who are fully retired, and to a somewhat lesser extent, in the

fraction of the sample who are partially retired.

      Secondly, among those who work at all, partial retirement is more

 common than non—retirement for individuals past the age of 65. For the
                                             7




                   Table 1: Retirement Status by Age and Year



                                       Age

        58    59     60    61     62          63    64    65    66    67    68    69



                                 Non—retirement
1969   .85   .81    .79   .72    .64         .56
1971                .77   .70    .61         .49   .44   .24
1973                             .56         .47   .40   .17   .13   .13
1975                                               .35   .17   .11   .09   .08   .06


                                Partial retirement

1969   .05   .06    .06   .08    .12     .16
1971                .06   .07    .09     .12       .13   .19
1973                            .10      .09       .12   .16   .17   .15
1975                                               .13   .15   .17   .18   .15   .17



                                Full retirement

1969   .09   .12    .12   .18   .23      .27
1971                .14   .20   .27      .36       .41   .54
1973                            .33      .40       .47   .66   .69   .71
1975                                               .50   .67   .70   .72   .77   .76
                                8




five—year span beginning at age 65 and ending at age 69, the fraction

of individuals who are partially retired holds fairly steady at between

15% and 20%. During the same period, non—retirement falls from around

20% to just a little more than 5%. These figures reflect a finding

already mentioned in the last section, namely, that partial retirement

is an important phenomenon, particular in the older age ranges.

     Finally, there appears to be an unmistakable secular trend in the

percentages not retired and fully retired. Between 1969 and 1973, the

percentage of 62—63 year-olds not retired drops by 8-9 percentage points,

and similar drops are observed for 64-65 year olds between 1971 and

1975. The figures for full retirement display an equally large trend

in the opposite direction. What is not clear from this table is whether

a similarly strong secular trend applies to those under 62 or over 65.

For those age ranges the Retirement History Survey includes data from

at most two adjacent surveys. The data from these surveys gives some

hint of a secular trend for those groups, but it does not appear to be

as strong as for the 62-65 year-old group.

Transition Rates M1on9 Retirement States. Table 2 presents the entry

and exit rates among the various retirement states.7 The top half of

the table indicates entry rates from specific states two years earlier.

For example, of the people whowerepartially retired, 44.1 percent of

them had been not retired two years earlier, 40.0% had been partially

retired two years earlier, and so on. The rows of this table sum to

one, and the number of observations in each row is indicated along the

right side of the table. The bottom half of the table conveys the same
                                   9




             Table 2 Basic Flows Over Two-Year Periods



                             Entry Rates


                                         From Status                Observations

                        N                P              R      U        Inrow
         N            .959             .024           .007   .010         5088
To
         P           .441              .400           .135   .024         1904
Status
         R           .303              .094           .588   .014         7096
         U           .711              .093           .069   .127          204



                             Exit Rates


                                          To Status                 Observations

                       N                 P              R      U        Inrow
         N           .609              .105           .268   .018        8017
From     P           .077              .485           .426   .012        1572
Status
         R           .008              .057        .932      .003        4482
         U           .226              .208        .448      .118         22].




1Symbols N      Not Retired
         P       Partially retired
         R       Fully retired
         U       Unemployed
                                10




kind of information on exit rates to specific states two years later.

For instance, of the people who were not retired as of a particular

survey, 10.5% were partially retired by the next survey two years

later, and 26.8% were fully retired two years later. Again, the

rows of the table sum to one, and the number of observations in each

row is indicated along the right side of the table.

     There are three features of particular interest in this table.

First, consider the exit rates from non—retirement.   For individuals

in this age range, about 37.3% of the individuals who are not retired

will be either partially or fully retired by the time of the next sur-

vey two years later. Of those who leave non—retirement and -do not

become unemployed, 28.2% (calculated as .105/.373) will partially re-

tire, and the remaining 71.8% will fully retire. These figures under-

score the fact that partial retirement is a phenomenon which affects

a significant fraction of the labor force during their later years.

     A second feature of the table which bears mention is the exit rates

for partially retired workers. There is only a 48.5% chance that an

individual who is partially retired during one survey will still be

partially retired during the next survey two years later. If exit

 from partial retirement were a random process with a constant hazard

 rate, this would imply that the average duration in the partial retire-

ment state is a little under three years.8 The assumption of a con-

 stant hazard rate is undoubtedly an oversimplification, but the figure

 nevertheless suggests that the duration of partial retirement is quite

 short, particularly when compared to the duration of an individual's
                                     11




 full-time work.

      A third interesting feature of the table involves the flows against

the normal retirement paths. In the previous section, we noted that

 for most people, the optimal path of work effort would proceed from

non—retirement, possibly through partial retirement, to full retire-

ment. In.some cases with unusual wage paths, or in cases where the

individual encountered unforeseen events, it is possible that the in-

dividual would move in the reverse direction. Table 2 indicates that

this does indeed occur. More specifically, of the people who enter

partial retirement (and who were not unemployed), about 23.4% [cal-

culated as .135/(.l35 +     .441)]   had been fully retired in the previous

survey, while 76.6% had been not retired, Of the people who left par-

tial retirement and did not become unemployed, 15.3% [calculated as

.077/(.077 +   .426)]   were not retired in the next survey, while 84.7%

were fully retired. The third "reverse" flow, that from full retire-

ment to non—retirement and the corresponding exit rate are both less

than one percent.

Continuation Rates           .   It is useful to examine in more depth the
way these flows, and especially the continuation rates—-the diagonal

elements of the lower part of Table 2—-vary with age. Table 3 reports,

by age in the initial year, the percentages of individuals who continue

in the same retirement category in the next survey two years later.

     How should these continuation rates behave? We know that pension

programs and mandatory retirement provisions affect the likelihood of

retirement at 62 and 65 either by providing incentives for individuals
                                             12




                      Table 3. Two-Year Continuation Rates by Age


                                    Age In Initial Period

                                       61         62    63     64    65       66      67
              58      59      60

                                             .632      .327   .267   .415    .515   .432
         N   .873    .831    .713     .652

                                             .458      .446   .475   .510    .597   .604
         P   .409    .472    .467     .450
Status
                                             .918      .931   .933   .934    .944   .932
         R .926      .939    .934     .921

                                      .070   .105      .114     0a    053a     0a     0a
             •222a    267a   .242




         a. based on sample sizes <25.
                                i. 3




 to leave their jobs or by forcing them out of their jobs at the age of

 mandatory retirement. Moreover, while there is controversey about

 the effects of Social Security at 62, we know that at age 65 the ad-

 justments are no longer actuarially fair, providing a further incentive

 for retirement.9 On the supply side, the changing effects of health

 and family structure and the increasing disutility of work should act

 to reduce continuation rates in non-retirement below the high levels

typical of individuals in their prime working years.

      There is indeed evidence of rapidly falling continuation rates for

non-retirement up to age 64. These range from 87% at age 58 to 27% at

age 64——the age when the strongest economic incentives to leave non—

retirement are about to be encountered. The continuation rates for

6 to 67 year-olds lie above those for 64 year-olds, but well below

the rates observed for those in their late fifties and early 60's.

     For the partially retired, continuation rates tend to stay relative-

ly steady in the 45—50% range up to age 64. Thereafter the continuation

rates for full retirement are very high, averaging about 93% and never

falling below about 92%. niong the unemployed, there are too few

observations to make generalizations about the pattern of the con-

tinuation rates.

Duration Dependence of Continuation Rates. Table 3 investigates con-

tinuation rates by age. A related issue, particularly for partial re-

tirement, is whether the continuation rate depends on how long the in-

dividual has been partially retired, i.e., the duration dependence of

continuation rates.
                              14




    To investigate this issue, we selected the individuals who were

not retired in 1969 but who were partially retired in 1971. This

avoids having to deal with periods of partial retirement already in

                                           individuals be working full—
progress. Moreover, the requirement that

time in 1969    assures that we are looking at individuals who are in

the normal sequence and perhaps not quite as likely to be responding

                                             this group, 292 were still
to unusual or unexpected circumstances. Of

in the sample by 1973, and of that number 122, or 41.8%, were still

partially retired in 1973. Hence, a person newly partially retired

had a 41.8% initial two-year continuation rate.
                                                     retired both in 1973
     112 of the 122 individuals who were partially

and 1971 were in the sample by 1975, and of those individuals 75, or

67.7% were still partially retired at that date.     Hence, for individ-

uals with durations in partial retirement of between two and four years,

the two—year continuation rate is considerably higher than for individ-

uals with durations of less than two years.1° It should be kept in mind

that these individuals were also growing older with each successive

survey, and the evidence from Table 3 indicates that this could be part

of the explanation as to why the individuals exhibited higher continti-

ation rates between 1973 and 1975 than between 1971 and 1973. Even so,

the magnitude of the increase in the continuation rate from 41.8% to

                                                in the continuation rates
67.7% is relatively large compared to changes
                                                indicated in Table 3. It
 caused by an additional two years of age, as

would appear that there is some duration dependence in which the con-
                                                   with the length of time
 tinuation rate for partial retirement increases
                                 1 )




the   individual has been partially retired.

Detailed Flows for Partially Retired Individuals. Table 4 looks at the

flows pertaining to partially retired individuals in somewhat greater

detail in order to shed some light on the mechanism of partial retire-

ment. In this table, partially retired individuals are separated into

three categories according to the relationship between their non-retire-

ment and their partial retirement jobs. The top line of both sections

of the table considers individuals who have partially retired in jobs

in which they reported themselves not retired in a previous survey, or

if the observation is for the first survey, in jobs which they started

before the age of 55. The second line refers to individuals who have

partially retired in jobs which are different from any jobs in which

they reported themselves not retired in prior surveys. The third line

indicates individuals who were partially retired, but for whom the job

could not be definitely classified with respect to one or the other of

these categories

      The information in the table contains a couple of interesting im-

plications. First, it suggests that partial retirement in a job pre-

viously reported as a non—retirement job and partial retirement in a

different job are relatively distinct paths. Of the individuals

leaving partial retirement in a job previously reported as a non-

retirement job, only 7.3% (calculated as .0391.531) are found in the

next survey to be partially retired in a different job, and of the in-

dividuals entering partial retirement in a job not previously reported

as a non—retirement job, only 4.4% (calculated as .032/.727) are
                                      16




              Table 4. Detailed Flows For the partially Retired1



                             Entry Rates

                             From status                      Observations

                N2      Pf     P0          Pa    R       U       Inrow

         pf    .566   .434    0            0     0      0          560
   TO
         P0    .422   .032   .273     .094      .144   .034        618
status
         Pa    .360   .051   .039     .285      .231   .034        726




                             Exit Rates

                              To status                       Observations

                                                                 In row

         Pf    .091   .469   .039     .071      .324   .006        518

From     Pc    .069     0    .487     .081      .354   .009        347

Status   Pa    .071     0    .082     .293      .536   .018        707




         1
          These are two-year rates.


         2Syxnbols:    Pf    Partially retired in a job previously reported as
                             a non-retirement job o in a job begun before age 55.

                       Pc    partially retired in a different job.

                       Pa    Partially retired, but type of job is ambiguous.

                Other symbols are defined in Table 2.
                                 17




entering from partial retirement in a job previously reported as a non-

retirement job or in a different job, but not both.

     Secondly, a comparison between the exit rates of individuals

partially retired in jobs previously reported as a non—retirement job

and individuals partially retired in different jobs indicates that the

behavior of these two groups is generally similar. A person partially

retired in a job previously reported as a non—retirement job is a couple

of percentage points (9.1% vs. 6.9%) more likely to return to non—

retirement, while an individual partially retired in a different job

is three percentage points (35.4% vs. 32.4%) more likely to retire com-

pletely. Both groups are about equally likely (57.9% vs. 56.8%) to

continue partial retirement in some form. Individuals who are partially

retired but who cannot be assigned in either one or the other of these

categories appear to be somewhat different, with substantially lower

probabilities for continuing partial retirement and substantially higher

probabilities for complete retirement. There is a suspicion that these

unclassified individuals are probably more likely to be in fact partial-

ly retired in jobs they have not previously held as non-retirement jobs,

but it is not possible to be entirely sure of this.

             III. Implications for Retirement Models

     one of the aspects of the data described in the last section has

particular importance for retirement models of the type presented earlier

in this paper. Namely, the data indicate that even though a substan-

tial minority of older individuals pass through a stage of partial

retirement, the spells of partial retirement are typically very short.
                                            18



More than half of these spells appear to last less than two years, and

it seems likely that an individual would almost never be partially

retired for a siginificant fraction of his working life.              This fact,

that partial retirement durations tend to be very short, when considered

together with the observed incidence of partial retirement, provides

a powerful clue as to the nature of the utility function on which in-

dividuals are basing their retirement decisions.

      In order to investigate the implications of the descriptive statis-

tics, it is necessary to consider the solution path of the retirement

model in somewhat more detail. At any point in time, the solution path

maximizes the quantity



(6)         Z(t) =    u[C(t)   ,   L(t),   t; ]   +   X d(t) S(t)




where s(t) =   Y(t)    —   C(t)    is the amount saved in period t and Y(t) =

            t] + W [H(t) t) is the net compensation for labor in period
wN(HN(t)
t.       may be interpreted as the marginal utility of discounted life-

time income, that is, the marginal utility of relaxing the lifetime

budget constraint by one dollar. (See MaCurdy, 1981) It is chosen so

that when this optimization is implemented for all time periods, the

lifetime budget constraint                 d(t) S(t) dt + A0 = 0 is just satisfied.

The maximization is subject to the constraints of equations (2) through

 (5), which describe the hours limitations on the two types of employ-

ment.

        If we substitute for s(t) in equation (6), the maximand in this
                                          19




 problem becomes



 (7)         Z(t) =    u[C(t),     L(t), t; ] +        d(t)   [Y(t) —   C(t)].


 Since c(t) appears neither in the definition of Y(t) nor in any of the

 constraints in equations (2) through (5), the value of C(t) which max-

 imizes equation (7) may be found simply by differentiating the equation

 and   setting   the result equal to zero:



 (8)               =
                       uc[C(t)s    L(t), t; ]    -     d(t)   = 0



where u indicates the partial derivative with respect to the first ar—

guxnent. This equation may then be solved for the optimal C*(t) as a

function of L(t) and )d(t):



            C*(t) = C* [L(t), t; ,             d(t)]

This may in turn be substituted into equation (7) to yield:



            Z(t) =     u{C* (L(t), t; 8
(9)
                                           Ad(t)]       L(t), t; •}


            + Xd(t)      {Y(t) —   C   [L(t), t; 8


           = Z[Y(t),     L(t), t; 8,
                                        Ad(t)]

At a particular point in time, this means that the individual may be
                                      20




               Figure 1.   The Earnings—Leisure Choice at Time t




wN(hN(t), t]




                             B




                                                                       L (t)
                                                                   1
                            l_hN
                                    21.




viewed as maximizing a utility function involving only income and

leisure,12 instead of consumption and leisure as in equation (6).

The maximization is done subject to the definition of Y(t) and the

constraints of equations (2) through (5).

       Figure 1 illustrates the maximization problem facing the individ-

ual at time t. The indifference curve II is one of a set of such

curves implied by equation (9). All of these indifference curves are

vertical displacements of one another, or equivalently, they all have

the same slope along any vertical line)3 The budget constraint for

the individual at time t consists of point A plus the line segments

between B and C. The point A corresponds to the earnings and leisure

available if the individual chooses to work on the non—retirement job.

The series of line segments between B and C represent potential income

opportunities if the individual works on the partial retirement job,

allowing for effects. such as the reduction in Social Security benefits

after a disregard amount)4 The individual chooses the point along this

constraint which enables him to reach the highest indifference curve.

This may occur at point A, in which case the individual is non-retired,

or at some point between B and C, which corresponds to partial retire-

ment, or at C, which represents full retirement. Notice that a value

of zero income at time t, which is associated with point C, does not

mean   that   consumption, or income from Social Security, pensions or other

programs would be zero should the outcome associated with point C be

chosen.

       Over time, this diagram changes in some important respects. First,
                               22



the indifference curves will rotate clockwise, —i.e., other things the

same they will be steeper as an individual becomes older, reflecting

the fact that a given amount of work is likely to generate an increasing

amount of disutility with increasing age. Point A may shift downward

as well, since past a certain age both Social Security and private pen-

sions may reduce effective compensation. The budget line between B

and C, may also be affected, but here we would not expect the effects

                                                the constraint which lies
to be too great, particularly for the part of

below the Social Security disregard amount. In this range, Social

Security will not change the effective compensation, and partial re-

tirement jobs are unlikely to involve pension plans which alter the

effective compensation.

     Now consider the implications of the two facts noted above: first

that a substantial minority of older workers go through a phase of

partial retirement, and second that for most of them the period in par-

tial retirement is fairly short. In Figure 1, there are two ways in

which an individual might find it optimal to retire partially for a

relatively short period of time. One possibility is that the individ-

ual has a set of indifference curves with just the right degree of

curvature so that when he leaves point A, the tangency with the budget

segment BC will already be very close to C. In this case, only a

slight rotation of the curve or a slight decline in the partial retire-

ment wage rate will be sufficient to induce him to retire fully after

 only a short period of time in partial
                                          retirement. This might be a

 satisfactory explanation for an occasional individual who partially
                                  23




 retired for a short period of time, but it seems more unlikely that

 almost everyone who partially retires should have just the right cur-

 vature of the indifference curves so that almost all of them partially

 retire for only a short period in spite of the fact that they face a

 wide range of wages in the nonretirement and partial retirement jobs.

       This leaves a second explanation for the fact that most people

 who partially retire do so only for a short period of time, specifical-

 ly, that the indifference curves are rotating fairly rapidly. Here,

 when the individual leaves the non-retirement job, the indifference

 curve for an individual who partially retires may have a tangency at

 any point along BC. If the indifference curves are rotating rapidly,

 the point of tangency will travel along BC towards C fairly rapidly, and

 the individual will again retire after a fairly brief spell in partial

 retirement.

       In the retirement model, then, the descriptive statistics thus

 suggest that the indifference curves in Figure 1 have enough curvature

that at least some individuals partially retire, and that the curves are

rotating fairly rapidly, becoming significantly steeper as the individ-

ual ages. This is an interesting and important implication of the data,

but it leaves unanswered one final question: What do these results

imply about the utility function in the original structural model, namely

u(C(t), L(t), t; j)? To examine this issue, consider the specific func-

tion




(10)       u[C(t), L(t), t; ]    [O(t)/p].[C(t)   +   b(8   ,   t)L(t)],    pci


where 0(t) is the time preference discount factor and a =         l/(l-p)
                                    24




is within—period elasticity of substitution between consumption and

leisure.5 The indifference curves implied by this utility function

have slope S =     —b(8,t) [L(t)/C(t))1. The corresponding indifference
curves in Figure 1 have slope S =        —b(,t) 6(t) L(t)/ [X d(t)])6
For a given point in Figure 1, S changes over time with the quantity

b(, t) 8(t)! d(t), while for a given point in the consumption-leisure

space of u, Su changes according b(3,t). Unless the rate of time pre-

frence exceeds the discount rate by a considerable amount, both sets

of indifference curves will be rotating rapidly if either is. Thus

the fact that few individuals who partially retire do so for long, which

implies that the indifference curves in Figure 1 are rotating rapidly,

implies that the indifference curves corresponding to the utility func-

tion in the structural model are also rotating rapidly as the individ-

ual ages.

                              IV. Conclusion

     The    descriptive   statistics presented in the paper impose some

important requirements for a good structural retirement model. First,

a good model should be able to explain the behavior of continuation

rates, especially the sharp dip in continuation rates in the years im-

mediately prior to 65. It seems likely that the explanation for this

dip lies in the effect of pension and Social Security benefit formulae,

mandatory retirement and other factors affecting the budget line.

Certainly, models which explain these continuation rates in terms of ad hoc,

discrete, age—related changes in slopes of the indifference curves

should be regarded with a certain amount of suspicion, particularly

if the models are intended to be used to predict the effects of hypo-
                                25




thetical changes in Social Security or pension rules.17 Secondly, a

good structural model must deal with the minority of observations for

which the flows appear to be in a reverse direction compared with the

normal sequence. In particular, it is necessary to resolve the question

whether these reverse flows are the result of expected but unusual

paths of the wages in the full—time or partial retirement jobs, or as

seems more likely, whether these reverse flows signify responses to

unforseen events or to miscalculations. In the latter case, the proper

model may be a stochastic model in which the individual recalculates

the optimal labor supply path in each period conditional on his past

decisions, taking into account current or expected future changes which

were not forseen when he made his previous calculations.

     The statistics also suggest an important characteristic of the

lifetime utility function that individuals are attempting to maximize.

Specifically, the fact that a significant number partially retire but

that few of them remain in the state for very long implies that the

indifference curves of the individuals, measured either in the earnings-

leisure space or the consumption—leisure space, may be relatively con-

vex but rotating fairly rapidly with age. If confirmed by further

studies, this would be an important finding, for the rapidity with

which these indifference curves rotate is an important factor in de-

termining the effects of potential changes in such important programs

as Social Security and private pensions on the amount of labor individ-

uals wish to supply to the market.
                                  26



                               FOOTNOTES




     11n that paper, the main job is defined as the job held by the
individual at age 55.

     2Counting each observation for a given employer only one time,

we found that for a sample of older white males who are not self em-

ployed, 53% of the partially retired are on jobs on which they had

previously worked full—time, and the remainder are in jobs on which

they have not previously reported working full-time (Gustman and

Steinmeier, 1982).

        3including a bequest motive in the budget constraint would leave

the discussion unchanged.

        41n this formal model, the "partial retirement" job may refer to

a job distinct from the main job, or it may refer to the opportunity

to remain in the main job and work less than full—time at a reduced

wage.

        5A closely related model could be developed with the assumption

that labor supplied to the partial retirement job must fall in a more

restricted range.

           fourth category, not included in Table 1, consists of anyone

who reported that their major activity during the survey week was

looking for work. With the exception of one cell (61—year—olds in 1971),

the percentage in this category never exceeded 2 percent.     People were

classified as not retired, partially retired, or fully retired on the
                                       27




 basis of their answers to the question "Do you consider yourself to be

 completely retired, partially retired, or not retired at all?"

         7The figures in Table 2 exclude cases where the individual dropped

out of the sample in the subsequent survey (for exit rates) or was not

in the sample in the previous survey (for entry rates). The principal

reasons for being out of the sample were death and non-response. The

percentages of individual who dropped out of the sample by the next

survey were 10.1% for not retired workers, 11.4% for partially retired

workers, 15.0% for retired workers, and 10.2% for unemployed workers.

only 2.2% of the individuals who dropped out of the sample subsequently

re-entered, and most of those who re—entered did so into the full re-

tirement state.

     8.
      With    a constant hazard rate, durations are distributed with the

exponential density function f(t) = ________
                                    exp (yt)
                                                      If   51.5% of this dis—

tribution lies between zero and two, y may be calculated as .362. The

mean of the distribution is then calculated as 2.76 years.


     9mere is little reliable work on the incentive effects for par-

tial retirement. For some discussion, see Gustman and Steinmeier (1981

and forthcoming). Reduced form retirement equations which include

partial retirement as an outcome are reported in the former paper.

    10
         Given the sizes of the two samples, the difference between the 41.8%

figure and    the   67.7% figure is statistically significant at better than

a 1% confidence level.
                                     28




      11Note especially that this group includes anyone who was partially

retired during the initial survey but whose current job began after age

55.


      12The fact that     appears in Z[] means that the function cannot

be viewed as constant from individual to individual, since        depends

on earnings opportunities in other years.

            may be shown by examining the slope of an indifference curve

at any point in the diagram. This slope is given by S = ZL/ZY.        From

equation (9)ZLdoes not depend on Y(t), so that it may be written

ZL (L(t), t; ,     Xd(t)],   and Z,. =
                                          Xd(t).   Thus


                                     Since Y(t) does not appear either direct—
S = ZL    [L(t), t; 3, Ad(t)].

              (Xd(tfl
ly or indirectly in this expression, the slope of the indifference curve

at time t depends only on L(t) and hence all the curves must have the

same slope.

      14For a related discussion, see Blinder (1982). Note that since

this budget constraint refers to compensation, the slopes of the seg-

ments reflect not only any current Social Security benefit reductions,

but also the effects of any deferred benefits. Also, this budget con-

straint does not include a "guarantee" amount (i.e., a vertical segment

at L(t) =   1),   since any such guarantee should really be attributed to

compensation in previous years.

      15This is similar to the utility function used by Gordon and Blinder

in their study (1980). Note that it would not make sense to choose u to
                                   29




be linear homogeneous, for the resulting indifference curves in Figure

1 would necessarily be straight lines. This may be shown as follows.

In a linear homogeneous function, both u and UL are strict functions

of the ratio C(t)/L(t), and hence of each other. By equation (8), u

is equal to Ad(t) which is independent of earnings and leisure at

time t, giving the result. The Gordon—Blinder function does satisfy

the criterion that the degree of homogeneity should be less than 1,

yielding convex indifference curves in Figure 1.

    161f p is close to 1, the indifference curves associated with both

u and Z have little curvature. Hence the existence of a substantial

amount of partial retirement at reduced compensation rates would suggest

that p cannot be close to 1 for all individuals. This reasoning is

contrary to Gordon and Blinder's empirical finding that p =   0.9,   re-

latively close to 1.


    '71t may be argued that a more elaborate model than ours is appro-

priate because discontinuities at particular ages may result from the

influence of some socially acceptable retirement age, which in turn is

influenced by program parameters. But to analyze the effects of changes

in retirement policy, the role of a socially acceptable retirement age

should be modeled explicitly since the effects of these age terms may

be altered by the policy change.
                               31)

                            References



Alan S. Blinder, "private Pensions and Public Pensions: Theory and
     Fact," NBER Working Paper Number 902, June 1982.

Roger H. Gordon and Alan S. Blinder, "Market Wages, Reservation Wages
     and Retirement," Journal of Public Economics, 1980, 14, 277-308.

Alan L. Gustmari and Thomas L. Steinmeier, "Minimum Hours Constraints
     and Retirement Behavior," forthcoming in Contemporary Policy
     Issues, Proceedings of the 1982 WEA meetings.

Alan L. Gustxnan and Thomas L. Steinmeier, "Partial Retirement and the
     Analysis of Retirement Behavior," National Bureau of Economic
     Research, Working Paper Number 763, September, 1981.

Alan L. Gustman and Thomas L. Steinmeier, "Partial Retirement and Wage
     Profiles for Older Workers," National Bureau of Economic Research,
     Working Paper Number 1000, October 1982.

Thomas L. MaCurdy, "An Empirical Model of Labor Supply In a Life-Cycle
     Setting," Journal of Political Economy, 89, December 1981,
     1059—1085.
