                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             MATERNAL EMPLOYMENT AND ADOLESCENT DEVELOPMENT

                                          Christopher J. Ruhm

                                         Working Paper 10691
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10691


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2004




I thank Reagan Baughman, Michelle Sylvester and participants at the Southern Economic Association
Meetings for helpful comments. Financial support from the National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development (HD38521-01A1), National Science Foundation (SES-9876511) and Russell Sage Foundation
is gratefully acknowledged. All opinions, findings, conclusions or recommendations are those of the author
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the funding agencies.The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Christopher J. Ruhm. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Maternal Employment and Adolescent Development
Christopher J. Ruhm
NBER Working Paper No. 10691
August 2004, Revised March 2006
JEL No. I120, J130, J180, J220

                                         ABSTRACT
This study investigates how maternal employment is related to the outcomes of 10 and 11 year olds

after controlling for a wide variety of child, mother and family background characteristics. The

results suggest that the mother's labor supply has deleterious effects on cognitive development,

obesity and possibly risky behaviors such as smoking or drinking, while reducing behavior

problems. These negative consequences are quite small for the average child, however, and usually

restricted to relatively long maternal work hours. Less intensive employment is often associated with

favorable outcomes and labor supply after the first three years typically has little effect. By contrast,

large adverse consequences are frequently obtained for "advantaged" adolescents, with negative

impacts predicted even for limited amounts of maternal labor supply and for work during the child's

fourth through ninth year.

Christopher J. Ruhm
Department of Economics
University of North Carolina at Greensboro
Greensboro, NC 27402-6165
and NBER
c_ruhm@uncg.edu
                        Maternal Employment and Adolescent Development
        Between 1975 and 2001, the labor force participation rate of mothers with non-adult
children increased 54 percent, from 47.4 to 73.1 percent (U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of
Labor Statistics, 1988; U.S. Bureau of the Census, 2002). The growth was an even larger 66
percent (from 31.0 to 55.2 percent) for those with children younger than six and 78 percent,
(from 31.0 to 55.2 percent between 1976 and 2000) for women with infants (Downs, 2003).
Combined with increases in single-parent households, these changes suggest that parents have
less time to invest in their offspring, with potentially deleterious effects.1 However, increased
market work may also yield benefits, most obviously by providing extra income.
        This paper analyzes how maternal employment affects the development of 10 and 11 year
olds using data from multiple years of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY). The
dependent variables include three high quality assessments of cognitive skill, two indicators of
socioemotional development and two measures of excess body weight. The results suggest
sharply disparate impacts across categories of youths.
        Moderate amounts of work by mothers have no effect or benefit children who are
“disadvantaged” based on race/ethnicity, low maternal education, absence of a male adult in the
household at birth, or using a multivariate index of low socioeconomic status (SES) described
below. Even long hours, which occur relatively rarely, are unlikely to leave them much worse
off than if their mothers did not engage in market work. By contrast, harmful consequences are
predicted for “advantaged” adolescents, with negative effects extending to even limited
employment. Particularly striking are the reductions in cognitive test scores and increases in
excess body weight anticipated for high SES youths whose mothers work. One reason for the
negative cognitive effects appears to be that these children have especially enriching home


1
 Moreover, the proportion of children in two-parent households declined from 80.3 percent in 1975 to
69.1 percent in 2001 (U.S. Bureau of the Census, 2004). Increased female employment has not been
offset by substantial reductions in male work hours but fertility rates and time spent in housework have
declined since the 1960s (Juster and Stafford, 1991; Mayer, 1997). The time parents have available for
children fell by 22 hours per week (14 percent) between 1969 and 1999 (Council of Economic Advisers,
1999) but Sandberg and Hofferth (2001) argue that, since the early 1980s, behavioral changes have
prevented any decrease in the time actually devoted to children.


                                                 Page 1
environments and so may lose when placed in nonparental care. The higher obesity rates may
partially be explained by determinants of excess weight that are common to both the child and
mother, like changes in family eating habits. There is also evidence of relatively large (in
percentage terms) increases in early substance use and small reductions in behavior problems;
however, these are never statistically significant.
                                         A. Previous Research
        The relationship between maternal employment and cognitive development or behavior
problems in early childhood (typically 3 to 6 years of age) has been widely studied. A few
investigations find positive effects (Vandell and Ramanan, 1992; Parcel and Menaghan, 1994;
Moore and Driscoll, 1997), others negative impacts (Leibowitz, 1977; Stafford, 1987; Mott
1991; Belsky and Eggebeen, 1991) and many obtain results that differ depending on the timing
of work or the specific group or outcome analyzed (e.g. Desai et al., 1989; Baydar and Brooks-
Gunn, 1991; Blau and Grossberg, 1992; Parcel and Menaghan, 1994; Greenstein, 1995; Barglow,
et al., 1998).2 The most recent and carefully conducted analyses generally indicate a deleterious
impact of labor supply during the child’s first year (Neidell, 2000; Han et al., 2001; Brooks-
Gunn et al., 2002; Waldfogel et al., 2002; Baum, 2003; Ruhm, 2004; James-Burdumy, 2005;
Verropoulou and Joshi, 2005; Hill et al., 2005) but with less consistent effects for subsequent
work. However, it is not clear whether these effects last into adolescence or "fade out" over
time. Harvey (1999) finds that the negative consequences of first year employment are
temporary, whereas Neidell (2000), Han et al. (2001) and Waldfogel et al. (2002) indicate greater
persistence. The patterns may vary across outcomes and with child or household characteristics
in ways that are poorly understood.


2
  The limited study of paternal employment obtains inconclusive results (Parcel and Menaghan, 1994;
Harvey, 1999; Ermisch and Francesconi, 2001; Waldfogel et al., 2002; Ruhm, 2004). Substantial related
research investigates the effects of early child care. Studies of infant-mother attachments (e.g. Belsky and
Rovine, 1988; Clarke-Stewart, 1989; Lamb and Sternberg, 1990; NICHD Early Child Care Research
Network, 1997) suggest that maternal employment, by increasing the use of day care, could reduce
attachment security in some situations. Child care may also increase behavioral problems and stress
levels (NICHD Early Child Care Research Network, 2003; Watamura et al., 2003; Magnuson et al.,
Forthcoming). Conversely, high quality care is linked to increased school readiness and improved
cognitive development (NICHD Early Child Care Research Network, 2002; Magnuson et al., 2004).


                                                  Page 2
        Studies of adolescents are also voluminous. Many researchers (Hillman and Sawilowsky,
1991; Gottfried and Gottfried, 1994; Paulson, 1994; Vander Ven et al., 2001) conclude that
maternal employment does not affect outcomes such as academic achievement, delinquency, or
substance abuse. However, both positive impacts (Richards and Duckett, 1994; Muller, 1995)
and negative consequences (Bogenschneider and Steinberg, 1994) have been obtained.
Moreover, there is a tendency to find the greatest gains or lowest costs from part-time (rather
than full-time) work, and for girls, blacks or children with less educated parents (Richards and
Duckett, 1991; Bogenschneider and Steinberg, 1994; Wolfer and Moen, 1996).
        These inferences should be viewed as tentative because the studies generally lack the
methodological sophistication found in recent investigations of younger children. The samples
are usually small and unrepresentative, and large but imprecisely estimated coefficients are often
interpreted as indicating no effect, without adequate consideration of statistical power.3 Most
importantly, mothers working long hours may differ from those who do not in ways that are
inadequately accounted for. For example, women with characteristics associated with high
ability tend to have elevated employment rates (Vandell and Ramanan, 1992; Waldfogel et al.,
2002; Ruhm, 2004; Hill et al., 2005). If these advantages extend to productivity in home
activities, maternal employment will be positively associated with child outcomes even absent a
causal impact.4 Reverse causation also presents problems if the mother'
                                                                      s work hours are
influenced by child outcomes in previous periods, since most prior studies control only for
contemporaneous employment.5

3
  This is particularly problematic given the small sample sizes. For example, analyses by Hillman and
Sawilowsky (1991), Gottfried and Gottfried (1994), Paulson (1994), and Richards and Duckett (1994)
contain 51, 106, 240 and 295 individuals, with results also often presented for subgroups.
4
  The bias could be in the opposite direction if working women have less interest or ability in home
production. There are similar difficulties with the literature on day care (e.g. Clarke-Stewart, 1991; Field,
1991; Caughy et al., 1994). A few studies use quasi-experimental designs to control for omitted variables
(e.g., Currie and Thomas, 1995). Karoly et al. (1998) provide an in-depth review of research on early
intervention programs.
5
  Anderson et al.’s (2003) investigation of adolescent obesity overcomes many of these problems by using
a large sample, reasonably comprehensive controls and sometimes estimating fixed-effect or instrumental
variable models. Menaghan et al. (2000) find that maternal employment correlates with antisocial
behaviors using a large sample and an apparently sound methodology. However, their control variables
are not detailed, nor are the effects of work completely disentangled from those of family circumstances.


                                                  Page 3
        Three approaches are used below to reduce these sources of potential bias. First, an
unusually comprehensive set of explanatory variables is included, with attention to changes in
the parameter estimates obtained when sequentially accounting for an increasing portion of the
heterogeneity. The addition of more complete controls generally raises the predicted costs of
maternal employment, suggesting that many previous investigations present overly optimistic
assessments. Second, employment in a period after child assessment is controlled for in most
models. Since labor supply is unlikely to have causal effects on outcomes that precede it, large
or statistically significant parameter estimates for this variable suggest model misspecification.
Third, results of the basic OLS and probit models are compared to those obtained when including
maternal fixed-effects or to average treatment effects estimated using propensity score
techniques.
                       B. Conceptual Framework and Econometric Methods
        In economic models, parents allocate resources to maximize an objective function that
includes child outcomes as one argument.6 Maternal employment may benefit children by
increasing incomes or hurt them because of decreases in child-related investments in time or
energy.7 The psychological and sociological literatures provide complementary mechanisms
through which market work may affect children including: the disruption of mother-child
attachments (Belsky, 1988); reductions in the quantity and quality of interactions (Hoffman,
1980); a weakening of social capital (Coleman, 1988); and “role model” effects (Haveman and
Wolfe, 1995). These may vary with household characteristics and age of the child. For example,



Using large samples and relatively sophisticated methods, Aughinbaugh and Gittleman (2004) uncover
neutral or positive effects of maternal employment on risky adolescent behaviors. While they control for
maternal labor supply in the child’s first three years of life and the three years before the behaviors are
evaluated, they do not do so during the intervening years.
6
  This section draws heavily on a detailed discussion in Ruhm (2004).
7
  There is wide agreement that children benefit from higher household incomes but debate over the
strength and cause of these effects (Duncan and Brooks-Gunn, 1997; Mayer, 1997). Time-diary data
confirm that working reduces the time mothers spend with children (Bryant and Zick, 1996; Zick and
Bryant, 1996; Bianchi, 2000; Gershuny, 2000; Hofferth, 2001; Sandberg and Hofferth, 2001; Ichino and
Sanz de Galdeano, 2005), although there is uncertainty about the extent to which productive time is
protected by cutting back least on activities directly engaging children. Long hours might also cause
parents to be tired or stressed (Bianchi, 2000), reducing the quality of the time with children.


                                                  Page 4
employment could be more harmful in rich than poor families if well-off parents provide higher
quality time. Conversely, wealthy families can afford better day care and educated women spend
a relatively large proportion of their nonmarket time in child-related activities (Leibowitz, 1974).
        The potential tradeoffs between the benefits of income and direct parental time
investments can be illustrated in a model where child outcomes at age t (Ct) depend on status in
the previous period (Ct-1), the non-market “leisure” time of parents (L), purchased inputs like
food or medical care (F), and exogenous determinants or production shocks (V) according to:
(1)                                     Ct = C(Ct-1,Lt,Ft,Vt).8
In (1), parental leisure benefits children by increasing time available and possibly by reducing
stress, raising energy levels and so forth. Higher incomes similarly enhance the ability to
purchase productive inputs and influence time allocation decisions. Child outcomes also depend
on prior status and therefore on endowments and the past choices of parents.
        Assume that parental time is divided between employment (H) and leisure (L), while
purchases of child inputs and other consumption are limited to the sum of earned and nonearned
income.9 Incorporating the time constraint and recursively substituting in for lags of C, equation
(1) can be rewritten as:
(2)                                     Ct = C(H,F,V),
where H, F and V are vectors of current and lagged values (e.g. H={Ht, Ht-1, … Ht-n}, for t-n the
first period where parental inputs affect children). Maximizing C subject to the income
constraint yields the reduced-form demand function:
(3)                                     Ct = C(P,V),
where P is a vector of current and lagged prices and wages.10




8
  This model follows Becker (1981) in emphasizing the role of non-market time in household production
and Grossman (1972) in treating health as an outcome produced by investment activities.
9
  Total time available to spend with a given child varies with the number of parents and children in the
household. The econometric analysis deals with this by directly controlling for family structure. The
model can easily be extended to allow for borrowing or lending across periods.
10
   Formally, parents solve a dynamic programming problem where utility depends on child outcomes,
parental consumption and non-market time. Blau et al. (1996) detail such a model.


                                                 Page 5
        Data restrictions preclude estimation of the child production or reduced-form demand
functions specified by (2) and (3), since information is lacking on the full vector of relevant
prices and many individual-specific production shocks. Instead, this analysis focuses on
“hybrid” equations (Rosenzweig and Schultz, 1983) of:
(4)                                     Ct = C(H,X,ε),
where H measures work hours, X is a vector of individual or family background characteristics
and ε is a disturbance term capturing production shifters or shocks not otherwise controlled for.
        The coefficient estimates from such hybrid equations generally embody the technological
properties of the production function and characteristics of unobserved household preferences or
production shifters. For example, child outcomes depend on the quality as well as the quantity of
parental time inputs and the “technologies” in place when decisions are made. The employment
coefficients therefore indicate the “effects” of working given average differences in other factors,
such as the price-adjusted quality of day care, accompanying the variation in labor supply. A
causal interpretation can only be applied if the variables in X capture the effects of all other
structural determinants of child outcomes.
        The model can be operationalized by allowing outcomes for child i at age t (Cit) to be an
additive separable function of maternal work hours at child ages t-n through t (Hit={Hit, Hit-

1,…Hit-n})   and other production shifters (Vit), according to:
(5)                                     Cit = α + Hitβt + Vit + εit,
for εit an i.i.d. disturbance. Implicit in (5) is the assumption that parental job-holding prior to t-n
or after t has no impact on child outcomes at age t.
        Ruhm (2004) highlights several important econometric issues when using this approach.
First, the parameters of primary interest, β̂ , will be biased if the uncontrolled portion of V is
correlated with H (e.g. if employed women have high home productivity or their children have
favorable endowments). The primary strategy below is to use the detailed information in the
NLSY in an attempt to include a sufficiently rich set of covariates that the error term in the




                                                 Page 6
estimating equation is orthogonal to Hit.11 Second, most previous research focuses on only a
specific period of interest (e.g. at assessment) and does not account for labor supply at other
times. When this is done, the impact of working during the specified years is likely to be
combined with that of labor supply in other periods. Consider the case where Hit={Hit,Hit-j}, for
t the assessment year and t-j an earlier period. If Hit is controlled for but Hit-j is not, βt will
generally be biased in the direction of βˆt − j , if employment is positively correlated over time.12 A
key feature of this analysis is therefore to control for maternal employment during the youth’s
entire life (through the birthday prior to assessment), rather than for just a portion of it.
        Even an extensive set of explanatory variables may not fully account for all important
sources of heterogeneity. One strategy for dealing with this is to control for maternal
employment characteristics prior to birth, in the hope that these absorb the effects of remaining
omitted variables without causally affecting the adolescent outcomes. Employment in the
calendar year after assessment is also incorporated as an additional control and to indicate
possible reverse causation. For example, a positive coefficient might be expected if child health
or developmental problems lead mothers to cut back work hours in future periods. Sibling fixed-
effect and propensity score models, detailed in section D.5, additionally test the robustness of the
results to alternative methods of accounting for heterogeneity.13
                                  C. Data and Descriptive Results
        Data are from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY), a sample of U.S.
residents born between January 1, 1957 and December 31, 1964, and surveyed since 1979.14


11
   However, it is important to exclude variables that result from parental job-holding, since these may
capture a portion of the labor supply effect.
12
   The correlation between average hours in years 1 through 3 and years 4 through 10 or 11 is 0.635 for
the nationally representative portion of the NLSY sample used below.
13
   Some researchers (e.g. Baum, 2003; Anderson et al., 2003; James-Burdumy, 2005) use IV strategies,
most commonly with local economic conditions as instruments. For the methods in this study, however,
it is difficult to devise instruments with power to predict differences in employment during the various
periods controlled for (before pregnancy, during the first 10 or 11 years and post-assessment).
14
   The NLSY originally included a representative sample of 6,111 youths, an oversample of 5,295 blacks,
Hispanics and economically disadvantaged whites, and a supplemental sample of 1,280 persons in the
military. Interviews with the military subsample were suspended after 1984 and for economically
disadvantaged non-Hispanic whites after 1990. This data set is now sometimes referred to as the


                                                 Page 7
Children born to and living with female NLSY respondents have been interviewed at two year
intervals beginning in 1986, with information used here through 2000. The NLSY provides a
unique source of longitudinal information on a large sample of children, including great detail on
maternal, child and household characteristics.
       The NLSY (through 2000) includes children whose mothers were 35 to 42 years old at
the end of 1999. It covers approximately 90 percent of childbearing for this cohort but does not
represent all fertility, since it excludes some births to older women (who tend to have high
incomes and education). The sample analyzed contains children born between 1979 and 1988
and who were 10 or 11 years old at one of the biennial assessment dates between 1986 and 1998.
C.1 Outcomes
       Cognitive development is proxied by scores on the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test
(PPVT) and Peabody Individual Achievement Test Mathematics (PIAT-M) and Reading
Recognition (PIAT-R) subtests. These widely used assessments have high test-retest reliability
and concurrent validity (Baker et al., 1993).15 The PPVT measures receptive vocabulary for
Standard American English and provides a quick estimate of verbal ability and scholastic
aptitude. The PIAT-M assesses attainment in mathematics beginning with early skills, such as
recognizing numerals and progressing to advanced concepts in geometry and trigonometry. The
PIAT-R indicates word recognition and pronunciation ability by examining skills such as
matching letters, naming names and reading single words aloud.
       The analysis focuses on “standard” scores which have been commonly used by previous
researchers (e.g. Baydar and Brooks-Gunn, 1991; Blau and Grossberg, 1992; Parcel and
Menaghan, 1994; Ruhm, 2004) and represent age-specific transformations of the raw scores
designed (during the 1970s) to have a normal distribution with a mean of 100 and a standard
deviation of 15. For ease of interpretation, the scores have been transformed to have a mean of
zero and a standard deviation of one for the nationally representative NLSY subsample, so that


NLSY79, to distinguish it from the new NLSY97 survey covering a later cohort. See Center for Human
Resource Research (2001) for additional information.
15
   Further information on the outcomes and many explanatory variables is contained in Center for Human
Resource Research (2002).


                                                Page 8
the regression coefficients show the standard deviation change in test scores predicted by a one
unit change in the explanatory variable. These are sometimes referred to as “effect sizes”.
        Socioemotional problems are proxied by Behavior Problems Index (BPI) scores and a
dichotomous measure of whether the child has smoked a cigarette or drunk more than a sip or
two of alcoholic beverages. The overall BPI score, used here and in substantial previous
research (e.g. Baydar and Brooks-Gunn, 1991; Moore and Driscoll, 1997; Harvey, 1999; Han et
al., 2001), indicates problems related to antisocial behavior, anxiousness/depression,
headstrongness, hyperactivity, immaturity, dependency and peer conflict/social withdrawal.
Age-specific “standard” scores are used, normalized to a mean of zero and standard deviation of
one. Higher scores imply more problems.16 Early drinking or drug use are among the most
pervasive adolescent problem behaviors and have been associated with increased mortality and
morbidity (Kennedy and Prothrow-Stith, 1997). However, relatively few (13 percent) 10 or 11
year old NLSY children have engaged in these activities, limiting statistical power.
        The final two dependent variables identify adolescents who are obese or at risk of
overweight. Childhood obesity, which is rapidly increasing, reduces physical functioning,
impairs psycho-social health and raises the short-term risks of orthopedic, neurological,
pulmonary and endocrine conditions, type-2 diabetes, and the prediabetic state of glucose
intolerance and insulin resistance (Must and Strauss, 1999; Ebbeling et al., 2002; Schwimmer et
al., 2003). The excess weight significantly raises the chances of adult obesity (Whitaker et al.,
1997; Guo et al., 2002) resulting in serious medical complications and higher rates of future
mortality and medical costs (National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, 1998; Johnson et al.,
2003; Engeland et al., 2004).
        Youths are classified as “obese” if their body mass index (BMI) – weight in kilograms
divided by height in meters squared – is at or above the 95th percentile for gender and age-
specific growth charts compiled by the CDC’s National Center for Health Statistics; they are “at



16
  The BPI is a 32-item parent-reported scale with high internal consistency and test-retest reliability; it
has been widely used and tested across diverse populations to predict future problems (Love, 1997).


                                                   Page 9
risk of overweight” if BMI reaches or exceeds the 85th percentile (Kuczmarski et al., 2000).17
Since these thresholds were benchmarked for reference populations from the 1960s through
1980s, secular increases in body weight imply that far more than 5 (15 percent) of the NLSY
sample are obese (at risk of overweight).
C.2 Maternal Employment
        Maternal employment is measured on an annual basis. The first year of the child’s life
(denoted as year 1) covers the four quarters immediately following birth, year 2 includes the fifth
through eight quarters and so on, through the eleventh year.18 The models control for average
weekly work hours in all jobs divided by 20; thus, a one unit change corresponds to 20 additional
hours of labor supply per week. Most models control for average weekly work hours during
period from the child’s birth through the week of their birthday preceding assessment – when
they turned 10 or 11. For purposes of brevity, this is often referred to using terms like “all years”
or the child’s “entire life”. Some estimates allow nonlinear impacts; others separate employment
during the first three and later years. As with most prior research, paternal employment is
ignored, a significant limitation dictated by severe constraints on the data available for fathers.19
C.3 Other Explanatory Variables
        The analysis exploits the extensive child, maternal, household and geographic
information in the NLSY. A vector of “basic” background variables, so labeled because they
have frequently been used in prior research, contains continuous measures of birth order,

17
   See www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/dnpa/bmi/bmi-for-age.htm for further information. The CDC terms youths
above the 95th percentile as “overweight”. Following Johnson et al. (2003), I call them “obese” to avoid
confusion with the distinct categories of “overweight” and “obese” used for adults. The “at risk of
overweight” group includes children above the 95th percentile here, who are often excluded from this
category in government statistics. Adults are usually classified as obese if their BMI exceeds 30. A more
complicated criterion is used for children because their BMI varies systematically with age.
18
   The NLSY Child/Young Adult File indicates work hours for the first 16 quarters after birth. These
were used to construct the hours variables in the child’s first through forth years of life. Average hours in
other years were calculated using the NLSY Work History File containing weekly employment
information from January 1, 1978 through the end of 1999. In cases where work hours were missing for
specific weeks, the average was calculated over the weeks for which data were reported. Hours are
calculated only for the main job in the few cases where data on secondary jobs were missing.
19
   Limited information is available only for fathers residing with interviewed mothers. Most jobless
weeks do not reflect choices by fathers to spend time with young children (Ruhm, 2004), making it
especially difficult to avoid omitted variables bias when considering paternal labor supply.


                                                  Page 10
mother'
      s age (in years), a quadratic for child age in months, as well as dummy variables for
race/ethnicity (2 variables), sex of the child, the mother’s Armed Forces Qualifications Test
(AFQT) score in 1980, her education at child birth (4 variables) and if a spouse/partner was in
the household during the child’s birth year. Unless noted, all regressors are measured at the child
assessment date. Table A.1 further describes these and other variables used in this study.
        Most models include supplemental characteristics not usually controlled for that provide
information on time or financial resources, child health endowments at birth and the quality of
maternal inputs.20 Early child health problems are incorporated through dichotomous indicators
of low and very low birth weight (2 variables), long hospital stay at birth, hospitalization during
infancy and physician visits for illness during the first three months of life (3 variables). Total
family income in the year prior to birth is included, as are relative ages of the youth’s siblings (4
variables) and a dummy variable for whether the mother attended a private secondary school.
        A third set of regressors, labeled “maternal employment characteristics”, control for
occupation of the mother in the quarter prior to pregnancy (5 variables), the number of weeks
before giving birth that she stopped working (4 variables) and her average weekly work hours in
the year prior to pregnancy. 21 These supply information on tastes for employment and
opportunity costs of not working that may be correlated with unobserved influences on child
development. Weekly work hours in the calendar year after assessment (e.g. 1999 for children
who were 10 and 11 in 1998) are included to further control for confounding factors and indicate
possible reverse causation – from child outcomes to maternal labor supply.
        I tested whether the results were sensitive to including a still more detailed “auxiliary” set
of family and location characteristics such as: presence of the father in the household at the
survey date, the mother'
                       s number of siblings (3 variables), her geographic location at age 14 (3
variables), whether magazines, newspapers, or library cards were in her home at 14 (3 variables),
place of birth and education of her parents (4 variables), whether her mother worked when she

20
  Ruhm (2004) included many of these same explanatory variables.
21
  The pre-pregnancy period includes the 40th through 91st weeks prior to birth. Since the NLSY
employment history began in 1978, data for the entire year was not available for mothers giving birth in
the first three quarters of 1979; their hours were averaged for weeks during 1978 prior to pregnancy.


                                                 Page 11
was 14, her family structure at age 14 (2 variables), if she had smoked a cigarette before age 14
or tried marijuana or hashish before 21 (2 variables), residence in a central city or SMSA/MSA
(2 variables) and location-specific measures of crime, birth, marriage and divorce rates, as well
as the number of physicians (5 variables).22 These potentially account for attitudes, experiences,
capabilities and geographic factors correlated with investments in children. They were omitted
from the “preferred” econometric models, however, because their impact is likely to be indirect
or of limited importance and may be accounted for by the “basic” or “supplemental” regressors.
Also some of them (e.g. presence of the father) could be endogenous.
        To avoid excluding persons lacking data on one or more background characteristics, the
relevant regressors were sometimes set to zero and dummy variables created denoting the
presence of missing values. For example, mothers not reporting an AFQT score were given a
zero value and the “missing AFQT” variable was set to one.23 Alternatively, some dummy
variables were valued at one when the specified condition was met and zero when it was not or
when the relevant data were absent.24
C.4 Socioeconomic Status
        One goal of this investigation is to determine whether maternal employment affects
“advantaged” and “disadvantaged” youths differently. In part, this is evaluated using univariate
measures of race/ethnicity, maternal education or presence of a spouse/partner in the household
at birth.25 However, most of the analysis focuses on a multivariate index of socioeconomic status
(SES) constructed by regressing total family income in the calendar year prior to assessment on
mother’s age (at child birth), AFQT score and education, the child’s race/ethnicity, and whether
a spouse/partner was in the household during the birth year. Youths were then ordered by

22
   Most location data are from the restricted-use NLSY Geocode File and refer to the county of residence.
23
   This was also done for pre-pregnancy income, father’s presence in the household and local area
characteristics.
24
   This strategy was used for hospitalizations and doctor visits in the first year, race/ethnicity and the two
low birth weight regressors. Forty-eight observations were deleted because of missing data on one or
more years of maternal employment.
25
   Researchers considering SES differences typically stratify their samples using single variables such as
education, income or occupational attainment (e.g. Anderson et al., 2003; Zhang and Wang, 2004) or
composites, like the Hollingsworth index, representing relatively simple combinations of two or more
factors (e.g. Gordon-Larsen et al., 2003).


                                                   Page 12
predicted family incomes and classified as high (low) SES if they were in the upper (lower) half
of the predicted income distribution.26
        This SES index simultaneously accounts for a large number of determinants, rather than
relying on multiple stratifications with highly correlated indicators. It also removes some
sources of endogeneity. For example, current income varies with the mother’s employment but
this is less of an issue for predicted incomes that rely on group rather than individual
characteristics.27 Since the ranking procedure does not capture components of SES unrelated to
predicted incomes, it is complementary to rather than a substitute for the univariate measures.28
C.5 Home Environment
        Differences in home environments are proxied by total standard scores on the Home
Observation Measurement of the Environment – Short Form, hereafter referred to as “HOME”
scores.29 The HOME inventory contains a mix of observational and parent-reported items
assessing the emotional support and cognitive stimulation received by children through their
home environment, planned events and family surroundings.30 HOME scores are averaged
values for the assessment year and two and four years earlier, transformed to have a mean of zero
and standard deviation of one for the nationally representative NLSY subsample. The HOME


26
   Rosenbaum and Ruhm (2005) use a similar procedure. The econometric estimates are generally as
expected. Income is positively related to the mother’s AFQT score, education and age. Incomes are
relatively low for children who are black or born into single-parent households. Being Hispanic has
statistically insignificant positive predicted effect. Sample weights were accounted for when calculating
the income percentiles, with the result that the full NLSY sample (because it oversamples minorities)
contains more low than high SES youths. Persons with missing values for family incomes are excluded
from the prediction equation but are placed into SES categories based on the resulting predicted incomes
(which require information on the regression covariates but not on family income itself).
27
   Some endogeneity may remain. For instance, nonwhites have relatively low average incomes and high
obesity prevalence but both could result from third factors.
28
   For example, Smith (forthcoming) presents evidence that education is more important than income in
determining the health of middle-aged adults and seniors, although he emphasizes the importance of
economic circumstances during childhood for determining adult health outcomes.
29
   The standard HOME scores are normed to have an age-specific mean (standard deviation) of 100 (15).
30
   The total score reflects a summation of between 20 and 40 individual items, with the number and
specific items varying by age of the child. An example of a question on cognitive stimulation is “How
often do you read stories to your child” (asked in various wordings for children 9 and under); an example
relating to emotional support is “How often is child expected to clean his/her room” (for ages 6 and
older). Interviewer observations cover topics such as cleanliness of the household and the mother’s
interactions with the child.


                                                Page 13
inventory has high validity and reliability and has been extensively used in analyses of the NLSY
(Mott, 2004).




C.6 Patterns of Maternal Employment
        Figure 1 provides kernel density estimates for weekly maternal employment hours during
the first, third and tenth year of the child’s life, as well as averages over all years.31 There are
spikes at 0 and 40 hours for each individual year, fairly constant probabilities for intermediate
hours and low rates of labor supply beyond 40 hours. The fraction of mothers with no annual
work experience declines and the spike at 40 hours per week becomes much more pronounced as
the child ages. The distribution for hours averaged over the child’s life is considerably more
uniform. Over 93 percent of mothers work at some point during the period, averaging 19.0 hours
per week; the 10th, 25th, 50th, 75th and 90th percentiles are 0.8, 6.6, 18.0, 30.2 and 38.1 hours.
        Mothers work much less in their first child’s year than prior to pregnancy (11.8 vs. 19.0
hours) but labor supply rises substantially by the second year (to 15.1 hours) and increases
steadily thereafter due to growth at both the intensive and extensive margins (see the top panel of
Table 1). Just 57 percent engage in market employment during the child’s infancy, compared to
64 percent in year 2 and 76 percent in year 10. The probability of working more than 40 hours
per week is 7, 14 and 30 percent in the first, second and tenth years.
        Labor supply also increases with socioeconomic status. High SES mothers average 21
hours per week over the child’s life, versus 17 hours for the low SES group (see the lower panel
of table 1). They are 1.3 times as likely to work 20 or more hours weekly (51 vs. 40 percent) and
average at least 40 hours over twice as often (7.9 vs. 3.7 percent). However, almost all (93
percent) of low SES mothers engage in some market employment.
C.7 Descriptive Relationships



31
  Results in this section and the next refer to the nationally representative subsample of the NLSY.
Similar findings are obtained using weighted data for the full sample.


                                                 Page 14
        Maternal employment is associated with favorable child outcomes. The top panel of
Table 2 shows that children whose mothers averaged at least 30 hours per week had mean scores
.16 to .17 standard deviations higher on the three cognitive assessments than those with mothers
working fewer than 15 hours weekly. They also had substantially fewer behavioral problems
and lower rates of substance use but higher probabilities of obesity or risk of overweight.
Youths with mothers employed 15-29 hours per week generally had intermediate outcomes.32
        These disparities need not reflect causal effects. The remainder of the table demonstrates
that children whose mothers supply large amounts of labor tend to come from advantaged
families and possess favorable characteristics. Women averaging 30 or more hours per week
were older at child birth (23.5 vs. 22.7 years) and more likely to have attended college (43.8 vs.
25.5 percent) than those working 14 or fewer hours. They more often lived with a spouse/partner
during the birth year (80.4 vs. 69.6 percent), had higher AFQT scores (44.4 vs. 33.5), greater
income in the calendar year preceding assessment ($54,106 vs. $36,891) and their children less
frequently had low birth weight (4.8 vs. 6.8 percent).
        There are sharp SES gradients for all outcomes. Average differences between the top and
lower half of the SES distribution are .78, .62, .59 and -.24 standard deviations for PPVT, PIAT-
M, PIAT-R and BPI scores and -5.1, -5.8 and -3.6 percentage points for substance use, obesity
and risk of overweight (see Table A.2). These disparities once again mainly reflect factors other
than maternal employment. For instance, high SES youths rarely had low birthweight (5.8 vs.
8.9 percent), were much more likely to be born into two-parent households (92.5 vs. 46.0
percent) and to have college-educated mothers (56.0 vs. 16.2 percent).
                                       D. Econometric Estimates
        Table 3 summarizes results of four econometric specifications where the outcomes are
cognitive test performance. Table 4 provides corresponding results for BPI scores, substance
use, and excess body weight. Maternal employment refers to average weekly work hours

32
  The patterns differ somewhat for employment during the first three years, where the highest cognitive
scores were obtained by youths whose mothers averaged 15-29 hours per week. However, the penalties
associated with longer hours were not statistically significant and the latter group were least likely to have
behavioral problems or to have used tobacco or alcohol.


                                                  Page 15
(divided by 20) during child’s first 10 or 11 years. Estimation is by ordinary least squares for the
cognitive and BPI scores, with effect sizes of a 20 hour per week increase in the mother’s labor
supply displayed. Binary probit models are used for the dichotomous outcomes (substance use,
obesity and overweight risk) and the tables indicate the predicted effect of an extra 20 hours of
work with other explanatory variables evaluated at the sample means. All models include
assessment year dummy variables. Additional regressors are detailed at the bottom of the table:
B, S and E refer to the vectors of basic, supplemental and maternal employment characteristics
described previously and detailed in appendix Table A.1. One empirical strategy is to examine
how the addition of more extensive controls alters the parameter estimates on maternal labor
supply. Additional specifications, summarized in Table A.3, include vectors of auxiliary
characteristics or state fixed-effects.
D.1 Cognitive Development
        Column (a) of Table 3, which controls only for work hours and the assessment year,
provides further evidence that 10 and 11 year olds with employed mothers have relatively high
cognitive scores – 20 hours of labor supply per week is associated with a .19 to .26 standard
deviation rise in test performance. However, this largely reflects omitted variables bias.
Inclusion of the basic set of covariates (specification b) cuts the parameter estimates by at least
70 percent; adding the supplemental regressors (column c) further reduces the predicted gains,
and accounting for maternal employment characteristics (model d) yields small and insignificant
negative point estimates – the increased employment is correlated .03, .03 and .05 standard
deviation reductions in verbal, mathematics and reading scores, corresponding to changes from
the median to the 49th, 49th and 48th percentile. Inclusion of auxiliary characteristics or state
fixed-effects do not substantially alter these estimates (see Table A.3) but, if anything, suggest
more deleterious impacts than in model (d), the “preferred” specification focused upon below.
        The coefficients on post-assessment employment imply a fairly strong positive
relationship between test scores and the mother'
                                               s future labor supply. Since employment is
unlikely to substantially affect outcomes in earlier periods, this suggests reverse causation,
whereby good cognitive performance is positively correlated with subsequent work hours.


                                               Page 16
Assuming a similar pattern occurs at younger child ages, the estimates in Table 3 are likely to
understate the negative effects of work. However, even accounting for this, there is little
evidence that maternal employment strongly affects cognitive development for the typical child.


D.2 Socioemotional Development and Excess Body Weight
        Absent regressors other than the survey year, there is a negative association between
maternal work hours and behavior problems or early substance use but a positive correlation with
excess body weight (see column a of Table 4). The inclusion of additional controls
(specifications b through d) attenuates but does not eliminate the reduction predicted for BPI
scores – the effect size declines from -.11 to -.04 – and the small positive coefficient on post-
assessment employment suggests that the favorable impact of maternal job-holding on problem
behaviors may be slightly understated in specification (d). However, these effects are again
small for the average youth – corresponding to movement from the median to the 48th
percentile—and statistically insignificant. Conversely, labor supply predicts increases in
smoking or tobacco use that are large in percentage terms but imprecisely estimated.33
        The addition of covariates only minimally affects the employment coefficients for obesity
and overweight risk – 20 additional hours of work per week are anticipated to raise these
probabilities by 1.6 and 3.0 percentage points in column (a), compared to 1.6 and 2.3 points in
specification (d). These magnitudes are substantial but the confidence intervals are large.34
Moreover, while consistent with Anderson et al.’s (2003) evidence that maternal labor supply
increases youth obesity, the large parameter estimates on future employment raise doubts that
these represent causal effects rather than a spurious positive relationship.35
D.3 Socioeconomic Status


33
   With other explanatory variables at their sample means, the predicted probability of substance use is
.1110, so that an increase of .0112 corresponds to a rise of 10 percent. The small coefficient on future
employment (.001 with a standard error of .007) provides no indication of reverse causation.
34
   At the sample means, 13.4 (30.5) percent of children are predicted to be obese (at risk of overweight);
therefore the estimates in model (d) imply that 20 extra work hours raise the probability by 12 (8) percent.
35
   For all of these outcomes, the parameter estimates on labor supply are only minimally affected by
controlling for auxiliary characteristics or state fixed effects (see Table A.3).


                                                 Page 17
        Small average effects of maternal employment mask sharp disparities across
“advantaged” and “disadvantaged” adolescents. This is shown in Table 5, which displays results
for subsamples stratified by race/ethnicity, maternal education, presence of a spouse/partner in
the household at child birth, and the previously described multivariate SES index. Here and
below, all specifications control for the survey year, basic, supplemental and maternal
employment characteristics (equivalent to model d of Tables 3 and 4).
        Substantial negative impacts are predicted for advantaged youths, compared to neutral or
favorable consequences for the less advantaged. Effect sizes for the three cognitive scores range
between -.03 and .06 for disadvantaged children (see the top panel of the table), compared to .03
to .21 standard deviation reductions for advantaged adolescents (see the lower panel). The
magnitudes vary with the method of stratifying the sample but the adverse consequences of the
mother’s labor supply are estimated to be larger for advantaged than disadvantaged youths using
any of the criteria. Particularly noteworthy are the large reductions in cognitive performance
associated with the employment of highly educated mothers.
        The patterns are similar for excess body weight. Twenty hours of weekly employment
predicts –0.8 to 1.3 (0.2 to 2.0) percentage point increases in obesity (risk of overweight) among
disadvantaged youths, compared to a 1.4 to 3.2 (1.8 to 5.0) point higher prevalence for
advantaged adolescents.36 There is also some indication of less favorable or more detrimental
effects for advantaged adolescents when considering behavior problems or early substance use,
although these results are more sensitive to the sample stratification criteria.
        Evidence that high SES children are particularly disadvantaged by maternal employment
has been obtained in a number of recent studies (e.g. Brooks-Gunn et al., 2002; Ruhm, 2004;
Lopoo, 2004) as well as some earlier research (Greenstein, 1995). With the exception of
Anderson et al. (2003), however, this issue has received only peripheral attention. To remedy




36
  The positive relationship between the maternal work hours and obesity among high SES youths does
not reflect reverse causation – the coefficient (standard error) on future employment is .004 (.010).
However, this remains a concern for overweight risk, where the coefficient (standard error) is .037 (.016).


                                                 Page 18
this, the remainder of the analysis focuses on the role of SES, emphasizing results for the
multivariate measure based upon predicted family incomes.
D.4 Nonlinearities
       The impact of maternal employment could vary with its intensity. For example, several
studies (Parcel and Menaghan, 1994; Richards and Duckett, 1994; Muller, 1995; Ruhm, 2004)
suggest benefits of limited employment but decreasing returns or costs for longer work hours.
Specification (b) of Table 6 allows such nonlinearities by including a quadratic in labor supply,
with results displayed for cognitive performance and excess body weight.37 The first three rows
of each panel indicate predicted changes associated with averaging 20, 30 or 40 hours of work
per week over the child’s life, compared to no employment. Model (a) shows corresponding
estimates from models that exclude the quadratic term. The fourth row presents the p-value for
the null hypothesis that the coefficient on hours squared is zero. The fifth shows p-values for the
null hypothesis that the employment coefficients in the model are all equal to zero – testing
whether maternal labor supply has a statistically significant impact.
       The results again differ sharply by SES. Allowing for nonlinearities (specification b),
moderate amounts of employment have strongly positive anticipated impacts on the cognitive
outcomes of disadvantaged youths. The p-values are below .03 for verbal and reading
achievement, with a substantial but less precisely estimated effect on math performance. The
test scores are predicted to reach a maximum when the mother averages 18 to 22 hours of work
weekly, with negative effects obtained only for very long hours. Compared to not working, 20
hours per week of employment predicts PPVT, PIAT-M and PIAT-R score gains of .19, .09 and
.11 standard deviations. These findings contrast with the small and statistically insignificant
results obtained using linear models (see specification a). Neither the linear nor quadratic
specifications indicate any employment effect on obesity or risk of overweight.
       By contrast, maternal labor supply predicts strong deleterious impacts for high SES
adolescents which, except for PIAT-M scores, accumulate in an approximately linear fashion.

37
  BPI scores and substance use are not shown since mixed and generally insignificant findings were
obtained for them above and using these specifications.


                                               Page 19
The coefficient on hours squared only approaches statistical significance for mathematics
performance; in all other cases, the results suggest that the linear model (specification a) is
preferable. However, the employment effects are large in either specification. Compared to not
working, 40 hours per week of maternal employment is estimated to reduce PPVT, PIAT-M and
PIAT-R scores by .20, .18 and .18 standard deviations and raise obesity and overweight risk by
6.6 and 9.6 percentage points in model (a), versus .17, .13 and .18 standard deviations and 5.6
and 8.9 points in specification (b); although there are sometimes larger disparities at shorter
hours.
D.5 Alternative Specifications and Tests of Robustness
         The first years of life are believed to be especially important for children because of early
influences on brain development, learning skills, self-esteem and emotional security (Carnegie
Task Force on Meeting the Needs of Young Children, 1994; Shore, 1997; Heckman, 2000).38 I
examined this issue by allowing maternal employment during the first three years to have
different effects from that in later periods. The results do not provide uniform support for a
special role during earliest childhood. Particularly adverse impacts are obtained for work in the
first three years for some outcomes (e.g. PPVT and PIAT-M scores) but not others (e.g. PIAT-R
performance) and when considering obesity among high SES children, the negative
consequences are largely restricted to maternal labor supply occurring after the first three years.
         Boys are often thought to be particularly affected by early environmental conditions.39
Although estimates for subsamples of males and females were usually not precise enough to
reject the null hypothesis of no gender difference, the point estimates consistently suggested
stronger negative of maternal employment effects on cognitive development and excess body
weight for boys than girls. Working an extra 20 hours per week was predicted to reduce male
PPVT, PIAT-M and PIAT-R scores by .04, .08 and .09 standard deviations, compared to .03, -

38
   However, the mechanisms are poorly understood and the relationship between early brain development
and future outcomes remains controversial (Bruer, 1999).
39
   Previous research obtains mixed evidence for maternal employment however. Desai, et al., 1989;
Richards and Duckett, 1991; Brooks-Gunn, et al., 2002) obtain stronger negative effects for boys than
girls but Han et al. (2001) do not uncover gender differences, Waldfogel et al. (2002) find larger negative
effects for girls, and the relative magnitudes obtained by Ruhm (2004) vary across outcomes.


                                                 Page 20
.02 and -.00 standard deviations for females; obesity and overweight risk were anticipated to rise
2.8 and 3.2 percentage points for boys versus -0.0 and 1.2 points for girls. The data same pattern
was obtained for high SES youths, although with smaller gender disparities than for the full
sample.40
        Some researchers (Neidell, 2000; Ermisch and Francesconi, 2001; Waldfogel et al., 2002;
Anderson, et al., 2003; Aizer, 2004; Aughinbaugh and Gittleman, 2004; James-Burdumy, 2005)
have use fixed-effect (FE) models to exploit variations among children with the same mother.
These automatically control for time-invariant maternal factors but are not a panacea since child-
specific attributes (uncorrelated with the maternal fixed-effect) are not held constant. The
resulting bias may be larger than in corresponding OLS estimates if unobserved differences
across children are a key determinant of sibling variations in maternal labor supply. There is
considerable evidence that mothers work less when their children have health or developmental
problems (e.g. Behrman, et al., 1982; Corman et al., 2003; Powers, 2003), implying that the FE
models are likely to underestimate any costs of work by mothers. Even so, for high SES siblings
the fixed-effect estimates usually revealed more deleterious effects on cognitive development
than analogous OLS specifications.41
        A similar pattern was obtained when I calculated average treatment effects from
propensity score (PS) models (Rosenbaum and Rubin, 1983; Heckman et al., 1998) where the
treatment (control) group included youths whose mothers averaged at least 30 (10 or fewer)
hours of weekly work.42 Maternal employment was once again generally estimated to have small


40
   A 20-hour per week increase in maternal employment is predicted to reduce the PPVT, PIAT-M and
PIAT-R scores of high SES boys by .10, .15 and .09 standard deviations, compared to decreases of .10, -
.02 and .07 standard deviations for high SES girls. Obesity and overweight risk are anticipated to rise by
4.3 and 5.4 percentage points for males, versus 2.3 and 5.2 points for females.
41
   Fairly large (but statistically insignificant) positive (negative) FE coefficients were obtained for the
PPVT and PIAT-M (PIAT-R) scores of low SES youths, while the OLS coefficients were close to zero.
Reliable FE estimates could not be obtained for the body weight measures because the conditional logit
procedures rely on the small sample of siblings with different values for these dichotomous outcomes.
42
   Youths whose mothers averaged more than 10 and less than 30 hours of labor supply were excluded.
The PS estimates used kernel-matching with a Gaussian kernel. Computation of the average treatment
effects was restricted to the region of common support and bootstrapped standard errors were obtained
using 250 repetitions.


                                                 Page 21
and insignificant effects for low SES adolescents.43 By contrast, the PS specifications yielded
larger deleterious effects for high SES youths than corresponding OLS models.44
        The observed SES differences are also not an artifact of the classification thresholds.
This is shown in the top panel of Table 7, which divides the sample into thirds (rather than
halves) of the predicted income distribution. The estimated effects again become uniformly
more negative as SES increases. For example, a 20 hour per week increase in maternal labor
supply is anticipated to raise the PPVT scores of children in the lowest third of distribution by
.05 standard deviations, compared to reductions of .07 and .16 standard deviations for those in
the middle and top tertiles. Similarly, predicted changes in obesity are -1.7, 0.7 and 6.3
percentage points for children in the lowest, middle and highest SES groups.
        As an alternative stratification criteria, the lower panel of Table 7 categorizes SES using
family income in the year prior to pregnancy. The rational for doing so is that pre-pregnancy
incomes will unaffected by employment decisions made by the mother during the child’s life.
The pattern of results obtained are similar to those just discussed – with more negative maternal
employment effects for high than low SES children – although the gradient is weaker for excess
body weight than when basing SES on predicted incomes.
D.6 Sources of SES Disparities
        I tested, but found no support, for the possibility that maternal labor supply has
particularly deleterious consequences for advantaged adolescents because the benefits of
earnings provided by the mother’s employment are muted at high SES levels.45 When controls
for family incomes or maternal earnings (averaged over several years) were added to the basic




43
   The one exception was that both the PS and OLS models suggested that low SES children in the
treatment group had significantly fewer behavior problems than those in the control group.
44
   Effect sizes from the PS models were -.11, -.05, -.14, and .07 for PPVT, PIAT-M, PIAT-R and BPI
scores, compared to -.05, .02, -.09 and .02 in corresponding OLS specifications. The PS (OLS) models
predicted 1.8, 6.6 and 14.5 (0.9, 4.4 and 11.2) percentage point increases in substance use, obesity and
overweight risk.
45
   This might occur because of diminishing marginal benefits of income or because a greater proportion of
income is devoted to children in poor than wealthy families (Lazear and Michael, 1988).


                                                Page 22
regression model, there was little indication that either mattered, and the employment
coefficients were scarcely affected by their inclusion.46
        Another potential explanation is that advantaged adolescents have particularly enriching
home environments, implying relatively high costs of being placed in nonparental care.47 Such
effects may vary across outcomes. The most negative consequences for academic test scores
were obtained for children with highly educated mothers (see Table 5), suggesting that time
inputs by educated parents may be a key input for cognitive development. By contrast, family
structure (as proxied by presence of an adult male in the birth year) was of equal or greater
importance when considering obesity, possibly reflecting differences in eating habits or
recreational activities.
        The data confirm that home environments vary systematically with socioeconomic status.
Average HOME scores of high SES children are .71 standard deviations above those of their low
SES counterparts and the environments of advantaged youths are superior across a variety of
other measurable dimensions.48 Favorable home environments also predict better cognitive
scores, as shown in specification (a) of Table 8 which adds the HOME standard score to the
regression specifications estimated previously. A one standard deviation increase in this score is
associated with a .15 to .20 standard deviation rise in verbal, mathematics and reading test scores
for the full sample, with effect sizes ranging between .12 and .20 (.18 and .29) for low (high)
SES youths. However, HOME scores are not consistently related to excess body weight.




46
   Family incomes (for the prior calendar year) were measured at the assessment date and 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8
and 9 survey years earlier. Maternal earnings were averaged for the year before assessment and 2, 4, 6, 8
and 10 years prior to that. The choice of periods was largely dictated by data availability. These results
are consistent with other recent research (e.g. Blau, 1999; Shea, 2000; Aughinbaugh and Gittleman, 2003)
indicating that income has no effect or a very small positive impact on child outcomes.
47
   Bianchi et al. (2004) provide evidence that highly educated mothers spend relatively large amounts of
time with their children and devote more of it to activities likely to be particularly beneficial (e.g. reading
to their children rather than watching television with them). These education differentials appear to have
risen over time, despite faster growth in the employment of highly educated mothers.
48
   They are more likely to have visited a museum in the previous year (84.4 vs. 72.3 percent), to have
been read to by their mother three or more times per week at ages 6 or 7 (55.1 vs. 37.1 percent) and they
watch 1.1 fewer hours of television per day (3.8 vs. 4.9 hours).


                                                   Page 23
          Specification (b) of Table 8 augments the model by interacting HOME scores and
maternal work hours. If the mother’s employment is particularly harmful to children raised in
enriching environments, we expect the interaction coefficient to be negative. This is what occurs
for the three cognitive outcomes, although the parameter estimate is not always statistically
significant. Given the absence of any main effect of HOME scores on obesity or overweight
risk, the small and insignificant interaction effects for these outcomes are not surprising.
          Table 9 shows the portion of the SES disparity in the effects of maternal employment that
can be attributed to differences in the environmental factors captured by HOME scores. The top
rows of the upper and middle panels, labeled “At Actual HOME Score”, indicate predicted labor
supply effects without adjusting for these differences. These are obtained from regressions
identical to specification (d) of Tables 3 and 4, for the subsample of children with reported
HOME scores.49 The second row of the top two panels, labeled “At Average HOME Score”,
shows the expected impact of maternal employment obtained from specification (b) of Table 8
but with the HOME score (and so also its interaction with work hours) set to zero – the average
value for the nationally representative NLSY subsample. The bottom panel shows the total SES
disparity (the difference between the first rows of the middle and upper panels), the predicted
gap for children living in an average home environment (the difference between the second rows
of the two panels) and the fraction of the disparity explained by differences in average HOME
scores (one minus the second row of the lower panel divided by the first row, expressed as a
percentage).
          The findings confirm that heterogeneity in home environments explains, at least in a
statistical sense, a large portion of the SES disparity in the effects of maternal employment on
cognitive development. For instance, 20 hours of additional weekly labor supply is predicted to
reduce the PPVT scores of high SES youths by .100 standard deviations while having virtually
no effect low SES adolescents (raising them.004 standard deviations), for a total disparity of -
.104 standard deviations. However, the anticipated decreases are .033 and .077 standard
deviations, for low and high SES adolescents with average HOME scores, leaving a gap of .044
49
     A maximum of 0.4% of observations are lost due to missing HOME scores.


                                                Page 24
standard deviations and implying that 58 percent of the original disparity has been accounted for.
Differences in HOME scores similarly explain 35 and 62 percent of the SES gap in PIAT-M and
PIAT-R performance, but none of the difference for excess body weight. Since the HOME
inventory is an imperfect proxy of the home environment, these results may provide a lower-
bound on the extent to which the latter explains the observed SES disparities.
        The NLSY contains no information on physical activity or food intake, which determine
(in a mechanical sense) adolescent obesity. However, there is indirect evidence that maternal
employment changes factors such as eating habits (e.g. the frequency of calorie-rich meals in
restaurants) that have common effects across family members. Higher maternal BMI predicts
greater risk of excess body weight among adolescents.50 Such correlations are not decisive,
because they may partially reflect other factors (like genetics), but it is noteworthy that changes
in maternal BMI, measured from before pregnancy to the assessment date, are also positively
related to adolescent obesity and risk of overweight.51 Moreover, controlling for the change in
BMI changes reduces the SES disparity in maternal employment “effects” by 11 (17) percent for
adolescent obesity (risk of overweight), again suggesting a role for common family factors.52
        Further support is obtained from models where maternal BMI (at the assessment date) is
the outcome. The striking result is that higher labor supply predicts reductions in body weight
for low SES mothers but increases for their advantaged counterparts. These relationships are
attenuated but not eliminated when also controlling for BMI prior to pregnancy or using changes
in BMI between the two periods as the dependent variable (see Table A.4).53 The differences are
not always statistically significant and need not represent causal relationships, if selection into
employment by body weight is not adequately accounted for, but they are consistent with the
effects of work hours on adolescent body weight documented above and so with a role for

50
   When mother’s BMI at the assessment date is added to the models estimated above, each BMI “point”
(kg/m2) raises the probability of obesity (overweight risk) by 0.9 (2.2) percentage points for high SES
youths and 1.0 (1.6) points for low SES adolescents.
51
   A one kg/m2 change in the maternal BMI is predicted to raise obesity by 0.5 (0.9) percentage points for
low (high) SES youths and elevate the risk of overweight by 0.8 (2.0) points.
52
   The gaps decrease considerably more – by 39 and 67 percent – when maternal BMI before pregnancy
and at the assessment date are separately controlled for.
53
   The coefficient on BMI before pregnancy exceeds one, suggesting that early disparities grow over time.


                                                 Page 25
common family factors.54 That said, future research needs to further examine sources of SES
disparities in obesity.55
                                               E. Discussion
        Recent research indicates that maternal employment during the child’s early years has
negative effects on cognitive and socioemotional development measured around the time of
school entry. This analysis shows that few of these deleterious consequences persist through the
beginning of adolescence for the average youth. More striking are the sharp variations in effects
predicted by socioeconomic status. For low SES youths, the most favorable outcomes occur
when the mother is employed approximately half-time, with negative impacts largely restricted
to long work hours. Maternal employment averaging 20 hours per week is anticipated to raise
verbal, mathematics and reading test scores by 0.19, 0.09 and 0.11 standard deviations,
compared to no work, while having little effect on excess body weight. Averaging 40 hours of
work per week, which is rare, eliminates many of the cognitive benefits but still generally leaves
the youths no worse off than if the mother did not hold a job.
        By contrast, substantial negative consequences of even limited amounts of labor supply
are predicted for advantaged adolescents: where maternal employment averaging 40 hours per
week decreases expected cognitive test performance by .13 to .20 standard deviations, while
raising obesity (risk of overweight) by 6.6 (9.6) percentage points. Losses of this size are
substantial. Compared to not working, full-time employment is anticipated to decrease PPVT,
PIAT-M and PIAT-R scores from the 60th, 57th and 61st to the 53rd, 52nd and 54th percentiles, to
almost double the rate of obesity (from 7.6 to 14.2 percent) and raise overweight risk by over 40
percent (from 23.5 to 33.5 percent). Currie and Thomas (2001) indicate that early test


54
   I briefly examined whether the SES disparities might be related to variations in television viewing.
The estimates suggested that television hours were positively associated with adolescent obesity but, since
maternal employment was more strongly correlated with TV watching for low than high SES youths, this
seems unlikely to explain the differences in excess body weight.
55
   Crepinsek et al. (2004) provide intriguing evidence that children whose mothers work full-time have
less healthy diets than those with nonworking mothers, with larger differences 5-12 than 2-4 year olds.
They do not analyze SES disparities but show that participation in the federal Child and Adult Care Food
Program (which provides subsidized nutritious meals and snacks to children in day care) is associated
with larger improvements in diet for children in low than high income families.


                                                 Page 26
performance is strongly related to future educational and labor market outcomes, suggesting that
the cognitive effects may have lasting economic costs. The negative health consequences of
excess weight during early adolescence are well known.
        We do not fully understand why maternal job-holding is particularly deleterious for high
SES youths. A tentative but fairly strong conclusion is that much of the cognitive impact occurs
because these children are pulled out of home environments conducive to learning, presumably
to be placed in less enriching nonparental care. This does not explain the findings for obesity,
where preliminary evidence suggests the importance of determinants weight that are common to
both the child and mother (e.g. the frequency of consuming home-cooked meals).
        These findings demonstrate that the pathways to desirable child outcomes may vary with
the specific attributes considered and highlight the need to examine other potential sources of
SES disparities. For example, disadvantaged children with working mothers are often cared for
by grandparents or other relatives (Anderson and Levine, 2000; Smith, 2002; Rosenbaum and
Ruhm, 2005), which might reduce any negative effects, if relatives provide time investments of
similar quality to those of parents. Alternatively, employment by high SES women might
relatively frequently be motivated by divorce or other adverse family events that negatively
affect children.56 Also, experimental evidence indicates that the work requirements associated
with welfare reform adversely affected the school performance of adolescent children (Gennetian
et al., 2002), suggesting that the consequences for low SES youths may vary depending on
whether maternal employment is voluntary or mandated.
        Several limitations of the analysis deserve mention. The NLSY is not entirely
representative, since it excludes some offspring of older mothers and is restricted to children
born between 1979 and 1988. The consequences of employment may depend on the
technologies or institutional arrangements in place, and so could differ across locations or for

56
   High SES mothers more frequently work long hours but there is no evidence that this is the main
reason for the disparities in employment effects. Instead, the combination of adverse consequences for
even limited amounts of labor supply and for work after the child’s first three years of life is consistent
with this group having particularly favorable home environments (e.g. time investments by highly
educated mothers during the early school years may particularly promote the development of good study
habits and mastery of difficult material).


                                                  Page 27
more recent cohorts (e.g. if workplaces have become more “family-friendly” or there have been
changes in the quality of nonparental child care). Better understanding the mechanisms by
which parental investments promote child development might also facilitate designing less costly
methods of achieving the same benefits. Finally, the role of paternal employment needs to be
carefully examined, which is difficult given shortcomings of existing data sources.
       The models rely upon the explanatory variables to account for the selection into market
work, rather than exploiting exogenous sources of variation. Identifying natural experiments or
instrumental variable approaches represents a useful goal for future research. That said, the
negative consequences of maternal employment for advantaged youths are probably not an
artifact of the estimation technique. The predicted labor supply effects typically become less
favorable with the addition of more complete controls for heterogeneity and women tend to work
less if their offspring had low test scores in previous years, which is likely to induce a positive
correlation between employment and cognitive development. Maternal fixed-effect and
propensity score models also yield similar or more negative estimated consequences than
corresponding OLS specifications for high SES adolescents.
       Over 90 percent of mother’s work during their child’s first 10 or 11 years but most only
limited amounts – less than half average 20 or more hours per week and fewer than 6 percent at
least 40 hours weekly. When combined with the results above, this suggests that low SES
families are generally making employment decisions consistent with the most favorable child
outcomes. Conversely, even limited amounts of employment are predicted to have negative
effects for high SES adolescents and their mothers supply more labor.
       Advantaged youths, however, do relatively well even when their mothers work. Table 10
shows predicted cognitive scores and prevalence of excess weight at 0, 20 and 40 hours of
maternal employment.57 A high SES adolescent whose mother averaged 40 hours per week is
expected to have considerably worse cognitive performance than if her mother did not hold a job

57
  These predictions are obtained using a quadratic in work hours for low SES youths and a linear model
for their high SES counterparts, except for PIAT-M scores where a quadratic specification is used for
both groups. For the dichotomous outcomes, the expected outcomes are averaged over all children, with
covariates other than maternal employment evaluated at the individual values.


                                               Page 28
– scoring at the 52nd through 54th percentile on the three tests, versus the 57th through 61st
percentiles. Nevertheless, these are well above the 33rd through 39th percentiles predicted for a
low SES child whose mother worked 20 hours per week (approximately where test performance
is maximized). Expected rates of overweight risk and obesity are also relatively low for
advantaged 10 and 11 year olds, except when their mothers are employed full-time. The welfare
implications of these findings are unclear since child outcomes are just one argument in the
parents’ utility function. High SES families may willingly forgo some gains to their children to
obtain other benefits.58 Alternatively, they might not be aware of the negative labor supply
effects, implying suboptimal outcomes.




58
     For example, time off work might reduce advancement in the labor market and lower future incomes.




                                                 Page 29
                                                References
Anderson, Patricia M. and Phillip B. Levine. 2003. “Child Care and Mother’s Employment
  Decisions”, in Finding Jobs: Work and Welfare Reform, edited by David Card and Rebecca
  Blank. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 2000, 420-62.

Anderson, Patricia M., Kristin F. Butcher, Phillip B. Levine. 2003. “Maternal Employment and
  Overweight Children”, Journal of Health Economics, 22(3), 477-504.
Aiza, Anna. 2004. “Home Alone: Supervision After School and Child Behavior” Journal of Public
  Economics 88(9-10), 1835-48.
Aughinbaugh, Alison and Maury Gittleman. 2003. “Does Money Matter” A Comparison of the
  Effect of Income on Child Development in the United States and Great Britain” Journal of
  Human Resources, 37(2), 416-40.
Aughinbaugh, Alison and Maury Gittleman. 2004. “Maternal Employment and Adolescent Risky
  Behavior” Journal of Health Economics, 23(4), 815-38.
Baker, Paula C., Canada K. Keck, Frank L. Mott, and Stephen V. Quinlan. 1993. NLSY Child
  Handbook, 1986-1990. Columbus, OH: Center for Human Resource Research.
Barglow, Peter, Josefina Contreras, Laura Kavesh, Brian E. Vaughn. 1998. “Developmental
  Follow-up of 6-7 Year Old Children of Mothers Employed During Their Infancies” Child
  Psychiatry and Human Development, 29(1), 3-20.
Baum, Charles L. 2003. “Does Early Maternal Employment Harm Child Development? An
  Analysis of the Potential Benefits of Leave Taking”, Journal of Labor Economics 21(2), 409-
  448.
Baydar, Nazli and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn. 1991. “Effects of Maternal Employment and Child-Care
  Arrangements on Preschoolers’ Cognitive and Behavioral Outcomes: Evidence from the
  Children of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth” Developmental Psychology 27(6), 932-
  945.
Becker, Gary S. 1981. A Treatise on the Family. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Belsky, Jay. 1988. “The ‘Effects’ of Infant Day Care Reconsidered” Early Childhood Research
  Quarterly, 3, 235-272.
Belsky, Jay and David Eggebeen. 1991. “Early and Extensive Maternal Employment and Young
  Children’s Socioemotional Development”, Journal of Family and Marriage, 53, November,
  1083-1110.
Belsky, Jay and Michael J. Rovine. 1988. “Nonmaternal Care in the First Year of Life and the
  Security of Infant-Parent Attachment” Child Development 59, 157-167.
Behrman, Jere R., Robert A. Pollack, and Paul Taubman. 1982. “Parental Preferences and Provision
  for Progeny” Journal of Political Economy 90(1), 52-73.
Bianchi, Suzanne. 2000. “Maternal Employment and Time With Children: Dramatic Change or
   Surprising Continuity” Demography, 37(4), 401-414.




                                              Page 30
Bianchi, Suzanne, Philip N. Cohen, Sara Raley, and Kei Nomaguchi. 2004. “Inequality in Parental
   Investments in Child-Rearing: Expenditures, Time, and Health” in Kathryn M. Neckerman (ed.)
   Social Inequality. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 189-219.
Blau, David M., David K. Guilkey, and Barry M. Popkin. 1996. “Infant Health and the Labor
   Supply of Mothers” Journal of Human Resources 31(1), 90-139.
Blau, David M. 1999. “The Effect of Income on Child Development” The Review of Economics and
   Statistics, 81(2), 261-76.
Blau, Francine B. and Adam J. Grossberg. 1992. “Maternal Labor Supply and Children’s Cognitive
   Development” The Review of Economics and Statistics 74(3), 474-481.
Bogenschneider, Karen and Laurence Steinberg. 1994. “Maternal Employment and Adolscents’
  Academic Achievement: A Developmental Analysis” Sociology of Education 67(1), 60-77.
Bruer, John T. 1999. The Myth of the First Three Years: A New Understanding of Early Brain
  Development and Lifelong Learning. New York: The Free Press.
Brooks-Gunn, Jeanne, Wen-Jui Han, and Jane Waldfogel. 2002. “Maternal Employment and Child
  Cognitive Outcomes in the First Three Years of Life: The NICHD Study of Early Child Care”,
  Child Development 73(4), 1052-1072.
Bryant, W. Keith and Cathleen D. Zick. 1996. “An Examination of Parent-Child Shared Time”,
  Journal of Marriage and the Family 58(1), 227-237.
Carnegie Task Force on Meeting the Needs of Young Children. 1994. Starting Points: Meeting the
  Needs of Our Youngest Children. New York: Carnegie Corporation of New York.
Caughy, Margaret O’Brien, Janet A. DiPietro, and Donna M. Strobino. 1994. “Day-Care
  Participation as A Protective Factor in the Cognitive Development of Low-Income Children”
  Child Development 65, 457-471.
Center for Human Resource Research. 2001. NLSY79: Users Guide: A Guide to the 1979-2000
  National Longitudinal Survey of Youth Data. Columbus, OH: Center for Human Resource
  Research, Ohio State University.
Center for Human Resource Research. 2002. NLSY79: Child and Young Adult Data Users Guide: A
  Guide to the 1986-2000 Child Data, 1994-2000 Young Adult Data. Columbus, OH: Center for
  Human Resource Research, Ohio State University.
Clarke-Stewart, K. Alison. 1989. “Infant Day Care: Maligned or Malignant?” American
   Psychologist 44(2), February, 266-273.
Clarke-Stewart, K. Alison. 1991. “A Home is Not A School: The Effects of Child Care on
   Children’s Development” Journal of Social Issues 47(2), 105-23.
Coleman, James S. 1988. “Social Capital and the Creation of Human Capital” American Journal of
  Sociology, 94, s95-s120.
Corman, Hope, Nancy E. Reichman, Kelly Noonan. 2003. “Mothers’ and Fathers’ Labor Supply in
  Fragile Families: The Role of Child Health”, National Bureau of Economic Research Working
  Paper, No. 9918.




                                             Page 31
Council of Economic Advisers. 1999. Families and the Labor Market, 1969-1999: Analyzing the
  “Time Crunch”. Washington, DC: Council of Economic Advisers, Executive Office of the
  President, May.
Crepinseck, Mary Kay, Nancy R. Burstein, Abt Associates Inc. 2004. Maternal Employment and
  Children’s Nutrition. Economic Research Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture. Accessed
  from: http://www.ers.usda.gov/publications/efan04006 on 4/21/05.
Currie, Janet and Duncan Thomas. 2001. “Early Test Scores, School Quality and SES: Longrun
  Effects on Wages and Employment Outcomes” Research In Labor Economics (Worker
  Wellbeing in a Changing Labor Market), 103-32.
Currie, Janet and Duncan Thomas. 1995. “Does Head Start Make A Difference” American
  Economic Review 85(3), June, 341-364.
Desai, Sonalde, P. Lindsay Chase-Lansdale, and Robert T. Michael. 1989. “Mother or Market?
  Effects of Maternal Employment on the Intellectual Ability of 4-Year Old Children”
  Demography 26(4), November, 545-561.
Downs, Barbara. 2003. Fertility of American Women: June 2002. Current Population Reports
  P250-548. U.S. Census Bureau: Washington, D.C.
Duncan, Greg J. and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn. 1997. “Income Effects Across the Life Span: Integration
  and Interpretation” in Greg J. Duncan and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn (eds.) Consequences of Growing
  Up Poor. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 596-610.
Ebbeling, Cara B., Dorota B. Pawlak, and David S. Ludwig. 2002. “Childhood Obesity: Public-
  Health Crisis, Common Sense Cure” The Lancet, 360(9331), August 10, 473-482.
Engeland, Anders, Tone Bjøge, Aage Tverdal, and Anne Johanne Søgaard. 2004. “Obesity in
  Adolescence and Adulthood and the Risk of Mortality” Epidemiology, 15(1), January, 79-85.
Ermisch, John and Marco Farncesconi. 2001. “The Effects of Parents’ Employment on Children’s
  Educational Attainment”, mimeo, June, University of Essex.
Field, Tiffany M. 1991. “Quality Day-Care and Grade School Behavior and Performance” Child
   Development 62(4), August, 863-870.
Gennetian, Lisa A., Greg J. Duncan, Virginia W. Know, Wanda G. Vargas, Elizabeth Clark-
  Kauffman, Andrew S. London. 2002. How Welfare and Work Policies for Parents Affect
  Adolescents: A Synthesis of Research. New York: Manpower Demonstration Research
  Corporation.
Gershuny, Jonathan. 2000. Changing Times: Work and Leisure in Postindustrial Society. New
  York: Oxford University Press.
Gordon-Larsen, Penny, Linda S. Adair, and Barry M. Popkin. 2003. “The Relationship of Ethnicity,
  Socioeconomic Factors, and Overweight in U.S. Adolescents” Obesity Research, 11(1), 121-129.
Gottfried, Adele E. and Allen W. Gottfried. 1994. “Role of Maternal and Dual-Earner Employment
  Status in Children’s Development”, in Adele E. Gottfried and Allen W. Gottfried (eds.),
  Redefining Families: Implications for Children’s Development. New York: Plenum Press, 55-
  97.




                                             Page 32
Greenstein, Theodore N. 1995. “Are the “Most Disadvantaged” Children Truly Disadvantaged by
  Early Maternal Employment?” Journal of Family Issues 16(2), March, 149-169.
Grossman, Michael. 1972. “On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for Health” Journal
  of Political Economy 98(5, Part 1), 983-1007.
Guo, Shumei Sun, Wei Wu, William Cameron Chumlea, Alex F. Roche. 2002. “Predicting
  Overweight and Obesity in Adulthood from Body Mass Index Values in Childhood and
  Adolescence” American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 76(3), September, 653-58.
Han, Wen-Jui, Jane Waldfogel, and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn. 2001. “The Effects of Early Maternal
  Employment on Later Cognitive and Behavioral Outcomes”, Journal of Family and Marriage,
  63, February, 336-354.
Harvey, Elizabeth. 1999. “Short-Term and Long-Term Effects of Early Parental Employment on
  Children of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth” Developmental Psychology 35(2), 445-
  459.
Haveman, Robert and Barbara Wolfe. 1995. “The Determinants of Children’s Attainment: A
  Review of Methods and Findings” Journal of Economic Literature, 33(4), 1829-78.
Heckman, James J., Hidehiko Ichimura and Petra Todd. 1998. “Matching as an Econometric
  Evaluation Estimator” Review of Economic Studies, 65(2). 261-94.
Heckman, James J. 2000. “Policies to Foster Human Capital” Research In Economics, 54(1),
  March, 3-56.
Hill, Jennifer L., Jane Waldfogel, Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, and Wenjui Han. 2005. “Maternal
   Employment and Child Development: A Fresh Look Using Newer Methods”, Developmental
   Psychology, 41(6), 833-50.
Hillman, Stephen B. and Shlomo S. Sawilowky. 1991. “Maternal Employment and Early
   Adolescent Substance Use” Adolescence 26(104), 829-837.
Hofferth, Sandra L. 2001. “Women’s Employment and Care of Children in the United States”, in
  Tanja van der Lippe and Liset van Dijk (eds.), Women’s Employment In A Comparative
  Perspective. New York: Aldine de Gruyter, 151-174.
Hoffman, L.W. 1980. “The Effects of Maternal Employment on the Academic Studies and
  Performance of School-Age Children” School Psychology Review, 9, 319-335.
Ichino, Andrea and Anna Sanz de Galdeano. 2005. “Reconciling Motherhood and Work: Evidence
   from Time-Use Data in Three Countries” in Daniel S. Hammermesh and Gerard A. Pfann (eds.)
   The Economics of Time Use. Amsterdam: Elsevier B.V., 263-288.
James-Burdumy, Suzanne. 2005. “The Effect of Maternal Labor Force Participation on Child
  Development” Journal of Labor Economics, 23(1), 177-211.
Johnson, Eric, Melayne Morgan McInnes, and Judith A. Shinogle. 2003. “Obesity and Medicaid: A
   Lifecycle Model of Pediatric Obesity”, University of South Carolina, mimeo, 2003.
Juster, F. Thomas and Frank P. Stafford. 1991. “The Allocation of Time: Empirical Findings,
   Behavioral Models, and Problems of Measurement” Journal of Economic Literature 29(2), June,
   471-522.



                                             Page 33
Karoly, Lynn A., Peter W. Greenwood, Susan S. Everingham, Jill Houbé, M. Rebecca Kilburn, C.
  Peter Rydell, Matthew Sanders, James Chiesa. 1998. Investing in Our Children: What We Know
  and Don’t Know About the Benefits of Early Childhood Interventions. Santa Monica, CA:
  RAND.
Kennedy, Bruce P. and Deborah Prothrow-Stith. 1997. “The Status of Adolescent Problem
  Behaviors” in Robert M. Hauser, Brett V. Brown, and William R. Prosser (eds.) Indicators of
  Children’s Well-Being. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 442-454.
Kuczmarski, Robert J., Cynthia L. Ogden, Laurence M. Grummer-Strawn, et al. 2000. CDC
  Growth Charts: United States. Advance Data from Vital and Health Statistics, no. 314.
  Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics.
Lamb, Michael E. and Sternberg, Kathleen J. 1990. “Do We Really Know How Day-Care Affects
  Children?” Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 11, 351-37.
Lazear, Edward and Robert Michael. 1988. Allocation of Income Within the Household. Chicago,
  IL: University of Chicago Press.
Leibowitz, Arleen. 1974. “Home Investments in Children” Journal of Political Economy, 82(2, part
   2), s111-s131.
Leibowitz, Arleen. 1977. “Parental Inputs and Children’s Achievement” Journal of Human
   Resources, 12(2), 242-251.
Lindberg, Laura D. 1996. “Women’s Decisions About Breastfeeding and Maternal Employment”
   Journal of Marriage and the Family 58(1), February, 239-251.
Lopoo, Leonard M. 2004. “The Effect of Maternal Employment on Teenage Childbearing” Journal
  of Population Economics 17(4), 681-702.
Love, John M. 1997. “Indicators of Problem Behavior and Problems in Early Childhood” in Robert
  M. Hauser, Brett V. Brown, and William R. Prosser (eds.) Indicators of Children’s Well-Being.
  New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 409-427.
Magnuson, Katherine A., Marcia Meyers, Christopher J. Ruhm, and Jane Waldfogel. 2004.
  “Inequality in Preschool Education and School Readiness”, American Educational Research
  Journal, 41(1), Spring, 115-57.
Magnuson, Katherine A., Christopher J. Ruhm, and Jane Waldfogel. Forthcoming. “Does
  Prekindergarten Improve School Preparation and Performance?” Economics of Education
  Review.
Mayer, Susan E. 1997. “Indicators of Children’s Economic Well-Being and Parental Employment”
  in Robert M. Hauser, Brett V. Brown, and William R. Prosser (eds.) Indicators of Children’s
  Well-Being. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 237-257.
Menaghan, Elizabeth, Frank Mott, Elizabeth Cooksey, Susan Jekielek. 2000. “Work and Family
  Patterns: Effects Across Generations”, Journal of Socio-Economics, 29(6), 587-590.
Moore, Kristin A. and Anne K. Driscoll. 1997. “Low-Wage Maternal Employment and Outcomes
  for Children: A Study” The Future of Children 7(1), Spring, 122-127.
Mott, Frank L. 1991. “Developmental Effects of Infant Care: The Mediating Role of Gender and
  Health” Journal of Social Issues 47(2), 139-58.


                                              Page 34
Mott, Frank L. 2004. “The Utility of the HOME-SF Scale for Child Development Research in a
  Large National Longitudinal Survey: The National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 Cohort”
  Parenting Science and Practice, 4(2-3), April and September, 259-70.
Muller, Chandra. 1995. “Maternal Employment, Parental Involvement, and Mathematics
  Achievement Among Adolescents” Journal of Marriage and Family 57, February, 85-100
Must, A. and R.S. Strauss. 1999. “Risks and Consequences of Childhood and Adolescent Obesity”
  International Journal of Obesity, 23(Supplement 2), S2-S11.
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. 1998. Clinical Guidelines on the Identification,
  Evaluation, and Treatment of Overweight and Obesity in Adults. Bethesda, MD: National
  Institutes of Health.
Neidell, Matthew J. 2000. “Early Parental Time Investments in Children’s Human Capital
  Development: Effects of Time in the First Year on Cognitive and Non-cognitive Outcomes”,
  mimeo, University of California at Los Angeles, August.
NICHD Early Child Care Research Network. 1997. “The Effects of Infant Child Care on Infant-
  Mother Attachment Security: Results of the NICHD Study of Early Child Care” Child
  Development 68(5), October, 860-879.
NICHD Early Child Care Research Network. 2002. “Early Child Care and Children’s Development
  Prior to School Entry: Results from the NICHD Study of Early Child Care” American
  Educational Research Journal 39(1), 133-164.
NICHD Early Child Care Research Network. 2003. “Does Amount of Time Spent in Child Care
  Predict Socioemotional Adjustment During the Transition to Kindergarten?” Child Development
  74(4), 976-1005.
Parcel, Toby L. and Elizabeth G. Menaghan. 1994. “Early Parental Work, Family Social Capital,
   and Early Childhood Outcomes” American Journal of Sociology 99(4), January, 972-1009.
Paulson, Sharon E. 1996. “Maternal Employment and Adolescent Achievement Revisited: An
  Ecological Perspective” Family Relations 45(2), 201-208.
Powers, Elizabeth T. 2003. “Children’s Health and Maternal Work Activity: Definitions under
  Alternative Disability Definitions”, Journal of Human Resources, 38(3), 522-556.
Richards, Maryse H. and Elena Duckett. 1991. “Maternal Employment and Adolescents” in
   Jacqueline V. Lerner and Nancy L. Galambos (eds.) Employed Mothers and Their Children.
   New York: Garland Publishing, Inc., 85-130.
Richards, Maryse H. and Elena Duckett. 1994. “The Relationship of Maternal Employment to Early
   Adolescent Experience With and Without Parents” Child Development, 65, 225-236.
Rosenbaum, Dan T. and Christopher J. Ruhm. 2005. “Caring for Young Children: Inequality in the
  Cost Burden of Child Care” mimeo, University of North Carolina at Greensboro, November.
Rosenbaum, P.R. and D.B. Rubin. 1984. “The Central Role of the Propensity Score in
  Observational Studies for Causal Effects” Biometrika, 70(1), 41-55.
Rosenzweig, Mark R. and T. Paul Schultz. 1983. “Estimating A Household Production Function:
  Heterogeneity, the Demand for Health Inputs, and Their Effects on Birth Weight”, Journal of
  Political Economy, 91(5,), October, 723-746.


                                              Page 35
Ruhm, Christopher J. 2004. “Parental Employment and Child Cognitive Development”, Journal of
  Human Resources, 39(1), Winter, 155-192.
Sandberg, John F. and Sandra L. Hofferth. 2001. “Changes in Children’s Time With Parents:
  United States, 1981-1997”, Demography, 38(3), August, 423-436.
Schwimmer, Jeffrey B., Tasha M. Burwinkle, and James W. Varni. 2003. “Health-Related Quality
  of Life of Severely Obese Children and Adults”, Journal of the American Medical Association,
  289(14), April 9, 1813-1819.
Shea, John. 2000. “Does Parents’ Money Matter?” Journal of Public Economics, 77(2), 155-84.
Shore, Rima. 1997. Rethinking the Brain: New Insights Into Early Development. New York:
  Families and Work Institute.
Smith, James P. Forthcoming. “Unraveling the SES-Health Connection”, Population and
  Development Review.
Smith, Kristin. 2002. “Who’s Minding the Kids? Child Care Arrangements: Spring 1997.”
  Washington D.C.: U.S. Bureau of Census, Current Population Reports, P70-86. July 2002,
  http://www.census.gov/prod/2002pubs/p70-86.pdf.
Stafford, Frank P. 1987. “Women’s Work, Sibling Competition, and Children’s School
   Performance” American Economic Review, 77(5), December, 972-980.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. 2004. Living Arrangements of Children Under 18 Years Old: 1960 to
  Present, internet release date September 15, accessed from url:
  http://www.census.gov/population/socdemo/hh-fam/tabCH-1.pdf on January 7, 2005.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. 2002. Statistical Abstract of the United States: 2002 (122th Edition).
  Washington D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. 1988. Labor Force Statistics Derived from
  the Current Population Survey, 1948-87, Bulletin 2307.
Vandell, Dobrah L. and Janaki Ramanan. 1992. “Effects of Early and Recent Maternal Employment
  on Children from Low-Income Families” Child Development 63(4), August, 938-949.
Vander Ven, Thomas M., Francis T. Cullen, Mark A. Carrozza, and John Paul Wright. 2001.
  “Home Alone: The Impact of Maternal Employment on Delinquency” Social Problems 48(2),
  236-257.
Verripoulou, George and Heather Joshi. 2005. “Does Mothers’ Employment Conflict with Child
  Development? Multilevel Analysis of British Mothers born in 1958”, mimeo, University of
  London.
Watamura, Sarah E., Bonny Donzella, Jan Alwin, and Megan R. Gunnar. 2003. “Morning-to-
  Afternoon Increases in Cortisol Concentrations for Infants and Toddlers at Child Care: Age
  Differences and Behavioral Correlates” Child Development 74(4), 1006-1020.
Wolfer, Loreen T. and Phyllis Moen. 1996. “Staying in School: Maternal Employment and the
  Timing of Black and White Daughters’ School Exit” Journal of Family Issues, 17(4), 540-560.
Waldfogel, Jane, Wenjui Han, and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn. 2002. “The Effects of Early Maternal
  Employment on Child Cognitive Development”, Demography 39(2), 369-392.



                                                Page 36
Whitaker, Robert C., Jeffrey A. Wright, Margaret S. Pepe, Kristy D. Seidel, and William H. Dietz.
 1997. “Predicting Obesity in Young Adulthood from Childhood and Parental Obesity” New
 England Journal of Medicine, 337(13), September 25, 869-73.
Zhang, Qi, and Youfa Wang. 2004. “Socioeconomic Inequality of Obesity in the United States: Do
  Gender, Age, and Ethnicity Matter?” Social Science and Medicine 58(6), 1171-1180.
Zick, Cathleen D. and W. Keith Bryant. 1996. “A New Look at Parents’ Time Spent in Child Care:
   Primary and Secondary Time Use” Social Science Research, 25(3), 260-280.




                                               Page 37
                                          Table 1:
                          Maternal Employment at Specified Child Ages
Time                   Average Weekly             Prob                Prob                  Prob
Period/Group            Work Hours              (Hours>0)          (Hours ≥ 20)          (Hours ≥ 40)

Before Pregnancy              19.0                 .747                 .475                 .165
Year 1                        11.8                 .569                 .272                 .070
Year 2                        15.1                 .636                 .363                 .140
Year 3                        16.3                 .638                 .398                 .155
Year 4                        17.3                 .652                 .421                 .179
Year 5                        18.3                 .679                 .448                 .201
Year 6                        19.3                 .689                 .468                 .215
Year 7                        20.3                 .710                 .491                 .236
Year 8                        21.6                 .733                 .523                 .259
Year 9                        22.8                 .750                 .555                 .269
Year 10                       23.5                 .762                 .564                 .298
Year 11                       24.3                 .782                 .588                 .307
Post-Assessment               24.8                 .771                 .596                 .333
All Years                     18.9                 .934                 .453                 .057
Years 1 – 3                   14.4                 .763                 .339                 .054
After Year 3                  20.7                 .911                 .508                 .111

Low SES                       17.0                 .927                 .402                 .037
High SES                      20.9                 .940                 .509                 .079

 Note: Table displays results for the nationally representative subsample of the NLSY. The
 sample size is 2,201. Year 1 refers to the first four quarters of the child'
                                                                            s life, year 2 to the fifth
 through eighth quarter, and so forth. The period before pregnancy refers to the 40th through 91st
 weeks prior to pregnancy; that after assessment to the calendar year following the survey date at
 which the child is 10 or 11 years old. “All years” refers to the period from the child’s birth until
 the birthday preceding the assessment date. “After year 3” refers to the same period, with the
 exclusion of the first three years. SES is determined by ranking children according to predicted
 total family income in the year prior to assessment. Predicted income is estimated by regressing
 income on maternal age, education and AFQT scores, race/ethnicity and presence of a
 spouse/partner in the household in the birth year. High (low) SES children are those whose
 families are in the top (bottom) half of the predicted income distribution. The results in the
 lower panel of the table refer to employment in all years.


                                                Page 38
                                       Table 2:
     Sample Means of Selected Variables By Average Weekly Work Hours of Mother
                                                     Average Weekly Work Hours
Variable                         Full Sample       0-14        15-29        ≥ 30
Outcome
PPVT                                       0.00           -0.10           0.08           0.06
                                          (0.02)         (0.04)          (0.04)         (0.04)
PIAT-Mathematics                           0.00           -0.09           0.05           0.08
                                          (0.02)         (0.04)          (0.04)         (0.04)
PIAT-Reading Recognition                   0.00           -0.09           0.05           0.08
                                          (0.02)         (0.04)          (0.04)         (0.04)
Behavior Problems Index                    0.00           0.04            0.00           -0.07
                                          (0.02)         (0.03)          (0.04)         (0.04)
Substance Use (%)                          13.1           13.4            15.7            9.3
                                           (0.8)          (1.2)           (1.5)          (1.4)
Obese (%)                                  12.7           11.9            12.5           14.1
                                           (0.7)          (1.1)           (1.3)          (1.5)
Overweight Risk (%)                        29.2           29.0            27.8           31.5
                                           (1.0)          (1.5)           (1.7)          (2.0)
Family Background
Mother'
      s Age (years)                       22.9             22.7           22.7           23.5
                                          (0.1)           (0.1)          (0.1)          (0.1)
Mother Has Attended College (%)           32.4             25.5           32.7           43.8
                                          (1.0)           (1.4)          (1.8)          (2.1)
Mother'
      s AFQT Score                        38.3             33.5           40.1           44.4
                                          (0.6)           (0.9)          (1.0)          (1.1)
Spouse/Partner Present (%)                74.5             69.6           76.5           80.4
                                          (0.9)           (1.3)          (1.6)          (1.6)
Total Family Income in Previous          43,848          36,891         45,170         54,106
Year ($)                                 (1,696)         (2,265)        (3,317)        (3,570)
Child Characteristics
Low Birth Weight (%)                       6.2             6.8            6.6             4.8
                                          (0.5)           (0.8)          (0.9)           (0.9)
Very Low Birth Weight (%)                  0.8             1.0            0.6             0.5
                                          (0.2)           (0.3)          (0.3)           (0.3)
Note: See note on Table 1. Table displays averages for the nationally representative subsample
of the NLSY. Standard errors are in parentheses. Work hours are averaged over all years.
PPVT, PIAT and BPI scores are normalized to have a mean (standard deviation) of 0 (1) for the
nationally representative NLSY subsample. Mother'    s age or education and presence of a
spouse/partner refer to year in which the child was born. Total family income is for the calendar
year before the assessment date. Low (very low) birth weight indicates that the child weighed
less than 2500 (1500) grams at birth.

                                             Page 39
                                         Table 3:
   Regression Estimates of the Effect of Maternal Employment on Cognitive Outcomes

Time Period                     (a)                (b)                (c)               (d)

                                          PPVT Score
Before Assessment               .262              .048               .023             -.033
                               (.026)            (.023)             (.024)            (.031)
Post-Assessment                                                                        .032
                                                                                      (.019)
                                   PIAT-Mathematics Score
Before Assessment               .195              .055               .044             -.031
                               (.025)            (.024)             (.024)            (.032)
Post-Assessment                                                                        .036
                                                                                      (.019)
                               PIAT-Reading Recognition Score
Before Assessment               .190              .020              -.001             -.050
                               (.025)            (.024)             (.024)            (.032)
Post-Assessment                                                                        .035
                                                                                      (.019)

Other Regressors               None                 B                B,S               B,S,E

Note: Table shows predicted effect of a 20 hour increase in average weekly maternal work hours
during the period from the child’s birth through the birthday prior to assessment and, in
specification (d), also for the calendar year after assessment. Outcomes are for children 120-143
months of age. The cognitive assessments are normalized to have a standard deviation of one
and estimation is by ordinary least squares. All models control for the assessment year. The
categories of additional regressors are “Basic” child, maternal and household characteristics (B);
Supplementary child health, family background and location specific characteristics (S), and pre-
pregnancy maternal employment characteristics (E). See Table A.1 for full descriptions. Sample
sizes are 3,521, 3,556 and 3,547 for PPVT, PIAT-M and PIAT-R scores.




                                             Page 40
                                         Table 4:
 Regression Estimates of the Effect of Maternal Employment on Non-Cognitive Outcomes

Time Period                     (a)                (b)                (c)               (d)

                                   Behavior Problems Index
Before Assessment              -.114               -.049            -.041              -.038
                               (.024)             (.025)            (.026)             (.034)
Post-Assessment                                                                         .016
                                                                                       (.021)
                                         Substance Use
Before Assessment              -.009               .002              .003               .012
                               (.009)             (.009)            (.009)             (.012)
Post-Assessment                                                                         .001
                                                                                       (.007)
                                             Obesity
Before Assessment               .016               .029              .022               .016
                               (.008)             (.009)            (.009)             (.012)
Post-Assessment                                                                         .013
                                                                                       (.012)
                                        Overweight Risk
Before Assessment               .030               .040              .032               .023
                               (.011)             (.012)            (.012)             (.016)
Post-Assessment                                                                         .027
                                                                                       (.010)

Other Regressors               None                 B                 B,S              B,S,E

Note: See note on Table 3. BPI scores are normalized to have a standard deviation of one.
Estimation is by OLS for BPI and as binary probit models for substance use and excess body
weight. For the probit estimates, the table shows predicted effects with the other explanatory
variables evaluated at the sample means. Sample sizes are 3,651, 3,245, 3,775 and 3,775 for
BPI, Substance Use, Obesity and Overweight Risk.




                                             Page 41
                                                          Table 5:
                         Effects of Maternal Employment for Advantaged and Disadvantaged Children
                                                                                  Substance                               Overweight
Group                           PPVT          PIAT-M      PIAT-R        BPI                      Obesity
                                                                                     Use                                     Risk
                              Disadvantaged Children
Hispanic or Black                .018             .004          -.012          -.124           .001            .002           .020
                                (.045)           (.045)         (.045)         (.047)         (.016)          (.017)         (.022)
Mother Has Not                   .060             .033          -.017          -.009           .019            .013           .012
Attended College                (.038)           (.039)         (.039)         (.042)         (.015)          (.015)         (.020)
No Spouse/Partner                .027            -.018           .030          -.076           .007           -.008           .009
Present in Birth Year           (.052)           (.055)         (.055)         (.060)         (.022)          (.022)         (.028)
Low SES (bottom 50%)             .004             .014          -.025          -.049           .002           -.002           .002
                                (.040)           (.042)         (.043)         (.047)         (.017)          (.017)         (.022)
                               Advantaged Children
Not Hispanic or Black            -.126           -.083          -.092           .054           .019            .022           .018
                                (.042)           (.047)         (.047)         (.051)         (.018)          (.015)         (.023)
Mother Has Attended              -.214           -.155          -.133          -.102           .000            .014           .039
College                         (.054)           (.056)         (.055)         (.058)         (.016)          (.018)         (.027)
Spouse/Partner Present           -.063           -.030          -.089          -.027           .012            .028           .037
in Birth Year                   (.039)           (.040)         (.040)         (.042)         (.014)          (.013)         (.020)
High SES (top 50%)               -.100           -.091          -.090          -.063           .016            .032           .050
                                (.050)           (.051)         (.050)         (.051)         (.015)          (.015)         (.024)

Note: See note on Tables 3 and 4. The specification estimated is the same as model (d) of those tables, with the sample limited to the
specified group. Maternal education refers to status in the year the child was born. SES is determined by ranking children according
to predicted total family income in the year prior to assessment. Predicted income is estimated by regressing total family income on
maternal age, education and AFQT scores, race/ethnicity and presence of a spouse/partner in the household in the birth year. High


                                                               Page 42
(low) SES children are those whose families are in the top (bottom) half of the SES distribution. Samples sizes range between 1,845-
2,165 for Hispanics or blacks, 1,400-1,600 for non-Hispanic non-Blacks, 2,225-2,569 for no college, 1,015-1,198 for attended college,
1,171-1,357 for no spouse/partner present in birth year, 2,001-2,298 for spouse/partner present in birth year, 2052-2373 for low SES
and 1,239-1,477 for high SES children.




                                                              Page 43
                                                        Table 6:
 Linear and Quadratic Estimates of Effect of Maternal Employment on the Cognitive Development and Body Weight by SES
                                                                                                        Overweight
                                PPVT           PIAT-M                PIAT-R           Obesity
                                                                                                           Risk
                          (a)          (b)    (a)     (b)          (a)     (b)      (a)      (b)        (a)     (b)

                     Low SES Children
Effects of Working
 20 Hours                .004      .185      .014    .094         -.024   .105     -.002    .006       .002    -.009
 30 Hours                .006      .143      .021    .082         -.037   .061     -.002    .035       .003    -.005
 40 Hours                .008      .010      .028    .028         -.050   -.049    -.003    -.003      .004     .004
P-Value
 Hours Squared                     <.001             .094                 .008              .696                .641
 Joint Test              .918      <.001     .742    .232         .559    .024     .925     .923       .921     .892
                     High SES Children
Effects of Working
 20 Hours                -.100     -.025     -.091   .039         -.090   -.091    .029     .004       .046     .027
 30 Hours                -.150     -.083     -.137   -.020        -.135   -.136    .047     .023       .071     .054
 40 Hours                -.200     -.171     -.182   -.133        -.180   -.181    .066     .056       .096     .089
P-Value
 Hours Squared                     .286              .067                 .986              .209                .558
 Joint Test              .047      .078      .073    .038         .069    .192     .032     .044       .039     .100
Hours Squared             No       Yes        No     Yes           No     Yes       No      Yes        No       Yes



                                                        Page 44
Note: See notes on Tables 3 through 5. SES is determined by ranking children according to predicted total family income in the year
prior to assessment. High (low) SES children are those whose families are in the top (bottom) half of the SES distribution.
Specification (b) includes a quadratic for maternal work hours whereas model (a) does not. “Effects of working” refer estimated
differentials relative to no employment by the mother during the child' s life. For the binary probit estimates, these are calculated as
differences in predicted values averaged across all sample members. The P-Value for “joint test” refers to the hypothesis that the
linear and quadratic term (if any) on work hours are jointly equal to zero; that on hours squared refers to the p-value for only the
quadratic term.




                                                                Page 45
                                    Table 7:
         Effects of Maternal Employment Using Alternative SES Groupings
                                                                      Overweight
SES Group          PPVT        PIAT-M        PIAT-R        Obesity
                                                                         Risk
   SES Based on Predicted Family Income in Year Before Assessment
Lower Third           .045            .035               .007       -.017           -.005
                     (.046)          (.049)             (.050)     (.020)          (.025)
Middle Third          -.065           -.040              -.053      .007            .008
                     (.059)          (.061)             (.060)     (.019)          (.029)
Top Third             -.164           -.107              -.161      .063            .091
                     (.063)          (.063)             (.060)     (.019)          (.030)

    SES Based on Actual Family Income in Year Before Child’s Birth
Lower Third           .003            .023               .015       -.005           -.002
                     (.057)          (.059)             (.058)     (.022)          (.029)
Middle Third          -.075           -.026              -.087      .033            .019
                     (.057)          (.063)             (.062)     (.022)          (.031)
Top Third             -.133           -.198              -.165      .028            .037
                     (.073)          (.073)             (.073)     (.022)          (.037)

Notes: See notes on Tables 3 through 5. In the top panel, SES is determined by ranking children
according to predicted total family income in the year prior to assessment. In the lower panel,
SES categorizes children based upon actual family income in the calendar year prior to the
child’s birth.




                                              Page 46
                                                        Table 8:
                 Estimated Effects of Home Environment on Cognitive Development and Body Weight by SES
                                                                                                                      Overweight
Regressor                          PPVT              PIAT-M                PIAT-R                Obesity
                                                                                                                         Risk
                             (a)          (b)      (a)       (b)         (a)       (b)         (a)       (b)         (a)       (b)
                          All Children
HOME                        .204     .248         .152      .185         .159     .191         -.000    -.004        .002      .006
                           (.017)   (.024)       (.018)    (.025)       (.018)   (.024)       (.006)   (.009)       (.009)    (.012)
HOME * Work                            -.054                -.039                 -.040                 .005                   -.004
Hours                                 (.020)               (.021)                (.021)                (.008)                 (.010)

                       Low SES Children
HOME                       .167    .196           .122      .143         .144     .173         .002     .002         .014      .017
                          (.020)  (.028)         (.021)    (.030)       (.021)   (.030)       (.009)   (.012)       (.011)    (.015)
HOME * Work                            -.038                -.028                 -.039                 .001                   -.005
Hours                                 (.026)               (.028)                (.028)                (.012)                 (.015)

                       High SES Children
HOME                        .285    .418          .212      .265         .175     .203         -.001    -.014        -.018     -.011
                           (.032)  (.050)        (.033)    (.052)       (.032)   (.051)       (.010)   (.016)       (.015)    (.025)
HOME * Work                            -.125                -.050                 -.027                 .011                   -.006
Hours                                 (.037)               (.039)                (.037)                (.010)                 (.018)

Notes: See notes on Tables 3 through 6. SES is determined by ranking children according to predicted total family income in the year
prior to assessment. Specification (a) includes a control for the total standard score on the Home Observation Measurement of the
Environment (HOME), averaged over measurements at the assessment year and two and four years earlier, and normalized to have a
mean of zero and a standard deviation of one for the nationally representative NLSY subsample. Model (b) also includes an
interaction of the HOME score with maternal work hours.




                                                              Page 47
                                       Table 9:
           Effects of Work Hours on Cognitive Development and Body Weight
                       At Actual and Average Home Environment
                                                                                  Over-
Predicted Employment Effect       PPVT       PIAT-M      PIAT-R      Obesity      weight
                                                                                   Risk
                       Low SES Children
At Actual HOME Score               .004        .014       -.025        -.001       .004
                                  (.040)      (.042)      (.043)      (.017)      (.022)

At Average HOME Score              -.033       -.014      -.060        -.001       .000
                                  (.042)      (.044)      (.045)      (.018)      (.023)

                       High SES Children
At Actual HOME Score               -.100       -.092      -.092        .033        .051
                                  (.050)      (.051)      (.050)      (.015)      (.024)

At Average HOME Score              -.077       -.082      -.085        .033        .051
                                  (.049)      (.051)      (.049)      (.015)      (.024)

     SES Disparity Due to Difference in Home Environment
Total SES Disparity                -.104       -.106       -.067       .034        .047

Disparity Remaining After
                                   -.044       -.068       -.025       .034        .051
Controlling for HOME Score
% of SES Disparity Explained       58.1        35.4        61.8         0.9        -8.3

Note: The predictions at “Actual HOME Score” are obtained for specifications corresponding to
model (d) of Tables 3 and 4, with SES based on predicted income and the sample restricted to
observations with valid HOME score data. Those at “Average HOME Score” are obtained from the
coefficients on work hours in model (b) of Table 8, which are the expected effects of maternal
employment when HOME scores are equal to zero (the average value for the nationally
representative NLSY subsample).




                                           Page 48
                                       Table 10:
Predicted Test Scores and Obesity/Overweight Prevalence by Maternal Employment and SES

 Average                                                                              Overweight
                    PPVT            PIAT-M            PIAT-R           Obesity
 Weekly                                                                                  Risk
                  (percentile)     (percentile)     (percentile)        (%)
Work Hours                                                                               (%)

              Low SES Children
      0               27.1             32.2             34.4             16.8             32.8
      20              32.7             35.4             38.7             17.4             31.9
      40              27.4             33.1             32.8             16.5             33.2

              High SES Children
      0               60.2             57.2             61.0              7.6             23.5
      20              56.7             58.6             57.8             10.5             28.2
      40              53.2             52.3             54.4             14.2             33.2

Note: See notes on Tables 3 through 7. SES is determined by ranking children according to
predicted total family income in the year prior to assessment. High (low) SES children are those
whose families are in the top (bottom) half of the SES distribution. The table shows the predicted
test score percentile or percent predicted to be obese or at risk of overweight for specified number
of maternal work hours during the child’s life. Predictions are based on quadratic work hours
specification for low SES children. They are based on a linear specification for the high SES group,
except for PIAT-M scores, where the quadratic model is used. Test percentiles are calculated for
each individual, with maternal work hours set to the specified value, and then averaged across all
children in the group.




                                              Page 49
                                                  Appendix

                                 Table A.1: Variables Used in Analysis
Variable               Description
                                               Outcomes
PPVT                   Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test-Revised Total Standard Score
PIAT-M                 Peabody Individual Achievement Test, Mathematics Total Standard Score
PIAT-R                 Peabody Individual Achievement Test, Reading Recognition Total Std. Score
BPI                    Behavior Problems Index Total Standard Score
Substance Use          Has Smoked Cigarettes or Used (more than a sip or two of) Alcohol
Obesity                Body Mass Index (BMI) at or above sex- and age-specific 95th percentile cut point
Overweight Risk        BMI at or above sex- and age-specific 85th percentile cut point
                                      Maternal Employment
Hours                  Average Weekly Work Hours (divided by 20) during specified period
Post-Assessment        Average Weekly Work hours (divided by 20) in calendar year after assessment
                      “Basic” Child, Maternal and Household Characteristics (B)
Age                    Age of child (in months) at assessment date
Age Squared            Age Squared of child at assessment date
Race/Ethnicity         Child is Hispanic or a non-Hispanic Black (2 d.v.’s)
Female                 Child is Female (d.v.)
Parity                 Birth order of child
AFQT Score             Mother' s score on the Armed Forces Qualification Test in 1980
Mother's Age           Age (in years) of mother at the time of child'
                                                                    s birth
Education              Mother completed high school, attended college, college graduate in birth year (3
                       d.v.'
                           s)
Spouse                 Spouse/Partner present in birth year (d.v.)
                     Supplemental Maternal, Family and Child Characteristics (S)
Birth weight           Low ( ≤ 2500 grams) or Very Low ( ≤ 1500 grams) Birth weight (2 d.v.'   s)
Long Hospital Stay     Child stayed in hospital longer than mother following birth (d.v.)
M.D. Visit             M.D. visit in first, second/third month of life (2 d.v.'
                                                                              s)
Hospitalization        Child hospitalized during first year (d.v.)
Income                 Family Income in Year Before Birth (2000 year dollars)
Siblings               Sibling born ≤ 18, 19-36 months before/after child’s birth (4 d.v.’s)
Private                Mother' s current or last secondary school attended in 1979 was private (d.v.)
                            Pre-Pregnancy Employment Characteristics (E)
Weeks Before           Mother Stopped Working 0, 1-13,14-39, 40-155 weeks before birth (4 d.v.'   s)
Hours Before           Average Weekly Work Hours (divided by 20) in Year Prior to Pregnancy
Occupation             Occupation of main job in 4th quarter prior to birth was: professional/managerial,
                       sales, clerical, crafts/operative, service/household (5 d.v.’s)
                          Auxiliary Family and Location Characteristics (A)
Father Present         Father living in household at assessment date (d.v.)
Location               Mother lived outside U.S., in Southern U.S., or in rural area at age 14 (3 d.v.’s)
Grandmother Work       Mother' s mother worked when mother was 14 (d.v.)
Learning Resources     Mother had magazines, newspaper, library card in home in age 14 (3 d.v.’s)
Foreign Born           Mother' s mother/father foreign born (2 d.v.'
                                                                   s)
Grandparents Educ.     Mother' s mother/father completed high school, attended college (4 d.v.' s)
Both Parents           Mother lived with both mother and father at age 14 (d.v.)


                                                   Page 50
                                        Table A.1 (Continued)
Mother Only           Mother lived with mother and no adult male in household at age 14 (d.v.)
First Smoked          Mother smoked first cigarette before age 14 (d.v.)
Marijuana             Mother tried marijuana/hashish, before age 21 (d.v.)
Mother' s Siblings    Mother had 0, 3-5, ≥ 6 siblings (3 d.v.’s)
Residence             Lives in central city, SMSA/MSA at assessment date (2 d.v.’s)
Crime                 Local crime rate (in 1985)
Birth                 Local birth rate (in 1984)
Marriage              Local marriage rate (in 1984)
Divorce               Local divorce rate (in 1985)
Physician             Local physicians per 100,000 people (in 1985)
                                         Home Environment
HOME                  Home Observation and Measurement of the Environment – Short Form Total
                      Standard Score, averaged over three assessments
                                    Maternal Body Mass Index
BMI Before            Maternal BMI based on weight immediately before pregnancy.
BMI as Assessment     Maternal BMI based on weight at child assessment date.

Note: All variables are obtained from the NLSY. See text for additional details.




                                                  Page 51
                                    Table A.2:
           Sample Means of Demographic Characteristics and Outcomes By SES
Variable                                           Low SES                   High SES

Outcomes
PPVT                                              -0.59 (0.02)               0.19 (0.03)
PIAT-Mathematics                                 -0.44 (0.02)                0.18 (0.03)
PIAT-Reading Recognition                         -0.38 (0.02)                0.21 (0.03)
Behavior Problems Index                           0.12 (0.02)               -0.12 (0.03)
Substance Use (%)                                  14.7 (0.8)                 9.6 (0.8)
Obesity (%)                                        16.8 (0.8)                11.0 (0.8)
Overweight Risk (%)                                32.4 (1.0)                28.8 (1.2)

Family Background
Mother'
      s Age (years)                                21.2 (0.1)                24.8 (0.1)
Mother Has Attended College (%)                    16.2 (0.7)                56.0 (1.3)
Mother'
      s AFQT Score                                 18.6 (0.3)                49.1 (0.7)
Spouse/Partner Present (%)                         46.0 (1.0)                92.5 (0.7)
Total Family Income in Previous Year ($)        30,960 (1,382)             54,790 (2,497)

Child Characteristics
Low Birth Weight (%)                               8.9 (0.6)                  5.8 (0.6)
Very Low Birth Weight (%)                          1.3 (0.2)                  0.4 (0.2)

Note: See note on Table 5. SES is determined by ranking children according to predicted total
family income in the year prior to assessment. High (low) SES children are those whose families
are in the top (bottom) half of the SES distribution. Standard errors are in parentheses.




                                             Page 52
                                        Table A.3:
                  Additional Estimates of Effect of Maternal Employment

Outcome                                        (a)                 (b)                 (c)

PPVT                                          -.033               -.035               -.035
                                             (.031)              (.031)              (.031)
PIAT-Mathematics                              -.031               -.036               -.031
                                             (.032)              (.033)              (.033)
PIAT-Reading Recognition                      -.050               -.054               -.053
                                             (.032)              (.032)              (.032)
Behavior Problems Index                       -.038               -.056               -.034
                                             (.034)              (.035)              (.035)
Substance Use                                 .012                .013                .017
                                             (.012)              (.012)              (.012)
Obesity                                       .016                .016                .017
                                             (.012)              (.012)              (.012)
Overweight Risk                               .023                .023                .024
                                             (.016)              (.017)              (.016)

Additional Regressors                        B,S,E              B,S,E,A             B,S,E,F

Note: See notes on Tables 3 and 4. Specification (a) is the same as model (d) of those tables.
Columns (b) and (c), respectively, add controls for auxiliary characteristics (A) and state dummy
variables (F).




                                              Page 53
                                     Table A.4:
      Effects of Work Hours on the BMI of Mothers With 10-11 Year Old Children

Regressor                                 (a)                  (b)                  (c)

                     Low SES
Maternal Work Hours                     -.890                -.377                -.412
                                        (.292)               (.209)               (.209)
BMI Before Pregnancy                                         1.076
                                                             (.209)

                     High SES
Maternal Work Hours                      .482                 .134                 .164
                                        (.299)               (.197)               (.199)
BMI Before Pregnancy                                         1.135
                                                             (.197)

Dependent Variable                       BMI                  BMI                ∆ in BMI

Notes: See notes on Tables 3 through 5. SES is determined by ranking families according to
predicted total family income in the year prior to assessment. The dependent variable is Body Mass
Index (BMI) of the mother when the child is 10 or 11, except in column (c) when it is the change in
BMI from immediately prior to pregnancy until this time. Sample sizes range from 2,083 to 2,247
(1,320 to 1,414) for low (high) SES mothers.




                                                Page 54
                                                            .15
     .2 .15




                                                                .1
Density




                                                         Density
 .1




                                                       .05
     .05
     0




                                                            0
              0   20                40      60                       0     20                40   60
                       First Year                                               Third Year




                                                            .06
     .08
 .04 .06




                                                               .04
Density




                                                         Density
                                                       .02
     .02
     0




                                                            0

              0    20          40           60                       0     20                40   60
                     Tenth Year                                                 All Years


                  Fig 1: Average Weekly Work Hours of Mother at Specified Child Ages



                                                 Page 55
