NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOW FAR TO THE HOSPITAL?
THE EFFECT OF HOSPITAL CLOSURES ON ACCESS TO CARE
Thomas C. Buchmueller
Mireille Jacobson
Cheryl Wold
Working Paper 10700
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10700
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2004

We thank Robert Town, Tom Y. Chang, seminar participants at the NBER Summer Institute Health Care
meetings, the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, the University of California, Irvine’s Health Policy
Research Center and the Association for Public Policy Analysis and Management’s 2003 Fall Conference
for helpful comments. Yani Lam, Jennifer Savage and Abishek Tiwari provided excellent research assistance.
Tom Y. Chang graciously offered his technical skills in automating MapQuest® and Yahoo! Maps®.
Financial support was provided by the California Policy Research Center’s Program on Access to Care. All
mistakes are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Thomas C. Buchmueller, Mireille Jacobson, Cheryl Wold. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

How Far to the Hospital? The Effect of Hospital Closures on Access to Care
Thomas C. Buchmueller, Mireille Jacobson, Cheryl Wold
NBER Working Paper No. 10700
August 2004
JEL No. I11, I12, I18
ABSTRACT

Do urban hospital closures affect health care access or health outcomes? We study closures in Los
Angeles County between 1997 and 2003, through their effect on distance to the nearest hospital. We
find that increased distance to the nearest hospital shifts regular care away from emergency rooms
and outpatient clinics to doctor's offices. While most residents are otherwise unaffected by closures,
lower-income residents report more difficulty accessing care, working age residents are less likely
to receive HIV tests, and seniors less likely to receive flu shots. We also find some evidence that
increased distance raises infant mortality rates and stronger evidence that it increases deaths from
unintentional injuries and heart attacks.
Thomas C. Buchmueller
Graduate School of Management
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697
and NBER
buchmu@uci.edu
Mireille Jacobson
Department of Planning, Policy and Design
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697
mirielle@uci.edu
Cheryl Wold
Office of Health Assessment and Epidemiology
Los Angeles County of Department and Health Services – Public Health

Introduction
Just prior to the November 2002 elections, Los Angeles County announced that
without a $350 million bailout it would be forced to close several area hospitals and
clinics. High on the list of proposed closures were Harbor-UCLA and Olive ViewUCLA Medical Centers, hospitals that serve a disproportionate share of the county’s
Medi-Cal and uninsured populations. Since Harbor-UCLA is a Trauma I center, its
closure would mean the loss of significant trauma and emergency care services in the Los
Angeles area. The passage of a ballot initiative (Measure B) that increased tax funding
for emergency rooms and trauma centers has reduced pressure on the county’s health care
system though, even with this additional funding, the system is still projected to face a
deficit of between $300 and $600 million over the next 3 years. Thus, the possibility of
imminent hospital closures remains real.
The proposed closures are part of an ongoing trend in Southern California.
Between 1997 and 2002, Los Angeles County lost roughly 10 percent of its initial 133
hospitals (see Table 1). Since 2002, Tenet Healthcare Corporation, an owner of several
of these hospitals, has announced additional closures in the area (Hymon 2004, Vrana
2003). Although considerable media attention has focused on the potential deleterious
effects of hospital closures on access to care and health outcomes in Los Angeles County,
surprisingly little is known about the impact of urban hospital closures on patients. The
bulk of the literature on urban closures focuses on the supply-side of the market: the
determinants of closure (see Lindrooth et al. 2003 for a good summary) and the operating
efficiency of hospitals remaining in the market (Lindrooth et al. 2003).1

1

Scheffler et al. (2001) specifically studies the causes of hospital closures in California between 1995 and
2000. Not surprisingly, poor financial performance is a key predictor of closure.

1

Research on the impact of closures on access to care and health more generally
has focused largely on rural hospitals (Bindman et al. 1990, Mullner et al. 1989,
Rosenbach and Dayhoff 1995, Succi et al. 1997, US GAO 1991). For obvious reasons,
such studies have, at best, limited implications for considering the consequences of
hospital closures in urban areas such as Los Angeles County. A notable exception,
Vigdor (1999), examines the effect of changes in the density of hospitals in Los Angeles
County between 1984 and 1995 on rates of avoidable hospitalizations and deaths in the
hospital from heart attacks and motor vehicle accidents. As pointed out by the author,
however, by focusing solely on hospital discharges, Vigdor (1999) cannot assess the
effect of closures on the health of people who never make it to the hospital in an
emergency or on people who rely on hospital-based outpatient facilities.
In this paper, we address the gap in the literature by assessing the impact of
hospital closures in the Los Angeles Region on perceived access to care, actual health
care utilization, and health outcomes. We consider closures through their effect on
distance from a resident’s home to the nearest hospital. Past work shows that patients
typically choose both providers and hospitals, particularly for acute conditions, based on
proximity and reduced travel time (McGuirk and Porell 1984, Cohen and Lee 1985,
Dranove et al. 1993, McClellan et al. 1994). Thus, increased distance may translate to
reduced access to care. While patients affected by a closure in urban areas often have
other hospitals nearby, the reduction in hospital supply may lead to increased crowding at
and reduced access to the facilities remaining in the market.2 As a result, some may
forgo or delay care when obtaining it becomes more of a hassle.
2

One recent study reports that in 90 percent of urban communities that experienced a closure between 1990
and 2000, emergency and inpatient care were still available within 10 miles of the closed facility
(Department of Health and Human Services, Office of the Inspector General 2003).

2

On the other hand, it is possible that closures may have beneficial effects on
patients who are directly affected. Since closed hospitals are typically low-volume, poorperformers, health care outcomes might improve as residents are forced to choose among
the remaining higher volume hospitals. Similarly, closures may shift some patients’
usual source of care from a hospital to physician offices or community clinics, which are
generally viewed as more appropriate sources of primary care.
To the extent that closures affect access and utilization, the effects are likely to
vary with patient characteristics. We expect the effect of closures to be greatest on
seniors, who travel shorter distances to the hospital (Vigdor 1999) and low-income
patients, who are both less likely to travel far and more likely to use the hospital as their
“regular” source of care (Weissman and Epstein 1994).3 Indeed, in a study of hospital
choice for maternal delivery in the San Francisco Bay Area, Phibbs et al. (1993) find that
Medi-Cal women rely more heavily on public transportation than privately insured
women and are therefore more sensitive to distance. Given the higher likelihood among
Medi-Cal women of delivering at hospitals lacking specialized neonatal care and with
worse perinatal outcomes, the authors interpret distance as a barrier to effective care for
the poor. Similarly, in a study using national data, Currie and Reagan (2003) find that
central-city black children living further from a hospital are less likely to have had a
check-up, regardless of their insurance status. Both studies suggest that to the extent that
closures force nearby residents to travel further for care, poor women and children may
be particularly adversely affected. 4

3

Among children with a regular source of care in 1993, only 5 percent of the privately insured rely on a
clinic or emergency room whereas 35 percent of publicly insured and 20 percent of uninsured do so (Bloom
1997a). The breakdown by insurance status is similar for working-age adults (Bloom 1997b).
4
Patients whose choice of hospital is determined largely by proximity may be vulnerable in other, less

3

There may also be important differences with respect to health conditions. Even
if the closure of weaker, poorer performing hospitals improves the average quality of
hospitals, closures may have negative consequences for certain types of patients. In
particular, outcomes for patients experiencing health events requiring fast attention, such
as injuries sustained in an accident or a heart attack (AMI) may be affected by small
changes in travel distance (Herlitz et al. 1993). In contrast, we would not expect urban
hospital closures to affect mortality from conditions like cancer, where immediate
emergency care is less relevant.
Our analysis is based on two distinct sources of health data: household surveys
conducted by the Los Angeles County Department of Health Services (LACDHS)
between 1997 and 2002, the period when most of the recent closures were occurring, and
annual administrative zip code level mortality data from the California Department of
Health Services. The survey data, which provide information on residential location,
allow us to assess the impact of changes in hospital proximity on perceived health care
access and reported health care utilization. The administrative data give us an
independent source of information on health outcomes, not subject to self-reporting bias.
We find that increased distance to the nearest hospital is associated with a lower
probability of identifying an emergency room or an outpatient hospital clinic as a usual
source of care. It is also associated with an increase in the probability of respondents’
reporting a doctor’s office as the place they go when sick or in need of health care advice.
Distance has little effect on perceived access to care in the population generally, though it

easily measured ways. For example, several studies indicate that within the same medical center, patients
who travel farther to receive elective care or even cancer treatment have better outcomes than similar
patients with the same disease and receiving the same treatment, but who live nearby (Ballard et al. 1994,
Goodman et al. 1997, Lamont et al. 2003).

4

is negatively related to perceived access for lower-income residents who tend to rely
more on hospitals. This effect is partially offset by insurance. Among the elderly,
distance is negatively related to the probability of receiving an influenza vaccine. In
contrast, we find that hospital closures are associated with an increase in the probability
that those with health insurance receive colon cancer screening, possibly reflecting a
switch among residents to higher quality hospitals or their increased use of office-based
physician care, where referrals for such screening are common.
Increased distance to the nearest hospital is also associated with delays in the
receipt of prenatal care and a rise in infant mortality rates, though the latter effect is
sensitive to the empirical specification. Finally, we find evidence that increased distance
is associated with increased deaths from unintentional injuries and acute myocardial
infarction, but not from other causes such as cancer or chronic heart disease, for which
timely emergency care is less important.

Data and Methods
Data Sources
We use several independent sources of data. The first is household level data
from the Los Angeles County Health Surveys (LACHS), which were conducted by the
LACDHS in 1997, 1999/2000, and 2002/2003. The LACHS, which surveys roughly
8000 adults, depending on the year, asks several questions on perceived access to care
and self-reported utilization. Specifically, the survey asks whether the individual has a
usual source of care (and where it is), how they perceive their access to care (very to
somewhat difficult versus very to somewhat easy), and whether or not they have received

5

several different types of preventive care (colon cancer screening, vaccines, HIV tests).
In addition, it has detailed information about a respondent’s health status, demographics,
socio-economic status, and medical insurance status. Importantly for this analysis, there
is also information on the zip code of each respondent’s residence, which allows us to
link respondents to measures of distance to the nearest hospital.5
To examine the effect of distance to the nearest hospital on health outcomes, we
use zip code level birth and death reports from California’s Department of Health
Services. Using the birth data, we assess the impact of distance to the nearest hospital on
the receipt of prenatal care and infant mortality rates. The expected effect is theoretically
ambiguous. On the one hand, previous studies have been shown maternal health care
access, and thus infant health, to be sensitive to distance (Phibbs et al. 2003). Moreover,
the time it takes to get to an emergency room may be critical for an infant’s recovery
from an accident or a serious acute illness occurring after discharge from the hospital.
On the other hand, when smaller hospitals with less technically advanced facilities close,
more births may occur at larger hospitals with better facilities (e.g., neo-natal intensive
care units), which may lead to better birth outcomes.
We use cause-specific mortality data from 1997-2001 to test for an effect of
distance to the nearest hospital on mortality from conditions for which access to timely
emergency care is likely to be an important determinant of survival. Specifically, we
examine the effect of distance on the count of deaths from heart attacks and unintentional
injuries. As a specification check, we also consider the relationship between distance on
the number of deaths from colon and lung cancer and chronic ischemic heart disease,
outcomes that should be not be sensitive to how long it takes to get to the nearest
5

Zip codes are stripped from the publicly available LACHS data.

6

hospital. A finding that distance is related to these outcomes would most likely be
spurious, which would then cast doubt on our research design.
To calculate changes in travel distances from the center of each zip code in Los
Angeles County to the address of the nearest hospital, we use data from the 1997-2001
Office of Statewide Health Planning’s (OSHPD’s) Annual Utilization Report of Hospitals
1997-2001, supplemented by OSHPD’s 2002 Hospital Facility Listing. We consider
hospitals in the entire Los Angeles Region, as the nearest hospital to certain County
residents may lie in neighboring counties within the Region. Since changes in proximity
to the hospital for LA County residents came almost exclusively through closures,
whereas residents from other parts of the region experience many changes due to
openings as well as closures (see Table 1), we restrict our analysis to LA County.6

Econometric Specification
We use a quasi-experimental design to examine how changes in the travel
distance from the population center of each zip code in Los Angeles County to the
nearest hospital have affected perceived access, self-reported health care utilization, and
actual health outcomes among residents in that zip code.7 Essentially we compare
changes for individuals in areas where hospitals closed to otherwise similar individuals in
areas where the availability of hospital services remained constant. One set of
regressions uses the individual-level data from the LACHS, while another uses annual
6

LA County residents were affected by 1 opening, a Kaiser facility in Baldwin Park. Because it occurred
just prior to the closing of another neighborhood facility, Santa Rosa Hospital, distance from the two
affected zip centers to the nearest hospital was virtually unchanged. Moreover, as Kaiser is technically
open only to its enrollees, we are understating the true change in distance from the Santa Rosa closing.
7
The zip center coordinates from http://www.oseda.missouri.edu/uic/zip.resources.html are essentially a
population-weighted average of the coordinates for the census blocks in a zip code area. They are virtually
identical to the zip center coordinates given by both Yahoo!® Maps and MapQuest®.

7

utilization and mortality data aggregated to the level of the zip code. For both types of
data, the general form of the econometric specification is:

(1)

Yzt = αDistancezt + X’β + γt + δz + εzt,

where the dependent variable, Y, includes the measures of access, utilization and health
outcomes just described. Control variables are represented by the vector X. In the
models estimated using the LACHS data the controls are individual characteristics that
are likely to affect medical care utilization and perceived access, such as income, health
insurance coverage and health status. We also include some neighborhood characteristics
such as the number of community health clinics in a zip code and city-level
unemployment rates.8
In the zip code level infant mortality models, the controls include the share of
births delivered by race of mother (White, Hispanic, Black, Asian, Filipino, American
Indian and unknown), share of births by weight category (under 1500g, 1500-2499g, over
2500g and weight unknown) and share of births by mother’s age group (under 20, 20-29,
30-34, 35 and over, and age unknown). When we consider counts of infant deaths (in
contrast to infant death rates), we include the total number of births in the zip code as an
additional covariate. The models of other mortality counts in a zip code include controls
for total deaths, deaths by homicide (to proxy for the general risk of the neighborhood)

8

Annual unemployment rates are available for 125 cities and “census designated places” through the
California Economic Development Department’s “Labor Force Data on Sub-County Areas in California.”
For cities missing unemployment rates, we use the county-year average. We also include an indicator for
this substitution in the regressions. Clinics, which are listed in OSHPD’s Primary Care Clinic Listings,
open and close based on where there is greatest need (US GAO 1995). Thus, we use counts of clinics in an
area to proxy for the health care needs and status of a community.

8

and the age distribution of deaths (to proxy for the age structure of the neighborhood).
Both the infant mortality and the mortality count models also control for the number of
health clinics in the zip code.
The terms γt and δz are fixed effects for time (i.e., year) and geographic area. In
all of the models we present, we include zip code fixed effects. In these specifications,
the effect of distance is identified by changes in mean distance induced by hospital
closures. The advantage of this approach is that we can account very completely for
differences in demand that may exist across areas due to factors such as the
socioeconomic characteristics of the population. In the mortality regressions we also
report specifications that include separate time trends for each zip code to account for
demographic or economic shifts within a zip code that are not common across areas.
Because we have only three years of survey data, however, we do not include zip codespecific time trends in any of the models of individual health care access or use.
Because hospital closures are quite rare, a possible disadvantage of this estimation
strategy is that the model is identified by changes affecting a fairly small percentage of
the population. Therefore, as an alternative specification, we estimate models that
replace the zip code dummy variables with city or “community” fixed effects.9 To the
extent that these communities are relatively homogeneous with respect to demographics
and other demand side variables, this specification exploits additional within-community
differences in distance related to the location of all hospitals, not just those that closed or
opened during the period of the analysis.

9

For areas outside of the city of Los Angeles we use the city as the geographic unit in this specification.
Within Los Angeles we include separate fixed effects for distinct communities such as Brentwood,
Hollywood, Encino and Boyle Heights. These communities are geographically compact and relatively
homogeneous in terms of economic and demographic characteristics.

9

Another possible limitation of (1) is that it assumes that the effect of distance is
the same for all residents of an area, which clearly may not be the case. To the extent
that uninsured patients are more likely to use emergency departments and hospital-based
clinics as a source of primary care, we would expect them to be more strongly affected by
the distance to the nearest hospital. Similarly, lower income people are likely to face
higher transportation costs, which would translate to a larger effect of distance on access
and utilization. In the models using the LACHS data we test for these possible
differential effects by estimating models in which the distance variable is interacted with
insurance coverage. We also estimate models on a sub-sample of individuals reporting
an annual household income of less than $30,000. 10
All of the outcomes from the LACHS are dichotomous: whether the usual source
of care is an emergency room or hospital-based clinic, whether or not the respondent
believes she has good access to care, and whether or not the person has received several
types of preventive care or diagnostic tests. For these outcomes we estimate probit
models. In our analysis of deaths (infant mortality as well as deaths of all residents by
cause), we use negative binomial models, exploiting the nonnegative count nature of
mortality data while using a more flexible functional form than the more common
Poisson model.11 We do this to avoid introducing additional noise into the analysis,
since in many zip code years there are few deaths of any given type.12 In all models we
adjust standard errors to allow for correlation in the error terms at the zip code level.13
10

Median household income in Los Angeles County in 2000 is roughly $42,000.
The Negative Binomial model is essentially a Poisson regression model with unobserved heterogeneity
introduced by a gamma distributed error term. This more flexible functional form allows for overdispersion. Hausman et al. (1984) pioneered the approach; Long (1997) provides a good review.
12
For example, in 30 percent of all zip code years there are no infant deaths and in 54 percent there are
fewer than 5 deaths from unintentional injuries.
13
Failure to account for this will cause the precision of our estimates to be overstated, leading to an over11

10

Results
Descriptive Statistics: LACHS
Table 2 presents summary statistics for LACHS respondents overall and
separately according to whether they live in zip codes that experienced a change in
distance to the closest hospital during the sample period. For the full sample, the average
driving distance to the nearest hospital is 2.64 miles. The figures in the second and third
columns show that the average distance is greater for individuals who faced an increase
in distance due to a closure compared to individuals for whom the distance did not
change. This is also true before closures (not shown here): zip codes that experienced
hospital closures during this period experienced an increase in driving distance to the
nearest hospital by about a mile, from an average driving distance of just under 3 miles to
almost 4 miles. Within this group, the change in distance associated with a closure
ranged from roughly a tenth of a mile to about 3.6 miles.
Other differences between the two groups suggest the importance of controlling
for individual characteristics and area fixed effects. Those who faced a change were
significantly more likely to be white (54 vs. 39 percent), U.S. citizens (84 vs. 77 percent),
English-speaking (81 vs. 76 percent) and have a college or post-graduate degree (37 vs.
30 percent). Respondents in affected zip codes are also more likely to have private health
insurance (58 vs. 51 percent), less likely to have Medi-Cal (4.5 vs. 8.3 percent) and less
likely to rely on hospital for care (10 vs. 14 percent). Those affected by closures also
have better self-reported health and access to care. These differences are not surprising
given that several of the neighborhoods that lost hospitals (e.g. Beverly Hills, Burbank,

rejection of the hypothesis that changes in distance to the nearest hospital have no effect on access to care
(Moulton 1986; Bertrand, Duflo and Mullainathan 2004).

11

and North Hollywood) are relatively affluent. To the extent that our models do not fully
capture this heterogeneity and that the group experiencing a change in distance is
“healthier,” and of higher SES, we risk understating any negative effects of closure on
vulnerable populations.
The last part of Table 2 presents the outcomes we examine. The measures of
usual source of care and perceived access are defined for the full sample. In contrast, the
questions concerning the receipt of various types of preventive care were targeted to
specific relevant populations—e.g., individuals over age 50 for colon cancer screening,
individuals over age 65 for flu and pneumonia vaccines and women of different ages for
Pap smears and mammograms.

Probit Regression Results: Access to Care and Preventive Screening
The probit regression results for these outcomes are reported in Table 3 (usual
source of care and place of care), Table 4 (perceived access) and Table 5 (preventive
care). For all models, we report marginal effects (i.e., probability derivatives) computed
at the sample means of the data rather than the raw coefficients. Marginal effects of
health-related controls are reported in Appendix Tables 1, 2 and 3.14 In all cases, the
“marginal effect” of the interaction between insurance and distance is calculated as the
cross-derivative of the standard normal cumulative distribution with respect to distance
and insurance, evaluated at the sample means of the data (Ai and Norton 2003).
Panel A of Table 3 looks at whether the respondent has a "particular regular
14

For sake of brevity, we do not discuss these covariates in the text though they are interesting in their own
right. For example, they confirm that more vulnerable patients (e.g. those with poor self-reported health
status and diabetics) are more likely to use an ED or hospital based clinic as their regular source of care.
Similarly, those with poor self-reported health status and arthritics (primarily seniors), report more
difficulty accessing care.

12

source of care where he/she goes most often." Columns (1) and (3) consider the main
distance effect alone; columns (2) and (4) include the interaction between health
insurance and distance. In the full sample (columns (1) and (2)), hospital closures have
little detectable effect on the probability of reporting a usual source of care. Surprisingly,
in the low-income sample, a one-mile increase in distance to the nearest hospital is
associated with an almost 2 percent increase in the likelihood of reporting a particular
place where care is sought.15 One possible explanation for this counter-intuitive result is
that around the time of a closure, county or city authorities may have increased outreach
efforts to encourage low-income patients who had relied on the hospital emergency room
(but perhaps did not view it as a “usual” source of care) to find an alternative. Similarly,
low-income residents may have responded to the considerable media attention given to
hospital closures by identifying an alternative source of care. Finally, some physicians or
clinics that serve low-income populations may have seen closures as a business
opportunity and either moved into the area or marketed their services more aggressively.
The results in Panels B and C suggest that in the full sample the zero effect on
having a usual source of care masks an effect of closures on where patients receive care.
Increased distance to the hospital is associated with a decrease in reliance on an ED or
clinic when sick (Panel B). Although these effects are not significant at conventional
levels, if we exclude patients without a regular source of care (not shown here), the full
sample results indicate that a one-mile increase in distance is associated with a
statistically significant 1.3 percentage point decline in the probability of reporting an ED
or clinic as the source of care (off a base of 17 percent). This reduction coincides with an
15

The increased likelihood of having a regular place of care appears to be independent of health insurance
(see col (4), Panel A) but further analysis using separate interactions for Medi-Cal, Medicare, and “private”
insurance (not shown here), suggests that the increase is common to all but Medicare beneficiaries.

13

increased reliance on a physician’s office (Panel C). In both the full and low-income
samples, respondents report a 2 to 3 percentage point increase in the likelihood of going
to a doctor’s office when sick. This effect, which is independent of insurance status, is
quite large for the low-income group, suggesting an almost 5 percent increase in
reporting that a doctor’s office is the usual place of care.16
Table 4 takes the analysis a step further by asking how closures and the
subsequent shifting of sources of care affect perceived access. Results are given
separately for those with (Panel A) and without (Panel B) a regular source of care. Not
surprisingly, across all residents, increased distance appears to have little effect on
perceived access to care. For low-income respondents, however, a one-mile increase in
the distance to the nearest hospital results in a roughly 3 percent decrease in ease of
obtaining health care. The effect is fully offset by health insurance, implying that lowincome uninsured residents, despite their increase in reporting a doctor’s office as their
usual source of care, perceive more difficulty in accessing care after a hospital closure.
Among low-income residents who report no regular source of care (Panel B) the effect is
independent of insurance status and is quite large. A one-mile increase in distance to the
hospital is associated with a 7.1 percentage point decline in reported ease of access,
which is nearly a 20 percent effect relative to the base of 38 percent. Seniors also report
decreased ease of access (not shown here), irrespective of insurance status. Among those
65 and over, a one-mile increase in distance is associated with a 5 percentage point
decline in ease of access to care off of a base of 85 percent.
While reported source of care and perceived access are clearly important, we care

16

This effect is independent of health insurance status, although here again further analysis suggests the
increase is common to all (uninsured, privately insured or Medi-Cal insured) but Medicare beneficiaries.

14

ultimately about the effect of hospital closures on the use of health care services and
health outcomes. The regressions reported in Table 5 examine the effect of changes in
the distance to the nearest hospital on use of health care services. Panel A considers
colon cancer screenings (colonoscopy or sigmoidoscopy) in individuals over 50.17 In
both the full sample and the low-income subsample, the simplest model suggests a
negative though insignificant relationship between the probability of screening and
increased distance. When we include the insurance interaction, however, we find that
for insured individuals there is a positive relationship between distance and the
probability of screening, although the effect is not statistically significant for the lowincome group. For insured people in the full sample, a one-mile increase in distance to
the hospital is associated with a roughly 3 percentage point increase in the probability of
colon cancer screening or an almost 7.5 percent increase. 18 Since doctors typically
provide hospital referrals for this service, the increased screening may be attributable to
the increase in regular care sought in a physician’s office.
We also estimated the effect of distance on HIV tests for adults under age 65
(Panel B). The coefficients on distance and the interaction between distance and
insurance status are all statistically insignificant. When we use an alternative
econometric specification, discussed in our sensitivity tests below, however, we find
evidence suggesting that hospital closures may decrease the likelihood the residents get

17

The question was asked of those 40 and older in 1997 but only those 50 and older in subsequent surveys.
The 1997 survey asks about tests in the last two years, whereas later surveys ask whether the respondent
has ever had the test. This change creates a bias toward finding a positive effect of distance as the 1997
pre-closure rate of screening in a zip code is by definition less than (or equal to) the lifetime screening rate.
Sensitivity tests limiting the sample to the 1999 and 2002 survey years yield results that are remarkably
similar for the insured respondents, suggesting a roughly 3 percentage point increase in the probability of a
screen with a one-mile increase in distance to the hospital. If anything the results above, understate the
negative effect on the uninsured. The results from the 1999-2002 data suggest that the uninsured
experience a 5-percentage point decline in colon cancer screens, significant at the 20 percent level.

18

15

screened for HIV.
Panel C looks at flu shots in the past year and pneumonia vaccines (ever) for
those 65 and over. Because household income is less meaningful for this population, we
limit this analysis to the full sample of seniors. A one-mile increase in distance to the
hospital lowers the probability of having a flu shot by about 3 percentage points for all
seniors. While this result may seem surprising given that flu shots need not be given in a
hospital setting, it may reflect the fact that flu shot campaigns are often coordinated by a
local hospital. In addition, since hospitals are typically high-volume providers of flu
shots, closures may increase congestion at other facilities offering shots and thereby
decrease access to the vaccine. In contrast to flu shots, we find no effect of distance on
the probability of pneumonia vaccination. The difference between the pneumonia
vaccine and flu shot results, however, may be related to the fact that the pneumonia
vaccine is given to seniors on a roughly 10-year basis whereas the flu shot is given
yearly. Thus, even if seniors are less likely to go to the hospital for a vaccination, this
effect may only show up over a long time horizon.
Finally, in models not reported, we examined the effect of distance on PAP smear
tests for women 18 and over, and mammograms for women over 40, all within the last
two years. Compared to the other types of preventive screening, there is less reason to
expect an effect of distance on these outcomes. PAP smears can be administered
anywhere and are commonly provided in physicians’ offices. Similarly, mammograms
are often given in dedicated, non-hospital based facilities. It is not surprising, then, that
for these outcomes we find no discernable effect of distance to the nearest hospital.

16

Sensitivity Tests
As noted above, by controlling for geographic area effects at such a fine level, we
are identifying the impact of hospital closures only as they affect those in the immediate
surroundings of the hospital. And, since closures are relatively rare, we capture changes
in health of a fairly small percentage of the population. As an alternative specification,
we replace the zip code with community or neighborhood fixed effects. To the extent
that these communities are relatively homogeneous with respect to demographics and
other demand side variables, this specification exploits additional within-community
differences in distance to the location of all neighborhood hospitals, not just those that
closed during the period of analysis.
Results using this less restrictive model (see Appendix Table 4) are generally
quite similar to those with zip code fixed effects. The colon cancer screening results are
virtually identical in magnitude but more precisely estimated. In the case of HIV tests,
this alternative specification indicates that an additional mile in distance to the nearest
hospital is associated with a statistically significant 0.5 percentage point decline in
probability of receiving screening. The effect is also negative and of similar magnitude
for low-income residents, although only significant at the 19 percent level. In contrast
the flu vaccine results are no longer statistically significant when we include
neighborhood rather than zip code fixed effects.
Another potential problem with our main analyses is that, as demonstrated by the
descriptive statistics in Table 2, people in zip codes not affected by hospital closures are
quite different from those in affected zip codes and thus do not necessarily make a good
control group. Since those who did experience an increase in distance to the hospital

17

were typically higher SES, however, any bias from the choice of control group is likely to
understate deleterious effects of closures and overstate any positive effects.
One way to more fully control for this heterogeneity is to restrict the analysis to
respondents living in zip codes where there was a change in distance to the nearest
hospital at some point during the sample period (see Appendix Table 5). Restricting the
sample in such a manner cuts the number of observations down by about 85 percent, from
about 22,000 to almost 3,000 respondents, and typically, though not always, reduces the
precision of the results. In general, however, the results are qualitatively similar. In a
few cases, the results suggest that the estimated effects (both positive and negative) using
the full sample are understated. The increase in colon cancer screens among insured
residents is still statistically significant at the 5 percent level and is about twice the
magnitude, suggesting a one-mile increase in distance to the hospital increases the
probability of being screened for colon cancer by about 6 percentage points. Similarly,
the probability of HIV screening among insured residents declines by 1.8 percentage
points, implying a 6 percent reduction in screening that is statistically significant at the 2
percent level. The restricted sample results also suggest that the flu shot estimates from
the full sample are understated. The results from the restricted sample imply that a onemile increase in distance leads to nearly a 10-percentage point decline in testing (a 14
percent effect relative to the sample mean), which is significant at the 10 percent level.
Although the precise magnitude of the results vary somewhat across
specifications or samples, the basic qualitative results are clear. On net, the LACHS
results suggest both positive and negative effects due to the closure of even poor
performing hospitals. Not surprisingly, the negative effects are largely concentrated in

18

vulnerable populations – lower income residents, the uninsured, and seniors.

Zip Code Level Analysis of Prenatal Care and Infant Mortality
We now turn to our analysis of mortality using zip code level administrative data.
Table 6 summarizes the data that we use to analyze the effect of hospital closures on
receipt of prenatal care and infant mortality. As expected given the LACHS data,
mothers in zip codes that faced closures are more likely to be white and less likely to be
black or Hispanic. They tend to be older and are also significantly more likely to have
received prenatal care in their 1st trimester of pregnancy. The birth weight distribution of
their babies is not statistically significant different and the infant death rate is only
slightly lower from that of mothers in zip codes that experienced no change in distance to
the nearest hospital.
The first two columns of Table 7 consider early use of prenatal care services
among women who eventually give birth. With or without zip code time trends, we find
a negative effect of increased distance on the share of births that received 1st trimester
prenatal care. The effect of distance is larger in the model that includes the zip code
trends (-0.658 vs. -0.144), where it is statistically significant at the 6 percent level.
However, even this effect is small in economic terms. Relative to the mean of the
dependent variable (864), the result in column 2 represents a 0.08% effect.
Next, we examine the effect of distance to the nearest hospital on infant deaths.
In columns 3 and 4, the dependent variable is the infant mortality rate (deaths per 1000
live births). Columns 5 and 6 report results from negative binomial regressions in which
the dependent variable is the total number of infant deaths; in this specification the total

19

number of births enters on the right hand side. Overall, these models are suggestive of an
effect of distance on infant deaths, though the results are sensitive to the specification. In
column 3, a one-mile increase in distance to the nearest hospital is associated with a .061
increase in infant deaths per 1000 live births. However, when zip code specific trends are
included, the sign on the effect flips and is no longer statistically significant. Similarly,
the basic negative binomial model implies that a one-mile increase in distance to the
nearest hospital is associated with a roughly 7 percent increase in the number of deaths in
the first year of life, but the effect is smaller (4.7%) and not statistically significant (pvalue = 0.289) when we add separate time trends for each zip code.

Zip Code Level Analysis of Mortality from Other Causes
Increased distance to the nearest hospital may affect survival probabilities of area
residents experiencing acute conditions for which prompt medical attention is crucial. To
test for such effects we consider the effect of distance on mortality from acute myocardial
infarction and unintentional injuries. As a check on these results, we estimate similar
models on outcomes where emergency care is much less important: chronic heart disease
and cancer. The summary statistics for the data used in this part of the analysis are
reported in Table 819 and the key regression results are in Table 9.
For AMI, the basic model indicates that a one-mile increase in distance leads to a
nearly a 3% increase in the number of deaths (Table 9, column 1). The magnitude of this
effect more than doubles when we include zip code specific time trends (column 2). We
obtain similar results for deaths due to unintentional injuries: a one-mile increase in
19

Consistent with the differences in SES found in the other data sets, fewer residents in zip codes
experiencing a change in distance die by homicide. In contrast, there is no significant difference in the
share of total deaths from heart attacks or unintentional injuries.

20

distance to the nearest hospital is associated with a roughly 4 to 6 percent increase in the
number of deaths, with the larger effect coming from the model with the zip code specific
time trends.
In contrast, we find no significant relationship between changes in distance to the
nearest hospital and deaths from chronic heart disease, colon cancer or lung cancer.
Given our LACHS findings of increased colon cancer screenings among those with
health insurance and the fact that colon cancer is highly curable if diagnosed and treated
early (Tomeo 1999), we may have expected a consequent effect on colon cancer deaths.20
Since we cannot infer insurance status from death records, however, any effect of early
diagnosis on deaths from colon cancer may be masked in our data. Moreover, five years
may not provide a long enough time period to see any effect of increased diagnosis (and
subsequent treatment) on colon cancer death rates. Though not presented here for sake of
brevity, this invariance to distance is also found for deaths from chronic pulmonary
obstructive disorder (COPD), Alzheimer’s disease, and diabetes. We take these null
results as some confirmation that the heart attack and unintentional injury findings are
picking up real effects of changes in distance to the nearest hospital rather than some
unobserved factors affecting deaths more generally in these zip codes.

Discussion
While important, the finding that hospital closures in Los Angeles County may
have reduced access and increased mortality does not necessarily imply that the closures
were welfare-reducing. It is necessary to weigh these costs against the benefits of
20

Unlike diagnostic tests for other forms of cancer or even many other diseases, colon cancer screenings
are a “primary prevention” method because early detection of precancerous polyps can prevent the actual
development of disease (Tomeo 1999).

21

closures, most importantly those benefits related to improved operating efficiency and
lower costs. While a full cost-benefit analysis of these closures is beyond the scope of
this paper, we can conduct a rough assessment.
Scheffler et al. (2001) document that the California hospitals that closed during
the period of our study were smaller than average and, prior to closing, had weaker
financial performance than those that remained opened. They calculate that statewide
these closures reduced total inpatient capacity by between 3 and 4 percent. Shifting care
to more efficient hospitals and reducing excess capacity should have reduced systemwide costs. According to Lindrooth et al. (2003), urban hospital closures result in a
roughly 3 percent reduction in costs per adjusted admission. Applying this estimate to
the average cost per adjusted admission in 1999 in Los Angeles County of $2346 and an
annual figure of 5.5 million patient days (OSHPD 2001), implies that the closures in LA
County in the late 1990s saved approximately $387 million per year.
Our analysis suggests that the greatest cost of hospital closures is due to the
increase in deaths from AMI and unintentional injuries. In our data, the zip code level
means for these outcomes are 14 deaths per year for AMI and 5 deaths per year for
accidents. Based on our estimates of the effect of a one-mile increase in distance, the
mean increase associated with hospital closures in our sample, closures increased AMI
deaths an average of 4.5 percent and deaths due to unintentional injuries an average of the
4.85 percent. Together, these estimates translate to an additional 0.873 deaths per year in
affected zip codes. Since 35 zip codes were affected, this implies that closures in LA
County resulted in an average of 30.5 additional deaths per year. Ignoring the fact that
those who die from AMI are typically middle-aged and using standard value of life

22

estimates of between $1 and $5 million (Viscusi 1993), the mortality-related costs of
hospital closures may be as high as $92 million, well below the estimated cost savings.
Supplementing this rough cost-benefit calculation with the net costs of reduced
HIV testing and influenza vaccinations as well as decreased access to care are unlikely to
change this basic assessment. This average calculation, however, masks specific,
changes in health care use that may not have been cost-beneficial. For example, consider
the effect of closures on flu shots among the elderly, which numerous studies find to be
very cost-effective (see Nichol 2003 for an extensive review). One study of elderly
members of a health maintenance organization found that influenza vaccines reduced
direct medical costs by an average of $73 per person, largely by reducing hospitalizations
(Nichol et al. 1998). Our results imply that the hospital closures in LA County resulted in
over 26,700 fewer seniors receiving vaccines.21 Combining these two estimates would
imply that the reduced immunizations caused by the closures led to additional medical
costs of over $1.8 million. Flu vaccines have also been shown to reduce mortality among
the elderly. One meta-analysis cited in Nichol (2003) suggests that vaccinating seniors
reduces deaths from all causes by about 50 percent. With about 42,000 deaths per year
among seniors in the County and a value of $25,000 per additional year of life lived and 5
more years of life expected, the reduction implies a cost of almost $74 million (42,000 *
.50 * .028 * $125,000) in years of life lost.22

21

Specifically, we find that closures reduced the probability of being immunized by 2.8 percentage points.
This effect and a total senior population of 955,000 equal 26,740.
22
Death figures are from http://www.dhs.ca.gov/hisp/chs/OHIR/vssdata/2001data/2001MCountyEX.htm

23

Conclusions
Past work has shown that urban hospital closures improve the efficiency of the
health care systems by shifting care to lower cost facilities (Lindrooth et al. 2003). In a
similar vein, we find that hospital closures shift care previously given in emergency
rooms and outpatient clinics to doctor’s offices, a more appropriate and cost-effective
source of regular care (Baker and Baker 1996). Although these efficiency savings from
hospital closures are extremely important, they tell only part of the story.
We find that proximity to a hospital is an important determinant of access to care
for the more vulnerable residents in Los Angeles County. Lower-income residents and
seniors, who tend to rely more on hospitals, report more difficulty accessing care as a
result of closures, though this effect is partially offset by insurance. Moreover, increased
distance to the hospital lowers the probability that seniors receive flu shots, that younger
residents get screened for HIV and the timeliness of prenatal care for pregnant women.
Cause-specific mortality data suggests that urban hospital closures also have
implications for the population more generally. We find strong evidence that increased
distance to the nearest hospital is associated with higher mortality counts from emergent
conditions, such as heart attacks and unintentional injuries. We also find some evidence
that distance to the nearest hospital is positively related to infant mortality, though these
results are less robust. Overall, we conclude that the costs associated with these adverse
outcomes are outweighed by the efficiency gains related to hospital closures. Social
welfare may be further increased, however, by promoting low-cost, non-hospital-based
ways of treating emergent conditions after a local hospital closure.

24

References
Ai, Chunrong and Edward C. Norton. “Interaction terms in logit and probit models,”
Economic Letters, 2003, 80: 123-129.
Baker, Laurence C. and Linda S. Baker. “Excess Cost of Emergency Department Visits
for Non-urgent Care,” Health Affairs, 1994, 13(5): 162-171.
Ballard, David J., Sandra C. Bryant, et al. “Referral selection bias in the Medicare
hospital mortality prediction model: are centers of referral for Medicare beneficiaries
necessarily centers of excellence? Health Services Research, 1994, 28(6):771–84.
Bindman, Andrew B., Diane Keane, and Nicole Lurie. “A Public Hospital Closes: Impact
on Patient’s Access to Care and Health Status.” Journal of the American Medical
Association, 1990; 264 (22): 2899-2904.
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. “How Much
Should We Trust Differences-in-Differences Estimates?” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 2004, 119(1): 249-275.
Bloom, Barbara. “Health insurance and medical care.” December 12, 1990, Advanced
Data from Vital and Health Statistics of the NCHS, #188, Public Health Service,
Bloom, Barbara et al. “Access to Health Care Part 1: Children,” National Center for
Health Statistics, Vital Health Stat 10(196) 1997a.
Bloom, Barbara et al. “Access to Health Care Part 2: Working-age Adults,” National
Center for Health Statistics, Vital Health Stat 10(197) 1997b.
Cohen, M and H. L. Lee "The Determinants of Spatial Distribution of Hospital
Utilization in a Region." Medical Care, 1985, 23(1): 27-38.
Currie, Janet and Patricia Reagan. “Distance to Hospital and Children’s Use of
Preventive Care: Is Being Closer Better and For Whom?” Economic Inquiry,
2003, 41(3): 378-391.
Dranove, D, W. D. White and L. Wu (1993), "Segmentation in Local Hospital Markets."
Medical Care, 1993, 31(1): 52-64.
Goodman, D. C., E. Fisher, et al. “The Distance to Community Medical Care and the
Likelihood of Hospitalizations: Is Closer Always Better? “American Journal of
Public Health, 1997, 87(7): 1144-1150.
Hak, Eelko, James Nordin, et al. “Influence of High-Risk Medical Conditions on the
Effectiveness of Influenza Vaccination among Elderly Members of 3 Large ManagedCare Organizations.” Clinical Infectious Diseases, 35 (Aug): 370–377, 2002.

25

Hausman, Jerry, Bronwyn Hall, et al. “Econometric Models for Count Data with an
Application to the Patents-R&D Relationship,” 1984, Econometrica 52: 909-938.
Herlitz, J, M. Hartford et al. “Delay Time Between Onset of Myocardial Infarction and
Start of Thrombolysis in Relation to Prognosis,” 1993, Cardiology, 82: 347-53.
Hymon, Steve, “Bid to Sell Hospitals Stirs Fears,” Los Angeles Times, January 29, 2004.
Lamont, Elizabeth B, Davinder Hayreh et al. “Is Patient Travel Distance Associated With
Survival on Phase II Clinical Trials in Oncology?,” Journal of the National Cancer
Institute, 2003, 95 (18): 1370-1375.
Lindrooth, Richard C, Anthony T. Lo Sasso, and Gloria J. Bazzoli. “The Effect of Urban
Hospital Closures on Markets.” Journal of Health Economics, 2003, 22(5): 691-712.
Long, J. S. Regression Models for Categorical and Limited Dependent Variables.
Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications, 1997.
McClellan, Mark, Barbara J. McNeil, and Joseph P. Newhouse. “Does More Intensive
Treatment of Myocardial Infarction Decrease Mortality in the Elderly,” Journal of
the American Medical Association, 1994, 272 (11): 859-866.
McGuirk, M. and F. Porell. “Spatial Patterns of Hospital Utilization: The Impacts of
Distance and Time.” Inquiry, 1984, 21(1): 84-95.
Moulton, Brent R. “Random Group Effects and the Precision of Regression Estimates.”
Journal of Econometrics, 1986, 32(3): 385-97.
Mullner, Ross M. Robert J. Rydman et al. “Rural Community Hospitals and Factors
Correlated With Risk of Closure.” Public Health Reports, 1989, 104:315-325.
Nichol, K.L. “The Efficacy, Effectiveness and Cost-effectiveness of Inactivated
Influenza Virus Vaccines.” Vaccine, 2003, 21:1769-1775
Nichol, K.L, J. Wuorenma, and T. von Sternberg. “Benefits of Influenza Vaccination for
Low-, Intermediate- and High-Risk Senior Citizens.” Archives of Internal
Medicine, 1998, 158: 1769-1776.
Office of Statewide Health Planning and Development, California Perspectives in
Healthcare, 1999, Edition 2, 2001.
Phibbs, Ciaran S, Mark, David H. et al. “Choice of Hospital for Delivery” A Comparison
of High-Risk and Low-Risk Women,” Health Services Research, 1993, 28(2):
201-222.
Rosenbach, Margo L. and Debra A. Dayhoff. “Access to Care in Rural America: Impact

26

of Hospital Closures.” Health Care Financing Review, 1995, 17(1): 15-37.
Scheffler, Richard, Rachel Kagan et al. “California’s Closed Hospitals, 1995-2000.”
Report of the Nicholas C. Petris Center, April 2001.
Succi, Melissa J., Shou D. Lee, and Jeffrey A. Alexander. “Effects of Market Position
and Competition on Rural Hospital Closures.” Health Services Research, 1997,
31(6): 679-99.
Tomeo, CA, GA Colditz et al. “Harvard Report on Cancer Prevention. Volume 3:
prevention of colon cancer in the United States.” Cancer Causes and Control, 10:
167-180, 1999.
US General Accounting Office, “Rural Hospitals: Factors that Affect Risk of Closure.”
June 19, 1990, GAO Report HRD-90-134.
US General Accounting Office, “Rural Hospitals: Federal Efforts Should Target Areas
Where Closures Would Threaten Access to Care.” February 15, 1991, GAO
Report HRD-91-41.
US General Accounting Office, “Community Health Centers.” May 4, 1995, GAO
Report HEHS-95-138.
US Office of the Inspector General, “Trends in Urban Hospital Closure, 1990-2000.”
May 2003, OEI 04-02-00611
Vigdor, Elizabeth, “The Impact of Urban Hospital Closures on Health,” Mimeo, Duke
University, 1999.
Viscusi, Kip. “The Value of Risks to Life and Health.” Journal of Economic
Literature 31: 1912-1946, 1993.
Vrana, Deborah, “Tenet to Close or Sell 14 Hospitals in an Overhaul,” Los Angeles
Times, March 19, 2003.
Weissman, Joel S. and Arnold M. Epstein, Falling through the Safety Net: Insurance
Status and Access to Health Care, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UP, 1994.

27

Table 1. Hospital Closures and Openings in the Los Angeles Region: 1998-2002
Los Angeles County

Year
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002

Open start
of Year
133
128
124
123
122
119

Closed
During
Year
5
5
1
1
3

Neighboring Counties

Opened
During
Year
0
1
0
0
0

Open start
of Year
89
87
85
86
86
87

Closed
During
Year
2
2
1
2
0

Opened
During
Year
0
0
2
2
1

Source: OSHPD’s Annual Utilization Report of Hospitals, 1997-2001 and 2002 Hospital Facility Listing.
Notes: The neighboring counties are Orange, Ventura, Riverside and San Bernardino.General Acute Care
(GAC) hospitals are all nonfederal hospitals except psychiatric hospitals (acute or long term), chemical
recovery hospitals, and state correctional facilities. A GAC hospital is listed as having closed in 1998 if it
appeared in the 1997 but not the 1998 or later years. Some hospitals that were incorrectly not listed in
certain years were added back to the data; a detailed list of the reporting errors is available on request.

28

Table 2. Los Angeles County Health Survey Summary Statistics
Overall

By Change in
Distance to Closest Hospital

2.64
(.019)

No Change
2.52
(.020)

Change
3.48
(.049)

Miles to closest hospital (straight line)

1.78
(.012)

1.67
(.013)

2.45
(.030)

Change in driving distance to hospital

.137
(.003)

--

1.03
(.015)

.407

.407

.408

43
(.11)

42
(.12)

43
(.27)

Race
Hispanic

.376

.392

.294

White

.411

.386

.535

Black

.100

.112

.042

Asian

.094

.091

.106

Pacific Islander

.008

.008

.008

American Indian

.005

.007

.007

Other

.003

.004

.005

Citizen

.784

.773

.842

Survey Taken in
English

.770

.759

.814

Spanish

.200

.213

.141

Mandarin

.010

.009

.015

Cantonese

.006

.006

.005

Korean

.008

.008

.010

Vietnamese

.005

.005

.004

Hospital Distance Variables
Miles to closest hospital (driving)

Individual Characteristics
Gender (male)
Age

29

Household Income
< $10000

.136

.126

.183

$10000-20000

.115

.123

.074

$20000-30000

.179

.187

.134

$30000-40000

.119

.123

.097

$40000-50000

.099

.099

.099

$50000-75000

.080

.080

.080

> $75000

.119

.115

.134

Education Level
8th Grade or less

.094

.098

.071

9-12th Grade

.102

.108

.072

HS Graduate

.213

.216

.198

Some College

.278

.277

.281

College Grad

.203

.194

.244

Post Grad Degree

.110

.105

.134

.463
(.003)

.462
(.003)

.474
(.008)

Part-Time

.109

.108

.115

Hours Unknown

.005

.005

.006

Not Working

.161

.164

.147

Retired

.127

.127

.131

Homemaker

.095

.096

.094

.479

.473

.467

Co-habitating

.072

.076

.054

Widowed

.064

.064

.066

Divorced

.100

.100

.099

Working Status
Full-Time

Marital Status
Married

30

Separated

.035

.036

.027

Never Married

.250

.252

.240

3.09

3.12

2.94

24.0
(.054)

24.1
(.059)

23.6
(.127)

Self-assessed health: 1=excellent,
5=poor
Diabetes

2.50

2.52

2.37

.063

.063

.062

Arthritis

.173

.174

.168

Heart Disease

.060

.061

.059

Smoke Cigarettes

.160

.162

.154

Health Insurance Status

.521

.508

.588

Insured - Private, Empl, Military

.077

.083

.045

Medi-Cal, non-Medicare

.122

.121

.127

Medicare

.122

.121

.127

Outcome Variables
Has regular source of care

.781

.779

.792

Source of care is ER or outpatient clinic

.133

.140

.099

Colon Cancer Screen (age>50)

.380

.378

.391

Received HIV Test (age<65)

.358

.367

.312

Flu Shot (age≥65)

.696

.692

.715

Pneumonia Vaccine (age≥65)

.572

.558

.636

23503

20377

3126

Household Size
Health Status and Behaviors
BMI

# of Observations

Notes: Standard errors for continuous variables are given in parenthesis. With the exception of the hospital data which
are from OSHPD, data are from the (adult) Los Angeles County Health Survey (LACHS) 1997, 1999/2000 and
2002/2003. Miles to closest hospital is defined as the MapQuest® driving distance from the population centroid or in
some cases the physical center of a zip code to the closest hospital. Insurance and health status questions refer to time
of survey. BMI is defined as weight in kilograms divided by the square of height in meters. Self-assessed health status
ranges from excellent (1) to poor (5). Colon cancer screens include colonoscopies and sigmoidoscopies among
respondents 50 and over in their lifetime. All other questions about diagnostic exams refer to the past two years. The
flu shot refers to this year while the pneumonia vaccine refers to the respondent’s lifetime.

31

Table 3: Marginal Effect of Distance to the Closest Hospital on Source of Care
Sample
Driving Distance to
Hospital (miles)

Panel A: Have a Place Where Regular Care is Sought
Full
HH Income<30,000
.006
.006
.016
.016
(0.93)
(0.88)
(1.78)
(1.41)

Miles * Insurance
Insurance
Observed Probability
# of Observations
Sample
Driving Distance to
Hospital (miles)

--

-.003
(0.48)

--

-.007
(0.86)

.241
(35)

.233
(25)

.261
(28)

.253
(19)

.784
22258

.784
22258

.714
11821

.714
11821

Panel B: Respondent Goes to a Doctors Office if Care is Needed
Full
HH Income<30,000
.018
.019
.025
.026
(2.44)
(2.19)
(2.81)
(2.99)

Miles * Insurance
Insurance
Observed Prob.
# of Observations
Sample
Driving Distance to
Hospital (miles)

--

-.001
(0.09)

--

.011
(0.34)

.358
(39)

.344
(27)

.367
(34)

.348
(22)

.619
22481

.619
22481

.486
11990

.486
11990

Panel C: Respondent Goes to ED or Outpatient Clinic if Care is Needed
Full
HH Income<30,000
-.008
-.009
-.002
-.003
(1.40)
(0.54)
(0.22)
(0.23)

Miles * Insurance
--

-.010
(0.38)

--

-.005
(0.76)

Insurance

-.048
(9.53)

-.037
(5.96)

-.056
(6.99)

-.041
(3.87)

Observed Prob.
# of Observations

.133
21995

.133
21995

.197
11524

.197
11524

Notes: Standard errors are cluster-adjusted by zip code; absolute value of z-statistics are shown in
parenthesis. Regressions include survey year and zip code fixed effects. They also control for age, agesquared, gender, household size and its square, race (7 categories), citizenship, language the survey was
taken in (6), household income (6), education (6), current employment status (6), and marital status (6).

32

Table 4. Marginal Effect of Distance to the Closest Hospital on
Reported Ease of Access to Health Care Services

Sample
Driving Distance to
Hospital (miles)

Full
-.000
(0.58)

Miles * Insurance

Panel A: All Respondents
HH Income<30,000
-.003
-.017
-.016
(0.61)
(1.94)
(1.86)

--

.004
(1.30)

--

.014
(1.83)

.296
(40)

.287
(28)

.330
(30)

.309
(20)

Observed Prob.
# of Observations

.716
21848

.716
21848

.605
11532

.605
11532

Sample
Driving Distance
(miles) to Hospital

Panel B: Respondents Without a Regular Place of Care
Full
HH Income<30,000
.001
.001
-.071
-.074
(0.08)
(0.09)
(2.00)
(1.90)

Insurance

Miles * Insurance
--

.008
(1.15)

--

-.001
(0.12)

Insurance

.320
(19)

.303
(13)

.300
(14)

.257
(9.11)

Observed Prob.
# of Observations

.463
4467

.463
4467

.379
3077

.379
3077

Notes: Standard errors are cluster-adjusted by zip code; absolute value of z-statistics are shown in
parenthesis. Regressions include survey year and zip code fixed effects. They also control for age, agesquared, gender, household size and its square, race (7 categories), citizenship, language the survey was
taken in (6), household income (6), education (6), current employment status (6), and marital status (6).

33

Table 5. Marginal Effect of Distance to the Closest Hospital on Diagnostic Care

Driving Distance (miles)
to the Hospital
Miles * Insurance

-.005
(0.45)

Panel A: Colon Cancer Screening, age≥50
Full
HH income<30,000
-.007
-.003
-.005
(0.54)
(0.15)
(0.22)

--

.033
(2.44)

--

.035
(1.49)

Insurance

.125
(5.55)

.047
(1.44)

.116
(4.63)

.037
(1.05)

Obs Prob
# of Obs

.441
6959

.441
6959

.421
3677

.421
3677

Panel B: HIV tests, age<65

Full Sample

Sample
Driving Distance
(miles) to the Hospital

HH Income<30000

.002
(0.21)

.001
(0.20)

.007
(0.80)

.007
(0.81)

--

-.004
(1.16)

--

-.001
(.0.23)

Insurance

.063
(6.82)

.074
(6.27)

.053
(3.95)

.083
(5.45)

Obs. Prob
# of Obs

.360
20105

.360
20105

.390
10430

.390
10430

Driving Distance (miles)
to the Hospital

Panel C: Preventative Care, age 65+
Flu Shot
Pneumonia Vaccine
-.030
-.028
.009
.012
(0.67)
(1.65)
(0.11)
(0.14)

Miles * Insurance

Miles * Insurance
--

-.020
(0.16)

--

-.037
(1.06)

Insurance

.313
(4.65)

.402
(3.89)

.280
(3.84)

.358
(3.39)

Obs Prob
# of Obs

.678
1845

.678
1845

.573
1849

.573
1849

Notes: Standard errors are clustered by zip code; absolute value of z-statistics are shown in parenthesis. All
models include zip and year fixed effects and control for age, age-squared, gender, household size and its
square, race (7 categories), citizenship, language the survey was taken in (6), household income (6),
education (6), employment status (6), marital status (6), BMI, self-assessed health status, diabetes, arthritis,
and whether the respondent smokes.

34

Table 6: Summary Statistics for Infant Mortality Data: Los Angles County, 1997-2001

Miles to Closest Hospital
(driving)

Overall
Mean
2.81
(.107)

Distance to Closest Hospital
No Change
Change
2.77
3.09
(.120)
(.186)

Change in Distance

.054
(.032)

--

.513
(.304)

Driving Time to Closest
Hospital (minutes)

6.87
(.148)

6.67
(.147)

8.38
(.605)

# Clinics

.709
(.028)

.744
(.030)

.411
(.055)

Deaths <1 yr per 1000 live
births

4.00
(.106)

4.07
(.113)

3.41
(.261)

Neonatal Deaths (<28 days)
per 1000 live births

2.73
(.085)

2.77
(.092)

2.35
(.195)

Post-neonatal Deaths per
1000 live births

1.27
(.051)

1.30
(.054)

1.06
(.035)

Share Mothers, White

.333

.318

.465

Share Mothers, Hispanics

.465

.475

.385

Share Mothers, Black

.072

.077

.033

Share Mothers, Asian

.081

.082

.068

Share Mothers, Filipino

.027

.026

.029

Share Mothers under 20

087

.089

.066

Share Mothers 20-29

.455

.458

.427

Share Mothers 30-34

.265

.261

.295

Share Mothers 35 & older

.200

.191

.212

Share weigh<1500g

.012

.012

.011

Share weigh 1500-2499g

.053

.053

.051

Share weigh 2500g +

.935

.934

.937

Prenatal Care in 1st trimester

864

861

893

35

Per 1000 live births

(1.69)

(1.80)

(4.34)

No prenatal care Per 1000
live births

5.20
(.155)

5.29
(.168)

4.39
(.343)

Zip-year Observations

1673

1498

175

Source: California Department of Health Services, Birth and Death Statistical Master Files.

36

Table 7: Effect of Distance to the Closest Hospital and
Prenatal Care and Infant Mortality

Model Type:
Driving
Distance (miles)
to the Hospital
Zip Trends
Dep. Var. mean
# Observation
Adj R-sq

1st Trimester Prenatal
per 1000 Live Births
OLS
-.144
-.658
(0.99)
(1.91)
No
864
1670
.300

Yes
864
1670
.287

Infant Deaths Per 1000
Live Births
OLS
.061
-.022
(2.24)
(0.29)
No
4.00
1670
.300

Yes
4.00
1670
.287

Infant Deaths
Negative Binomial
6.56
4.66
(2.58)
(1.06)
No
2.59
1670
--

Yes
2.59
1670
--

Notes: Standard errors are clustered at the zip code level. Absolute value of t-statistics are and shown in
parenthesis for the OLS regression and of z-statistics for the negative binomial regression (NBR) models.
The key independent variable is the driving distance from each zip code population center to the closest
hospital in a given year. All models also control for both the age and racial distribution of mothers, the
weight distribution of babies, the number of community health clinics, zip code fixed effects and year fixed
effects. Where indicated, zip-code specific time trends are also included. The NBR models also control for
total births. (Since the mean of the dependent variable in a binomial regression model is parameterized as
µi = exp(Xi’β), the percentage change in expected deaths from a unit change in distance is given by
100*[exp(βk)-1]. )

37

Table 8. Summary Statistics for General Mortality Data, 1997-2001

Miles to Closest Hospital
(driving)

Overall
Mean
3.01
(.099)

Distance to Closest Hospital
No Change
Change
2.88
4.15
(.097)
(.408)

Driving Time to Closest
Hospital (minutes)

6.87
(.148)

6.67
(.147)

8.38
(.605)

Community Health Clinics

.709
(.028)

.744
(.030)

.411
(.055)

Total Deaths

173
(2.97)

176
(3.22)

142
(6.51)

Unintentional Injury Deaths

5.17
(.110)

5.28
(.120)

4.03
(.234)

AMI Deaths

13.9
(2.72)

14.2
(.294)

11.4
(.664)

Chronic Ischemic Heart
Disease Deaths

23.7
(.433)

24.1
(.468)

20.4
(1.03)

Lung Cancer Deaths

9.44
(.182)

9.51
(.195)

8.84
(.481)

Colon Cancer Deaths

3.31
(.071)

3.35
(.076)

3.02
(.183)

Homicides

2.96
(.116)

4.08
(.160)

1.12
(.114)

Share Deaths<1 year old

.017

.017

.017

Share Deaths, 1-4 year olds

.004

.003

.004

Share Deaths, 5-14 year olds

.005

.005

.003

Share Deaths, 15-24 years olds

.016

.0161

.018

Share Deaths, 25-34 year olds

.024

.024

.012

Share Deaths, 35-44 year olds

.047

.048

.043

Share Deaths, 45-54 year olds

.078

.078

.076

Share Deaths, 55-64 year olds

.108

.108

.109

Share Deaths, 65-74 year olds

.183

.182

.179

38

Share Deaths, 75-84 year olds

.272

.270

.286

Share Deaths, 85+ years olds

.246

.247

.244

Zip-year Observations

1675

1500

175

Source: California Department of Health Services, Death Statistical Master Files.

39

Table 9. Conditional Maximum Likelihood Negative Binomial Models: Percentage Change
in Deaths Due to a Mile Increase in Distance to the Hospital in Los Angeles County
AMI

Unintentional
Injuries

Chronic Heart
Disease

Lung Cancer

Colon Cancer

Miles

2.93
(1.56)

6.04
(2.37)

3.63
(2.20)

6.14
(2.56)

-0.57
(0.62)

-0.73
(0.34)

1.71
(1.51)

1.87
(1.00)

-2.28
(1.16)

0.24
(0.06)

Zip
Trends
Mean
Deaths

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

14

14

5.3

5.3

24

24

9.4

9.4

3.3

3.3

Notes: Standard errors are clustered at the zip code level; absolute value of z-statistics shown in parenthesis. The key
independent variable is the driving distance from each zip code population center to the closest hospital in a given year.
All models also control for total deaths, deaths by homicide, the age distribution of deaths, number of community
health clinics, zip code fixed effects and year fixed effects. Where indicated, zip-code specific time trends are also
included. (Since the mean of the dependent variable in a binomial regression model is parameterized as µi = exp(Xi’β),
the percentage change in expected deaths from a unit change in distance is given by 100*[exp(βk)-1]. )

40

Appendix Table 1. Marginal Effects of Health-Related Control Variables from
Baseline Models of Regular Source of Care (Table 3)
Sample
Distance
(miles)
Insurance

Regular Care
Full
Income<
30,000
.006
.016
(0.93)
(1.78)

Care in doctor’s Office
Full
Income<
30,000
.018
.025
(2.44)
(2.81)

Care in ED or Clinic
Full
Income<
30,000
-.008
-.002
(1.40)
(0.22)

.241
(35)

.261
(28)

.358
(39)

.367
(34)

-.048
(9.53)

-.056
(6.99)

BMI

.002
(4.28)

.002
(2.81)

.003
(5.71)

.003
(4.90)

.000
(0.03)

-.000
(0.60)

Self-assessed
Health Status

.001
(0.39)

.000
(0.04)

-.014
(5.71)

-.023
(4.55)

.010
(4.28)

.015
(3.71)

Diabetes

.071
(6.00)

.092
(5.08)

.037
(2.36)

.036
(1.73)

.027
(3.35)

.050
(3.64)

Arthritis

.032
(3.59)

.037
(2.61)

.020
(1.93)

.024
(1.56)

.006
(1.02)

-.002
(0.17)

Smoke
Cigarettes

-.016
(2.16)

-.027
(2.15)

-.017
(1.68)

-.016
(1.04)

-.000
(0.05)

-.000
(0.04)

Observed Prob
Observations

.784
22258

.714
11821

.619
22481

.486
11990

.133
21995

.197
11524

See notes to Table 3.

41

Appendix Table 2. Marginal Effect of Health-Related Control Variables from
Baseline Models of Ease of Access to Health Care Services (Table 4)
All Respondents
Sample

-.000
(0.58)

HH
Income<30,000
-.017
(1.94)

.296
(40)

.330
(30)

.320
(19)

.300
(14)

BMI

.001
(1.93)

.001
(2.08)

.003
(2.16)

.002
(1.93)

Self-assessed Health
Status

-.045
(15)

-.056
(12)

-.063
(7.24)

-.059
(6.07)

Diabetes

.008
(0.59)

.028
(1.53)

.068
(1.24)

-.044
(0.72)

Arthritis

-.027
(2.71)

-.045
(2.93)

-.047
(1.27)

-.050
(1.23)

Smoke Cigarettes

-.023
(2.53)
.716
21848

.002
(0.17)
.605
11532

-.011
(0.46)
.463
4467

.024
(0.92)
.379
3077

Driving Distance to
Hospital (miles)
Insurance

Observed Prob.
# of Observations

Full

Respondents Without a Regular
Place of Care
Full
HH
Income<30,000
.001
-.071
(0.08)
(2.00)

See notes to Table 4.

42

Appendix Table 3. Marginal Effects of Health-Related Control Variables from
Baseline Models of Diagnostic and Preventative Care (Table 5)
Colon Cancer Screen
Full
Income<
Sample
30,000
-.005
-.003
(0.45)
(0.15)

HIV tests
Full
Income<
Sample
30,000
.002
.007
(0.21)
(0.80)

Insurance

.125
(5.55)

.116
(4.63)

.063
(6.82)

.053
(3.95)

.313
(4.65)

.280
(3.84)

BMI

.003
(2.47)

.001
(1.06)

-.001
(1.20)

.000
(0.03)

-.003
(1.19)

.004
(1.48)

Self-assessed
Health Status

.013
(1.98)

.021
(2.35)

-.005
(1.29)

-.010
(1.98)

.014
(1.09)

.014
(0.88)

Diabetes

-.007
(0.32)

.016
(0.61)

.048
(2.76)

.058
(2.47)

.104
(3.10)

.037
(0.90)

Arthritis

.087
(5.72)

.071
(3.41)

.024
(2.07)

.014
(0.82)

.092
(3.42)

.104
(3.52)

Smoke
Cigarettes

-.111
(6.13)

-.093
(3.47)

.030
(2.93)

.047
(3.39)

-.201
(4.17)

-.148
(3.04)

Observed Prob
Observations

.441
6959

.421
3677

.360
20105

.390
10430

.678
1845

.573
1849

Distance
(miles)

See notes to Table 5.

43

Vaccinations
Flu Shots, Pneumonia,
age≥65
age≥65
-.030
.009
(0.67)
(0.11)

Appendix Table 4. Sensitivity Test: Neighborhood Fixed Effects
Colon Cancer Screens, age≥50
Sample
Driving Distance to the
Hospital (miles)

Full Sample
.001
(0.49)

-.000
(0.20)

-.002
(0.45)

-.005
(0.94)

-6934
.440

.031
(2.96)
6934
.440

-3682
.411

.031
(2.08)
3682
.411

Miles * Insurance
# of Obs.
Obs. Prob.

HH Income<30000

HIV tests, age<65
Sample
Driving Distance to the
Hospital (miles)

Full Sample

HH Income<30000

-.004
(1.63)

-.004
(1.35)

-.006
(1.30)

-.005
(1.13)

# of Obs.
Obs. Prob.

-20067
.360

-.005
(1.84)
20067
.360

-10364
.391

-.003
(0.63)
10364
.391

Driving Distance to the
Hospital

Flu Shots, age≥65
-.004
-.003
(0.54)
(0.44)

Miles * Insurance

Miles * Insurance
# of Obs
Obs. Prob

-.037
(1.24)
1887
.695

-1887
.695

Pneumonia Vaccine, age≥65
-.002
-.002
(0.25)
(0.22)
-1867
.571

-.016
(0.65)
1867
.571

Notes: All regressions include neighborhood fixed effects. For all other details see notes to Table 5.

44

Appendix Table 5. Sensitivity Test: Zip Codes Experiencing
Changes in Distance to the Nearest Hospital

Driving Distance to the
Hospital

Colon Cancer Screens, age≥50
-.015
-.017
(1.12)
(1.02)

Miles * Insurance
# of Obs
Obs. Prob

Driving Distance to the
Hospital
# of Obs
Obs. Prob

HIV Tests, age<65
.002
.000
(0.32)
(0.01)

.064
(2.08)
982
.456

982
.456

-.018
(2.37)
2647
.308

2647
.308

Flu Shots, age≥65
-.098
(1.63)

Pneumonia Vaccine, age≥65
.030
(0.43)

238
.710

226
.677

See notes to table 5.

45

