                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  ABORTION LEGALIZATION AND LIFECYCLE FERTILITY

                                        Elizabeth Oltmans Ananat
                                             Jonathan Gruber
                                             Phillip B. Levine

                                          Working Paper 10705
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10705


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2004




We would like to thank Melissa Kearney and Doug Staiger for helpful conversations and Jean Roth for her
assistance acquiring the Vital Statistics data. This research was supported by the National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development, grant # RO1 HDO42819. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Elizabeth Oltmans Ananat, Jonathan Gruber, and Phillip B. Levine. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Monetary Policy and Asset Prices: A Look Back at Past U.S. Stock Market Booms
Elizabeth Oltmans Ananat, Jonathan Gruber, and Phillip B. Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 10705
August 2004
JEL No. I1

                                             ABSTRACT


Previous research has convincingly shown that abortion legalization in the early 1970s led to a

significant drop in fertility at that time. But this decline may have either represented a delay in births

from a point where they were "unintended" to a point where they were "intended," or they may have

represented a permanent reduction in fertility. We combine data from the 1970 U.S. Census and

microdata from 1968 to 1999 Vital Statistics records to calculate lifetime fertility of women in the

1930s through 1960s birth cohorts. We examine whether those women who were born in early

legalizing states and who passed through the early 1970s in their peak childbearing years had

differential lifetime fertility patterns compared to women born in other states and in different birth

cohorts. We consider the impact of abortion legalization on both the number of children ever born

as well as the distribution of number of children ever born. Our results indicate that much of the

reduction in fertility at the time abortion was legalized was permanent in that women did not have

more subsequent births as a result. We also find that this result is largely attributable to an increase

in the number of women who remained childless throughout their fertile years.

Elizabeth Oltmans Ananat                                 Phillip B. Levine
Department of Economics                                  Department of Economics
MIT                                                      Wellesley College
Cambridge, MA 02139                                      Wellesley, MA 02481
eoltmans@mit.edu                                         and NBER
                                                         plevine@wellesley.edu
Jonathan Gruber
Department of Economics
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
gruberj@mit.edu
I. INTRODUCTION

        The ability to control one’s fertility through legal abortion is one of the most profound

changes in family planning of the last fifty years. The significant change in the cost of abortion

brought about by its legalization enabled women to abort pregnancies that would otherwise have

resulted in an unwanted birth. Past research has shown that women responded very strongly to

this incentive when abortion was legalized in the early 1970s, reducing their fertility by at least 4

percent (cf. Levine, et al., 1999).

        The immediate drop in the birth rate in response to legal abortion does not, however,

necessarily indicate that women have fewer children over the rest of their childbearing years.

Many of the women who chose to abort rather than have an unwanted birth still had a number of

fertile years remaining. If the births that did not occur were “replaced” by additional births

subsequently, then women would not experience a net reduction in lifetime fertility. Therefore,

the short-run impacts on birth rates estimated in earlier work may not represent long-run

reductions in birth rates and completed fertility. For example, the ability to better control one’s

fertility may have simply led women to delay births to a more preferred later date. In this case,

abortion legalization would have had no long run affect on completed fertility. Yet, to our

knowledge, no evidence exists regarding the impact of abortion legalization on women’s fertility

patterns over the remainder of their childbearing years.1

        Understanding the effect of abortion availability on fertility patterns is important for three

reasons. First, it allows for a richer model of the fertility impacts of public policy. If abortion

1
  Perhaps the most closely related study is the one by Angrist and Evans (1999), who examine the influence of
reduced teen fertility attributable to abortion legalization on educational outcomes and employment status of
women. It is similar to our analysis in that it extends the immediate fertility reduction brought about by legal
abortion to women’s subsequent outcomes. On the other hand, its focus on education and employment differs from
our analysis of fertility patterns of the rest of the women’s childbearing years.

                                                       1
availability had only a short-run timing affect on fertility, then it has a very different long-run

implication for population dynamics than if there was a permanent effect on the population.

There is some literature, reviewed subsequently, on the general sources of variation in birth rates

over time in the United States, but none of this work has carefully analyzed the direct impact of

fertility control itself in this process. Our work fills this gap by providing clear evidence on the

impact of fertility control, through abortion legalization, on both completed fertility and birth

timing.

          Second, understanding the extent to which legal abortion generates a permanent reduction

in women’s fertility, compared to a change in the timing of births, is crucial for interpreting the

recent literature on abortion access and child outcomes.        For instance, in response to the

legalization of abortion Gruber, et al. (1999) find improvements in child well-being and Donahue

and Levitt (2001) report a reduction in crime when those children mature. One explanation for

these findings is that those children who were born are differentially selected among those who

could have been born if abortion had not been legal. But if births are just timed differently, then

any selection effect would strongly depend upon whether childrens’ outcomes are determined by

the fixed characteristics of mothers or the age at which those mothers give birth. If it is the

mother’s fixed characteristics that matter, then the effects reported in Gruber, et al. (1999) and

Donahue and Levitt (2001) should diminish over time since the “marginal” children will

eventually be born. If it is the age of the mother that matters, then even the delay will lead to

lasting improvements in child well-being.

          Finally, the observed changes in childbearing in response to abortion legalization may

have important implications for women’s outcomes as well. A woman’s fertility patterns over

her childbearing years could easily alter other outcomes she is likely to experience in her life.

                                                 2
For instance, a woman who accidentally becomes pregnant at, say, age 20 may choose to drop

out of college if she was unable to abort the pregnancy. If that same birth could have occurred

five years later, she may have graduated, but she may have restricted her labor market activity

subsequently. If that birth never occurred, she may have also participated in the labor market

more fully over the remainder of her worklife.

        The purpose of this paper is to estimate the impact of abortion legalization on lifecycle

fertility, beginning from the point at which abortion was legalized through the remainder of

women’s childbearing years. We combine data from the 1970 U.S. Census and microdata from

1968 to 1999 Vital Statistics records to calculate lifetime fertility of women in cohorts born in

the 1930s through 1960s. We examine whether those women who were born in early legalizing

states and who passed through the early 1970s in their peak abortion and childbearing years had

differential lifetime fertility patterns compared to women born in other states and in different

birth cohorts. We consider the impact of abortion legalization on both the number of children

ever born as well as the distribution of number of children ever born.

        We find that much of the reduction in fertility at the time abortion was legalized was

permanent; women did not have many more subsequent births as a result. We also find that this

result is attributable to an increase in the number of women who remained childless throughout

their fertile years.



II. BACKGROUND AND LITERATURE REVIEW

        The process by which abortion was legalized in the United States in the early 1970s is an

integral component of the identification strategy we employ. A detailed description of the events

leading up to the legalization of abortion in the United States is provided in Garrow (1994).

                                                 3
Briefly, prior to the late 1960s, abortion was illegal in every state in America except when

necessary to preserve a pregnant woman’s life. Between 1967 and 1973, a number of states

implemented modest reforms making it legal for some women to obtain abortions under very

special circumstances, such as rape, incest or a serious threat to the health of the mother.

Abortion became widely available, however, in five states in 1970. In four of these states (New

York, Washington, Alaska, and Hawaii), there was a repeal of anti-abortion laws. In the fifth,

California, there was a "de facto" legalization, since in late 1969 the California State Supreme

Court ruled that the pre-1967 law outlawing abortion was unconstitutional. Following the 1973

Supreme Court decision in Roe vs. Wade, abortion became legal in all states.

       These events contributed to a dramatic increase in the frequency with which women

chose to end a pregnancy through abortion. Although it is difficult to determine the number of

abortions performed prior to legalization, the trend in its immediate aftermath was dramatic. The

abortion rate almost doubled in the years following Roe v. Wade. This heightened prevalence of

abortion came at the same time as an ongoing steep reduction in fertility rates. Because births

had been falling precipitously even before the introduction of legalized abortion, it is not clear to

what extent the introduction of legalized abortion contributed to the decline.

       To distinguish between these ongoing trends and the causal impact of changes in abortion

law, Levine, et al. (1999), used the natural experiment provided by the staggered introduction of

legalized abortion across states. Since the methods they used are comparable to those that we

will introduce subsequently, we review them in some detail here. The legislative history enabled

them to categorize states by abortion legality in different years to jointly exploit two legislative

changes. They first compared changes in fertility rates in the “early legalizing” (or “repeal”)

states from before 1970 to after 1970, relative to other (“non-repeal”) states where abortion was

                                                 4
still illegal. Then they reversed the treatment in 1973, comparing births in those states where the

Roe decision legalized abortion to the repeal states where it had already been legal.

       In particular, Levine, et al. estimated regression models of the form:

              ln(birth rate)st = β1*REPEALs*D7173 + β2*REPEALs*D7475                           (1)

                + β3*REPEALs*D7680 + β4δs + β5τt + β6δs*TREND + β8Xst + εst

where: the birth rate represents births per 1,000 women in the defined age group in state s and

time t; REPEALs is a repeal state indicator; D7173, D7475, and D7680 are dummies for the eras

1971-1973, 1974-1975, and 1976-1980, respectively; δs is a set of state dummies; τt is a set of

year dummies; TREND is a linear time trend; and Xst are state-specific time-varying control

variables.   This fixed effects specification provides generic controls for the multitude of

otherwise unobservable differences that exist across states or take place over time. Within this

regression framework, the impact of abortion legalization in the early repeal states is captured by

the coefficient β1. Since the dependent variable is the log of the birth rate, this coefficient is

interpreted as the percentage change in the birth rate brought about by legalization. The impact

of abortion in the other states, where abortion was legalized by Roe v. Wade, is indicated by β1 –

β3; if there was a full “rebound” in those states when abortion was legalized, then β3 should equal

zero. The middle coefficient, β2, tests whether the rebound in the differential was instantaneous

or whether it occurred with a lag.

       As an extension to this model, Levine, et al. provide estimates separately comparing

repeal states to non-repeal states that vary by their distance to repeal states, using the distance

categories of within 250 miles (from closest population centroids), 250 to 750 miles, and greater

than 750 miles. If we assume that women in closer non-repeal states were more likely to cross



                                                 5
state lines to obtain an abortion (e.g. those in New Jersey crossing into New York), then the

effects of abortion should be strongest for those living farthest from the early repeal states.

       The results obtained from their analysis indicate that the legalization of abortion in the

United States in the early 1970s reduced the fertility rate by over 4 percentage points. Teens and

women age 35 and over experienced much larger reductions in fertility, as did nonwhite and

unmarried women. Levine, et al. also found that this effect was much larger when early repeal

states were compared to more distance comparison states, suggesting that travel between states

dampened the estimated impact.

       Although no work of which we are aware has explored the relationship between abortion

legalization and lifecycle fertility, others have explored the determinants of lifecycle fertility

more generally. Analyses of the distinction between fertility timing and completed fertility have

been conducted in the past. For example, much of the variation in birth rates over time in the

United States, and particularly the baby boom and subsequent bust, is the result of changes in

timing of births rather than changes in completed fertility (c.f. Hotz, et al. 1997). Differences in

the timing of fertility across demographic groups over time can account for differences in their

fertility patterns (c.f. Chen and Morgan, 1991; Rindfuss, et al. 1996; Morgan, et al. 1999; and

Martin, 2000). In addition, a number of recent micro-econometric studies of the fertility process

have found a key role of economic factors, and especially a woman’s wage, in determining the

timing of first birth (Heckman and Walker, 1990; and Hotz and Miller, 1988). Heckman and

Walker (1990), in particular, found that the strongest effects of economic variables were through

the timing of first birth. But none of this work has carefully analyzed the direct impact of

fertility control itself in this process. Our work fills this gap by providing clear evidence on the



                                                  6
impact of fertility control, through abortion legalization, on both completed fertility and birth

timing.

          Finally, as noted in the introduction, our work is indirectly related to the large recent

literature on abortion availability and cohort outcomes. This literature started with Gruber et al.

(1999), who used the identification strategy of Levine et al. to examine the characteristics of

cohorts born before and after abortion became available. They find that outcomes such as living

with a single parent, living in poverty, or living beyond one’s first birthday all improved

significantly once abortion was available, implying that the “marginal child” not born because of

abortion would have lived in poor circumstances.

          Subsequent work has focused more directly on the implications of abortion for these

cohorts as they age. Most notable is Donahue and Levitt (2001), who showed that abortion

availability was associated with lower crime rates when these cohorts became teenagers. These

authors use a somewhat different identification strategy than that pursued in Levine et al.,

employing all the variation in abortion rates that took place over this period rather than just

indicators of the legal status of abortion. This approach is criticized in Joyce (2004), and

defended in Donahue and Levitt (2004). Charles and Stephens (2002) provide an additional

example of research in this area, investigating the relationship between abortion legalization and

substance abuse as teens. In this body of literature the long-term implications for children’s

outcomes depend critically on whether the abortion legalization permanently reduced a woman’s

fertility or just altered the timing of when she gave birth.




                                                  7
III. METHODOLOGY

       To examine the impact of abortion legalization on life-cycle fertility, we will again

exploit the quasi-experiment provided by the variation across states in the exact timing of

abortion legalization in the early 1970s. The main methodological extension in the present

analysis is to convert the focus on period effects that Levine, et al. estimated to a focus on cohort

effects. The period effect analysis operated by comparing women at different ages at the time of

the law changes (either early repeal or Roe vs. Wade), and measuring their current fertility rates.

The cohort analysis instead compares women who passed through these different legal states at

the time when they were most likely to be affected by abortion availability, and examines

measures of completed fertility.

       We focus on those cohorts who were most likely to be affected by changes in abortion

law in the early 1970s based on their age at that time. Women in these cohorts from repeal states

experienced greater exposure to legal abortion and may have had different fertility patterns over

the remainder of their lives as a result.       Once these “treatment cohorts” are defined, the

methodological approach is analogous to that based on period effects. Women in the different

sets of states in cohorts before the treatment cohorts and after the treatment cohorts should have

been equally affected by changes in abortion policy; abortion would have either been uniformly

illegal (for the earlier cohorts) or uniformly legal (for the later cohorts) during the years in which

they were most at-risk of unwanted pregnancies.

       Our approach for defining the “treatment cohorts” is illustrated in Figures 1 and 2, which

apply information on the impact of abortion legalization on births in the 1970s by exact age to

determine more precisely which birth cohorts should have been differentially affected. One of

the lines in Figure 1 shows the relative impact of abortion legalization on the birth rate by exact

                                                  8
age. The points on this line represent the results of regression models analogous to those

reported in equation (1) and estimated in Levine, et al. by the exact age of birth using Vital

Statistics microdata between 1968 and 1980 (described in the next section). The points plotted

represent the percentage reduction in births brought about by abortion legalization at each age.2

As reported in Levine, et al. (albeit with less age-specificity), legalized abortion had the biggest

relative impact on births to teens and to older women. The impact is largest at age 15, declines

to zero by age 28, and then rises again.

         Figure 1 also displays the level of the birth rate in 1970 by specific age. Birth rates peak

at age 23. They are highest between the late teens and late 20s and are low in the early teens and

into the 30s and 40s. Therefore, the large relative impact of abortion legalization on births at

older ages needs to be tempered by the fact that the base is relatively low. The absolute impact

on the number of births is not that large at older ages.

         This point is made more clearly in Figure 2. The points plotted in this figure are

estimated from the same model as we used to obtain the points in Figure 1, except the dependent

variable is the level of the birth rate rather than the natural logarithm. As such, parameter

estimates represent the absolute effect on the birth rate rather than the relative effect based on the

percentage change. The solid line in the figure represents the average reduction in the birth rate

across all ages. In Figure 2 we see that ages 16 through 26 represent the peak ages at which the

number of births was affected. At these ages, births fell by roughly 6 per 1,000 women in

response to abortion legalization. With the exception of a peculiar spike at exact age 31, the

absolute impact was considerably smaller at all other ages. Therefore, we would expect the



2
  More specifically, they represent the coefficient on the interaction between a repeal state indicator and an indicator
for births in the 1971-1973 period in equation 1.
                                                           9
largest impact on lifecycle fertility to hit those cohorts who passed through the early 1970s

between the ages of 16 and 26.

         Table 1 helps facilitate the transition from these age-specific period effects to the

definition of what we define to be the treatment cohorts. This table simply translates age at

childbearing in specific years into the relevant birth cohorts of women. We know that abortion

laws differed between repeal and other states over the 1970 to 1972 period, which, given the nine

month delay of pregnancy, largely applies to births in 1971 to 1973. We can combine this

information with the fact that the peak ages of abortion legalization’s impact was 16 to 26. As

Table 1 helps make clear, this means that the birth cohorts of the later 1940s and earlier 1950s

whose fertility were the most directly affected by abortion legalization. As an approximation, in

our analysis we define the 1946 to 1955 birth cohorts to represent the treatment cohorts.3 If

abortion legalization in the early 1970s reduced fertility at those ages for these women, any

permanent impact on lifetime fertility would show up as a gap in children ever born between

those who lived in early repeal states and others. Women born after 1955 would have entered

childbearing ages following the Roe decision, so they would have faced a lifetime of exposure to

legal abortion regardless of their state of residence. Similarly, women born in the 1930s and

earlier 1940s were in their later stages of childbearing by the early 1970s. These women passed

through their peak childbearing years with no legal abortion access, regardless of where they

lived.

         These results bring us to an empirical specification of our model of completed fertility.

We estimate models of the form:

3
  Our results are not sensitive to small changes in the start and end date of the treatment cohort. We also
experimented with alternative specifications within the 1946-1955 cohort window (like breaking it up into two
windows – one from 1946-1950 and one from 1951-1955), but found no pattern strong enough to statistically
distinguish.
                                                     10
                  CFcs = β1*REPEALs*D4655 + β2*REPEALs*D(post55)                                (2)

                                    + β3δs + β4τc + β5δs*TREND + εcs

where CFcs represents alternative measures of completed fertility in cohort c in state s, D4655 is

an indicator of the 1946-1955 birth cohorts and D(post55) is an indicator of post-1955 birth

cohorts. The omitted term here is the difference before 1946 between repeal and non-repeal

states, which is captured by the set of state fixed effects. The coefficient β1 measures the

difference in completed fertility between repeal and non-repeal states for those women born in

the 1946-1955 period (the treatment cohorts), relative to those born before 1946 (who were

beyond prime childbearing age when abortion was legalized). The coefficient β2 measures the

difference in completed fertility between repeal and non-repeal states for the set of women born

after 1955 (for whom there should be no effect since they were all subject to legal abortion

throughout their childbearing years), relative to those born before 1946. As with the period tests

of Levine et al., this framework provides two tests for the effect of abortion legalization: that β1

is negative, and that β2 is zero.

          It is important to recognize the additional power that we obtain by including the

interaction for the post-1955 cohort. Absent this term, we would be unable to differentiate an

early repeal effect from a differential trend by repeal vs. non-repeal states. That is, the early

repeal of abortion, followed by Roe v. Wade, allows researchers to go beyond the typical

“difference-in-difference” setup, in which it is difficult to distinguish policy-induced changes

from underlying trends. By finding both that there is an effect on fertility for the treatment

cohort, and that there is no effect for later cohorts, we are able to confirm that there is a causal

effect of abortion availability and not an underlying trend that differs between these sets of

states.

                                                  11
           There are a couple of important modifications in making the translation from the period

effect model in equation 1 to the cohort effect model in equation 2. First, states no longer

represent the state that the birth occurred since states are designed to identify the mother’s state

of residence in the early 1970s. As described below, however, it is impossible to determine

states of residence in the early 1970s from the available data, so we use mothers’ states of birth

instead. Using state of birth has two advantages for our purposes: it is exogenous to any mobility

decisions related to abortion availability; and it is a fixed characteristic that allows us to merge

the two data sources we use below. Second, we no longer control for other time varying, state-

specific covariates.          In the cohort context, individuals are potentially influenced by some

complex function of social conditions since they were born and it is unclear how to specifically

control for them in a regression framework. Instead, we rely on state of birth fixed effects along

with linear trends within states of birth to control for these other factors.4

           In addition to estimating models of this form, we also follow Levine, et al. and estimate

models comparing completed fertility to women in repeal states to women in non-repeal states

who differ in their distance to repeal states. If travel between states occurred in response to the

early legalization of abortion in repeal states, then the estimated impacts should be greater when

comparing repeal states to more distant non-repeal states.



IV. DESCRIPTION OF THE DATA

           Based on this discussion, we need data providing measures of women’s completed

fertility for different birth cohorts of women along with geographical identifiers that can isolate

those women exposed to the early legalization of abortion in repeal states. No single dataset

4
    The findings reported later in the paper are similar when we control for state-specific quadratic trends.

                                                            12
provides all of this information.5 We rely on the Public Use Micro Sample from the 1970

Census and data from the Vital Statistics Natality Detail Files between 1968 and 1999 to

construct measures of completed fertility for birth cohorts beginning in the 1930s and going

through the 1960s. This combination provides a unique opportunity to examine the life-cycle

fertility of the relevant treatment and control cohorts.

           The Vital Statistics data represent individual records on every birth that took place in the

United States between 1968 and 1999. Microdata prior to 1968 are not publicly available. These

data are invaluable because they specify the parity of the birth, the mother’s age (from which we

can estimate the year she was born), and the mother’s state of birth.6 With these data, we can

attribute every birth that takes place in the United States to the mothers’ state/year of birth

cohort.7 Moreover, we can use the information available on the parity of each birth to help

formulate the distribution of the number of births to each woman over her childbearing years.8

           For those women born in the mid 1950s and later, these Vital Statistics microdata contain

a record of every birth they have had. Since fertility trails off considerably after age 35 and is


5
  Data from the 1970, 1980, and 1990 Censuses provide information on the number of children ever born and each
individual’s year and state of birth, but there are two drawbacks to using this as the basis of our analysis. The first is
that younger women, for whom we expect to see the strongest effects on fertility, have not completed their
childbearing by 1990, and the 2000 Census does not include information on children ever born. This means that we
can only estimate the effect on childbearing by certain ages (in particular, age 35) rather than lifetime fertility. The
second is that the Census provides only a 5 percent (or, in 1970, 4 percent) sample rather than complete count data.
We did analyze the 1970-1990 Census data, creating a sample composed of women who were born in the 50 states
and the District of Columbia between 1935 and 1955 and using a framework similar to that reported in the text for
the Vital Statistics analysis. Our results were consistent with the results we present here, but lacked the precision of
the results provided by analysis of the complete-count, 1968-1999 Vital Statistics data.
6
    For a very small number of births, this information is missing. These births are not included in the analysis.
7
  Another minor limitation of these data is that births to women who were born in the United States but gave birth in
another country would not be captured in these data. It is our impression that this is a very infrequent event and we
ignore it here.
8
 Each birth at a given level of parity contributes to the counts in a cumulative birth distribution, which can then be
converted to a probability distribution.

                                                            13
very low after age 40, birth records for the 1968 through 1999 period will capture most, if not all

all births to women born as recently as the mid 1960s. Therefore, these data on their own are

sufficient to measure completed (or almost completed) fertility for roughly a decade’s worth of

birth cohorts. But these data are inadequate for capturing completed fertility for women born

before the mid 1950s since they will already have given birth to at least some of their children

prior to 1968. If they give birth to additional children after 1968, we will see them in the Vital

Statistics data from later years, but we would miss any women whose fertility is completed

before 1968.

        To count births prior to 1968 we use data from the 1970 Census, which provides

information on both women’s state of birth and their children ever born.9 Based on these data,

we can count children ever born who are more than two years old, and thus were born before

1968, by mothers’ birth cohort and state.           This becomes a baseline to which we can add

information on later births from the Vital Statistics data. For example, consider the cohort of

women born in 1940. We use the 1970 census data to measure how many children those women

had through 1967. We then use the Vital Statistics data to track the additional births to this

cohort that occurred in 1968 or later. Since both sources of data are sorted by state of birth, we

can be sure that we are tracking the same women.

        We use these combined Census and Vital Statistics microdata to create measures of

lifetime fertility for women born in the 1930s through the 1960s. For the earliest of these

cohorts, the Census data captures virtually their entire fertile period. For those born after the mid

1950s their fertility history is virtually entirely captured by the Vital Statistics microdata. For the

intervening cohorts, these two data sources are combined to create complete fertility histories.

9
 The Census data we use comes from the standardized Minnesota Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (Ruggles
and Sobek 2003).
                                                     14
Using the available data, we are able to construct measures of the number of children ever born

by age 25, by age 30, by age 35, and then total completed fertility.10 We convert counts of births

by these ages to measures of children ever born per woman by incorporating estimates from the

1970 Census on the number of women in each state/year of birth cohort. In addition, we have

constructed distributions of the number of children born to each woman in each state/year of

birth cohort and focus, in particular, on the percentage of women who never have children.

         While this is, we believe, the best empirical strategy to study the fertility effects of

abortion legalization, there are some limitations. First, the Vital Statistics data do not contain

information on mother’s state of birth in 1968, 1969 and 1972; the only geographic information

is the state in which the birth occurred. Assigning births to mother’s state of birth based on the

state in which the birth occurred introduces two sources of bias: some women move between the

time they are born and give birth and some women giving birth in the United States were not

born here. To circumvent these problems, we employed data from 1970, 1971, and 1973 to

estimate the probabilities of moving between a particular birth state and a state in which a birth

occurs and the probability that births in a given state are from a foreign-born mother. We assign

those probabilities from the 1970 data to the births in 1968 and 1969 and the average of the 1971

and 1973 probabilities to the births in 1972 to provide estimates of the expected births to women

in each state/year of birth cohort.11

         A second limitation of the Census data is that it pertains to the date the Census was

completed by each individual and does not specifically identify births taking place prior to 1968.

10
   Where sufficient data is available, we define total completed fertility to include births up to age 44. In some
instances, however, we use births up to age 39 since so little fertility takes place after that.
11
  These probabilities are calculated and assigned separately for each state/year of birth cohort as well as live birth
order.

                                                         15
For children still living with their mothers (which would account for the vast majority of those

under age 2), we can use data on the ages of the children in the household to remove from our

count those children we estimate as being born in 1968 or later.12 This approach creates an

additional problem, however, since the only identifying information is the age of the child and

his/her quarter of birth. Without knowing the exact date the Census was completed, it is

impossible to know exactly when the child was born. We employ an algorithm that assumes all

responses were filed on April 1st to determine the number of children born since the beginning of

1968 and then take the difference between this and children ever born to determine the number

born prior to 1968.13

         Figure 3 provides an indication of the accuracy of these constructed data. It compares

aggregated national data on average children ever born for each birth cohort between 1930 and

1960 from the Vital Statistics system (U.S. Centers for Disease Control, National Center for

Health Statistics, 2004), from the June Current Population Survey (CPS) Fertility Supplement

(Brown, 2002), and from the data we have constructed from the 1970 Census and 1968-1999

Vital Statistics microdata.14 This comparison indicates that our constructed data come close to

those reported from other sources. For the earlier and later birth cohorts, the estimates are

extremely close. This may be consistent with the fact that all births from each of these groups of



12
  We use the Minnesota Integrated Public Use Microdata Series identification of mother-child relationships
(Ruggles and Sobek 2003).
13
  In the 1970 Census, 78 percent of households filed their forms by April (they are mailed out in March). The
remainder filed them sometime subsequent to that after Census enumerators were able to track them down.
14
   For these other sources, we assign the reported statistics on children ever born by age 40 to 44 to the center of the
five year birth intervals that the data represent. In our constructed data, we report the average number of children
born by age 44 for women born before 1955 and births by age 40 for the remainder. If the Vital Statistics data were
reported by the mother’s state of birth, we could use those data directly in our analysis. Unfortunately, no such
detail is available either in printed reports or through tabulations of publicly available microdata.

                                                          16
birth cohorts comes from a single source, the Census for the earlier cohorts and Vital Statistics

for the later cohorts.

         But small differences do begin to appear in the middle birth cohorts, in which estimates

are spliced together from the two data sources.15 This analysis suggests that combining these

data sources does introduce a small overcount in the number of births in these years in our data.

Some double counting of births may be occurring due to any of the problems described earlier in

these data sources (and particularly the inability to perfectly define when births occur in the 1970

Census) or from other forms of misreporting.                     Yet it is important to recognize that the

discrepancy is not large and does not appear to perfectly coincide with the 1946 to 1955 birth

cohorts that we concentrate on. To introduce bias into our analysis, it would also have to be

correlated with the repeal status of women’s birth states and, in some specifications, with the

distance from a non-repeal state to a repeal state. Moreover, in some of our analyses reported

subsequently, we only use births that take place in 1968 or later, which only rely on the Vital

Statistics microdata and should not be affected by this problem. Based on this assessment, we

believe the data we have constructed are more than sufficient to undertake our intended exercise.



V. RESULTS

         Our empirical strategy is based upon converting methods based on period fertility to

methods based on cohort fertility, as described earlier. Since previous research has explored the

impact of abortion legalization on period fertility, we start from the results of those analyses and

15
   We have also explored an alternative approach, using the Vital Statistics data only from 1970 onwards, allowing
us to avoid the problem of assigning birthdates to those under age 2 in the 1970 Census and the problem of missing
state of birth identifiers in the 1968 and 1969 Vital Statistics data. This alternative yielded a nearly identical pattern
in Figure 3 and similar regression results to those reported below. Since we prefer to use as much of the superior
Vital Statistics data as possible, we continue to use those data for births beginning in 1968.

                                                           17
then move toward reporting the results that are based exclusively on the completed fertility of

different birth cohorts.



Results for Period Fertility

       Table 2 focuses exclusively on period fertility and is intended to show the impact of

changes in data and model specification that are required for our cohort analysis. In Column 1,

we replicate the results presented in Levine, et al., which shows that births to women in repeal

states fell by just over 4 percent during the 1971 to 1973 period relative to births to women in

states with no change in their abortion laws. After abortion was legalized nationwide by the Roe

decision, the gap in birth rates between states was eliminated (in a statistical sense). These

results formed the basis for their conclusion that abortion legalization had a causal impact on

births. In Column 2 of this table, the sample period used in the analysis is updated to start in

1968, which is when the microdata available from Vital Statistics for our exercise begin. This

change in the sample had very little impact on the results.

       The third column of Table 3 examines the impact of dropping all covariates from the

regression model other than the repeal/year interactions and the state and year fixed effects along

with state-specific trends. The other covariates in the preceding models include controls for

states that instituted modest abortion reforms in the late 1960s and early 1970s along with a

handful of variables that vary over time within states: the age composition of women of

childbearing age, state per capita income, the insured unemployment rate, the percentage of a

state’s residents that are nonwhite, and the crime rate. We drop reform measures since they have

no significant impact and the variables that change over time within states because it is not clear

exactly how to incorporate these period-specific control variables into a cohort-specific analysis.

                                                18
The results in Column 3 indicate that the pattern of results is not influenced by dropping these

control variables, although the magnitude of the estimated impact of abortion legalization (i.e.

the repeal*1971-1973 coefficient) rises somewhat.16 The final column of this table replicates

this analysis, but categorizes women into repeal states or otherwise based on the mother’s state

of birth, which we will use in our cohort-based analysis, not where the birth occurred. The

results reported here suggest that this change does not alter the results that much.



Cohort-Based Approach – Initial Evidence

        Figure 4 continues the transition towards a cohort-based approach. It relies exclusively

on age-specific birth rates beginning in 1968 from the Vital Statistics microdata, attributing the

births at each age to the relevant birth cohort of the mother (defined as the year of birth minus

mother’s age). We then plot the percentage difference in age-specific birth rates between women

in repeal states and other states for three selected cohorts. For the 1959 birth cohort, the

differential timing across states in abortion legalization would have had no impact on the

difference in birth rates since these women would not have reached their childbearing years until

after Roe v. Wade. Therefore, this cohort can serve as a control group. In this cohort, women in

repeal states are more likely to have their births at later ages, as indicated by the general upward

slope in this difference.

        The treated cohorts are those born in 1954 and 1949, who would have been 17 and 22

years old in 1971, respectively, when abortion was legalized in the early repeal states. The

trends in age-specific fertility for these cohorts clearly show the period effects that past research

16
   Among these variables, those that vary with states and years are the main contributors to the change in this
magnitude. None of these can be identified as the main culprit. The impact of comparing repeal states to all other
states rather than just those with no law change is inconsequential.

                                                       19
has found. Age-specific birth rates for women in repeal states in the 1954 birth cohort show a

clear drop exactly at age 17 relative to women in non-repeal states and to other birth cohorts.

This drop lasts for the few years in which abortion laws differed across states and then reverts

back to the pattern for the control cohorts. Similarly, births to women in repeal states in the 1949

birth cohort fall exactly at age 22, which corresponds to their births in 1971, and remain lower

just for the three years in which abortion policies differed across states.17

        The advantage of this figure is that it enables us to compare births at later ages for these

cohorts that were clearly contemporaneously affected by differential abortion access.                           The

impression one would take away from this figure is that the contemporaneous reduction in births

did not alter childbearing patterns at later ages. The age-profile in the difference in births for the

1954 cohort is no different after the early 20s from that of the control cohort. If anything,

women in the 1949 birth cohorts from repeal states had fewer births over the remainder of main

childbearing years compared to women in other states and the control cohort. These results

provide the first evidence that the reduction in period fertility attributable to abortion legalization

may have been permanent.

        Another advantage of the approach taken here is that it only uses micro Vital Statistics

data and does not integrate that with data from the 1970 Census. This provides evidence that the

small discrepancy in reports of children ever born between other sources and the constructed data

we will employ in the remainder of this analysis are not driving the results.



Cohort-Based Approach – Main Results



17
  Note that births for the 1949 cohort are only reported beginning at age 19, which corresponds to their fertility in
1968, the first year in which Vital Statistics microdata are available.
                                                        20
         Figure 5 and the top panel of Table 3 present the main results of our cohort-based

analysis examining the impact of abortion legalization on children ever born. Figure 5 focuses

on children ever born throughout the childbearing years and Table 3 separately considers

children ever born by age 25, 30, 35, and completed fertility (by age 44, or age 39 for cohorts

who have not yet reached 44 in 1999).18 As we described earlier, we are looking for a gap to

emerge in the difference in children ever born between women in repeal and other states

beginning around the 1946 birth cohorts that would then disappear for the post-1955 birth

cohorts.

         Figure 5 displays the difference in children ever born between women born in repeal

states and other states over time. The results indicate a clear upward trend in this difference, as

illustrated by the trend line added to the figure. Apparently, it used to be the case that women in

non-repeal states had more children than women in repeal states, but this difference has been

slowly going away. This highlights the need to consider the deviation from state-specific trend.

Such a deviation from trend is clearly apparent for the relevant birth cohorts, those born between

1946 and 1955. For that set of cohorts, there is a sharp reduction in the differential of children

ever born between repeal and non-repeal states.

         This conclusion is confirmed in the top panel of Table 3. By the end of childbearing (the

final column), we see that abortion legalization reduced children ever born by 0.054. Moreover,

the difference in children ever born that emerged for the 1946 to 1955 birth cohorts in repeal

18
  Since all fertility information before 1968 comes from the information on children ever born information available
in the 1970 Census, it is impossible to date when births occurred prior to that year. This explains why data on births
by age 25 and age 30 are only available as far back as the 1943 and 1938 birth cohorts, respectively. To maintain at
least some balance to our sample, we do not use birth cohorts prior to 1933 since we would not be able to date births
by age 35 prior to that year. At the other extreme, births by age 35 are only available through the 1964 birth cohort
since our micro Vital Statistics data ends in 1999. In addition, children ever born represents births to age 44, except
for the 1956 through 1960 birth cohorts in which births to age 39 are used since these birth cohorts had not yet
reached age 44 by 1999.

                                                         21
states was statistically eliminated in the post-1955 cohorts. The coefficient for that cohort is

statistically and substantively insignificant. This further confirms the causal interpretation of our

finding. The effects we estimate here are present only for the 1946-1955 cohorts, relative to both

cohorts born before 1946 (the omitted group), and cohorts born after 1955; these are not just

trends in differential state fertility behavior.

        Evidence in the top panel of Table 3 also suggests that the similar reductions in fertility

are observed by ages 25, 30, and 35. By each of those ages, we see that children ever born to

women in repeal states had fallen by .07 relative to women in non-repeal states in the 1946 to

1955 birth cohorts. Importantly, this gap is statistically and substantively insignificant in the

post 1955 cohorts (except, perhaps, by age 25). Although these point estimates for the 1946 to

1955 birth cohorts by age 35 are slightly larger than that by the end of childbearing, they are not

statistically different. These results suggest that the reduction in births associated with abortion

legalization in the early 1970s was essentially permanent. It does not appear that much, if any,

of it was made up in the form of additional births at later ages.

        As a rough assessment of the validity of these findings, we applied the impact of abortion

legalization on period-specific birth rates estimated in Column 4 of Table 2 to the 1970 age-

specific birth rates to determine the steady state impact on children ever born. We include the

immediate reduction in fertility that occurred in the 1971 to 1973 period as well as the slow

bounce back that is estimated for 1974 and 1975 in simulating the reduction in births. The

results suggest that children ever born would have fallen by 0.043, which is comparable to (and

not significantly different from) our estimate of 0.054 by the end of childbearing in Table 3.



Cohort-Based Approach – Distance Estimates

                                                   22
       A means of confirming this striking finding is to take advantage of the fact that the non-

repeal states are better “controls” the farther they were from the repeal states (due to the

possibility of travel to the repeal states from nearby states). Following Levine, et al., we can

divide the non-repeal states into those within 250 miles, between 250 and 750 miles, and more

than 750 miles from repeal states. By doing so, we can assess whether our results are stronger

for the farther away set of control states, as we would expect.

       Figure 6 and the remainder of Table 3 report the results of our analysis, separately for

control states of different distances to the repeal states.    Figure 6 displays the difference in

children ever born by the end of childbearing to women in repeal states relative to women in

each of these distance categories by mother’s birth cohort. Again, this figure shows that women

in repeal states historically had fewer births, but it also shows that the difference is greater when

they are compared to further away states. In each case the general trend is toward a narrowing of

the gap. But for far away non-repeal states, another clear pattern is the break from trend that

occurs in the difference in children ever born among cohorts born in the late 1940s and early

1950s. No such trend is apparent when comparing children ever born between repeal states and

the nearest group of comparison states.

       These assessments are confirmed in the bottom three panels of Table 3. By age 25,

children ever born to women in repeal states born between 1946 and 1955 fell by an insignificant

amount relative to women in the closest group of comparison states, by 0.085 children relative to

the middle distance group, and by 0.099 children relative to the most distant group of

comparison states. Moreover, the estimates are roughly stable throughout the remainder of the

childbearing years. And, for all distances, the results are largely insignificant for the cohorts



                                                 23
born after 1955. These results provide further evidence of a causal and largely permanent impact

of abortion legalization on children ever born.



Distribution of Children Ever Born

        We turn our attention now to the impact of abortion legalization on the distribution of

children ever born rather than just the count. We pay particular attention to the percentage of

childless women, which is of primary importance since it is the only point in this distribution for

which we have an unambiguous prediction; more women should remain childless. Since the

remainder of the distribution should be shifting to the left, it is difficult to tell whether the flow

out of a particular level should be greater than the flow in from a larger value (e.g. the share of

women who only had one child will be falling as those who otherwise would have one child

move to zero children, but it will also be rising as those who otherwise would have two children

move to one child).

        The main results of this analysis are reported in Figure 7 and in the top panel of Table 4.

Figure 7 displays the difference in the percentage of childless women between repeal and non-

repeal states by birth cohort. For all birth cohorts before the mid 1940s, this difference is

reasonably stable. But by the mid 1940s we begin to see a sizeable jump in the number of

childless women in repeal states relative to non-repeal states. The gap widens through the early

1950s and then recedes, just as we would predict if the cause of the gap was differential abortion

access. By 1956, the difference is at the same level as before the “treatment” cohort began in

1946.

        Table 4 presents a regression-based version of these results that also includes the

percentage of women with different numbers of children. The results presented here confirm our

                                                  24
observations from Figure 7 in that abortion legalization is estimated to have increased the

number of childless women in the treatment cohort by 3.57 percent. Once again, there is no

significant impact on the post-1955 cohort, consistent with the causal interpretation of this

finding.

           The evidence regarding the impact at other points in this distribution is not that strong.

Although we see a reduction in the number of women with one child and two children in the

1946 to 1955 repeal cohorts, a similar reduction is also observed for the later birth cohorts in

those states. Therefore, it is difficult to attribute this change to abortion legalization itself as

compared to some other ongoing trend that differed across states in the later birth cohorts.

       Figure 8 and the remainder of Table 4 conduct the analogous exercises differentiating

comparison states by their distance to repeal states. In Figure 8 we see that the difference in the

percentage of childless women between repeal states and the closest set of non-repeal states was

stable across birth cohorts. But as the distance increases across comparison states, we see the

gap in the percentage of childless women for the late 1940s and early 1960s birth cohorts grow.

       The bottom three panels of Table 4 confirm these impressions. Relative to the closest

group of comparison states, there was no statistically significant increase in the percentage of

childless women among women born in repeal states between 1946 and 1955. Relative to the

middle distance and farthest distance groups, however, these women are estimated to be 3.89

percent and 5.45 percent more likely to be childless.     The pattern by repeal status, birth cohort,

and distance to repeal states provides strong evidence that this finding is causally related to

abortion legalization.



Discussion and Implications of Lifecycle Fertility Results

                                                  25
        The results from this analysis tell a very consistent story: the early availability of abortion

in the repeal states led to a decline not only in contemporaneous but in permanent fertility, and

this appears to arise to a large extent from women using abortion to avoid ever having children.

This finding is clear both graphically and statistically. And it is confirmed both by the absence

of any differential effect for cohorts born after 1955, and by the fact that the effect is much

stronger the farther away the control states were from the early repeal states.

        These results are also substantively large. The 1945 birth cohort, which had already

passed through its peak childbearing years by the time abortion was legalized, averaged about

2.4 births per women; about 11.3 percent had no children at all.19 By the 1960 birth cohort,

which was fully exposed to legalized abortion in all states at the time they hit childbearing age,

each woman had 1.9 children on average; 18.2 percent had no children. Our overall estimates

imply that abortion availability lowered the number of children ever born by 0.054, and the odds

of being childless by 3.6 percent. These figures account for 11 and 52 percent of the time series

changes in these variables.

        Moreover, this calculation likely provides a lower bound of the effect of legalized

abortion because it does not account for the fact that some women in non-repeal states traveled to

repeal states prior to the Roe decision. Using our estimates based on the control states farthest

from the early repeal states, we would be able to explain 17 and 79 percent of the time series

change in these variables.



Other Outcomes for Women



19
  This estimate is based on the data employed in this project. Estimates based on data from Current Population
Fertility Supplements are more like 14 percent.
                                                     26
        The fact that abortion availability had such a fundamental impact on the lifecycle fertility

patterns of women raises the issue of whether legalization had impacts on other aspects of these

women’s lives as well. Women who reduced the total number of children they had or chose

never to have any at all may have invested in more education and worked more, which would

have led to higher wages. Their marital decisions may have been altered as well. Changes in

both earnings and family composition effects also may have affected their poverty rates and

welfare participation.

        We attempted to investigate this by looking at measures of these outcomes available in

the decennial Census. In order to focus on the full effects of reduced fertility, we looked at

outcomes for women aged 35 to 44, for whom most childbearing is complete.20 We observed the

outcomes of the various cohorts of interest at these ages by pooling multiple Censuses.

Observations for women born between 1930 and 1935 come from the 1970 Census, so that the

outcomes of those born in 1930, for example, are measured at age 40, while the outcomes of the

1935 cohort are measured at age 35. For the 1936 to 1945 cohorts, observations come from the

1980 Census; for the 1946 to 1955 cohorts, from the 1990 Census; and for the 1956 to 1960

cohorts, from the 2000 Census.

        We estimated models comparable in format to those reported earlier regarding children

ever born to assess the impact of abortion legalization on women’s outcomes, categorizing

women according to state and year of birth and then examining the patterns in outcomes over

time between women born in repeal and non-repeal states. The outcomes examined include: the

probability of having completed high school or having completed college; current labor force

participation; poverty status, and household income as a percent of the poverty line. Using these

20
  Ideally, we would focus on a somewhat older age range, but the youngest of treated women, who were 15 in 1970,
had only reached age 45 by 2000.
                                                      27
samples, we were unable to identify effects of increased fertility control on any of these

outcomes, but our results were not sufficiently precise to rule out such effects. Apparently, the

availability of virtually universal Vital Statistics data on fertility provided enough statistical

power in our earlier analysis that we were unable to attain relying exclusively on the 5 percent

samples (or, in the 1970 Census, a 4 percent sample) available in the Census data.

         One outcome that we have examined using more powerful data is marriage. Clearly,

changes in fertility patterns brought about by abortion legalization had the potential to alter

marriage outcomes, particularly for younger women who became pregnant, for whom “shotgun

marriages” were prevalent around 1970 (c.f. Akerlof, et al., 1996). Again, we estimated models

comparable in format to those reported earlier regarding children ever born, taking advantage of

publicly available Vital Statistics microdata on marriages to women in the United States that

occurred between 1970 and 1990.21 We combined these data with additional data from the 1970

Census in much the same way that we described earlier to create counts of women who had ever

been married by various ages. Specifically, we categorized women according to their state and

year of birth and then obtained counts and rates of first marriages to examine patterns over time

between repeal and non-repeal states. Using this approach, we examined the likelihood of ever

marrying by age 18, 20, 22, 25, and 28.22



21
   These data exist for 1968 through 1995 (at which point they stopped being released), but the 1968 and 1991-1995
data do not contain information on the bride’s state of birth. We also do not use data for 1969 because in the 1970
Census we are only able to identify women who have ever been married by the survey date and cannot date when
the marriage occurred. Including 1969 marriages from Vital Statistics data would double count marriages in that
year.
22
   Although the Vital Statistics data provide the best available source to study this issue, these data are not without
their limitations. First, they do not represent the universe of marriages like the natality data provide. In many states,
and particularly the large ones like New York and California, the data included only represent a five percent sample
of all marriages that took place in that state. The smaller is the state, the higher is the sampling rate. We apply the
sampling weights available to estimate the counts of marriages. Second, they do not report marriages in all 51 states
(including the District of Columbia), but just in 42 of them. These states are excluded from this analysis.
                                                          28
       Based on this approach, we were not able to identify a causal impact of abortion

legalization on marriage. Although there were noticeable breaks from trend in the difference in

marriage rates between repeal and non-repeal states beginning just after the 1950 birth cohort,

the rebound back to steady state differentials that we would expect for late 1950s birth cohorts

(who were all exposed to legalized abortion throughout their fertile years) is not apparent.

Moreover, we do not observe any difference in this pattern by distance to repeal states. We are

unable to determine whether the weakness in these results indicates that there really was no

causal effect on marriage or whether it is attributable to the weaknesses of the underlying data.



VI. CONCLUSIONS

   It is clear from past research that the legalization of abortion in the U.S. induced a major

change in fertility. Estimates from past research, replicated here, suggest that total fertility fell

by roughly 5 percent when abortion was legalized. Previous research on fertility has emphasized

the importance of decomposing fertility changes into temporary fertility (timing) effects and

permanent (completed fertility) effects. Yet this has not been done for this critical change in the

nature of birth planning.

       In this paper, we directly investigate the impact of abortion legalization on the lifecycle

pattern of fertility of cohorts affected by legalization. The power of our analysis derives from

the observation that abortion legalization had its primary effects on those aged 16 to 26; for

younger and older ages, there was either a sufficiently small effect of abortion access, or

sufficiently low baseline fertility. Those ages 16 to 26 in the early 1970s, when abortion laws

differed across states, were mainly in the cohorts born between 1946 and 1955. Thus, by

comparing differences in children ever born between women in early repeal states to women in

                                                 29
other states during the 1946 to 1955 window relative to the analogous difference for women born

before and after those years, we can provide a causal estimate of the impact of abortion

legalization on lifetime fertility.

        Our results are striking. It appears that the response of fertility to legalization was largely

composed of reductions in completed fertility, not changes in timing.            Moreover, abortion

legalization is found to have led to a very large rise in childless women in these treatment

cohorts. The causal nature of our findings is confirmed by the comparison to other cohorts

surrounding the treatment cohort, and by the fact that the relationship is strongest relative to the

most distant states whose residents could not benefit from early legalization.

        There are several important implications of these findings.          First, they suggest that

improved fertility control does not simply lead to changes in fertility timing, as suggested by

some other papers. Indeed, the majority of the effect of abortion legalization was permanent, and

not timing effects. Second, they suggest that the availability of abortion can explain a sizeable

share of the time series trend in reduced completed fertility and in childless women over these

birth cohorts. Finally, there are potentially important implications for the long-term well-being of

these cohorts of mothers from the improved fertility control. We were unable to draw strong

conclusions about these implications from the available data, but this is a worthy goal for future

research.




                                                  30
                                         REFERENCES


Angrist, Joshua and William N. Evans. “Schooling and Labor-Market Consequences of the 1970
State Abortion Reforms,” in Solomon Polachek and John Robst (eds.), Research in Labor
Economics. Vol. 18 (1999). pp. 75-114.

Akerlof, George A., Janet L. Yellen, and Michael L. Katz. “An Analysis of Out-of-Wedlock
Childbearing in the United States.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. Vol. 111, No. 2 (May
1996). pp. 277-317.

Charles, Kerwin and Melvin Stephens, Jr. “Abortion Legalization and Adolescent Substance
Abuse.” National Bureau of Economic Research, working paper 9193, September 2002.

Chen, Renbao, and S. Philip Morgan. “ Recent Trends in the Timing of First Births in the United
States.” Demography, Vol. 28, No. 4. (Nov., 1991), pp. 513-533.

Donahue III, John J., and Steven D. Levitt. “The Impact of Legalized Abortion on Crime.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics. Vol. 116, No. 2 (May 2001). pp. 379-420.

Donohue III, John J., and Steven D. Levitt. "Further Evidence that Legalized Abortion Lowered
Crime: A Reply to Joyce." Journal of Human Resources. Vol. 39, No. 1 (Winter 2004). pp 29-
49.

Downs, Barbara. “Fertility of American Women: June 2002.” Current Population Reports
(P20-548). Washington, DC: U.S. Census Bureau. October 2003.

Garrow, David J., Liberty and Sexuality: The Right to Privacy and the Making of Roe v. Wade.
New York, NY: Macmillan Publishing Company. 1994.

Gruber, Jonathan, Phillip B. Levine, and Douglas Staiger. "Abortion Legalization and Child
Living Circumstances: Who is the “Marginal Child?” Quarterly Journal of Economics. February
1999. pp. 263-292.

Heckman, James and James R. Walker. “ The Relationship Between Wages and Income and the
Timing and Spacing of Births: Evidence from Swedish Longitudinal Data.” Econometrica, Vol.
58, No. 6. (Nov., 1990), pp. 1411-1441.

Hotz, V. Joseph, and Robert A. Miller. “An Empirical Analysis of Life Cycle Fertility and
Female Labor Supply.” Econometrica, Vol. 56, No. 1. (Jan., 1988), pp. 91-118.

Hotz, V. Joseph, Jacob Alex Klerman, and Robert J. Willis. “The Economics of Fertility in
Developed Countries.” Chapter 7 in Mark Rosenszweig and Oded Stark (eds.) Handbook of
Population and Family Economics. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science. 1997.


                                              31
Joyce, Theodore. "Did Legalized Abortion Lower Crime?" Journal of Human Resources. Vol.
39, No. 11 (Winter 2004). pp. 1-28.

Levine, Phillip B., Douglas Staiger, Thomas J. Kane, and David J. Zimmerman. "Roe v. Wade
and American Fertility." American Journal of Public Health. February 1999. pp. 199-203.

Martin, Steven P. “Diverging Fertility among U.S. Women Who Delay Childbearing Past Age
30.” Demography. Vol. 37, No. 4 (November 2000). pp. 523-533.

Moffitt, Robert. “Optimal Life-Cycle Profiles of Fertility and Labor Supply,” in T. Paul Shultz
and Kenneth Wolpin (eds.), Research in Population Economics. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
1984.

Morgan, S. Philip, Nikolai Botev, and Renbao Chen. “White and Nonwhite Trends in First Birth
Timing: Comparisons Using Vital Registration and Current Population Surveys.” Population
Research and Policy Review. Vol. 18, No. 4 (August 1999).

Rindfuss, Ronald R., S. Philip Morgan, and Kate Offutt “Education and the Changing Age
Pattern of American Fertility: 1963-1989.” Demography, Vol. 33, No. 3. (Aug., 1996), pp. 277-
290.

Ruggles, Steven and Matthew Sobek, et al. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series, Version 3.0.
Minneapolis:       Historical Census Projects, University of Minnesota, 2003.
http://www.ipums.umn.edu/

U.S. Centers for Disease Control, National Center for Health Statistics. Vital Statistics of the
United States, 1999. Volume I, Natality. Accessed February 23, 2004 at:
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/datawh/statab/unpubd/natality/natab99.htm




                                              32
                                             Table 1: Mother’s Birth Cohort versus Child’s Year of Birth

                                                                     Year of Child’s Birth
Year of          1968   1969   1970   1971   1972   1973   1974   1975 1976 1977 1978        1979   1980   1981   1982   1983   1984   1985
Mother’s Birth
     1927         41     42     43     44
     1928         40     41     42     43     44
     1929         39     40     41     42     43     44
     1930         38     39     40     41     42     43     44
     1931         37     38     39     40     41     42     43     44
     1932         36     37     38     39     40     41     42     43        44
     1933         35     36     37     38     39     40     41     42        43   44
     1934         34     35     36     37     38     39     40     41        42   43   44
     1935         33     34     35     36     37     38     39     40        41   42   43    44
     1936         32     33     34     35     36     37     38     39        40   41   42    43     44
     1937         31     32     33     34     35     36     37     38        39   40   41    42     43     44
     1938         30     31     32     33     34     35     36     37        38   39   40    41     42     43     44
     1939         29     30     31     32     33     34     35     36        37   38   39    40     41     42     43     44
     1940         28     29     30     31     32     33     34     35        36   37   38    39     40     41     42     43     44
     1941         27     28     29     30     31     32     33     34        35   36   37    38     39     40     41     42     43     44
     1942         26     27     28     29     30     31     32     33        34   35   36    37     38     39     40     41     42     43
     1943         25     26     27     28     29     30     31     32        33   34   35    36     37     38     39     40     41     42
     1944         24     25     26     27     28     29     30     31        32   33   34    35     36     37     38     39     40     41
     1945         23     24     25     26     27     28     29     30        31   32   33    34     35     36     37     38     39     40
     1946         22     23     24     25     26     27     28     29        30   31   32    33     34     35     36     37     38     39
     1947         21     22     23     24     25     26     27     28        29   30   31    32     33     34     35     36     37     38
     1948         20     21     22     23     24     25     26     27        28   29   30    31     32     33     34     35     36     37
     1949         19     20     21     22     23     24     25     26        27   28   29    30     31     32     33     34     35     36
     1950         18     19     20     21     22     23     24     25        26   27   28    29     30     31     32     33     34     35
     1951         17     18     19     20     21     22     23     24        25   26   27    28     29     30     31     32     33     34
     1952         16     17     18     19     20     21     22     23        24   25   26    27     28     29     30     31     32     33
     1953         15     16     17     18     19     20     21     22        23   24   25    26     27     28     29     30     31     32
     1954                15     16     17     18     19     20     21        22   23   24    25     26     27     28     29     30     31
     1955                       15     16     17     18     19     20        21   22   23    24     25     26     27     28     29     30
     1956                              15     16     17     18     19        20   21   22    23     24     25     26     27     28     29
     1957                                     15     16     17     18        19   20   21    22     23     24     25     26     27     28
     1958                                            15     16     17        18   19   20    21     22     23     24     25     26     27
     1959                                                   15     16        17   18   19    20     21     22     23     24     25     26
     1960                                                          15        16   17   18    19     20     21     22     23     24     25
     1961                                                                    15   16   17    18     19     20     21     22     23     24
     1962                                                                         15   16    17     18     19     20     21     22     23
     1963                                                                              15    16     17     18     19     20     21     22
     1964                                                                                    15     16     17     18     19     20     21
     1965                                                                                           15     16     17     18     19     20




                                                                        33
          Table 2: Sensitivity of Estimated Impact of Abortion Legalization on Fertility
                 (Coefficients multiplied by 100, standard errors in parentheses)

                                                (1)           (2)           (3)              (4)
 Repeal*1971-1973                              -4.13         -4.38         -6.15            -6.71
                                              (0.81)        (0.76)        (0.74)           (1.11)

 Repeal*1974-1975                              -1.45         -0.01         -1.78            -3.90
                                              (1.16)        (1.14)        (1.09)           (1.62)

 Repeal*1976-1980                              2.30          2.55          0.75             -1.76
                                              (1.60)        (1.67)        (1.57)           (2.34)

 Vital Statistics Data by State of              X
 Occurrence, 1965-1980

 Vital Statistics Data by State of                            X              X
 Occurrence, 1968-1980

 Vital Statistics Data by Mother’s                                                           X
 State of Birth, 1968-1980

 Original Model Specification                   X             X

 Fixed Effects and State-Specific                                            X               X
 Trends Only

Notes: The dependent variable in each specification is the natural logarithm of the birth rate, so
that each coefficient can be interpreted as a percentage change. Information on mother’s state of
birth is not available on the 1968, 1969, and 1971 Vital Statistics microdata and is imputed using
the methods described in the text. The original model specification also includes per capita
income, the insured unemployment rate, and the crime rate in each state/year.




                                                34
        Table 3: Estimated Impact of Abortion Legalization on Children Ever Born, by Age

                                                                         Children Ever Born by:

                                                                                                           End of
                                                     Age 25            Age 30           Age 35           Childbearing


                                    Repeal States Relative to All Non-Repeal States

 Repeal*1946-1955 birth cohorts                       -0.070            -0.070           -0.070              -0.054
                                                     (0.013)           (0.018)          (0.023)             (0.012)

 Repeal*post-1955 birth cohorts                       -0.033            0.006            0.018               -0.002
                                                     (0.019)           (0.030)          (0.030)             (0.018)



                    Repeal States Relative to Non-Repeal States within 250 Miles of a Repeal State

 Repeal*1946-1955 birth cohorts                       -0.031            -0.010           -0.007              -0.007
                                                     (0.020)           (0.023)          (0.030)             (0.023)

 Repeal*post-1955 birth cohorts                       -0.016            0.017            0.006               -0.009
                                                     (0.024)           (0.032)          (0.038)             (0.026)



             Repeal States Relative to Non-Repeal States between 250 and 750 Miles from a Repeal State

 Repeal*1946-1955 birth cohorts                       -0.085            -0.098           -0.095              -0.073
                                                     (0.017)           (0.021)          (0.026)             (0.013)

 Repeal*post-1955 birth cohorts                       -0.042            -0.005           -0.006              -0.008
                                                     (0.023)           (0.033)          (0.035)             (0.028)



                Repeal States Relative to Non-Repeal States greater than 750 Miles from a Repeal State

 Repeal*1945-1955 birth cohorts                       -0.099            -0.108           -0.114              -0.087
                                                     (0.023)           (0.030)          (0.026)             (0.019)

 Repeal*post-1955 birth cohorts                       -0.040            0.009            0.016               0.028
                                                     (0.033)           (0.048)          (0.039)             (0.033)

Notes: The “end of childbearing” is defined to be the oldest age for which births occur. For younger cohorts
additional births are likely to result after the period for which data is available here. To address this, I only include
the 1960 and earlier birth cohorts whose fertility at least through age 39 is recorded. Since so few births occur after
that, I define lifetime births to equal the births that have occurred through the last age observed. All specifications
include state and year fixed effects along with state-specific trends. Standard errors are corrected for
heteroskedasticity and an arbitrary covariance structure within birth states.



                                                           35
  Table 4: Estimated Impact of Abortion Legalization on the Distribution of Children Ever Born
                                (standard errors in parentheses)

                                                                  Number of Children Ever Born:

                                                                 1               2               3              4+
                                            No Children         Child         Children        Children        Children


                                    Repeal States Relative to All Non-Repeal States

 Repeal*1946-1955 birth cohorts                 3.57             -1.73          -1.85           -0.71           0.72
                                               (1.32)           (1.03)         (0.46)          (0.49)          (0.37)

 Repeal*post-1955 birth cohorts                 -0.19            -1.12          -1.46           1.43            1.34
                                               (0.58)           (0.33)         (0.39)          (0.50)          (0.80)



                    Repeal States Relative to Non-Repeal States within 250 Miles of a Repeal State

 Repeal*1946-1955 birth cohorts                 1.55             -1.21          -1.65           0.34            0.97
                                               (1.54)           (1.11)         (0.49)          (0.58)          (0.45)

 Repeal*post-1955 birth cohorts                 -0.01            -1.09          -1.35           1.89            0.56
                                               (0.79)           (0.45)         (0.56)          (0.56)          (0.91)



             Repeal States Relative to Non-Repeal States between 250 and 750 Miles from a Repeal State

 Repeal*1946-1955 birth cohorts                 3.89             -1.75          -1.64           -1.00           0.50
                                               (1.35)           (1.08)         (0.56)          (0.51)          (0.46)

 Repeal*post-1955 birth cohorts                 -0.45            -1.03          -1.15           1.43            1.20
                                               (0.76)           (0.57)         (0.59)          (0.57)          (1.08)



                Repeal States Relative to Non-Repeal States greater than 750 Miles from a Repeal State

 Repeal*1946-1955 birth cohorts                 5.45             -2.23         -2.44            -1.57           0.79
                                               (1.45)           (1.08)         (0.59)          (0.53)          (0.44)

 Repeal*post-1955 birth cohorts                 -0.53            -1.22          -2.14           1.05            2.83
                                               (1.01)           (0.55)         (0.59)          (0.59)          (0.94)

Notes: Data represents 1930 to 1960 birth cohorts. All specifications include state and year fixed effects along with
state-specific trends. Standard errors are corrected for heteroskedasticity and an arbitrary covariance structure within
birth states.




                                                           36
                     Figure 1: 1970 Birth Rate and Relative Impact of Abortion Legalization, by Age
             200                                                                                               25


             180

                                                                                                               20
             160

                                                                Birth Rate (left axis)
             140
                                                                                                               15




                                                                                                                    Percentage Reduction in Births
             120
Birth Rate




             100                                                                                               10


             80

                                                                                                               5
             60


             40
                                                                                                               0
                                          Impact (right axis)
             20


              0                                                                                                -5
                   15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44
                                                                    Age
                                              Figure 2: Absolute Impact of Abortion Legalization on Birth Rate, by Age
                                   10




                                   8




                                   6
Absolute Reduction in Birth Rate




                                   4
                                                                                                                         average effect



                                   2




                                   0




                                   -2




                                   -4
                                        15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44
                                                                                   Age
                                                     Figure 3: Average Children Ever Born, by Birth Cohort
                             3.5




                             3.0
Average Children Ever Born




                             2.5




                             2.0




                             1.5




                             1.0
                                1930   1932   1934   1936    1938    1940    1942    1944   1946    1948   1950    1952    1954   1956   1958     1960
                                                                                     Birth Cohort


                                         Current Population Survey, Fertility Supplement      1970 Census and Vital Statistics     Vital Statistics
                                                                             Figure 4: Percentage Difference in Birth Rates between
                                                                                         Repeal and Non-Repeal States
                                              50


                                              40


                                              30
Percentage Difference (Repeal - Non-Repeal)




                                              20


                                              10


                                               0


                                              -10


                                              -20

                                                                                                          1949 cohort - age 22 in 1971
                                              -30


                                              -40
                                                                                1954 cohort - age 17 in 1971

                                              -50
                                                    15   16   17   18   19    20   21   22   23    24   25      26   27   28   29   30   31   32   33   34   35   36 37   38   39   40
                                                                                                                      Age

                                                                                                  1949 cohort         1954 cohort        1959 cohort
                                                                              Figure 5: Effect of Abortion Legalization on Children Ever Born
                                                           0
Difference in Children Ever Born (Repeal - Non-Repeal)




                                                         -0.1


                                                                                                                                                           trend line




                                                         -0.2




                                                         -0.3




                                                         -0.4
                                                                1933   1935     1937   1939   1941   1943   1945     1947    1949   1951   1953   1955   1957   1959
                                                                                                            Mother's Birth Year
                                                        Figure 6: Impact of Abortion Legalization on Children Ever Born, by
                                                                            Distance from Repeal State
                                          0.1



                                            0
Difference in CEB (repeal - non-repeal)




                                          -0.1



                                          -0.2



                                          -0.3



                                          -0.4



                                          -0.5



                                          -0.6
                                                 1933     1935   1937   1939   1941     1943    1945     1947    1949   1951   1953   1955      1957   1959
                                                                                               Year of Birth Cohort

                                                                          < 250 miles                  250-750 miles              > 750 miles
                                                  Figure 7: Difference in Percentage of Childless Women, by Birth Cohort
                                   10




                                   8
Difference (Repeal - Non-Repeal)




                                   6




                                   4




                                   2




                                   0
                                        1930   1932   1934   1936   1938   1940   1942   1944   1946    1948   1950   1952   1954   1956   1958   1960
                                                                                         Birth Cohort
                                                          Figure 8: Impact of Abortion Legalization on the
                                               Percentage of Women with No Children, by Distance from Repeal State
                                   18


                                   16


                                   14


                                   12
Difference (repeal - non-repeal)




                                   10


                                    8


                                    6


                                    4


                                    2


                                    0


                                   -2
                                        1933     1935   1937   1939   1941     1943    1945     1947    1949   1951   1953   1955      1957   1959
                                                                                      Year of Birth Cohort

                                                                 < 250 miles                  250-750 miles              > 750 miles
