                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          LONG-TERM CONSEQUENCES OF
                         SECONDARY SCHOOL VOUCHERS:
              EVIDENCE FROM ADMINISTRATIVE RECORDS IN COLOMBIA

                                             Joshua Angrist
                                              Eric Bettinger
                                             Michael Kremer

                                          Working Paper 10713
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10713


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2004




Special thanks goes to Cristina Estrada, Claudia Gonzalez, Marcela Monsalvo, and Ana Gomez for research
assistance. We are also grateful to Jorge Estrada for help interpreting Colombian ID numbers and to the staff
at ICFES for providing data. We thank the National Institutes of Health, the World Bank, and Harvard’s
David Rockefeller Center for Latin American Studies for funding this research and Victor Chernozhukov for
helpful discussions. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Joshua Angrist, Eric Bettinger, and Michael Kremer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Long-Term Consequences of Secondary School Vouchers: Evidence from Administrative
Records in Colombia
Joshua Angrist, Eric Bettinger, and Michael Kremer
NBER Working Paper No. 10713
August 2004
JEL No. I21, J13, I28

                                           ABSTRACT

Colombia's PACES program provided over 125,000 poor children with vouchers that covered half

the cost of private secondary school. The vouchers were renewable annually conditional on adequate

academic progress. Since many vouchers were assigned by lottery, program effects can reliably be

assessed by comparing lottery winners and losers. Estimates using administrative records suggest

the PACES program increased secondary school completion rates by 15-20 percent. Correcting for

the greater percentage of lottery winners taking college admissions tests, the program increased test

scores by two-tenths of a standard deviation in the distribution of potential test scores. Boys, who

have lower scores than girls in this population, show larger test score gains, especially in math.

Joshua Angrist
MIT
Department of Economics
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
angrist@mit.edu

Eric Bettinger
Department of Economics
Case Western Reserve
Cleveland, OH 44106-7235
and NBER
bettinger@cwru.edu

Michael Kremer
Department of Economics
Littauer Center 207
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
mkremer@fas.harvard.edu
                                                I. Introduction

Demand-side subsidies for education are increasingly common in developing countries.             Chile and

Colombia have both offered educational vouchers for private secondary schools, while Brazil, India,

Israel, and Mexico have introduced student stipends that reward attendance and performance. Interest in

demand-side subsidies in developing countries parallels interest in the United States, where publicly-

funded vouchers for private schools have been distributed in a number of cities. Along the same lines in

higher education, merit scholarships for American college students have grown almost 50 percent in the

past five years (College Board 2002).

        Previous research on primary and secondary school vouchers typically focuses on the short-run

effects of vouchers on test scores. The results so far suggest that vouchers benefit some groups of

recipients, though the extent of test score gains is disputed.1 Missing from most studies of voucher effects

is an assessment of impacts on longer-term outcomes – such as high school graduation rates – that are

more clearly tied to economic success. Research on school vouchers naturally focuses on short-run

outcomes because participants are young and many programs are recent. Moreover, long-run follow-up

efforts are difficult and costly.

        This paper examines the longer-run effects of Colombia’s PACES program, one of the largest

voucher initiatives ever implemented.2        Between 1991 and 1997, PACES awarded nearly 125,000

vouchers to low-income high school students. Since vouchers were renewable annually conditional on

satisfactory academic progress as indicated by scheduled grade promotion, the program provided

incentives for students to work harder as well as widening their schooling options. PACES vouchers may

therefore have effects similar to merit-based college scholarships and test-based achievement awards (see,

e.g. Angrist and Lavy 2003, Kremer, Miguel and Thornton, 2003, Dynarski 2003, Ashworth and

Hardman 2001, Cornwell and Mustard 2002). In common with anti-dropout interventions in the US and

1
 See, e.g., Rouse (1998); Howell and Peterson (2002), and Krueger and Zhu (2003).
2
 PACES is an acronym for Programa de Amplicación de Cobertura de la Educación Secundaria.

                                                       1
UK, however, the PACES program most likely provided achievement incentives for students at risk of

repeating grades or dropping out of school, as opposed to those likely to excel in school.

        A key feature of the PACES program for our purposes is that in Bogotá as well as a number of

other large cities, the vouchers were awarded by lottery. The random assignment of vouchers facilitates

a natural-experiment research design in which losers provide a comparison group for winners.                  In

previous research (Angrist, Bettinger, Bloom, King, and Kremer, 2002), we used the PACES lotteries to

estimate the impact of vouchers on years of school completed between 6th and 8th grade, grade repetition,

test scores, and the probability of working. These results strongly suggest that voucher winners devoted

more time to school and had higher test scores than they otherwise would have had. Most of the results in

our earlier study are for students observed about three years after winning the vouchers but still three

years before high school graduation. While these results support the notion that vouchers had a positive

short-run effect on schooling and test scores, they do not tell us whether vouchers increased high school

graduation rates and achievement at the end of school.

        In an effort to close this gap, we turn here to an assessment that exploits administrative data from

Colombia’s centralized college entrance examinations, the ICFES test, taken by most high school

graduates.3 The principal advantage of administrative records over survey methods is that there is no loss

to follow-up and administrative data are much cheaper than surveys.

        Since more lottery winners than losers took the ICFES exam, direct comparisons of test scores for

winners and losers are subject to selection bias. We discuss a number of solutions to this selection

problem. On balance, the results of our follow-up study point to lasting benefits for voucher winners,

with substantially higher high school graduation rates and, after adjusting for selection bias, higher test

scores among those who took the ICFES exam. Upper bounds on test-score effects are not as large at

the upper end of the score distribution as at the lower end, though this could be because upper bounds are

tighter higher in the distribution. In any case, the fact that the program increased test scores even fairly

3
 ICFES is an acronym for Colombia’s college admissions testing service, the Instituto Colombiano Para El Fomento
De La Educacion Superior.
                                                       2
high in the score distribution suggests that the program increased learning not only by increasing

incentives for students at risk of repeating grades, but also through other mechanisms, such as increasing

school choice. We also find somewhat larger voucher effects for boys than for girls, especially in math.

Because boys have lower test scores than girls, this implies the program reduced the male-female score

gap.

        The next section provides additional background on the PACES program and voucher lotteries.

Section III presents estimates of the effect of PACES vouchers on high school graduation rates, as

measured by ICFES registration rates. Section IV discusses the problem of selection bias in analyses of

test scores and presents estimates of effects on scores using alternative approaches to the selection

problem. Section V concludes the paper.



                                             II. Background

A. The PACES program

        The Colombian government established PACES in late 1991. The program targeted low-income

families by offering vouchers to children in neighborhoods classified as falling into the two lowest

socioeconomic strata (out of 6 possible strata).   To qualify for a voucher, applicants must have been

entering the Colombian secondary school cycle, which begins with grade 6, and have been aged 15 or

under. Prior to applying, students must already have been admitted to a participating secondary school

(i.e., one that would accept the voucher). Participating schools had to be located in participating towns,

which included all of Colombia’s largest cities. Many elite private schools opted out of the program, so

just under half of private schools in the 10 largest cities accepted PACES vouchers in 1993.

        PACES vouchers were worth about 190 US dollars in 1998. Our survey data show matriculation

and monthly fees for private schools attended by voucher applicants in 1998 averaged about $340, so

most voucher recipients supplemented the voucher with private funds. By way of comparison, the

average annual per-pupil public expenditure in Colombia’s public secondary school system in 1995 was

                                                    3
just over $350 (DNP, 1999), and public school parents in our sample typically paid tuition or fees of

roughly $58. Per capita GNP in Colombia was then around $2,280 (World Bank, 1999).

        Participating schools tended to serve lower-income pupils, and to have lower tuition than non-

participating private schools. Schools with a vocational curriculum were also over-represented among

those in the program. Initially, vouchers could be used at both for-profit and non-profit schools, but after

1996, for-profit schools were excluded.      In the peak years of 1994 and 1995 roughly 90,000 students

used vouchers. Almost 40 percent of the approximately 3.1 million secondary school pupils in Colombia

in 1995 attended private schools. In Bogotá, 58 percent of the 567,000 secondary school pupils attended

private school.

        Pupil-teacher ratios and facilities were similar in public and participating private schools, and

many of the teachers in the private schools that were most likely to participate in the PACES program

were moonlighting or retired public school teachers. Test score comparisons reported by King, Rawlings,

Gutierrez, Pardo, and Torres (1997) show that achievement levels in participating private schools were

close to levels in public schools, though significantly below achievement levels in non-participating

private schools.

          Vouchers were renewed automatically through eleventh grade, when Colombian high school

ends, provided the recipient’s academic performance warranted promotion to the next grade. In practice,

approximately 86 percent of participating 6th graders in our sample were promoted. It therefore seems

likely that the incentive aspects of the PACES program were strongest for the weakest students, since

these students were at greatest risk of failing a grade.

         One of our identification strategies is based on the lotteries used to allocate vouchers when

demand exceeded supply for a particular cohort and town. In this study we concentrate on one of the

largest applicant cohorts, students in Bogotá who applied in 1994 to enter private school in 6th grade in

1995. Assuming no grade repetition, students in this cohort would have been in 11th grade, their last year



                                                       4
of high school, in 2000. Any 11th grader or high school graduate is eligible take the ICFES exam, which

is required for admission to Colombian colleges and universities.

        Our earlier results (Angrist et al, 2002) suggest that three years after entering the lottery, voucher

winners were 16 percentage points more likely to be attending a private school. Fee payments for voucher

winners were $52 higher than for losers, suggesting that some winners may have used their vouchers to

trade up to higher priced schools. Lottery winners and losers did not differ in enrollment rates, but

winners had completed .12 additional years of school, partly because they were 6 percentage points less

likely to have repeated a grade. But winners also appear to have learned more. Among a sub-sample of

lottery applicants who agreed to take a standardized test, winners scored .2 standard deviations more than

losers, the equivalent of a full grade level. However, the sample of test takers was small (only 283), and

hence these differences were only marginally significant at conventional levels, and since only 60 percent

of those asked to take the test did so, selection remained a potential concern.



B. Data and Descriptive Statistics

        Table 1 reports descriptive statistics for the 1995 cohort of 4,044 voucher applicants. The

demographic characteristics in the table were derived from the forms completed by applicants. About 59

percent of voucher applicants were awarded vouchers in the 1995 lottery. Applicants were almost 13

years old, on average, and about evenly split between boys and girls. Roughly 88 percent of applicants

came from households with a telephone or access to a telephone.

        We matched PACES applicants with records of whether they registered for the ICFES exam and

their score on the exam using the Colombian national ID number, an identification number consisting of

11 digits, the first 6 of which show date of birth. (A detailed description of our matching procedure and

test score database is given in the data appendix.) A final “check digit” in the ID number bears a

mathematical relationship to the other digits. We used the embedded check digit and birth dates to



                                                      5
determine whether ID numbers were valid. About 9.5 percent of applicants had invalid birth dates.4 Of

the 3661 applicants with plausible birth dates, 97 percent reported valid ID numbers.

         Voucher winners and losers have similar demographic characteristics, except possibly for           a

small age difference (columns 3-6 of Table 1). The age differences by voucher status appear to be driven

by a few outliers, probably due to incorrectly coded ID numbers among losers. The age gap is smaller

when the sample is limited to those with valid ID numbers, though still marginally significant. We

therefore control for age when estimating voucher effects.

         The first outcome of interest is a dummy for whether a PACES applicant registered for the ICFES

test. In addition to signaling an interest in higher education, ICFES registration is an excellent proxy for

high school graduation status since 90 percent of high school graduates take the test (The World Bank,

1993), while all of those tested must be in 11th grade or have graduated high school (mostly the former).

One concern is the possibility that any initially incorrect ID numbers were more likely to have been

corrected later among winners than losers and that this could lead to a spurious finding of higher match

rates with ICFES registrations records among lottery winners. Differential correction rates could arise,

for example, as a result of continued bureaucratic interaction between lottery winners and the authorities

administering the PACES program.

         In practice, however, there is little evidence of differential ID-number accuracy by voucher status

in our data. Table 2 shows estimates of "0 in the regression model:

                  vi = Xi'$0 + "0Di + ,i,                                                                (1)

where vi is a dummy for the validity of applicant i’s ID number, Di is an indicator for whether applicant i

won a voucher, and Xi is a vector of controls for age and sex. Also reported are estimates with no

covariates.5




4
 Birth dates are considered valid when they imply applicants were aged 9-25.
5
 The standard errors reported in Table 2 and elsewhere are heteroscedasticity-consistent.
                                                         6
        Eighty-eight percent of all applicants had a valid ID number (Column 1 of Table 2)). Voucher

winners were 1 percentage point less likely to have a valid ID, but this difference is not significantly

different from zero. Restricting the sample to those with valid birth dates embedded in their ID numbers

results in an even smaller voucher effect, with or without demographic controls. Results are also similar

when estimated separately by sex. These results strongly suggest that voucher winners are not more

likely to be matched solely because they have more accurately recorded ID numbers.6



                                     III. Effects on High School Graduation

        Estimates of voucher effects on high school graduation rates were constructed using an equation

like (1), replacing the dependent variable with an indicator for ICFES registration. Students in the 1995

applicant cohort who were promoted on schedule should have registered to take the ICFES exam at one of

two opportunities in the 2000 school year. Because some students may also have advanced or repeated

grades, we searched for applicants in the population of students who registered for any exam offered in

2000 and 2001. If a student was found to have been tested more than once, we retained the first set of test

scores. In addition, we experimented with more restrictive matching strategies using city of residence and

students’ names for validation.7

        About 35 percent of PACES applicants were matched to ICFES records using ID numbers, a

result that can be seen in the first row of Table 3. A stricter match definition that requires both ID

numbers and city of residence to line up generates an overall match rate of 34 percent, while matching on

ID numbers and the first 7 letters of students’ last names produces a match rate of 33 percent. Finally,

requiring both city and a 7-letter match generates a match rate of 32 percent.


6
 We found some evidence of differential record-keeping in the first cohort of Bogotá applicants from 1992, before
the lottery process was computerized. Because of this and other data problems, the 1992 applicant cohort was
omitted from this study.
7
 An applicant’s city was considered matched if he or she registered for the ICFES test in Bogotá. Of course, in
practice, some Bogotá applicants may have been tested elsewhere. A few apparent matches from 1999 were
included as well. See the data appendix for details.
                                                          7
        In models with no controls, vouchers are estimated to have raised ICFES registration rates about

7 percentage points. This can be seen in column 1 of Table 3. The voucher effect falls slightly to about 6

percentage points with demographic controls but remains significantly different from zero. The estimated

effects are slightly larger for boys than for girls, and the base rate is lower for boys. Using city of

residence to validate matches leads to slightly smaller treatment effects for girls and overall, but the

change is not substantial. Validation by matching on names as well as ID numbers leads to treatment

effects almost identical to those without validation, and validation using both city and name generates

estimates similar to those using city only. On balance, the estimated effects of voucher status on ICFES

registration are remarkably robust to changes in sample, specification, and the definition of a match.

Thus, it seems fair to say that PACES vouchers increased the likelihood of ICFES registration, and

probably high school graduation, by 5-7 percentage points, with no consistent pattern of differences by

sex. This amounts to an increase of 15-20 percent in the probability students took the ICFES exam.



                             IV. Effects on College Entrance Exam Scores

A. The Selection Problem

        We turn here to an assessment of the effects of PACES vouchers on academic achievement as

measured by ICFES test scores. The principal econometric challenge in an evaluation of effects on test

scores arises from the fact that voucher winners were more likely than losers to take the test. Thus, the

score distributions of winners and losers are no longer directly comparable.          To see the likely

consequences of differential test-taking rates for comparisons of scores among test-takers, let y1i be the

ICFES score student i would obtain after winning the voucher and let y0i denote the score student i would

obtain otherwise. We assume that both of these potential outcomes are well-defined for all pupils,

whether they actually took the test or not, and whether they won the lottery or not. The average causal

effect of winning the voucher on the scores of all winners is E[y1i!y0i| Di=1]. Of course, in practice, we



                                                    8
only observe scores for those who were tested. Moreover, among tested pupils, we only observe y1i for

winners and y0i for losers.

        Using a notation paralleling the notation for potential test scores, let T1i and T0i denote potential

test-taking status. That is, T1i is a dummy for whether a student would have taken the ICFES after

winning the lottery and T0i is a dummy for whether a student would have taken the ICFES after losing the

lottery. By virtue of the random assignment of Di, the vector of all potential outcomes {y1i, y0i, T1i, T0i} is

jointly independent of Di, though the elements of this vector are probably correlated with each other.

Observed test-taking status, the dependent variable in the previous section, is linked to these potential

outcomes by the equation:

                 Ti = T0i + (T1i!T0i)Di.

Similarly, the latent score variable (i.e., what we would observe if all students were tested) is

                 yi = y0i + (y1i!y0i)Di.

The observed win/loss contrast in test scores among those who were tested can be now written

                 E[yi| Ti=1, Di=1] ! E[yi| Ti=1, Di=0]       = E[y1i| T1i=1, Di=1] ! E[y0i| T0i=1, Di=0]

                                                             = E[y1i| T1i=1] ! E[y0i| T0i=1],

where the second equality is because Di is randomly assigned. This contrast does not have a causal

interpretation, since students with T1i=1 and T0i=1 are not drawn from the same population unless Di has

no effect on the probability of being tested. In fact, we can expand this further to write

                 E[yi| Ti=1, Di=1] ! E[yi| Ti=1, Di=0] = E[y1i!y0i| T0i =1]

                                                             + {E[y1i| T1i =1] ! E[y1i| T0i =1]}.          (2)

Equation (2) shows that the win/loss contrast among test-takers is equal to the average causal effect on

those who would have been tested anyway, E[y1i!y0i| T0i=1], plus a term that captures the selection bias

due to the fact that we are conditioning on ICFES registration status, itself an outcome that is correlated

with potential test scores.



                                                         9
        The bias term in equation (2) is likely to be negative if PACES vouchers increased test scores.

To illustrate this, suppose that y1i = y0i + ", where ">0, and that students choose to be tested if their

potential scores exceeded a constant threshold, :. Then Tji=1[yji>:] for j=0,1; and the selection bias is

                 E[y1i| y1i>:] !E[y1i| y1i>:+"],

which is clearly negative. Of course, this example presumes that vouchers are never harmful. If vouchers

were harmful, selection bias could (by the same argument) mask a negative treatment effect.

        To provide an empirical basis for the claim that selection bias in the sample of ICFES takers is

likely to be negative, we used test scores from our earlier random sample of Bogota students, the sample

used by Angrist, et al (2002) to assess the effect of vouchers in learning. Although our sample of 259

tested students is somewhat more likely to have taken the ICFES test than the overall average test rate for

the 1995 Bogota cohort (about 44% versus 35% overall), in contrast with the ICFES test, the likelihood of

taking our test is the same for voucher winners and losers. Thus, the earlier sample of test takers is not be

contaminated by self-selection bias of the sort affecting ICFES takers (though there is missing score data

for other reasons).

        A regression using stacked math and reading scores from the earlier testing sample generates a

voucher effect of .186, with effects measured in standard deviation units (and with a standard error

adjusted for student clustering of .105). Limiting this sample to the roughly 44% of tested students who

also took the ICFES generates a voucher effect of .044 (s.e.=.157). The pattern of substantial (and

usually marginally significant) positive effects in the full sample and considerably smaller and

insignificant treatment effects when this simple is limited to those who also took the ICFES test appears

for all dependent variables and specifications. This finding illustrates the fact that conditioning on ICFES

testing status almost certainly drives positive treatment effects towards zero.




                                                     10
B. Non-Parametric Bounds

         This section builds on the discussion above to derive a set of non-parametric bounds on quantile-

specific program impacts on the distribution of test scores. Because selection bias is most likely negative

when treatment effects are positive, selection-contaminated comparisons provide a lower bound on the

likely impact of vouchers on achievement.             Here, we also develop an upper bound by adapting a

theoretical result from our earlier paper (Angrist, et al, 2002).

         Suppose we are prepared to assume that winning the lottery was never harmful, i.e., that y1i$y0i

for all i. This seems reasonable since lottery winners were free to turn down their vouchers and attend

public school if they felt continued voucher use was harmful.8 It also seems reasonable to assume T1i$T0i

since test-taking status is probably determined by, among other things, expected scores. Finally, it is

useful to define a score variable that equals zero for those not tested:

                  Yji = Tjiyji for j=0,1.                                                                          (3)

Note that given our “never harmful” assumptions, we also have Y1i$Y0i for all i, and that

                  E[Y1i ! Y0i| T0i=1] = E[y1i ! y0i| T0i=1].

The observed outcome, Yi, is linked to potential outcomes by

                  Yi = Y0i + (Y1i!Y0i)Di = T0iy0i + (T1iy1i!T0iy0i)Di.

To simplify notation, drop subscripts for individuals and let q0(2) be the 2-quantile of the distribution of

Y0 and let q1(2) be the 2-quantile of the distribution of Y1. Assuming that students choose to be tested if

their potential scores exceeded a constant threshold, the quantiles of yji for test-takers are identified from

the quantiles of Yji for 2$2j where qj(2j)=0.

         For the development that follows, it’s useful to define a rank-preserving restriction on the joint

distribution of (Y0, Y1):


8
 This condition need not hold if some students who chose to use vouchers anticipated gains that did not materialize,
with a subset ending up having been harmed by voucher use. In practice, however, the “never harmful” assumption
is made more plausible by the fact that vouchers typically did not cover the entire cost of private school. This means
that students using vouchers presumably expected gains large enough to outweigh the financial costs of attending
private school, with a low risk of adverse academic effects.
                                                          11
Definition. The random variable Y1 is said to be a 2-quantile-preserving transformation (2-QPT) of the

random variable Y0 if P(Y1 ≥ q1(2) | Y0 ≥ q0(2))=1.



Note that Y1 is a 2-QPT of Y0 if the two potential outcomes are linking by a weakly increasing function,

or if, for any two draws from the joint distributions of Y1 and Y0, the orderings of Y1 and Y0 are the same.

The 2-QPT concept extends this idea of rank-preservation to quantile-specific comparisons.

        The following proposition establishes a set of quantile-specific bounds on average treatment

effects in the presence of sample selection bias:



Proposition 1. Suppose that y1$y0 and T1$T0. Choose 2$20 where q0(20)=0. Then

E[Y| D=1, Y>q1(2)] ! E[Y| D=0, Y>q0(2)]             $ E[y1!y0| y0>q0(2), T0=1]

                                                    $ E[Y| D=1, Y>q0(2)] ! E[Y| D=0, Y>q0(2)].

Furthermore, if Y1 is a 2-quantile-preserving transformation of Y0, then the left inequality is an equality.



Proof. E[Y| D=j, Y>qj(2)] = E[Yj| Yj>qj(2)] by random assignment. Also,

E[Y1| Y1>q1(2)] ! E[Y0| Y0>q0(2)]         = E[Y1!Y0| Y0>q0(2)] + {E[Y1| Y1>q1(2)]!E[Y1| Y0>q0(2)]}

                                          $E[y1!y0| y0>q0(2), T0=1] + b0.

If Y1 is a 2-QPT of Y0 then b0=0, so the second part is proved. Otherwise, we need to show that b0 $0.

Note that

b0 = E[Y11(Y1>q1) !Y11(Y0>q0)]/P(Y0>q0) since P(Y1>q1) = P(Y0>q0), so,

b0 $ E[Y1(1(Y1>q1) !Y11(Y0>q0))]

        = E[Y1(1(Y1>q1) !1(Y0>q0))] = E[Y1(1(Y1>q1, Y0<q0)!1(Y1<q1, Y0>q0))],

where the second equality above is a consequence of the facts that 1(Y1>q1)=1(Y1>q1, Y0<q0)+1(Y1>q1,

Y0>q0) and 1(Y0>q0)=1(Y1<q1, Y0>q0)+1(Y1>q1, Y0>q0). Further simplifying, we have

        E[Y1(1(Y1>q1, Y0<q0)!1(Y1<q1, Y0>q0))] = E[Y1| Y1>q1, Y0<q0]p1 ! E[Y1| Y1<q1,Y0>q0]p0,

                                                      12
where p1$Pr[Y1>q1, Y0<q0] and p0$Pr[Y1<q1, Y0>q0]. Clearly E[Y1| Y1>q1, Y0<q0] $E[Y1| Y1<q1, Y0>q0].

Also, p1 = p0 because

         P(Y1>q1) = p1 + Pr[Y1>q1, Y0>q0] = 2 = Pr[Y1>q1, Y0>q0] + p0 = P(Y0>q0).

This establishes the upper bound. The lower bound is a consequence of the fact that

E[Y| D=1, Y>q0(2)]!E[Y| D=0, Y>q0(2)] = E[Y1!Y0| Y0>q0(2)] + {E[Y1| Y1>q0(2)]!E[Y1| Y0>q0(2)]}

and E[Y1| Y0>q0(2)] = E[Y1| Y1 $Y0>q0(2)] $E[Y1| Y1>q0(2)].



Note that we can choose a quantile, 20, such that q0(20) = 0, and then drop the lower 20 percent of the Y1

distribution to obtain an upper bound on E[y1!y0| T0=1]. At the same time, the unadjusted conditional-

on-positive contrast in test scores provides a lower bound. Moreover, if Y1 and Y0 are linked by a 2-QPT,

the upper bound provides an estimate of E[y1!y0| T0=1].9 We can use this fact to estimate or bound

average treatment effects at a number of points in the score distribution.

         We can also use the proof of the proposition to get a sense of when the upper bound is likely to

be tight. The bias of the upper bound is

                  b0 /E[Y1| Y1>q1(2)]!E[Y1| Y0>q0(2)],

which is equal to zero when Y1 preserves the 2-quantile of Y0. Since some of the applicants induced to

take the test by winning the lottery presumably scored above the minimum score achieved by applicants

who took the test after losing the lottery, the bound is unlikely to be perfectly tight. However, since few

of these “leap-frogging” applicants are likely to have scored in the upper quantiles of the distribution, the

likelihood that the 2-QPT assumption holds probably increases with 2. We should therefore expect upper

bounds estimated using the proposition to be tighter at the top of the distribution than the bottom.



9
 The latter result can also be understood as follows. Angrist (1997) shows that monotonicity in selection status
(T1i$T0i), combined with a constant-effects link between y1 and y0, implies that controlling the probability of sample
selection eliminates selection bias. Symmetric truncation is equivalent to fixing the probability of sample selection.
The proposition generalizes this result to models with a non-constant but still rank-preserving link between potential
outcomes. Krueger and Whitmore (2001) used a similar idea to estimate E[y1!y0| T0=1] in a study of class size. See
also Lee (2002).
                                                          13
            Estimates of non-parametric bounds on treatment effects at different quantiles are reported in

Tables 4a and 4b for language and math scores, for 20 such that q0(20)=0, and for 2=.75, .85., and .95.10

The largest effects are at q0(20)=0, i.e., effects on all pupils who would have been tested even if they had

not won the lottery. The lower bound for effects on language scores in this population is .68 (s.e.=.33),

while the upper bound is 2.8 (s.e.=.31). For 2=.95, the bounds fall to an insignificant .35 on the low end

and still-significant 1.4 (s.e.=.34) on the high end. The pattern of bounds by quantile is consistent with

either a larger shift in scores for pupils with Y0 close to the low end of the test-takers’ score distribution,

or with a tightening of the upper bound at higher quantiles, or both.

            The effects on math scores in the sample that includes boys and girls are generally somewhat

smaller than those on language scores. In fact, lower bounds for the estimated effects on math scores are

not significantly different from zero at every cutoff, while the lower bounds for language effects are at

least marginally significant at the lower three cutoffs. Interestingly, most of the effects for boys are larger

than the corresponding effects for girls, especially at the first two cutoffs and for the upper bounds. The

difference in effects by sex is most marked for math scores.

            A comparison of the entire distribution of test scores for winners and losers supports the notion

that the voucher led to an increase in achievement by winners.                Figures 1a and 1b, which plot kernel

density estimates in the sample of all test takers, show slightly flattened and right-shifted distributions for

winners. As with the comparisons of means, however, this contrast is contaminated by selection bias, in

particular, the likely introduction of low-scorers into the sample of tested winners. Adjusting for sample

selection bias as suggested by Proposition 1 leads to a clearer impression of a shift. This can be seen in

Figures 2a and 2b, which plot score distributions after limiting the distribution of winners to the top 28

percent of the score distribution (including zeros).             In other words, Figures 2a and 2b plot scores

conditional on Y0>q0(.72), where            q0(.72)=0, and Y1>q1(.72).        The adjusted figure shows a clearer

rightward shift in the distribution for winners, especially in the middle of the density.


10
     These estimates are for the sample with valid ID and age as in Table 3; covariates include age and sex.
                                                            14
         The density plots and differences in average treatment effects reported for different quantiles in

Tables 4a and 4b suggest the PACES program had an impact on the distribution of test scores beyond a

simple “location shift.” To explore distribution effects further (and quantify the impression left by the

figures), we estimated the impact of winning a voucher at different points in the cumulative distribution

of test scores. In particular, we estimated voucher effects in equations analogous to equation (1), with the

dependent variable given by 1[Yi > c], where c is a quantile in the score distribution among test takers.

This procedure uses a sample where test scores for non-takers are coded as zero. Therefore, assuming

that those not tested would have scored below c, the resulting estimates are unaffected by selection bias.11

         Estimates of effects on the distribution of test scores, reported in Table 5, show the largest effects

on the probability test scores exceeded the lowest decile in the score distribution (among test-takers). For

example, the probit marginal effects of the impact of a voucher on the probability of crossing the first

decile are .063 (s.e.=.015) for the language score distribution and .068 (s.e.-.016) for the math score

distribution. These estimates appear in columns 3 and 6 of Table 5. The corresponding estimates fall to a

bit over .04 at the median, and then to around .025 at the 75th percentile. It seems unlikely that many

students at the 75th percentile of the distribution of test scores among test takers were in danger of having

to repeat a grade. The substantial impact of the program on the likelihood of scoring in the upper quartile

among test takers therefore suggests the program operated through channels other than simply reducing

the risk of grade repetition. Moreover, while the estimated distribution shifts at the upper decile in this

specification are only .01 and .003 for language and math, the former effect is still significantly different

from zero.

         Another interesting finding that comes out of the distribution analysis, echoing the results in

Tables 4a and 4b, is a reasonably clear pattern of larger voucher effects on the distribution of scores for

11
  An alternative and perhaps more conventional procedure that captures effects on distribution while avoiding
selection bias under the same assumptions is quantile regression (QR). In this case, however, quantile regression is
made less attractive by the almost-discrete nature of the test scores. About 80 percent of the mass of the distribution
of scores among takers falls into a range of 15 points or less. This near-discreteness causes QR estimates to behave
poorly and invalidates standard asymptotic theory for QR since a regularity assumption for quantile regression is
continuity of the dependent variable.
                                                           15
boys than for girls. For example, the distribution shift at the median of the math score distribution is .059

(s.e.=.015) for boys and .033 (s.e.=.017) for girls.       Again, these are probit marginal effects.      The

differences in effects by sex are even larger in the corresponding linear probability model and when these

effects are estimated in models without covariates.



C. Parametric strategies

        The strategies discussed in the previous section rely on relatively weak functional-form and

distributional assumptions at the cost of a possible reduction in statistical power and, for the first

approach, the need to settle for bounds instead of point identification.         Here we briefly explore a

potentially more powerful parametric strategy that codes the latent scores of non-takers as falling below a

particular value or quantile, then censors the score distribution at or above this value and uses Tobit to

correct for censoring. A comparison of Tobit results using different censoring points provides a natural

specification test for this procedure since, if correctly specified, results using different censoring points

should be similar. A key drawback in this case is the need to assume normality of the uncensored latent

score distribution. The quality of the normal approximation may be especially poor given the relatively

discrete nature of the score data.

        The idea behind this approach is spelled out in more detail below. We assume that the causal

effect of interest could be estimated by regressing latent scores, yi, on Di and covariates, Xi. That is, the

regression of interest is

                 yi = Xi'$ + "Di + 0i,                                                                     (4)

where 0i is a normally distributed error. Now, construct an artificially censored version of Yi using

                 Yi(J) / 1[Yi > J]Yi,                                                                      (5)

for some positive threshold, J.      Assuming any untested student would have scored at or below this

threshold if they had been tested, the parameters in (4) can be consistently estimated by applying Tobit to

Yi(J).This is not realistic for J=0 but it may be for, say, the 10th percentile of the score distribution among

                                                      16
test-takers. Finally, note that if Tobit using Yi(J0) identifies ", then Tobit using Yi(J1) will also work for

any threshold value J1, such that J1>J0.

            As a benchmark for this procedure, we again report estimates using the sample of test-takers,

without adjusting for censoring. A simple comparison of winners’ and losers’ test scores in the sample of

test-takers, presented in column 1 of Table 6, shows winners scored about 0.7 points higher on the

language exam, with similar though less precise effects in samples of boys and girls.12 The estimated

effects for math scores are smaller though still positive. Censoring the score distribution at the first

percentile among test-takers, including all students and without adjusting for censoring in the estimation,

generates a voucher effect of 1.1 (s.e.= .24) for language and 0.79 (s.e.=.18) for math. These results are

reported in column 2.

            Tobit estimates using data censored at the first and 10th percentiles among test-takers suggest

much larger effects than those that arise without correcting for selection bias. The Tobit estimates,

reported in columns 3 and 4 of Table 6, are on the order of 2-4 points for language and 2-3 points for

math, in all cases significantly different from zero. Effects are at the lower end of this range, around 2

points, when the data are censored at the 10th percentile. Consistent with some of the earlier results, Tobit

estimates separately by sex lead to larger estimates for boys than for girls for both math and language

scores.

            Assuming the Tobit model applies to data censored at the first percentile, the Tobit coefficient

estimates should be the same when estimated using data censored at the 10th. The decline in estimates

moving column 3 to column 4 therefore suggests the first percentile is too low a threshold for the model

to apply.       On the other hand, Tobit estimates of " are remarkably stable when the distribution is

artificially censored with a cutoff that removes the lower 10-80 percent of scores. This can be seen in

Figures 3a and 3b, which plot the estimated Tobit coefficients and confidence bands for alternative

censoring points. The estimated treatment effects are fairly stable at around 2 points, turning down


12
     The covariates and sample used here are the same as in Tables 3-5.
                                                            17
slightly when the lower 90 percent of scores among takers are censored. It should be noted, however, that

the confidence intervals widen at this point. Moreover, normality may be a poorer approximation for the

score distribution at the upper tail. On balance, the model summarized in (4) and (5) seems to provide

reasonably coherent account of the voucher impact on latent scores. Effects in this range amount to a

score gain of about .2F where F is the standard deviation of the latent residual in equation (4). This is

consistent with our earlier estimates of effects on achievement for a random sample of Bogotá 8th graders

in 1998.13



                                           V. Summary and Conclusions

         This paper presents evidence on the impact of PACES vouchers on long-run outcomes for

applicants to the Bogota voucher lottery. The PACES program allowed students to attend private schools,

and was renewable annually, conditional on grade advancement. The random assignment of vouchers

facilitates causal comparisons between those who did and not receive vouchers. Administrative data on

college entrance exams allow us to estimate the impact of vouchers on high school graduation rates and

scholastic achievement. Two potential empirical problems in a study of this sort are the possibility of

higher false match rates for winners than losers and selection bias in comparisons of test scores among

those who were tested. As it turns out, the quality of record-keeping appears to have been similar for

winners and losers, so that false matches are probably not a problem. We used a variety of simple

strategies to adjust for selection bias, with reasonably consistent results coming out of different methods.

         The empirical results point to an increase in high school graduation rates of 5-7 percentage

points, relative to a base rate of 25-30 percent. This finding is consistent with our earlier results showing

a 10 percentage point increase in 8th grade completion rates among voucher winners, as well as gains on a


13
  Effect sizes calculated using the distribution of the latent Tobit residual seem like an appropriate standard of
comparison since, on one hand, the R-squared in the latent equation estimated here is likely to be small and, on the
other, the research strategy used in our earlier study can be thought of as providing estimates of the standard
deviation of latent scores since all applicants in the relevant sample were tested (i.e., whether or not they were likely
to later register for ICFES).
                                                             18
standardized test. The magnitude of the test score gains in our follow-up study turn partly on how

selection bias is controlled. Tobit estimates with artificially censored data put the treatment effects at

around 2 points, or roughly .2F relative to the standard deviation of latent scores. Non-parametric bounds

bracket this number, with a lower bound that is significantly different from zero in the full sample. Since

the upper bound is exact under the assumption of a monotone shift, and the Tobit estimates satisfy a

simple over-identification test, something close to the Tobit estimate of 2 points seems like a good

summary estimate.

        For the most part, bounds on average treatment effects at higher quantiles of the score distribution

are smaller than those at the lower end. This may be because program effects were actually greatest at the

bottom of the distribution, perhaps due to the incentive effects generated by PACES vouchers. However,

it also seems likely that the upper bounds are tighter higher in the distribution for technical reasons having

to do with the relationship between potential outcomes in the treated and non-treated states. In any case,

the fact that lottery winners were substantially more likely to score in the top quartile on the national

university entrance exam suggests that the program probably improved learning not only by increasing

financial incentives, but also by expanding school choice. A final noteworthy result is that the effects we

estimated for boys, who generally score lower in this population, tend to be somewhat larger than those

estimated for girls. Thus, the voucher program acted to reduce male-female score differentials.

        In conclusion, it is worth emphasizing that all of the estimation methods used here point towards

a substantial gain in both high school graduation rates and achievement as a result of the voucher

program. The size and persistence of this impact suggests PACES was a cost-effective intervention.

Although the benefits of achievement gains per se are hard to quantify, there is a substantial economic

return to high school graduation in Colombia. At a minimum this suggests demand-side financing efforts

along the lines of the PACES program warrant further study.            Another area for future work is a

reconciliation between our results for Colombia, which consistently show large benefits to voucher

recipients, and results for the U.S., which have been more mixed. One possibility is that gaps between the

                                                     19
quality of public and private schools are greater in Colombia than in the U.S. Another is that PACES

features not necessarily shared by other voucher programs, such as incentive effects and the option for

those who would have gone to private school anyway to use vouchers to attend more expensive schools,

played an important role in generating the gains documented here.




                                                   20
                                             Data Appendix

ICFES-matching Details

           The population to be matched consisted of 4,044 applicants from the 1995 PACES cohort in

Bogotá. Matching was carried out by searching computer files in the ICFES offices in Bogotá. The

search was implemented by our research assistants with assistance from ICFES staff members. ICFES

tests are offered twice a year. We searched for matches among all test-takers in 1999, 2000, and 2001. 27

students with an exact ID match registered but never took the exam. We code this event as a match but

assigned a score of zero. Another 44 had scores recorded from tests offered in 1999, before the ICFES

was a re-designed and a new score scale introduced. We assigned these individuals the mean score for

their age/sex cell among takers in 2000 and 2001. Results are similar when the 1999 matches are treated

as non-matches.



ICFES Subjects and Score Distribution

           The ICFES scores used here are from the redesigned scoring system introduced in March 2000.

Our scores are for the Mathematics and Language components of the Common Core of Basic

Competence (Nucleo Comun Competencias Basicas), which includes modules in Biology, Chemistry,

Physics, Mathematics, Language, History, Geography, and a Foreign Language test chosen by the

student.     In addition to these required tests, students choose to be tested in up to four areas of

specialization. The ICFES is given over a two-day period with two morning sessions and an afternoon

session on the first day.

           The Mathematics and Language components of the Common Core each take one hour and have

35 questions. Test scores are reported on a scale of 0-100, with the score distribution highly concentrated

in the 30-70 range. The distributions of Mathematics and Language scores for all those tested in Bogotá

in March 2000 are shown in the appendix figures (for 6,868 examinees).



                                                    21
                                          REFERENCES

Angrist, Joshua D., “Conditional Independence in Sample Selection Models,” Economics Letters 54,
        February 1997, 103-112.
Angrist, Joshua and Victor Lavy, “The Effect of High School Matriculation Awards: Evidence from
        Randomized Trials,” NBER Working paper 9839, 2003.
Angrist, Joshua; Bettinger, Eric; Bloom, Erik; King, Elizabeth and Kremer, Michael, “Vouchers for
        Private Schooling in Colombia: Evidence from a Randomized Natural Experiment,” American
        Economic Review 92, December 2002, 1535-1558.
Ashworth, K. and J. Hardman, “Education Maintenance Allowance: The First Year, A Qualitative
        Evaluation,” Research Report RR257, Department for Education and Employment, 2001.
The College Board, Trends in Student Aid, Washington, D.C., 2002.
Cornwell, Christopher and David Mustard, “The Enrollment Effects of Merit-Based Financial Aid:
        Evidence from Georgia’s HOPE Scholarship,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2002.
Dynarski, Susan, “The Consequences of Merit Aid.” NBER Working Paper 9400, 2003.
Howell, William G. and Paul E. Peterson (2002), The Education Gap: Vouchers and Urban Schools,
        Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution.
King, Elizabeth; Orazem, Peter and Wolgemuth, Darin, “Central Mandates and Local Incentives: The
        Colombia Education Voucher Program,” Working Paper No. 6, Series on Impact Evaluation of
        Education Reforms, Development Economics Research Group, The World Bank, February 1998.
King, Elizabeth; Rawlings, Laura; Gutierrez, Marybell; Pardo, Carlos and Torres, Carlos, “Colombia’s
        Targeted Education Voucher Program: Features, Coverage and Participation,” Working Paper
        No. 3, Series on Impact Evaluation of Education Reforms, Development Economics Research
        Group, The World Bank, September, 1997.
Kremer, Michael, Edward Miguel and Rebecca Thornton, “Incentives to Learn,” Harvard department of
        Economics, mimeo, 2003.
Krueger, Alan and Whitmore, Diane, “The Effect of Attending a Small Class in the Early Grades
        on College-Test Taking and Middle School Test Results: Evidence from Project STAR,”
        Economic Journal, January 2001, 111(468).
Krueger, Alan and Pei Zhu, “Another Look at the New York City School Voucher Experiment,” NBER
        Working Paper 9418, January 2003.
Lee, David, “Trimming for Bounds on Treatment Effects with Missing Outcomes,” NBER Technical
        Working Paper 277, June 2002.
Rouse, Cecilia Elena, “Private School Vouchers and Student Achievement: An Evaluation of the
        Milwaukee Parental Choice Program,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 1998, 13(2), 553-
        602.
Sanchez, Fabio and Jairo Mendez, “Por que los ninos pobres no van a la escuela? (Determinantes de la
        asistencia escolar en Colombia).” mimeo, Departmento Nacional de Planeacion Republica de
        Colombia, 1995.
The World Bank, Research Department, Staff Appraisal Report: Colombia, Secondary Education
        Project, Human Resources Operations Division, Latin America and the Caribbean
        Region, Report No. 11834-CO, November 19, 1993.
The World Bank, World Development Report 1998/99, New York: Oxford University Press, 1999.




                                                22
             Table 1. Characteristics of ICFES Matching Sample by Voucher Status
                                                                    Difference by Voucher Status
                                     Means                               (winners vs. losers)
                                                                                         Valid ID and
                            Full Sample W/               Full         Sample w/ Valid ID Age and Has
                           Sample Valid Age             Sample        Valid Ages and Age    Phone
                             (1)     (2)                  (3)             (4)      (5)        (6)
  Won Voucher                .588     .585

  Valid ID                   .876            .967
  Age at Time of             12.7        12.7               -.137        -.086        -.085          -.091
  Application                (1.8)       (1.3)             (.064)        (.045)       (.044)        (.047)
  Male                       .487            .493           .004          .011         .012          .008
                                                           (.016)        (.017)       (.017)        (.018)
  Phone                      .882            .886           .013          .008         .008           ---
                                                           (.010)        (.011)       (.011)
  N                          4044         3661             4044           3661         3542          3139
Notes: Robust standard errors reported in parentheses. Regression estimates of differences by voucher status in
column 4 are for sample with valid age data embedded in the National ID number. A valid age must be
between 9 and 25. Column 5 limits the sample to those with a valid ID check digit and Column 6 further limits
the sample to those with a phone. There are 1520 observations in Column 1 and 3664 in Column 2 for “Age at
Time of Application.” Other sample sizes are as shown.




                                                      23
      Table 2. Effect of Voucher Status on the Probability of Having a Valid ID
                            Full         Sample with Valid Age          Sample with Valid Age
                           Sample                 Data                        and Phone
                             (1)              (2)         (3)             (4)           (5)
                                        A. All Applicants
Dependent                   .876                   .968                             .968
 Variable Mean
Voucher Winner              -.010            .001             -.0002        .001            .0001
                           (.010)           (.006)           (.0060)       (.006)          (.0063)
Age                                                            -.010                         -.008
                                                              (.002)                        (.002)
Phone                                                         -.0003
                                                             (.0092)
N                           4044             3661              3661        3244             3244
                                      B. Female Applicants
Dependent                   .862                 .963                               .971
 Variable Mean
Voucher Winner              -.023           -.001             -.002        -.002            -.003
                           (.015)           (.009)           (.009)        (.010)          (.009)
Age                                                           -.010                         -.010
                                                             (.003)                        (.003)
Phone                                                         .003
                                                             (.013)
N                           2076              1857            1857         1631             1631
                                       C. Male Applicants
Dependent                    .891                     .971                          .971
 Variable Mean
Voucher Winner              .004              .003            .002          .004            .003
                           (.014)            (.008)          (.008)        (.008)          (.008)
Age                                                           -.011                         -.006
                                                             (.003)                        (.003)
Phone                                                         .001
                                                             (.013)
N                         1968               1804             1804         1613             1613
Notes: The table reports estimates of equation (1) in the text. Robust standard errors are shown in
parentheses.




                                                24
                                   Table 3. Voucher Status and the Probability of ICFES Match
                          Exact ID Match         ID and City Match        ID and 7-letter Name Match          ID, City, and 7-letter Match
                           (1)      (2)             (3)         (4)            (5)            (6)                  (7)             (8)
                                                        A. All Applicants (N=3542)
Dependent Var. Mean             .354                     .339                         .331                                 .318
Voucher Winner             .072      .059          .069        .056           .072           .059                  .068            .056
                          (.016) (.015)           (.016)      (.014)         (.016)         (.014)                (.016)          (.014)
Male                                -.052                     -.053                          -.043                                 -.045
                                   (.014)                     (.014)                        (.014)                                (.014)
Age                                 -.160                     -.156                          -.153                                 -.149
                                   (.005)                     (.005)                        (.005)                                (.005)

                                                     B. Female Applicants (N=1789)
Dependent Var. Mean             .387                     .372                      .361                                    .348
Voucher Winner             .067      .056          .069        .057         .071         .060                      .073            .062
                          (.023)    (.021)        (.023)      (.021)       (.023)       (.021)                    (.023)          (.021)
Age                                 -.168                     -.164                      -.160                                     -.156
                                    (.006)                    (.006)                    (.006)                                    (.006)

                                                      C. Male Applicants (N=1752)
Dependent Var. Mean             .320                     .304                     .302                                     .288
Voucher Winner             .079      .063          .071        .055         .074        .059                       .065            .050
                          (.022)    (.020)        (.022)      (.020)       (.022)      (.020)                     (.022)          (.020)
Age                                 -.153                     -.148                     -.146                                      -.141
                                    (.007)                    (.007)                   (.007)                                     (.006)
Notes. Robust standard errors are shown in parentheses. The sample includes all Bogotá 95 applicants with valid ID numbers and valid age data
(i.e. ages 9 to 25 at application). The sample is the same as in Table 1, Column 5.




                                                                     25
  Table 4a. Bounds on Voucher Effects on Language Scores, for Applicants Who Would Have
                             Taken the ICFES Exam Anyway
                                     Loser’s Avg         w/o Covs             w/ Covs
                                              Score Above          Lower        Upper         Lower      Upper
Loser's Value at      Percentile of             Quantile           Bound        Bound         Bound      Bound
  Percentile       Loser's Distribution           (1)               (2)          (3)           (4)        (5)
                                              A. All Applicants
       0           72nd Percentile                 46.9              .68         2.81           .70       2.80
                                                   (5.5)            (.33)        (.31)         (.33)      (.31)
       41          75th Percentile                 48.7              .46         2.47           .49       2.46
                                                   (3.9)            (.26)        (.26)         (.26)      (.26)
       47          85th Percentile                 51.2              .49         2.39           .50       2.37
                                                   (3.0)            (.27)        (.28)         (.27)      (.28)
       52          95th Percentile                 55.6              .35         1.38           .36       1.39
                                                   (1.7)            (.31)        (.34)         (.31)      (.34)

                                           B. Female Applicants
       0           67th Percentile                 46.6              .65         2.29           .74       2.33
                                                   (5.7)            (.45)        (.42)         (.45)      (.42)
       43          75th Percentile                 49.2              .46         1.86           .52       1.87
                                                   (3.7)            (.35)        (.35)         (.35)      (.35)
       47          85th Percentile                 51.5              .31         2.32           .32       2.31
                                                   (3.1)            (.37)        (.40)         (.37)      (.40)
       52          95th Percentile                 55.7              .11         1.32           .11       1.34
                                                   (1.8)            (.45)        (.52)         (.45)      (.53)

                                             C. Male Applicants
                      th
       0           74 Percentile                   47.3              .67         3.19           .66       3.18
                                                   (5.3)            (.48)        (.45)         (.48)      (.45)
       36          75th Percentile                 47.9              .54         2.61           .54       2.62
                                                   (4.6)            (.44)        (.42)         (.43)      (.41)
       47          85th Percentile                 51.6              .69         1.36           .69       1.35
                                                   (2.9)            (.39)        (.39)         (.38)      (.38)
       51          95th Percentile                 54.6              .20         2.33           .27       2.35
                                                   (2.1)            (.44)        (.46)         (.45)      (.47)

   Notes: The table reports bounds computed using the formulas in Proposition 1 in the text. Means and standard
   deviations are shown in column 1. Estimated bounds and standard errors are shown in columns 2-5.
   Columns 4-5 include controls for age and gender.




                                                       26
Table 4b. Bounds on Voucher Effects on Math Scores, for Applicants Who Would Have Taken
                               the ICFES Exam Anyway
                                    Loser’s Avg          w/o Covs            w/ Covs
                                               Score Above          Lower       Upper         Lower       Upper
Loser's Value at       Percentile of             Quantile           Bound       Bound         Bound       Bound
  Percentile        Loser's Distribution           (1)               (2)         (3)           (4)         (5)
                                              A. All Applicants
        0           70th Percentile                42.3               .40        2.40           .40        2.41
                                                   (4.8)             (.29)       (.27)         (.29)       (.27)
       37           75th Percentile                43.7               .35        1.76           .34        1.76
                                                   (3.8)             (.25)       (.25)         (.25)       (.25)
       42           85th Percentile                46.2               .24        1.44           .27        1.48
                                                   (3.2)             (.28)       (.28)         (.28)       (.28)
       47           95th Percentile                50.3               -.09       1.85           -.11       1.80
                                                   (2.4)             (.39)       (.42)         (.39)       (.43)

                                            B. Female Applicants
        0           68th Percentile                42.3               .14        1.63           .18        1.66
                                                   (4.7)             (.38)       (.36)         (.38)       (.36)
       39           75th Percentile                44.3               .24        1.08           .27        1.09
                                                   (3.3)             (.32)       (.32)         (.32)       (.32)
       42           85th Percentile                46.2               .28        1.53           .32        1.55
                                                   (2.8)             (.34)       (.34)         (.34)       (.34)
       47           95th Percentile                49.9               .06        2.19           .06        2.18
                                                   (1.6)             (.40)       (.42)         (.40)       (.42)

                                             C. Male Applicants
                      th
        0           74 Percentile                  42.3               .70        3.27           .70        3.28
                                                   (4.9)             (.44)       (.42)         (.44)       (.42)
       35           75th Percentile                43.2               .66        2.39           .65        2.39
                                                   (4.3)             (.40)       (.40)         (.40)       (.39)
       42           85th Percentile                46.3               .27        1.31           .32        1.37
                                                   (3.7)             (.46)       (.47)         (.46)       (.47)
       45           95th Percentile                49.8               -.60       2.45           -.61       2.44
                                                   (3.2)             (.60)       (.70)         (.60)       (.71)

Notes: The table reports bounds computed using the formulas in Proposition 1 in the text. Means and standard
deviations are shown in column 1. Estimated bounds and standard errors are shown in columns 2-5. Columns
4-5 include controls for age and gender.




                                                        27
               Table 5. Effects on the Probability of Exceeding Test Score Percentiles
                                                 Language Scores                               Math Scores
        Test Score                          OLS         OLS      Probit                   OLS       OLS Probit
                                 Score    No Covs       Covs      Covs                   No Covs    Covs   Covs
Language        Math         Threshold       (1)         (2)       (3)                     (4)       (5)    (6)
                                       A. All Applicants (N=3541)
   40             35        10th            .069        .057      .063                      .073        .061         .068
                            Percentile     (.016)      (.014)    (.015)                    (.016)      (.014)       (.016)
   44             39        25th            .055        .045      .047                      .062        .052         .054
                            Percentile     (.014)      (.013)    (.014)                    (.015)      (.014)       (.014)
   47             42        50th            .050        .043      .041                      .051        .044         .044
                            Percentile     (.012)      (.012)    (.011)                    (.012)      (.012)       (.011)
   51             45        75th            .033        .030      .025                      .034        .031         .027
                            Percentile     (.009)      (.008)    (.007)                    (.009)      (.009)       (.008)
   54             48        90th            .015        .013      .010                      .005        .003         .003
                            Percentile     (.006)      (.006)    (.004)                    (.006)      (.006)       (.005)

                                         B. Female Applicants (N=1788)
   40             35        10th               .066       .055      .065                    .066        .056         .065
                            Percentile        (.022)     (.020)    (.023)                  (.022)      (.020)       (.023)
   43             39        25th               .054       .045      .051                    .045        .036         .041
                            Percentile        (.021)     (.020)    (.021)                  (.021)      (.020)       (.021)
   47             42        50th               .052       .046      .044                    .037        .031         .033
                            Percentile        (.018)     (.017)    (.016)                  (.018)      (.017)       (.017)
   51             45        75th               .027       .024      .021                    .026        .023         .022
                            Percentile        (.012)     (.012)    (.010)                  (.013)      (.013)       (.011)
   54             48        90th               .009       .007      .005                    -.001      -.002        -.001
                            Percentile        (.008)     (.008)    (.006)                  (.008)      (.008)       (.006)

                                           C. Male Applicants (N=1753)
   41             37        10th                .074       .060     .061                    .083        .069         .070
                            Percentile         (.021)     (.020)   (.021)                  (.021)      (.020)       (.020)
   44             40        25th                .067       .055     .054                    .069        .059         .057
                            Percentile         (.020)     (.019)   (.019)                  (.019)      (.018)       (.018)
   48             42        50th                .050       .043     .039                    .070        .062         .059
                            Percentile         (.016)     (.015)   (.014)                  (.017)      (.016)       (.015)
   51             45        75th                .040       .035     .028                    .042        .038         .032
                            Percentile         (.012)     (.012)   (.009)                  (.012)      (.012)       (.010)
   55             48        90th                .013       .011     .008                    .010        .008         .007
                            Percentile         (.007)     (.007)   (.005)                  (.008)      (.008)       (.006)
Notes: The dependent variable indicates whether students exceeded various percentiles in the relevant score
distribution for test-takers. Marginal effects are reported for probit estimates. Standard errors are reported in
parentheses.




                                                           28
Table 6. OLS and Tobit Estimates of the Effects of the Vouchers on ICFES Scores
                                  OLS with           OLS             Tobit           Tobit
                                   score>0        censored at      Censored at     Censored at
                                                      1%              1%              10%
                                     (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)
                                      A. Language Scores
  Full Sample
       Dep Var Mean                 47.4              37.3             37.3            42.7
                                    (5.6)             (8.0)            (8.0)           (4.7)
       Voucher Effect                .70              1.14             3.29            2.06
                                    (.33)             (.24)            (.70)           (.46)

  Female Applicants
     Dep Var Mean                   47.0              37.6             37.6            42.8
                                    (5.7)             (8.1)            (8.1)           (4.7)
       Voucher Effect                .74              1.04             2.88            1.86
                                    (.45)             (.34)            (.91)           (.59)

  Male Applicants
      Dep Var Mean                  47.8              37.0             37.0            42.5
                                    (5.5)             (7.9)            (7.9)           (4.6)
       Voucher Effect                .66              1.25             3.77            2.29
                                    (.48)             (.34)           (1.10)           (.71)

                                           B. Math Scores
  Full Sample
       Dep Var Mean                 42.5              35.7             35.7            37.6
                                    (4.9)             (5.8)            (5.8)           (4.6)
       Voucher Effect                .40               .79             2.29            1.98
                                    (.29)             (.18)            (.51)           (.45)

  Female Applicants
     Dep Var Mean                   42.3              35.9             35.9            37.8
                                    (4.8)             (5.8)            (5.8)           (4.6)
       Voucher Effect                .18               .62             1.84            1.60
                                    (.38)             (.25)            (.66)           (.58)

  Male Applicants
      Dep Var Mean                  42.8              34.8             34.8            38.9
                                    (5.0)             (6.1)            (6.1)           (3.8)
       Voucher Effect                .70              1.02             3.03            2.21
                                    (.44)             (.27)            (.85)           (.62)
Note: Robust standard errors are in parentheses. Censoring point is the indicated percentile of the
test score distribution, conditional on taking the exam. Standard deviations are reported for the
dependent variable means. Sample sizes in Column 1, Panel A are 1223 for the whole sample, 672
for females, and 551 for males. Sample sizes are similar in Column 1, Panel B with an additional
male and female. The samples in the other columns are 3541 overall, 1788 women, and 1753 men.
Covariates include age and gender.




                                                29
Figure 1a. Language Scores by Voucher Status (No Correction for Selection Bias)
                Voucher Winners                      Voucher Losers

   .1




 .075




  .05



 .025



    0
        25                35                 45              55                 65
                                            score

  Figure 1b. Math Scores by Voucher Status (No Correction for Selection Bias)

                Voucher Winners                      Voucher Losers

   .1




 .075




  .05




 .025




    0
              25                  35            45             55               65
                                             score




                                       30
Figure 2a. Language Score Distribution by Voucher Status for Equal Proportions of
                              Winners and Losers
                 Voucher Winners                     Voucher Losers


    .1



  .075



   .05



  .025



     0
         25               35                 45              55               65
                                            score

  Figure 2b. Math Score Distribution by Voucher Status for Equal Proportions of
                              Winners and Losers
                Voucher Winners                      Voucher Losers


    .1




  .075




   .05




  .025




     0
         25               35                 45              55               65
                                            score



                                       31
                     Figure 3a. Tobit Coefficients by Censoring Percentile in Language Score Distribution


                         13
                         12
                         11
                         10
                          9
Tobit Coefficients




                          8
                          7
                          6
                          5
                          4
                          3
                          2
                          1
                          0
                               0       10      20      30       40       50     60       70      80         90
                                                                 Percentile


                       Figure 3b. Tobit Coefficients by Censoring Percentile in Math Score Distribution


                         12
                         11
                         10
                          9
                          8
Tobit Coefficients




                          7
                          6
                          5
                          4
                          3
                          2
                          1
                          0
                          -1
                               0       10      20      30       40       50     60       70      80         90
                                                                 Percentile




                                                             32
Appendix Figure Ia. Distribution of Language Scores in Bogota versus PACES Sample
            Language Scores in Bogota             Language Scores in PACES Sample
      35


      30


      25


      20


      15


      10


       5


       0   0-10      21-30      36-40      46-50      56-60     66-70     81-90
                                        ICFES Score Range


  Appendix Figure Ib. Distribution of Math Scores in Bogota versus PACES Sample
            Math Scores in Bogota                 Math Scores in PACES Sample
      40


      35


      30


      25


      20


      15


      10


       5


       0   0-10      21-30      36-40      46-50      56-60     66-70     81-90
                                        ICFES Score Range




                                          33
