                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         BORROWING CONSTRAINTS, COLLEGE AID,
                           AND INTERGENERATIONAL MOBILITY

                                           Eric A. Hanushek
                                         Charles Ka Yui Leung
                                            Kuzey Yilmaz

                                         Working Paper 10711
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10711


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2004




This research was funded by grants from the Packard Humanities Institute and Direct Grant and Summer
Research Grant of the Chinese University of Hong Kong. Helpful comments were received from Doug
Bernheim, Bruce Chapman, Betsy Caucutt, Charles Clotfelter, Dennis Epple, Martin Feldstein, Roger
Gordon, Rachel Ngai, and seminar participants at LSE and the NBER. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Eric A. Hanushek, Charles Ka Yui Leung, and Kuzey Yilmaz. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Borrowing Constraints, College Aid, and Intergenerational Mobility
Eric A. Hanushek, Charles Ka Yui Leung, and Kuzey Yilmz
NBER Working Paper No. 10711
August 2004
JEL No. H2, I2, D5, J3

                                           ABSTRACT

The current level and form of subsidization of college education is often rationalized by appeal to

capital constraints on individuals. Because borrowing against human capital is difficult, capital

constraints can lead to nonoptimal outcomes unless government intervenes. We develop a simple

dynamic general equilibrium model of the economy that permits us to explore the impact of

alternative ways of subsidizing higher education. The key features of this model include

endogenously determined bequests from parents that can be used to finance schooling, uncertainty

in college completion related to differences in ability, and wage determination based upon the

amount of schooling in the economy. Because policies toward college lead to large changes in

schooling, it is very important to consider the general equilibrium effects on wages. Within this

structure, we analyze tuition subsidies such as exist in most public colleges, alternative forms of

need-based aid, income contingent loans, and merit-based aid. Each of these policies tends both to

improve the efficiency of the economy while yielding more intergenerational mobility and greater

income equality. But, the various policies have quite different implications for societal welfare, and

the underlying subsidy patterns vary widely.

Eric A. Hanushek                  Charles Ka Yui Leung              Kuzey Yilmaz
Hoover Institution                Department of Economics           Department of Economics
Stanford University               Chinese University of             Koc University
Stanford, CA 94305-6010           Hong Kong                         80910 Istanbul
and NBER                          Shatin, Hong Kong                 Turkey
hanushek@stanford.edu             charlesl@cuhk.edu.hk              kuyilmaz@ku.edu.tr
1        Introduction

Education holds a special position in most societies around the world.                Governments quite uni-

formly subsidize schooling heavily, often making it free to the student. But it is not obvious why

governments intervene to this extent, particularly when discussing higher education. Nor is it clear

why government might choose one form of college subsidy over another. This paper explores the

implications of alternative subsidy schemes both from e¢ ciency and equity perspectives.

        On the policy side, any suggestion that a government contemplates raising student fees for

higher education frequently brings a wave of protests.             In the United States, political concerns

about rising tuition costs have led the U.S. Congress to hold hearings and contemplate legislation,

even though tuition policies are the province of state governments.1

        Government intervention in education has nonetheless received relatively little research atten-

tion, particularly given the magnitude of programs. For K-12 education, government subsidy can

be rationalized by arguments about externalities related to socialization, facilitating democratic

government, and reducing crime.2 But such externalities appear considerably less important when

considering college education. Our earlier paper (Hanushek, Leung and Yilmaz (2003)) considered

pure redistributional motives along with externalities of education in production, but provided

limited general support for this form of government subsidization.3

        A remaining argument for subsidization revolves around capital market imperfections and the

inability to borrow against human capital (e.g., Becker 1993[1964] or Garratt and Marshall 1994).

Because human capital is not good collateral for loans, individuals can …nd it di¢ cult to fund

college if the family cannot readily self-…nance.           Further, because any borrowing constraints are

likely to be related to parental income, the resulting decisions on college tend to inhibit intergen-

erational mobility.      To the extent that society wishes to disentangle opportunities of individuals

from the socioeconomic status of their parents, subsidizing college may directly meet societal goals
    1
    The pattern of net tuition by income groups in the U.S. is analyzed in Congressional Budget O¢ ce (2004).
    2
    Of course as raised previously by Friedman (1962), these arguments do not establish the case either for the
magnitude of current intervention or for the form that involves direct production as opposed to subsidy.
  3
    Consideration of direct distributional objectives is also the main thrust of Benabou (2002) and Caucutt and
Kumar (2003), although those papers are also directly related to our work here in that they explicitly consider the
dynamics of the problem.
                                                        1
for distributional outcomes.

    The existence and importance of credit constraints has been the subject of debate.                       In an

in‡uential set of papers (Cameron and Heckman 1999, 2001; Carneiro and Heckman 2002), Heckman

and his coauthors argue that short run credit constraints are small even if longer run constraints

deriving from transmission of achievement are more substantial.4                As discussed below, while we

do not try to estimate the magnitude of these e¤ects, we base our analysis on a presumption that

both exist.

    This analysis delves directly into the intergenerational outcomes of various college subsidy

schemes in the presence of borrowing constraints.              But, our previous paper demonstrated that

general equilibrium e¤ects are very important to consider, because policies that have signi…cant

impacts on college attendance and completion necessarily have direct e¤ects on wages in the econ-

omy. Thus, any policy consideration must be embedded within a model that can accommodate

aggregate impacts on the economy. Systematic study into aspects of both the e¢ ciency and dis-

tributional impacts of educational policies has been growing over time (see, for example, Lowry

(1981), Glomm and Ravikumar (1992), Iyigun (1999), and Fender and Wang (2003)), and this

analysis is a natural extension of these inquiries.

    Our objective is to develop a dynamic general equilibrium model that can provide insights into

the implications of various college aid policies for both the e¢ ciency of the economy and for the

distribution of outcomes over time. We begin in a world where short run borrowing constraints

stop some families from making optimal schooling decisions, implying that society will not achieve

its …rst best outcome without government intervention.               Government has, however, a variety of

instruments for subsidizing education, and these instruments have di¤erent implications for the

economy in both the short and long run.

    To capture the dynamic nature of the problem, we employ an overlapping generations model
   4
     Note that we do not separately analyze the importance of borrowing constraints but simply concentrate on the
implications that such constraints would have for the economy and the distribution of welfare. For other discussions
of the magnitude and nature of constraints on college attendance, see Keane and Wolpin (2001) and Kane (1999).
Other discussions such as the e¤ect on enrollment of eliminating Social Security tuition support for children with a
deceased, disabled, or retired parent are relevant to our development of models where some children are constrained
by insu¢ cient parental support (Dynarski (2003)).

                                                         2
where the economy is populated by a continuum of agents who live two periods and are part of

a continuum of two-agent families. In each “family” (or “dynasty”), there is an old agent (or

“parent”) and an o¤spring (or “child”), and thus the population of the economy is constant over

time.

      Heterogeneity of agents enters through ability di¤erences that a¤ect both the probability of

completing college and subsequent labor market productivity.5 Agents make optimizing decisions

with respect to enrolling in school under uncertainty of successful completion. Each family must,

however, fully fund the education of the child, so that in the absence of subsidies the child cannot

attend college whenever tuition exceeds the parents educational bequest. The parent passes along

bequests that interact with children’s ability to determine education in much the spirit of Lowry

(1981).

      The subsidy schemes considered include a variety of common interventions: low tuition, need-

based grants, merit awards, and an income contingent loan. While the government can intervene

in the college market, it must maintain a balanced budget each period (which is a generation in

our two-period OLG model).          Government intervention distorts the economy through taxes and

through changing college decisions with varying e¢ ciency losses across types of subsidy.                  This

basic economy, which is calibrated to match the stylized facts of the U.S. college market, permits

us to trace out the dynamics of the income distribution along with the impacts of government

intervention on overall output.

      The impact of the di¤erent college subsidies on output and social mobility is very di¤erent.

While each tends to improve output compared to the constrained case, need-based policies lead

to signi…cantly greater equality than merit-based policies. Further, targeted need-based policies

have desirable properties compared to the most common support for higher education –uniformly

reduced tuition at public colleges. Income contingent loans, while conceptually appealing, tend to

tax high ability poor people because of natural adverse selection.
  5
    Throughout the analysis, college quality is assumed constant.   Moreover, it ignores any potential impacts of
peers on quality or prices (Epple, Romano, and Sieg (2003)).



                                                       3
2       Basic Model of College Attendance and Completion

Individuals are thought of as living for two discrete periods.6               During the …rst period of life,

individuals make schooling decisions; during the second period, they work at a wage determined by

their educational attainment and provide funds for both the consumption and possible schooling

of their children.    Each family consists of one parent and one child.              Wages are determined by

an individual’s education (college completion or not) and ability. In each period, the old agent in

a typical household is characterized by education status i, i = e (educated); u (uneducated), and

ability/productivity x, x 2 [0; 1]. The worker will inelastically supply one unit of her labor and

receive after-tax wage income of (1           )kxwi units of consumption goods, where               is the income

tax rate (if any) and k is a productivity parameter. The parent divides this income between a

bequest to her child of b and consumption, c. (Both items are assumed to be non-negative, i.e.,

b; c    0).7 The child, who is born earlier in the same period, is endowed with ability/productivity

x0 along with the bequest b. Thus, agents di¤er in terms of both bequests and ability, and we

refer to (x0 ; b) as the “type” of the child. To capture the observation that the ability of the parent

and the child are correlated, it is assumed that x0 jx; x0 2 [0; 1] follows a Markov process.8                 The

underlying relationships for ability come from regressions of mother-child ability.9                  The steady

state distribution of ability by education level is shown in the appendix along with the details of

the ability regressions and the underlying transmission mechanism.
    6
     We consider an in…nite time horizon. Time subscripts are suppressed except when there could be a confusion.
    7
     Strictly speaking, the consumption c and the bequest b depends on the education status of the parent and hence
should have a superscript i. To avoid burdensome notation, however, we acknowledge this fact and suppress this for
the exposition.
   8
     Our formulation could be consistent with an underlying endogenous school quality model where families in‡uence
learning at the end of secondary schooling or a simple genetic transmission model. Recent empirical work on parent-
child achievement and schooling dynamics is found in Black, Devereux, and Salvanes (2003) and Oreopoulos, Page,
and Stevens (2003). Using di¤erent data and methodology to identify the transmission mechanism, they arrive at
somewhat di¤erent conclusions about the role of environmental di¤erences.
   9
     This formulation is consistent with the Caneiro and Heckman (2003) analysis that suggests that long run impacts
of achievement di¤erences by family income are the most serious issue of "capital constraints." For our purposes,
we take no position on the source of such di¤erences and believe that they could arise from a combination of genetic
and environment factors; see also Mulligan (1999). Our approach di¤ers signi…cantly from the analysis in Lowry
(1981), Benabou (2002), and Caucutt and Kumar (2003), which each considers children’s ability to be independent
of parental ability.




                                                         4
2.1     Individual decisions

The child makes a college attendance decision in the …rst period. If she decides not to go to

college, she consumes all of the parental bequest within the …rst period and then is employed as

an uneducated worker during the second period. If she decides to go to college, she pays tuition,

    ; and consume the remaining bequest, b            ; during the …rst period.   Successful completion of

college is not guaranteed, however, but depends on her ability. She has a success probability of

x0 (her ability). Successful completion yields wages of an educated worker in the following period,

while failure leads to wages of an uneducated worker. (Note, however, that ability a¤ects both

completion probabilities and subsequent productivity and earnings in a neutral manner similar to

Ben-Porath(1970)).

      To highlight the importance of the tuition policy, a form of capital market imperfection is

assumed. Young agents can only …nance their education by bequest. Without governmental in-

tervention, tuition loans are unavailable. Thus, kids with bequest less than the amount of tuition,

b      , have no choice but to remain uneducated. Those who inherit “enough,”b > , can consume

all the bequest when they are young (leaving them to be uneducated workers when they are old),

or they can make the risky decision of going to college. Agents with ability x0 have a probability

x0 of success in college (whereby they would receive after-tax wages of (1          ) kx0 we when they are

old) but probability (1    x0 ) of failure (whereby they would receive (1          ) kx0 wu when they are

old). Regardless of their education outcome, they can still consume the after-tuition bequest b

in the …rst period.

      Obviously, the schooling decision crucially depends on the individual’s utility function. We

adopt a "warm glow" utility function where parents get utility from providing bequests to children

but do not explicitly evaluate the future income or utility outcomes for children. To avoid the

complication of intertemporal substitution, a semi-linear utility function is assumed,

                                                                          1
                                 U (c01 ; c02 ; b0 ) = c01 +   c02   b0       ;


where c01 and c02 are …rst and second period consumption, respectively,             is the discount factor;

                                                         5
0<       < 1, and b0 is the bequest to be left for the child of the young agent.10

       This simple bequest motive provides for endogenous support of children and their human capital

investments.         It does not, however, have a parent adjusting support based on the ability of the

child (cf. Becker and Tomes (1979, 1986)) or any strategic purpose (e.g., Bernheim, Schleifer, and

Summers (1985)).11 It also presumes that the parent is indi¤erent among the child’s choice either

to consume the bequest or to invest in further schooling.

       The …nancial constraint on young people who have the ability to attend college but lack the

…nancial means clearly leads to ine¢ ciency in the economy. While we do not analyze it, the …rst

best situation would clearly be making loans available to students facing borrowing constraints (see

the appendix). Of course, loans run into signi…cant problems because of the well-recognized lack

of collateral. As a result, we concentrate on the analysis of existing types of college aid.

2.1.1      Capital constrained agents


For those who have insu¢ cient bequest, b                              , the lifetime utility without government is easy

to calculate. In the …rst period, she will consume all the bequest, c01 = b: In the second period,

the agent trades o¤ second period consumption and the bequest left to her child. Formally, the

optimization problem can be stated as

                                                            1
                                      max : c02        b0       ; s.t. c02 + b0    (1        )kx0 wu0 :


The optimal allocation is easy to see: c2 =                       (1       )kx0 wu0 , b0 = (1        )(1     )kx0 wu0 : In words,

it means that consumption and bequest are a …xed fraction of the after-tax income. Hence, the

lifetime utility for an agent born at time t, and endowed with ability x0 and bequest b, b                                   , is

U (c01 ; c02 ; b0 ; x0 ; b) = c01 +    (c02 ) (b0 )1        =b+            (1     )1    (1      )kx0 wu0 :
  10
     For a more complete discussion of alternative formulations of the parental decision problem along with some of
their implications, see Banerjee (forthcoming).
  11
     An alternative motivation emphasizes the precautionary savings aspects of household motivation (Dynan, Skinner,
and Zeldes (2002)).




                                                                       6
2.1.2      Unconstrained agents

For those who can a¤ord college education, the calculation is a little more complicated. If they

choose not to attend college, their lifetime utility will be similar to those who cannot a¤ord college,

U (c01 ; c02 ; b0 ; x0 ; b) = c01 + (c02 ) (b0 )1     = b+              (1     )1     (1       )kx0 wu0 : If they do attend college,

their youth consumption is reduced from b to b                           with certainty. Their second period consumption,

however, depends on the education outcome. Formally, the problem is:

                                                          1
                                  max : c02          b0            ; s.t. c02 + b0     (1       )kx0 wi0 ;


i = e; u: It is easy to check that at the optimum, (c02 ) (b0 )1                           =      (1         )1   (1   )kx0 w0i ; for an

agent with education level i, i = e; u. Therefore, introducing the uncertainty of college completion,

the expected lifetime utility for an agent attending college becomes EU c (x0 ; b) = b                                  +     (x0 U e0 +

(1    x0 )U u0 ), where         =         (1        )(1       ),   U i0 = (1        )kx0 wi0 , i = e; u. We assume that youth

completely know their own ability and the future wages that will result from having or not having

a college education.12

     Since going to college is a discrete choice, the decision rule here (and later with various education

subsidies) can be stated as a simple individual calculation of whether or not her ability is above a

minimum feasible investment level. This form of the rule is easy to see because the probability of

successful completion of college rises linearly with ability and the optimization involves trading o¤

tuition payments for the expected future income. From the comparison of expected utilities in the
                                                                       q
                                                                                =we0
two di¤erent states, the unconstrained agent attends college if x0 x =     (1 )k(1 we0 =wu0 ) :

     Importantly, some higher ability children (x0 > x ) do not attend college because of …nancial

constraints.        At the same time, the ability cuto¤, x , for unconstrained children is lower than

it would be if the higher ability but constrained children attended (because college wages are

higher than would be if there were not …nancially constrained potential entrants). As a result, a

purely private market will lead to nonoptimal outcomes. The school attendance decision is shown
  12
     The two-period utility function transfers discounted funds from the second period for the older agent to the
undiscounted …rst period consumption of children, which enters into our e¢ ciency calculations below. If, however,
bequests not used for college tuition are transferred to children in the second period of life –a death bequest instead
of an intervivos transfer – the results are essentially unchanged.
                                                                        7
schematically in Figure 1. Depending on the bequest relative to tuition, there are clear decision

regions that optimize for the individual.

2.2      College completion and schooling costs


The ability of an individual directly a¤ects the chances of successfully completing college and

is therefore a central element of individual decision making.                      However, the aggregate success

probabilities for college attenders have another impact: It a¤ects the cost of providing college and

thus the tuitions that must be charged to cover costs.

       It is convenient to de…ne a new indicator function, I e0 , to indicate the education outcome of

the young agent.         I e0 = 1 if the child enrolls and succeeds in college and I e0 = 0 otherwise.13

Let ft (x; I e ) represent the amount (or the “measure”) of agents with ability x and education

outcome I e at time t and recall that the probability of success for an agent with ability x is also

x. By a version of the Law of Large Numbers,14 the enrollment needed to obtain ft (x; I e = 1)

successfully educated agents is ft (x; I e = 1)=x, 0 < x          1.15 Therefore, a total enrollment at
                         R ft (x;I e =1)
time (t 1) of N r                x       dx yields a supply of educated (or “skilled”) workers at time t
          R
of N s      ft (x; I e = 1)dx.16 Since the young generation at time t needs to be educated in the

same period, a fraction of educated workers are employed in the colleges. We employ a very
                                             R ft+1 (x0 ;I e0 =1) 0
simple education technology: to educate N r0          x0         dx young agents at time t (who will

participate in the labor market at time t + 1), rN r0 skilled workers need to be sacri…ced, r > 0.17

The social costs of producing education are assumed to be entirely these labor costs, and these

determine tuition in the free market case.

2.3      Wage determination
  13
     Clearly, with inadequate inheritance and/or inadequate ability (b             or x0 < x ), I e0 = 0: Notice that, when
we characterize agents in terms of bequest and ability, it is in an ex ante concept, while this indicator function
characterizes the agents in terms of education outcomes and hence is an ex post measure. This permits us to
characterize a young agent (at time t) by (x0 ; I e0 ) rather than (x0 ; b) and, similarly, the type of parents by (x; I e ):
  14
     See Uhlig (1996) for the case with a continuum of agents.
  15
     For x = 0; the probability of success is zero.
  16
     In all the numerical implementation,
                          R                 the state space is discretized
                                                                   P         and hence the number of types becomes …nite
and the integration sign (:)dx is changed to summation sign (:).
  17
     For instance, we need old agents who succeeded in education at time t, to teach the young agents at time t.
In this context, = teacher-pupil ratio k: See Hanushek, Leung and Yilmaz (2003) for more justi…cation of this
assumption.
                                                             8
Constraine d :
  b ≤φ                                Do not attend college

                   0                                                        1



Unconstrai ned :           Do not
                       attend college                      Attend college
  b >φ

                   0                                                        1
                           x * = φ / β * (1 − τ )k ( w e − w u )




     Figure 1: School attendance in no subsidy regime
                 as a function of ability (x)
Wage determination depends on the mix of college completers and noncompleters in the market

at any point in time t. Because workers with di¤erent abilities have varying skill, we consider

the total skilled workers employed in goods production at time t in e¢ ciency units which comes
                                                                                                  R
from the total educated adult population less the college teachers: Est = Eet rN r0 ; where Eet =

kxft (x; I e = 1)dx. Analogously, the total e¢ ciency units for unskilled labor at time t, which are
                                          R
all devoted to goods production, is Eut = kxft (x; I e = 0)dx.

   The production side of this model economy is kept simple with a CES production function,

which depends on both the e¢ ciency units of skilled and unskilled labor,


                                Yt = A[ (Est )( ) + (1     )(Eut )( ) ]1= ;


where 0 <   < 1; and the elasticity of substitution is    = 1=(1        ): Clearly, when   = 0, this is the

Cobb-Douglas case. When       = 1, Est and Eut are perfect substitutes, and when           !   1; the two

factors are perfect complements and the production function is Leontief.

   The labor market is assumed to be competitive, and the wages are simply the corresponding

marginal product,
                                               @Yt         @Yt
                                       wte =     s , wtu =      .
                                               @Et         @Eut



2.4   The Aggregate Dynamics

The aggregate dynamics of this model are both simple and complicated. They are “simple”because

there is no aggregate uncertainty in this model. In fact, with a continuum of agents, the laws of

motion for di¤erent types are deterministic, despite the fact that there is an idiosyncratic (educa-

tion) risk for each young agent enrolled in college. On the other hand, the aggregate dynamics are

“complicated” because the macroeconomic variables in this model, such as the equilibrium wages,

depend on the distribution of the agents. Thus, it is necessary to keep track of the evolution of the

distribution in order to characterize the dynamics. Furthermore, there are two endogenous par-

ticipation constraints in the model: whether the young agent receives a su¢ ciently large bequest

for college (b 7    ) and whether the young agent has enough ability to make college attendance
                                                    9
rational (x0 7 x ). In this, both              and x are endogenous as they depend on wages that in turn

are a¤ected by college attendance decisions.

       To …x the idea, let Ft (x; I e ) be a vector representation of the distribution of all di¤erent types

of agents at time t, 8x 2 [0; 1], I e = f1; 0g. Then, the evolution of the economy can be captured

by a matrix equation



                                              Ft+1 (x0 ; I e0 ) =    t Ft (x; I
                                                                                  e
                                                                                      );

where         t   is the transition matrix of time t, incorporating the information of the transition prob-

abilities of abilities x0 jx;18 the wages at time t; the distribution of wealth at time t, and perhaps

more subtly, the two previously mentioned endogenous participation constraints at time t.19

2.5       Outcomes without Government
2.5.1         Basic calibration of economy


While our main focus is alternative college aid schemes, it is useful to understand the charac-

teristics of this basic economy and the general role for government intervention.                                We calibrate

this basic model to mimic key elements of the U.S. labor and college markets. With no govern-

ment involvement, expenditure per pupil, which comes entirely from teacher labor costs, equals

tuition.          The key parameter driving cost is the fraction of educated workers needed for work in

the college sector, r, and this is chosen such that                   =we – the ratio of tuition to wages of edu-

cated workers –is set approximately to be 0:05:20 Note that a child is …nancially unconstrained if
 b                                  u                 =we                         =we
we     = (1        )(1    )x(I e + w
                                   we (1    I e ))     k .    If we know           k ,      then we know who is constrained.
                                                             ( =we )=k                =we
Moreover, we also know x , since (x )2 =                (1     )(1 wu =we ) .          k    is set so that the enrollment ratio

is about 59% in the stationary equilibrium. The elasticity of substitution parameter, ; is set to

be 2; and the discount factor,             , is set to be 0:96, which are in line with the estimates of Cooley

and Prescott (1995). Our "bequest" is best thought of as a combination of intervivos gifts and
  18
     In the analysis below, the ability dynamics come from a Galtonian regression of the form: : x0 = b0 + b1 x + error:
Assuming that the error term is normally distributed (which can be con…rmed after running the regression), x0 j x
has a normal distribution. Details are presented in the appendix.
  19
     A description of the determination of the matrix t , which is technically involved, is available from the authors.
  20
     As noted below, we calibrate we = 1. Then, rN r we = rN r ) we = r.
                                                               10
bequests at death. The literature on bequest motives is controversial, and data on …nancial ‡ows

from parents are incomplete.21 The value of             here is set to be 0:95; which implies that the agent

will leave 5 percent of their wealth as bequest, which seems to be within the range of the estimates

in the literature. Once we know who attends college and the aggregate enrollment ratio, we can
                                                                                                      we
use the labor market clearing condition to set the stationary equilibrium wage ratio                  wu     1:70.22

These parameters imply that in equilibrium the fraction of work force in the education sector is
             rN rr
given by    Es +Eu   1:39 percent.

2.5.2      Economic outcomes

There are two outcomes that could support government intervention in these markets. The overall

outcomes are described in …gure 2. First, eight percent of all agents are capital constrained –i.e.,

they would have attended college had their families had su¢ cient funds to pay for tuition.23 (The

constrained group represents 22 percent of the children from families where bequests are less than

tuition).24 Because of these constraints, the people attending college are lower quality than they

otherwise would have been. One implication of this is that the college failure rate of 25 percent is

also high, and the costs of providing college education are thus excessive.25 This simple constraint

leads to an overall e¢ ciency loss for the economy of 4.7 percent.

       Second, the patterns of economic success tend to have considerable inertia.                Figure 2 shows

that the schooling outcomes di¤er dramatically by whether the student faces borrowing constraints

or not. The correlation of mother-child income for the population is 0.45, in the range of previous

…ndings by Solon (1992). The probability that a daughter is uneducated given that the mother is
  21
     A variety of models concentrate on intrafamily distributions, albeit from di¤erent underlying views on behavior;
see Becker and Tomes (1979, 1986), Berhneim, Schleifer, and Summers (1985), Bernheim and Severinov (2003). These
models frequently highlight di¤erences in bequests among siblings, something that Behrman and Rosenzweig (2004)
question. Our interest here is nonetheless the level and not the intrafamily pattern of bequests. Congressional
Budget O¢ ce (2004) con…rms that parental contributions are an important component of the funding of college
attendance.
  22
     To do this, we go to the production function to set = 0:607 and the scale parameter A = 1:5874 so that we = 1
in the stationary equilibrium.
  23
     This number of constrained agents is consistent with the calculations of Caneiro and Heckman (2002) except
their calculations are based on existing U.S. aid programs.
  24
     Note that the correlation of ability and income across generations implies that the ability distribution of con-
strained families is skewed to the lower end (see the appendix).
  25
     Note, however, that the failure rate in the base case is below that for U.S. college attenders. For U.S. high
school graduates in the class of 1992, only 45 percent of those enrolling in postsecondary schooling had achieved a
bachelor’s degree by 2000 (Adelman et al., 2003).
                                                         11
        Fig. 2: Distribution of choices without subsidies

100%



80%



60%                                                         nonattenders
                                                            constrained
                                                            college failure
40%                                                         college success


20%



 0%
       unconstrained       constrained        total
                       borrowing constraint
uneducated is 0.76, and this only falls to 0.66 after …ve generations.

         Clearly, the …nancial constraints inhibit the economy from reaching maximum outcomes through

purely private decisions. The correlations across generations of education and income may also be

a concern to those who wish higher degrees of intergenerational mobility. These two arguments

have been used to support a wide variety of educational subsidies by the government, so we turn

to details of the alternatives and their impacts.


3         Di¤erent College Aid Schemes

We now consider how alternative government interventions a¤ect these outcomes.26 The govern-

ment raises funds for college student aid with a proportional income tax and maintains a balanced

budget every period.27

3.1        Uniform Subsidy

The largest and most common subsidy to college students is the reduced tuition that students

receive. Public colleges and universities invariably maintain tuition below production costs, even

for nonresidents of the separate states.28           The government collects a uniform rate of tuition

and a uniform tax rate         from all agents. The proceeds are used exclusively to cover the costs of

education (which is the wage bill for the teachers), as in:


                                          0            0
                                     rN r we = N r + (we Es + wu Eu ):

Notice that, when the income tax rate is zero (                 = 0), the regime is reduced to purely private

education as discussed above, and the tuition is equal to the social cost of college education, i.e.,
    26
     Fender and Wang (2003) consider alternatives of public provision (and decision making on attendance) as an
alternative to the approaches here.
  27
     Our approach di¤ers from that in Caucutt and Kumar (2003). They begin with a series of policy objectives
including making the college decision independent of family income, maximizing the fraction of students with a college
degree, and introducing merit aid. They then consider the welfare e¤ects of each.
  28
     Details of current U.S. aid can be found in McPherson and Schapiro (1991), Kane (1999), and Congressional
Budget O¢ ce (2004). Nonresident tuition, applying both to U.S. citizens who are residents of other states and to
nonU.S. citizens, is typically above that charged to state residents but below the total production costs. Private
universities also tend to price tuition below total production costs, largely through subsidies from endowment (see
McPherson, Schapiro, and Winston 1993), although the support from past private donations are di¢ cult to include
in this analysis.

                                                           12
rwe = :

   Under di¤erent tax rates (and thus subsidy sizes), the unconstrained individuals still have the

same simple decision rule identi…ed previously.           As shown in …gure 1, attendance still depends

simply on ability relative to the decision point, x   .


   One common element of the various subsidy schemes is that they induce a larger number of

children to enroll in school. These choices are optimal in an ex ante sense, but the higher attendance

rates also yield higher failure rates when they induce lower ability agents to attempt college. Thus,

in an ex post sense, there are greater numbers of people who enter the work phase with the skills of

the uneducated but with a tuition bill that must be paid o¤ –making them worse o¤ ex post than

if they had not attempted college.

3.2     Means-Tested Subsidy Schemes


Many college subsidies, however, go beyond the simple uniform tuition cuts and attempt to …ne

tune the subsidies to the ability to pay of the student/parent. We consider two alternative versions

of means-tested subsidies de…ned by the amount of information about parental ability to pay and

by whether the subsidy is constant across individuals or not.           In each, only those who attend

college and are identi…ed as “poor” will be subsidized.

3.2.1    Imperfect information with ‡at subsidy

We begin with the possibility that the parent’s bequest might not be perfectly observable to the

government. Here we take to the extreme and assume that the government cannot observe the

income of the parents (old agents) but can observe their education levels. In the current setting,

high ability people tend to enroll in college and tend to get higher wage (recall that the total wage of

an agent is kxwi , i = e; u, which is proportional to the ability). Thus, the group of more educated

people and highly paid people overlap signi…cantly in this setting.

   Formally, if the parent succeeded in college (I e = 1), then the child is not eligible for the subsidy,

and hence the child is required to pay full cost of the college education,      = rwe . The children of

unskilled parents (I e = 0), however, receive an amount m for enrolling in college, implying their
                                                13
tuition is     = rwe    m.

       Since the subsidy scheme is targeted on those who enroll in college, the utility for those who

do not enroll remains unchanged, EU u (x0 ; b) = b +         U u , where U u = (1      )kxwu . The expected

utility of children going to college now equals EU c (x0 ; b) = b      +m(1 I e ) +      (x0 U e0 +(1 x0 )U u0 ):

It is easy to see that a version of the previous solution holds, with the quali…cation that both the

“threshold level of bequest” and “threshold level of ability” depends on the education level of

parents.

       There is still a constrained group where tuition less any subsidy exceeds the bequest. For this

group, the child does not enroll regardless of ability.        This is seen at the top of Figure 3.         But

now the decision rule varies with parental education.           For children with an uneducated parent,

there is an ability cuto¤ determining whether attendance is optimal: x (I e = 0): For children with

an educated parent, since they must pay the full tuition, there is a di¤erent cuto¤ that is higher:

x (I e = 1). The result that x (I e = 1)        x (I e = 0), depicted in …gure 2, is not surprising. Since

kids with educated parents are denied any education subsidy, their …nancial gains of attending

college are less than those for children of uneducated parents, and thus only the more capable ones

will try.29

       The government budget constraint is also simple. Since the kids with educated parents are

not eligible for subsidy, the government expenditure is concentrated on those whose parents are

unskilled. The total amount of students in this category is represented by
                          h                            i
                   Z P rob x0 ; I e0 = 1 j (x; I e = 0) ft (x; I e = 0)
                                                                                 0
                                             0
                                                                        dx0 N r;m :
                                            x

Hence, the government budget constraint is

                                                0
                                        mN r;m = (we Es + wu Eu ):

3.2.2      Perfect information with variable subsidy

An alternative is to allow the tuition to be (weakly) increasing in wealth. Students who have

larger bequests pay more in tuition. In practice, this scheme, which resembles much of the current
  29
    There is also a small group of children whose parents are educated but who remain …nancially constrained and
thus do not attend college.
                                                      14
Constrained :
b ≤ φ − m(1 − I e )                           Do not attend college

                             0                                                                       1

Unconstrained ( I e = 0) :           Do not                                  Attend college
  b >φ −m                        attend college

                             0                    x * ( I e = 0)
                                                                                                     1
Unconstrained ( I e = 1) :              Do not
                                                                                    Attend college
  b >φ                              attend college

                             0                                     x * ( I e = 1)
                                                                                                     1


Figure 3: School attendance in constant means-tested regime
                 as a function of ability (x)
U.S. aid, will lead to “false reporting”and other information asymmetry problems. Moreover, while

ignored here, there are obvious incentives for parents to adjust their bequests, since the government

will partially compensate for any lesser funds for the child. In this paper, however, we only want

to examine the case where wealth can be perfectly observed, and we assume away the informational

asymmetry issue. This provides the benchmark result for subsidies of the need-based type.

      In practice, need-based subsidies vary signi…cantly in details, including typically being very

non-linear. We nonetheless focus on the linear case, so that the intuition is more transparent and

the calculations are simpli…ed. We characterize tuition as an increasing function of the bequest

each child receives,

                                                    (b) =    1   +   2 b;


where      1    0 is the minimum level of tuition to be paid, and            2,   0   2     1, is the incremental

increase in tuition for each additional unit of bequest. It is clear that if          2   = 0; the present regime

is reduced to the uniform subsidy case. Under this regime, those with too little bequest will be

unable to a¤ord college, b               (b) () b       1 =(1        2)     : For those who can a¤ord college,

b >       , the decision depends on the ability they inherited from parents. The decision rule is a

slight modi…cation of the earlier ones, since the attendance cuto¤ is directly related to the child’s

bequest: x0        x (b).

      In this case, each agent has a critical value of ability/productivity, x (b); that determines

attendance, but it is increasing in the level of bequest the young agent receive.30 An implication is

that this scheme will facilitate social mobility in ex ante terms because, other things being equal,

kids from poor families are more likely to enroll in college with this subsidy (compared to no

subsidy).      They thus will have a higher chance to become a skilled worker in the later stage of

life. In the calibration analysis, we return to check this ex ante intuition, qualitatively as well as

quantitatively.

      The government budget under this subsidy is modi…ed as
 30
      x (b) is the square root of (b)=   (1   )k(we0   wu0 ).




                                                            15
                                            0
                                        rN r we =      n
                                                           + (we Es + wu Eu );

where         n   is the total amount of tuition collected under this variable subsidy scheme.

3.3       Income-Contingent Loans


Income contingent loans allow young agents to borrow for tuition (though it is not compulsory)

with the condition that the repayment depends on their future income.                     Such aid policies have

been advocated in a variety of circumstances and have been implemented in various countries at

the same time that fees were introduced.31

       To simplify the analysis, it is assumed that young agents either borrow the full amount of the

tuition or do not borrow at all.32 Young agents who do borrow will consume the bequest inherited

from their parents in the …rst period. In the second period, they repay a …xed fraction of their

after-income tax income,               (1       )kx0 wi , 0 <     < 1, i = e; u. Hence, they are left with only

(1        )       (1     )kx0 wi , i = e; u, for their second period consumption and the bequest they leave

to their kids. Notice that, while the amount of repayment depends on the second period income

(and hence the education outcome), the repayment as a fraction of the income is independent of

the income. Thus, the income-contingent loans formulated here can also be interpreted as a type

of “pro…t-sharing” of the return on individual human capital investment.

       The key element of this plan is, however, that the loan pool must maintain a zero balance.

Thus, if somebody has a low income and repays less than tuition, there must be others in the loan

pool who pay more than they borrowed for tuition, so that the loan pool remains solvent.

       To facilitate the discussion, we introduce a new indicator function I l ;

                                                  1 if the agent borrows
                                        Il =                             :
                                                  0       otherwise
  31
     For discussions of alternative programs and the rationales, see Barr (1989, 2001), Chapman (1997), and Dresch
(1974). The arguments stress both borrowing constraints (and distributional issues) and the insurance aspects related
to income risk.
  32
     Note that this is not the most general form, which would allow individuals to borrow a varying amount to close
the gap between bequest and tuition. This added complication would not change the basic character of our results.


                                                            16
We now characterize an individual’s type by (x0 ; b; I l ).              The expected utility of a young agent

depends on whether she attends college and whether she borrows the income-contingent loan (ICL

henceforth), EU (x0 ; b) = max fEU e (x0 ; b; 0); EU c (x0 ; b; 1), EU u (x0 ; b; 0)g.33 The lifetime utility

of a young agent under this scheme can be summarized as follows:

            EU c (x0 ; b; 0) = b   + (x0 U e + (1 x0 )U u )       attends college without ICL
               c   0
            EU (x ; b; 1) = b + (1        )(x0 U e + (1 x0 )U u ) attends college with ICL    ;
            EU u (x0 ; b; 0) = b + (U u )                         does not attend college

where U i = (1        )kx0 wi , i = e; u.

       The decision rules are clear. For young agents who are …nancially constrained, b                       ; attending

college without an ICL is not an option, and they only need to evaluate when EU c (x0 ; b; 1) >

EU u (x0 ; b; 0), which occurs when x > xCL             (U e    U u)   1 (U u )
                                                                                  (1   )   .34 (We will use "C" for

…nancially constrained, "U" for …nancially unconstrained, "L" for taking the loan, and "P" for

private …nancing). Notice that xCL does not directly depend on . For the …nancially constrained

agents, the cost of college education is not the tuition               but the additional tax on future income.

       For those who are not …nancially constrained, there are three choices: going to college with

an ICL, going to college without an ICL, and not going to college at all.                        With higher ability,

the borrower must repay a larger amount for the tuition loan and will in e¤ect be subsidizing low

ability students.      Thus, high ability people will …nance school privately as long as their ability

is above some threshold, xU P , that is determined in part by the tuition amount.                         At the other

end, unconstrained students have the same decision rule as constrained with respect to the cuto¤

between attending with an ICL and not attending, i.e., they attend with a loan if x0                           xCL . In

between these two is a third decision point for unconstrained students –where they decide between

attending with and without an ICL. For ability above this point, xU L , they attend without a loan,

because taking the loan would entail subsidizing the low ability (low expected wage) people. Below

that point, they would take the loan even though they did not need it, because the higher ability

people in the loan pool are expected to subsidize them so that their loan repayment is less than

the tuition charge.35
  33
     EU u (x; b; 1) is ruled out because those who do not attend college are not eligible for tuition loan.
  34
     The details of the formulae for the income-contingent loans are available from the authors.
  35
     The details of the di¤erent regimes are available from the authors.
                                                           17
   Figure 4 summarizes the decision rules with an ICL. While the constrained agents have no choice

except take the loan if they wish to attend school, unconstrained agents have greater latitude and

are thus better o¤.

   There are two possible equilibrium outcomes for the unconstrained. Loosely speaking, when the

repayment ratio,      ; is low enough, people who are in the middle of the ability distribution would

take ICL. The high ability people would go to college without the ICL, and the low ability people

would not go to college at all. When the repayment ratio          becomes too high enough, even the

people in the middle of the ability distribution would not take the ICL, and the loan regime would

not include any unconstrained people.

   If there is a viable loan pool, there must be some high income participants who participate

and who subsidize anybody who repays less than tuition.          But, this is just the calculation that

unconstrained agents are making.          If taking the loan requires repayment of more than tuition,

the unconstrained agent will privately …nance.        The unconstrained agent will participate only if

subsidized; this occurs when she has marginally low ability.       The only group of agents who will

participate and will subsidize the lower ability attendees are the high ability but constrained agents.

In other words, the smart poor end up subsidizing the other participants, including the lower ability

rich kids.

   A completely unrestricted income contingent loan system cannot, however, really operate (at

least within the structure of our model). If anybody can join the loan pool, very low ability people

will have incentives to "take a chance" on college –because they are highly subsidized and there is

no real cost to doing so. Without opportunity costs, which are not a feature of our model, almost

everybody could try college attendance in the hopes of getting lucky and completing. Therefore,

in our calculations and in reality, an ICL scheme would almost certainly include a separate ability

cuto¤ for eligibility to join the pool.

   The aggregate dynamics and government budget constraints are more complicated than the

other regimes, since in ex post terms, agents di¤er in three dimensions: ability x, educational

achievement I e , and whether they take loans from the government. The government budget in this

                                                    18
 Constraine d :              Do not                       Attend college
   b ≤φ                  attend college                      with loan

                     0                        *
                                                                                      1
                                          x   CL




  Unconstrai ned :           Do not                Attend college        Attend college
    b >φ                 attend college               with loan          without loan

                     0                        *                     *
                                                                                     1
                                          x   CL
                                                                x   UP




Figure 4: School attendance in income contingent loan (ICL)
             regime as a function of ability (x)
scenario is complicated as well as there are in fact two budget constraints. The …rst constraint is the

usual one, that the total expenditure on education does not exceed the sum of the total tuition and

the total income collected for schooling. The second constraint is that the total income-contingent

loans made in each period do not exceed the total repayment collected.

3.4      Merit-based Tuition subsidy

The …nal alternative we consider is to channel …nancial aid according to student ability/productivity.

A simple parameterization is to allow the tuition to be (weakly) decreasing in ability. Students

who have higher ability pay less in tuition, and those who have lower ability will pay more. In

practice, this scheme will depend on some “proxy” (such as SAT) because ability is not easy to

de…ne, let alone to measure accurately. In this paper, however, we only want to examine the case

where ability/productivity is one-dimensional and can be perfectly observed, and we assume away

the informational asymmetry issues.

       While merit-based subsidy is typically very non-linear (for instance, only the top few students

receive scholarship and others receive none), we will focus on the linear case:

                                                  (x0 ) =    3
                                                                      0
                                                                    4x ;


where      3   > 0 is the maximum level of tuition to be paid, and             4,   0   4   1, is the incremental

decrease in tuition for each additional unit of ability. The tuition is restricted to be non-negative,

 (x0 ) =       3   4x
                     0   0.36 If   4   = 0; the present regime is reduced to the uniform subsidy case. Under

this regime, those with too little bequest will be unable to a¤ord college (when b                            0
                                                                                                      3     4x

  (x0 ): For those who could a¤ord it, i.e., b >                 (x0 ), the decision depends on the ability they

inherited from parents. The decision rule is similar to those previously except that tuition varies

with ability, leading to a variable attendance rule.

       For young agents with higher ability/productivity x0 ,              (x0 ) is lower, and hence they are more

likely to enroll in college.37 If the ability/productivity of parents and o¤springs is positively corre-

lated, education decisions will be correlated across generations. Speci…cally, because higher ability
  36
   This assumption can be relaxed but is imposed here just to simplify the analysis.
  37
   The condition involves a quadratic equation in x0 which there always exists a positive root and a negative root.
We de…ne that positive root to be x :
                                                            19
parents are generally richer, the merit based policy implicitly involves some subsidy to the rich –

which is likely to have implications for the income inequality and mobility generated.

   The government budget under the need-based subsidy is modi…ed as


                                        0
                                   rN r we =   m
                                                   + (we Es + wu Eu );

where    m   is the total amount of tuition collected under merit-based subsidies:(Note that this has

the same form as the need-based subsidy with just an alteration of who gets the subsidies).

3.5     Equilibrium

For the simulations of the di¤erent schemes, we apply a common de…nition of equilibrium.              We

also concentrate on the steady state results for our economy.


De…nition 1 The equilibrium of this model economy is a series of wages fwe ; wu g1
                                                                                 t=0 and a series

of wealth distributions fFt (x; I e )g1
                                      t=0 such that the agents maximize their individual expected utility,

the factor markets are cleared, and the government balances its budget.


   Attention is focused exclusively on the case where we > wu with the steady state being:


De…nition 2 A steady state of the model economy is a series of equilibrium such that fwe ; wu g,

fFt (x; I e )g are all invariant over time.

3.6     E¢ ciency, Equality and Mobility

There is a major problem in simply looking at the marginal conditions for attendance under the

di¤erent scenarios.     The subsidy programs have large e¤ects on the schooling behavior of the

population, and this results in substantial changes in the cost of schooling and in the wages of people

who enter the labor market with di¤erent skills. Further, when considering the characteristics of

intergenerational mobility, it is clear that any changes in patterns accumulate over generations. To

deal with these issues, we return to our basic general equilibrium model and simulate the impacts of

alternative subsidy schemes. As noted, the prior benchmark indicates that substantial ine¢ ciency

exists in the absence of government intervention –because smart poor kids cannot a¤ord schooling
                                                20
and remain uneducated. Moreover, the borrowing constraints tend to lock in family status across

generations.

3.6.1   Individual outcomes with di¤erent subsidies

We simulate each of the subsidies under a range of tax rates, which index the size of the governmental

intervention. In order to provide an understanding of the general equilibrium implications of each

of the schemes, we begin with a description of how the uniform tuition subsidy impacts the economy.

Figure 5 traces out the patterns of college attendance and completion under di¤erent tax rates and

tuitions. While tuition starts at 4.9 percent of wages for educated workers, it falls to 1.58 percent

at a tax rate of 1.6 percent. This fall in tuition induces a large increase in college attendance –

from 59 to 87 percent. A substantial portion of this increase comes from a fall in "constrained"

agents (ones who have the required ability to attend optimally but lack su¢ cient funds to cover

tuition), which goes from 28 percent of the low-bequest agents to less than four percent. Figure

5, however, also vividly shows that a large portion of the increase in attendance is translated into

failure to complete college successfully. Nonetheless, the successfully completing students increase

from 34 percent with no government to 46 percent with a 1.6 percent tax rate for tuition subsidies.

   The patterns for the other subsidies lead to somewhat di¤erent results.       Figure 6 shows the

comparable patterns for the need-based subsidies that involve a lump sum distribution to unedu-

cated parents. Compared to the tuition subsidy, the constrained group is driven even lower with a

1.6 percent education tax. It also achieves a higher attendance rate (over 92 percent), but virtually

all of this gain comes with from an increase in failed college students.    (The linear needs-based

plan is hard to distinguish from the lump sum plan. Virtually all of the conclusions remain the

same, so we do not separately review those results).

   Merit aid produces a strikingly di¤erent pattern (Figure 7). The tilting of tuition advantages

toward the high ability students induces fewer people to attend and retains more constrained

students. As the amount of aid increases, almost the same number of students successfully complete

college, but fewer attend in the …rst place, failures are dramatically less (33 percent at a tax of

1.6 percent compared to 45 percent for the means-tested subsidy), and over …ve percent of the
                                            21
       Fig. 5: Distribution of choices with uniform tuition subsidy

100%



80%



60%                                                              nonattenders
                                                                 constrained
                                                                 college failure
40%                                                              college success



20%



 0%
         0.0%        0.4%       0.8%       1.2%        1.6%
                               tax rate
       Fig. 6: Distribution of choices with need-based tuition subsidy

100%



80%



60%                                                              nonattenders
                                                                 constrained
                                                                 college failure
40%                                                              college success



20%



 0%
          0.0%       0.4%       0.8%       1.2%       1.6%
                               tax rate
              Fig. 7: Distribution of choices with merit aid

100%



80%



60%                                                            nonattenders
                                                               constrained
                                                               college failure
40%                                                            college success



20%



 0%
       0.0%        0.4%        0.8%       1.2%        1.6%
                             tax rate
population remains …nancially constrained.

    The income contingent loans take a di¤erent approach to the problem. If we ignore any po-

tential problems of default, misreporting incomes, and the like, the ICL scheme e¤ectively removes

the borrowing constraints.         Anybody with su¢ cient ability can borrow for their tuition with a

repayment rate that ensures that the fund is …scally balanced.38 Thus, without any government

intervention, the economy can immediately improve outcomes and achieve close to maximum ef-

…ciency.    The program, as noted earlier, does nonetheless have some very speci…c redistribution

involved. Constrained high ability people –people who could not attend college without a loan but

have high enough college and labor market opportunities to yield incomes that more than repay

their loans –end up subsidizing low ability people (both constrained and unconstrained).39

    The results of an unsubsidized ICL are shown in …gure 8. In these calculations, an ability cuto¤

of 0.6 is applied to be eligible for participation in the loan pool, and, because of the correlation of

mother-daughter abilities, fewer constrained households meet these requirements. With the eligi-

bility requirement, any agent with ability greater than 0.7 would subsidize eligible borrowers with

lower ability. These "taxed" agents are all from the constrained group (because the unconstrained

can self-…nance and avoid taxation). They end up subsidizing the schooling of a number of lower

ability constrained students and a larger number of lower ability unconstrained students.

3.6.2      Aggregate outcomes

The question still remains, "What di¤erence does all of this make?" In order to address this larger

issue, we turn to the aggregate implications for output, distribution, and intergenerational mobility.

Before doing that, however, it is useful to note the importance of considering these questions in

a general equilibrium setting. Each of these subsidies has large implications for the distribution

of workers in the labor market, and this in turn directly a¤ects wages.                  The increase in college

completion (which is approximately the same for each of the need-based and merit-based subsidies
  38
     As noted above, an unrestricted program – in the absence of any opportunity costs – will encourage very low
people to take a chance at college even though the success probabilities are low because they are heavily subsidized.
For our simulations, we apply the added constraint that ability must be 0.6 or higher.
  39
     We actually consider a variant that simultaneously has government using a uniform tuition reducation subsidy
in addition to the loan opportunities. As the tuition goes down with more government subsidy, participation in the
ICL probrams falls because there are fewer constrained high ability people.
                                                         22
       Fig. 8: Distribution of Choices with Unsubsidized Income
       Contingent Loans (ICL) and Borrowing Ability Constraint

100%


80%


60%                                                        nonattenders
                                                           taxed loan
                                                           subsidized loan
40%                                                        self financed


20%


 0%
         unconstrained        constrained        total
                         borrowing constraints
discussed when going to a common 1.6 percent tax rate) drives down the wage ratio for college

educated compared to uneducated workers from 1.7 to 1.3, leading to a substantially more equal

distribution of income. Thus, simply calculating aggregate e¤ects with constant prices would yield

very misleading results.

    The …rst aggregate outcome that we note is that each of the subsidies improves the e¢ ciency of

the economy by substantially reducing if not eliminating the group of capital constrained potential

students. Figure 9 plots the e¢ ciency losses that occur at each tax rate and shows that each of

the government interventions leads to improved functioning of the economy.                     It is of course not

necessary that the interventions uniformly improve the economy, regardless of level, because they

also introduce their own distortions.40          Indeed, at the higher levels of tax and subsidy with the

uniform tuition reduction, the distortions of the scheme begin to outweigh the gains and e¢ ciency

losses increase. Similar outcomes occur for the other subsidies if tax rates and subsidies are allowed

to go higher than we present. These increasing distortions occur as tuition approaches zero.

3.6.3    Distributional outcomes

Government subsidy for college education continues to be motivated by attention to the distribution

of welfare in the society. There are a variety of ways in which this can be viewed. First, one might

ask whether government policy leads to more equality in addition to the e¢ ciency gains already

discussed. Figure 10 provides some insight into this. It plots steady state values of both Aggregate

Expected Utility (the sum of utilities in the society) against one minus the gini coe¢ cient. Since

the gini measures distance from equality, higher values of 1-gini indicate more equality of utility.

In this …gure we plot just the e¤ects of uniform tuition subsidies and of merit aid. Interestingly,

within the range of taxes and subsidies considered previously, government intervention leads both

to higher output and to more equality. The need-based subsidies do, however, consistently lead to

more equality than the merit-based subsidy.

    Uniform tuition subsidies also dominate merit aid. They can achieve a similar locus of e¢ ciency
  40
     Note also that our simpli…ed economy has …xed labor supply. This acts to minimize the distortion from a larger
government, since individuals do not ajust to higher tax rates. Our previous analysis (Hanushek, Leung, and Yilmaz
(2003) allows for tax distortions of labor supply, and these have a signi…cant impact on the e¢ ciency of the economy.
These distortions would tend to counteract the gains made from eliminating the costrained individuals.
                                                         23
                                                   Fig. 9: Efficiency Loss under Alternative Subsidies

                                       8%
Percentage loss in aggregate welfare




                                       6%

                                                                                                    uniform tuition
                                                                                                    constant means-tested
                                       4%
                                                                                                    linear means-tests
                                                                                                    merit aid

                                       2%




                                       0%
                                            0.0%     0.4%       0.8%       1.2%       1.6%
                                                               tax rate
                                       Fig. 10: Aggregate Utility and Inequality

                             0.7


                            0.68
Utility equality (1-Gini)




                            0.66
                                                                                   uniform tuition
                                                                                   merit aid
                            0.64


                            0.62


                             0.6
                                0.92   0.94           0.96        0.98       1
                                              Aggregate Expected Utility
and equality as need based aid.       At lower levels of taxes and program size, however, uniform

subsidies yield more ine¢ ciency that need based aid. Income contingent loans lie in between the

need based and merit aid loci.

   Second, the various policies can clearly a¤ect the patterns of intergenerational mobility. One

simple measure of mobility is the relationship between mother’s education and that of subsequent

generations. In Figure 11 we plot the probability that a child is educated given that the matriarch

is uneducated. We do this for varying numbers of generations under alternative subsidy schemes.

We also plot the unsubsidized, or no-government, case. With each of the subsidies, we compare the

intergenerational mobility that comes from a tax rate of 0.8 percent under the varying governmental

interventions, although the pattern is quite consistent across di¤erent tax rates. Two attributes

of these patterns stand out.     The most signi…cant di¤erence among the plans or the absence of

government is the fact that the mobility asymptotes at a di¤erent level. This varying steady-state

degree of mobility re‡ects most importantly the equilibrium enrollment rates under the di¤erent

plans.   Additionally, the mobility patterns are quite similar in shape, with substantial gains in

the …rst two generations (achieving roughly 60 percent of the steady-state level). This increasing

mobility with generations largely results from the imperfect transmission of ability and not from

di¤erential e¤ects of the programs.

   Third, while the aggregate results are interesting, it is useful to trace the exact pattern of

subsidies to people in di¤erent parts of the income distribution. Figure 12 displays the net subsidy

under di¤erent schemes with varying tax rates according the distribution of outcomes for the

children.   Speci…cally, the average tuition discount and taxes paid by the child once she enters

the labor market are given for each decile of the children’s income distribution. The schemes are

quite di¤erent with the incidence of the net subsidies for merit programs being almost the inverse

of those for uniform programs or need based programs. The uniform subsidy and the need based

subsidy in general use net taxes on upper income people to subsidize people in the 2nd through

6th deciles of the distribution.   But, in both cases and particularly at lower tax rates/program

sizes, children in the bottom decile also pay a net tax, in large part because they seldom attend

                                                 24
                            Fig. 11: Parent-Offspring Evolution of Education
                                   Under Varying Subsidies (tau=0.8)
                     0.50
Prob(child educated|mom




                     0.40
      uneducated)




                     0.30



                     0.20
                             0              2              4            6               8         10
                                                            Generations
                          uniform tuition       constant means-tested       linear means-tested   merit aid   no government
Figure 12. Distribution of net subsidies by income decile of the child

                                      (a) Uniform subsidy

   0.030
   0.020
   0.010
                                                                                      0.80%
   0.000
                                                                                      1.60%
  -0.010    1st    2nd    3rd    4th     5th    6th    7th    8th     9th     10th
  -0.020
  -0.030



                                       (b) Merit subsidy

   0.030

   0.020

   0.010                                                                              0%
                                                                                      0.80%
   0.000                                                                              1.60%
             1st   2nd    3rd    4th     5th    6th    7th    8th    9th     10th
  -0.010

  -0.020



                                (c) Need based subsidy

   0.030
   0.020
   0.010                                                                             0%
   0.000                                                                             0.80%
  -0.010     1st   2nd    3rd   4th      5th   6th    7th    8th    9th     10th     1.60%
  -0.020
  -0.030
school but end up paying for a portion of the redistribution through taxes. The merit system on

the other hand systematically rewards people at the top of the ability distribution –exactly those

who most often succeed at school and who earn the most in the labor market. (At high subsidy,

however, the top decile will pay net taxes related to their high incomes).

   If these incidence pictures were drawn for parents income, the usual object of policy discussions,

the pictures would be qualitatively the same. The biggest di¤erence is higher and more extensive

net taxes on the bottom two deciles of the mother’s income distribution.

   Finally, it is useful to follow exactly what groups are better o¤ and which are worse o¤ when the

subsidies are introduced. In the general equilibrium economy, a variety of forces are operating. The

previous discussions described the patterns of net subsidies by the income distribution, but it is also

possible to describe how people situated in di¤erent parts of the ability-bequest distribution fare

under the subsidies. The largest winners under the subsidy schemes are high ability constrained

people who could not attend school without intervention. But the government actions also improve

the e¢ ciency of the economy, while leading to some substantial changes in wages for both educated

and uneducated. To understand the total impact, we compare the no-government economy with

varying levels of uniform subsidies (for     up to 1.8 percent).    In all cases, the consistent loser

from introducing the subsidy is the group of unconstrained people (in the no-government case) who

would attend college without any intervention. For them, wages fall and taxes increase su¢ ciently

to overcome any bene…ts of paying lower tuition.       Among the remaining unconstrained groups,

both those who go to school with the subsidy and those who do not attend school in any case gain.

The latter group is interesting, because their wage improvements are su¢ cient to cover any taxes to

subsidize others. Finally, initially constrained people who do not attend college even with subsidies

gain with smaller programs (where wage gains exceed taxes), but lose with larger programs (where

the opposite holds).    These results reinforce the importance of considering signi…cant subsidy

policies in a general equilibrium setting, where the changes in wages and overall performance of the

economy have signi…cant impacts.



                                                  25
4    Concluding Remarks

In order to understand the potential role of government intervention into college education it is

important to consider the implications of borrowing constraints.     Without passing judgment on

the importance of such constraints, we …nd that they provide strong justi…cation for some kind

of governmental intervention into college …nance.     At the same time, not all policies have the

same bene…ts. We trace the implications of common policies for both the level and distribution of

outcomes in the economy.

    A key analytical aspect of this work is the use of a dynamic general equilibrium framework.

College policies have signi…cant impacts on the schooling and skills of the workers in the economy,

and the impact of these policies on wages cannot be ignored. Moreover, the focus of many policy

proposals toward college education is the potential impact on economic mobility across generations.

These issues cannot be addressed within the common static, partial equilibrium framework.

    The results highlight the distributional e¢ ciency implications of college subsidies, re‡ecting

the continuing importance of such issues in the public policy debate.      In a world with budget

constraints, the overall e¢ ciency of the economy can clearly be helped by …nding mechanisms that

allow high ability but poor children to attend school.   In most respects this is easiest and most

e¢ ciently done with need-based policies.    Merit based policies, while often motivated more by

individual institutions competing for students, perform quite poorly in terms of the distributional

implications.

    Income contingent loans, which have become quite popular, have considerable appeal compared

to much of the current policy debate. The current policy debate often focuses entirely on parental

income, neglecting the potentially large variance in the child’s future income.    Nonetheless, the

design of these schemes is especially important.     With no government subsidy, any insurance

elements of the program –guarding against low income realizations –must be paid for by others in

the risk pool. This implies the potential for considerable adverse selection: people who expect high

incomes will enter the pool only if they have to borrow the money. In our world, the smart but

constrained individuals subsidize less smart people who are both constrained and unconstrained.
                                                26
   Our e¤orts take polar cases of subsidies and consider their implications.    Nothing precludes

mixing policies to obtain multiple objectives in an e¢ cient way. Indeed, the programs currently in

existence (see Kane (1999) and Congressional Budget O¢ ce (2004)) include elements of all of the

programs we consider. The analysis here suggests a way to add up the various programs and to

ascertain the full short and long run implications.




                                                 27
                                                             Appendix


A         First Best Policy
In the main model, we have presumed imperfect capital markets. For comparison, we can also
consider the following scenario with government-supported tuition loan. For agents who would
enroll, suppose that they can borrow against their future, i.e. anybody can borrow as much
as they want (say m ) and pay back with an interest (1 + r) m: The interest rate r is set
to be 1 + r = 1 , so that borrowings purely for intertemporal substitution of consumption is not
pro…table. Thus, if an agent would like to borrow for college, it serves only to close the gap between
the amount of tuition and the bequest to the child, m = b : It means that, for an agent who would
borrow to go to college, EU b (x0 ; b) = b     + m + [x0 (U e0 (1 + r)m) +(1 x0 )(U u0 (1 + r)m)]
=b              0  e0           0  u0
         + (x U + (1 x )U ), as (1 + r) = 1; which is exactly equal to the expected utility
for agents who do not need to borrow. In other words, the existence of government loan erases the
di¤ erence in incentives for those who are …nancially constrained and those who are not.
    A child of type (x0 ; b) attends college if EU e (x0 ; b) EU u (x0 ; b) (i.e. x x ). Since the interest
rate exactly o¤sets the discount factor, those who are not …nancially constrained (b           ) would not
borrow. For a …nancially constrained agent (b < ), the amount of borrowing is b               : And recall
that b = (1     )(1     ) kx [we I e + wu (1 I e )] b (x; I e ) : Let I b be an indicator function,
which only takes on value zero and one,

                                                              1 if b (x; I e )
                                                   Ib =                              :
                                                              0 otherwise

Hence, the amount of total loans made at time t41
                     X Z Z                        P rob(x0 ; I e0 = 1jx; I e )
            T Lt                 1 I b (b       )                0
                                                                               f (x; I e )dxdx0 :
                   e
                                                              x
                                   I 2f0;1g




B        The Transmission of Ability
To determine the transmission of ability, we consider the test scores of parents (mothers) and
children. Our data are extracted from NLSY79 and NLSY79 Children Cohorts of National Lon-
gitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY). The NLSY79 is a nationally representative sample of 12; 686
young men and women who were 14 to 22 years of age when …rst surveyed in 1979. The dataset in-
cludes the 1980 administration of the Armed Forces Vocational Aptitude Battery (ASVAB), which
is used to create Armed Forces Quali…cations Test (AFQT) Scores, as well as the highest grade
they attended and their age at the time the survey conducted. We converted the AFQT scores
in percentiles into the standardized test scores. To eliminate the bias due to age and schooling
di¤erence, we calculated the e¤ect of age and schooling and regression adjusted the AFQT scores
to their predicted values when young men and women were 23 years of age.
  41
       Notice      that      P rob(x0 ; I e0 = 1jx; I e )f (x; I e ) only includes   those   succeeding   in   education;   while
P rob(x0 ;I e0 =1jx;I e )
          x0
                          f (x; I e )
                                   also includes those who enroll but fail.

                                                                   28
    The NLSY79 Child Sample consists of all children born to female NLSY79 respondents who
completed an interview during the even-year interviews beginning in 1986. The dataset includes
Peabody Individual Achievement Test (PIAT), which measures ability in Math, Reading Recog-
nition, and Reading Comprehension. We used PIAT scores when pupils were 14 years of age and
standardized the Math, Reading Recognition, and Reading Comprehension scores to percentiles.
As a measure of the ability of a child, the average of those three scores are taken.
    We chose family income as a proxy for the family background. Family income is calculated by
taking the average of CPI-adjusted income before the year the pupil took the test42 . We estimated
the following Galtonian Regression (1886),

                                              x0 =    0   +    1x   +

    Table A1 reports the …ndings where the sample is divided by income quartiles. It is evident that
a pupil and her mother’s ability are correlated. The smarter a mother is, the more likely the pupil
would be of high ability. Regression based on income quartiles provides support for a well-known
fact -the importance of family background in the ability formation. The transmission of ability
appears roughly constant across quartiles. We also looked at the residual plots to con…rm that
errors are normally distributed. We employ the fact that x0 jx has a normal distribution. Figure
A1 depicts the steady-state distribution of ability by schooling completion for our model.

                               Full                  By         Quartile
                             Sample            Bottom               2nd            3rd            Top
     Constant              -0.05 (1.62)     -0.31 (4.28)        -0.05 (0.79)   0.05 (1.03)    0.13 (1.84)
     Mother’s Ability      0.40 (14.1)      0.27 (4.52)         0.35 (5.53)    0.31 (4.82)    0.30 (4.20)
     Sample Size               814               301                215            159            139
     R2                        0.20             0.06                0.13           0.13           0.11

   The point estimates with “ ” are statistically signi…cant at 5% level and the t-statistics are in
the parenthesis.




  42
     The change in family income due to a later change in the family background such as divorce would have nothing
to do a pupil’s achievement.
                                                          29
                 Figure A1. Stationary Distributions of Ability by
                             Educational Attainm ent

         0.014

         0.012

         0.010

         0.008
                                                               all
f(x,e)




                                                               college educated
         0.006
                                                               uneducated
         0.004

         0.002

         0.000

                 0   0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9   1
                                  ability (x)
References

Adelman, Clifford, Bruce Daniel, Ilona Berkovits, and Jeffrey Owings. 2003.
      Postsecondary attainment, attendance, curriculum, and performance: Selected
      results from the NELS:88/2000 Postsecondary Education Transcript Study
      (PETS), 2000. Washington, DC: National Center for Education Statistics
      (September).

Banerjee, Abhijit V. forthcoming 2004. "Educational policy and the economics of the
       family." Journal of Development Economics.

Barr, Nicholas. 1989. Student Loans: The Next Steps. Great Britain: Aberdeen University
       Press.

———. 2001. The Welfare State as Piggy Bank: Information, Risk, Uncertainty, and the
   Role of the State. United States: Oxford University Press.

Becker, Gary S. 1993. Human capital: A theoretical and empirical analysis, with special
       reference to education. 3rd ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Original
       edition, 1964.

Becker, Gary S., and Nigel Tomes. 1979. "An equilibrium theory of the distribution of
       income and intergenerational mobility." Journal of Political Economy 87,no.6
       (December):1153-1189.

———. 1986. "Human capital and the rise and fall of families." Journal of Labor
   Economics 4,no.3, pt. II (July):S1-S39.

Behrman, Jere R., and Mark R. Rosenzweig. 2004. "Parental allocations to children: New
      evidence on bequest differences among siblings." Review of Economics and
      Statistics 86,no.2 (May):637-640.

Benabou, Roland. 2002. "Tax and education policy in a heterogeneous-agent economy:
      What levels of redistribution maximize growth and efficiency?" Econometrica
      70,no.2 (March):481-517.

Ben-Porath, Yoram. 1970. "The Production of Human Capital Over Time." In Education,
      Income and Human Capital, edited by W. Lee Hansen. New York: National
      Bureau of Economic Research:129-147.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, and Sergei Severinov. 2003. "Bequests as signals: An explanation
      for the equal division puzzle." Journal of Political Economy 111,no.4
      (August):733-764.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, Andrei Shleifer, and Lawrence H. Summers. 1985. "The strategic
      bequest motive." Journal of Political Economy 93,no.6 (December):1045-76.

Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes. 2003. "Why the apple doesn't
       fall far: Understanding intergenerational transmission of human capital." NBER
       Working Paper No. w10066, National Bureau of Economic Research (November).

Cameron, Stephen V., and James J. Heckman. 1999. "Can tuition policy combat rising
      wage inequality?" In Financing college tuition: Government policies and
      educational priorities, edited by Marvin H. Kosters. Washington, DC: The AEI
      Press:76-124.

———. 2001. "The dynamics of educational attainment for Black, Hispanic and White
   males." Journal of Political Economy 109,no.3 (June):455-499.

Carneiro, Pedro, and James J. Heckman. 2002. "The evidence on credit constraints in
       post-secondary schooling." Economic Journal 112(October):705-734.

Caucutt, Elizabeth M., and Krishna B. Kumar. 2003. "Higher education subsidies and
       heterogeneity: A dynamic analysis." Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control
       27,no.8 (June):1459-1502.

Chapman, Bruce. 1997. "Conceptual issues and the Australian experience with income
     contingent charges for higher education." Economic Journal 107,no.442
     (May):738-751.

Congressional Budget Office. 2004. Private and public contributions to financing college
      education. Washington, DC: Congressional Budget Office (January).

Cooley, Thomas, and Edward C. Prescott. 1995. "Economic growth and business cycles."
      In Frontiers of Business Cycle Research, edited by Thomas Cooley. Princeton:
      Princeton University Press.

Dresch, Stephen P. 1974. An Economic Perspective on the Evolution of Graduate
       Education. Washington, D.C.: National Board on Graduate Education

Dynan, Karen E., Jonathan Skinner, and Stephen P. Zeldes. 2002. "The importance of
      bequests and life-cycle saving in capital accumulation: A new answer." American
      Economic Review 92,no.2 (May):274-278.

Dynarski, Susan M. 2003. "Does aid matter? Measuring the effect of student aid on
      college attendance and completion." American Economic Review 93,no.1
      (March):279-288.
Epple, Dennis, Richard E. Romano, and Holger Sieg. 2003. "Peer Effects, Financial Aid,
       and Selection of Students into Colleges." Journal of Applied Econometrics
       18,no.5 (September/October).

Fender, John, and Ping Wang. 2003. "Educational policy in a credit contstrained
       economy with skill heterogeneity." International Economic Review 44,no.3
       (August):939-964.

Friedman, Milton. 1962. Capitalism and freedom. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Garratt, Rod, and John Marshall. 1994. "Public finance of private goods: The case of
        college education." Journal of Political Economy 103,no.3 (June):566-582.

Glomm, Gerhard, and B. Ravikumar. 1992. "Public vs. private investment in human
     capital: Endogenous growth and income inequality." Journal of Political
     Economy 100,no.4 (August):818-834.

Hanushek, Eric A. 2002. "Publicly provided education." In Handbook of Public
      Economics, edited by Alan J. Auerbach and Martin Feldstein. Amsterdam:
      Elsevier:2045-2141.

Hanushek, Eric A., Charles Ka Yui Leung, and Kuzey Yilmaz. 2003. "Redistribution
      through education and other transfer mechanisms." Journal of Monetary
      Economics 50,no.8 (November):1719-1750.

Hopenhayn, Hugo, and Edward C. Prescott. 1992. "Stochastic monotonicity for dynamic
      economics." Econometrica 60:1387-1406.

Iyigun, Murat F. 1999. "Public education and intergenerational economic mobility."
        International Economic Review 40,no.3 (August):697-710.

Kane, Thomas J. 1999. The Price of Admission: Rethinking How Americans Pay for
       College. Washington, D.C. and New York, NY: Brookings Institution Press and
       Russell Sage Foundation.

Keane, Michael, and Kenneth I. Wolpin. 2001. "The effects of parental transfers and
       borrowing constraints on educational attainment." International Economic Review
       42:1051-1103.

Loury, Glenn C. 1981. "Intergenerational transfers and the distribution of income."
       Econometrica 49,no.4:843-867.

McPherson, Michael S., and Morton Owen Schapiro. 1991. Keeping college affordable:
     Government and educational opportunity. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.
McPherson, Michael S., Morton Owen Schapiro, and Gordon C. Winston. 1993. Paying
     the piper: Productivity, incentives, and financing in U.S. higher education. Ann
     Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.

Mulligan, Casey B. 1999. "Galton versus the human capital approach to inheritance."
       Journal of Political Economy 107,no.6, pt. 2 (December):S184-S224.

Oreopoulos, Philip, Marianne E. Page, and Ann Huff Stevens. 2003. "Does human capital
      transfer from parent to child? The intergenerational effects of compulsory
      schooling." Working Paper No. 10164, National Bureau of Economic Research
      (December).

Solon, Gary. 1992. "Intergenerational income mobility in the United States." American
       Economic Review 82,no.3 (June):393-408.

Uhlig, Harald. 1996. "A law of large numbers for large economies." Economic Theory
       8,no.1:41-50.
