                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  THE IMPACT OF TRADE ON INTRAINDUSTRY
           REALLOCATIONS AND AGGREGATE INDUSTRY PRODUCTIVITY:
                               A COMMENT

                                         Richard E. Baldwin
                                       Frederic Robert-Nicoud

                                         Working Paper 10718
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10718


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2004




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2004 by Richard E. Baldwin and Frederic Robert-Nicoud. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of Trade on Intraindustry Reallocation and Aggregate Industry Productivity: A Comment
Richard E. Baldwin and Frederic Robert-Nicoud
NBER Working Paper No. 10718
August 2004
JEL No. H32, P16

                                           ABSTRACT

Melitz (2003) demonstrates that greater trade openness raises industry productivity via a selection

effect and via a production re-allocation effect. Our comment points out that the set-up assumed in

the Melitz model displays a trade off between static and dynamic efficiency gains. That is, although

freer trade improves industry productivity in a level sense, it harms it in a growth sense. To make

this point as simply as possible, we introduce a slight modification to the model that endogenises

the growth rate of industry productivity and we show that liberalisation slows growth.

Richard E. Baldwin
Graduate Institute of International Studies
Avenue de la Paix 11A
1202 Geneva, Switzerland
and NBER
baldwin@hei.unige.ch

Frederic Robert-Nicoud
Economics Department
University of Geneva
Boulevard du Pont Arve 40
1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland
robert@ecopo.unige.ch
                                                                                                           1

       The impact of trade on intraindustry reallocations and
                 aggregate industry productivity: a comment

                            Richard E. Baldwin and Frédéric Robert-Nicoud∗
                                                  July 2004


      ABSTRACT.

      Melitz (2003) demonstrates that greater trade openness raises industry productivity via a
      selection effect and via a production re-allocation effect. Our comment points out that
      the set-up assumed in the Melitz model displays a trade off between static and dynamic
      efficiency gains. That is, although freer trade improves industry productivity in a level
      sense, it harms it in a growth sense. To make this point as simply as possible, we
      introduce a slight modification to the model that endogenises the growth rate of industry
      productivity and we show that liberalisation slows growth.
      JEL H32, P16. Keywords: trade liberalisation, endogenous growth, heterogeneous
      firms, dynamic versus static efficiency.



                                 1. INTRODUCTION
Until the 1980s, ‘old’ trade theory assumed away intra-industry trade for simplicity’s sake, but
empirical evidence revealed that the bulk of world trade was exactly of the assumed-away kind. In
response, ‘new’ trade (Helpman and Krugman 1985) incorporated imperfect competition and
increasing returns to account for intraindustry trade. The ‘new’ trade modelling approaches
assumed away differences among firms for simplicity’s sake, but empirical evidence has recently
highlighted the fact that intra-firm differences are critical to understanding the data. In response,
Melitz (2003) created one branch of the ‘new new’ trade theory by incorporating firm-level
heterogeneity into general equilibrium trade models in a way that allows him to account for the
main firm-level facts (also see Helpman, Melitz and Yeaple 2004, Eaton and Kortum 2002,
Bernard, Eaton, Jensen and Kortum 2003, and Bernard, Jensen, and Schott, 2004).


∗
 Baldwin; Graduate Institute of International Studies, Avenue de la Paix 11A, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland,
http://heiwww.unige.ch/~baldwin, tel.+41 22 734-8950; fax:733-3049; Robert-Nicoud; Economics Department,
University of Geneva, Boulevard du Pont d’Arve 40, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland,
http://www.unige.ch/ses/ecopo/staff/robert/home.html, tel. +41 22 379-8272; fax: 379-8293.
                                                                                                          2
One of Melitz (2003)’s key result is to demonstrate that greater trade openness raises industry
productivity via a selection effect (lowering the maximum marginal cost of active firms) and via a
production re-allocation effect (production shifts to the most productive firms). Our comment points
out that the Melitz model is subject to a trade off between static and dynamic productivity gains. In
particular, although freer trade improves industry productivity in a level sense, it harms it in a
growth sense. Thus, Melitz’s positive openness-productivity correlation may hold within a sector
for some time, but need not hold across sectors. If econometricians use cross-section variation to
identify the openness-productivity relationship, the ‘Melitz model’ modified to allow for growth is
consistent with a negative openness-sectoral-productivity correlation.

To make this point as simply as possible, we work with a slightly modified Melitz model in which
both the level and growth of industry productivity are endogenous and affected by openness. The
rest of our comment is organised in two sections. The next presents a brief re-statement of the
Melitz model and the subsequent section presents a dynamic Melitz model and our main comment.
Formal details of the dynamic model are in the appendix.

                             2. THE MELITZ MODEL
The Melitz model combines heterogeneity in firm’s marginal costs with elements of the new trade
theory (Helpman and Krugman 1985) and its extension to include market-entry costs (Baldwin
1988, Baldwin and Krugman 1989, and Dixit 1988). His goal is to characterise how industry
competition and openness influence firms’ export behaviour and the distribution of their
productivity levels. Melitz (2003) works with identical nations, a single primary factor and a single
consumption-good sector. He focuses on the steady state equilibrium and ignores discounting, but
assumes firms face a constant probability of ‘death’ so present values remain finite (the hazard rate
is δ). The model is characterised by Dixit-Stiglitz monopolistic competition and iceberg trade costs
(selling one unit in the export market requires shipment of τ≥1 units). Marginal production costs are
constant but increasing returns arise from three fixed costs paid just prior to production. All firms
face the standard Dixit-Stiglitz fixed cost of developing a new variety, but selling their variety also
requires them to pay fixed costs to enter each market. These fixed market-entry costs – or
‘beachhead’ costs – reflect the cost of introducing a new variety into a market, e.g. the cost of
meeting market-specific standards and regulations, establishing a brand name, etc. These costs are
denoted as FD and FX for the local and export markets, respectively; we impose FX>FD in the focal
case.
                                                                                                         3
Our slightly modified version of the Melitz model adopts all the above assumptions but assumes
there are only two nations and that all three fixed costs are sunk.

                          2.1.   Equilibrium solutions and impact of freer trade
Symmetry of nations equalises wages, so taking labour as numeraire wages are unity and all
heterogeneity in firms’ marginal costs stem from differences in firms’ unit labour requirements,
which are denoted as ‘a’.

Standard Dixit-Stiglitz results tell us that a firm’s operating profit, denoted as π, equals its sales
times 1/σ where σ>1 is the constant elasticity of substitution among varieties. Sales depend upon a
firm’s market share and this is inversely proportional to its marginal cost. By the standard logic of
fixed costs, only firms with sufficiently low marginal costs will enjoy sales that justify the sunk
market-entry costs. Focusing on steady states, the relevant comparison is between the present value
of operating profit and the sunk market-entry costs. Given the constant firm-death rate, δ, the
present value is just π/δ, so the cut-off levels of marginal cost are defined by:

                           E                           E
(1)             s[a D ]      = FD ;        s[τa X ]      = FX
                          σδ                          σδ
where aD and aX are the cut-off marginal costs for entering the local market and the export market,
respectively, E is expenditure, and s[⋅] is the Dixit-Stiglitz market share function:

                1 a1−σ                  aD                      aX
(2)     s[a] = ( )     ;         ∆ = ( ∫ a1−σ f [a ]da + τ 1−σ ∫ a1−σ f [a]da ;
                n ∆                    0                        0


where n is the mass of active firms, ∆ is Melitz’s definition of average productivity – ϕ in his
notation – as well as the denominator of the standard CES demand function, f[a] is the distribution
of firm’s a’s, n is the mass of active firms and τ>1 is the iceberg trade cost. An intuitive
interpretation of (2) is that a firm’s market share deviates from 1/n to the extent its marginal cost, a,
deviates from the average, ∆. The two cut-off marginal costs define three types of varieties: N-
types, D-type and X-type. Varieties with marginal costs greater than aD are non-producers (N-
types), those with marginal costs less than aX enter both markets (X-types), and those with marginal
costs between aD and aX enter only their domestic market (D-types).

I-sector. Standard new trade models assume firm-level productivity is identical across all firms,
so there is no need to explicitly model its determination. The whole point of the Melitz model,
however, is to endogenise the distribution of firm-level marginal costs, so he explicitly models the
                                                                                                                        4
process by which new technologies are generated and selected. Melitz (2003) implicitly considers
the development of new varieties as part of a firm’s activity. However, intuition in served by
treating variety development more explicitly. To this end, we introduce an artificial innovation
sector (I-sector for short) and re-interpret the sunk costs. This re-interpretation entails no loss of
generality in the static Melitz model, but that allows us to transition easily to a dynamic Melitz
model in the next section.

The perfectly competitive I-sector makes and sells ‘patents’ for new varieties. I-firms first develop
the fundamental knowledge behind a new variety and then, if warranted, they also invent the
knowledge necessary to meet the market-entry costs, e.g. the knowledge necessary to adapt the
variety to market-specific standards and regulations. In particular, creating a new variety requires FI
units of knowledge, while adapting it to local and export market conditions requires FD units and FX
units of knowledge, respectively.

Choosing units of knowledge carefully, and assuming constant returns in knowledge production, the
F’s can be taken as fixed costs measured in units of labour as in the Melitz model. Since our I-sector
is Walrasian, we could equally well think of its activities as undertaken internally by manufacturing
firms, as Melitz does.

Following Melitz (2003), the variety-innovation process is stochastic. Development of a new
variety always requires FI units of knowledge, but it is stochastic in the sense that the marginal cost
associated with the new variety – as measured by its associated ‘a’ – is drawn from a Pareto
distribution whose the cumulative density function is:1

                                a k
(3)                 G[a ] = (      )          0 ≤ a ≤ a0
                                a0
where k and a0 are the ‘shape’ and ‘scale’ parameters, respectively; without loss of generality, we
choose units such that a0=1. After developing a new variety, the I-sector firm checks the associated
‘a’ to determine the variety’s type. N-types are abandoned, but the innovator sinks a further FD for
D-types and FD+FX for X-types. The patents are sold at competitive prices, namely the present value
of the variety’s operating profit.2




1
    See Melitz (2003) for analysis with more general distributions.
2
    Given (1) and (2) these values are vN=0, vD=a1-σE/n∆σδ, and vX=(1+φ)a1-σE/n∆σδ for a’s in the appropriate ranges.
                                                                                                                       5
Given (3) and the law of large numbers, I-firms face no aggregate uncertainty and produce the
three types of varieties in constant proportions.1 The fraction of N-types is 1-G[aD], where G[⋅]; the
fractions of X-type and D-types are G[aX] and G[aD]-G[aX], respectively. Given the frequency of
the three types, a typical I-sector firm’s pure profit is proportional to:2

                          E                                              G[a X ]FX    FI
(4)               Π I =              − F  = 0 ;         F ≡ FD +                 +
                          nσ δ                                            G[a D ]    G[a D ]

where the first term in parentheses is the ex ante expected profit on a ‘winning’ variety, and F is
the expected fixed cost of a ‘winner’.3 F consists of FD (for all winners) plus FX times the
probability of an X-type (conditional on it being a winner) plus the expected development cost of
getting a winner, which is FI times 1/G[aD]. Free entry drives ΠI to zero as indicated.

To replace the dying varieties, the I-sector produces a measure of new varieties equal to δn, so I-
firms continually sample an infinite number of times from (3). By the law of large numbers and (3),
the distribution of a’s among active firms is therefore:1

                                       a k −1
(5)                          f [a ] = k k
                                       aD

Melitz (2003) shows that the lack of pure profits implies:

(6)                         E=L

Note that the cut-off marginal costs are chosen to maximise I-sector profit but the mass of active
firms per nation, n, rises to eliminate ex ante pure profit in innovation. Thus, the three equilibrium
variables, aD, aX and n, are defined by the two cut-off conditions, (1), and the zero profit condition
(4). Calculations are facilitated by solving ∆ from (2) using (5) and (6), and identifying the ratio of
cut-offs from (1) using (2). Thus:

                                                                       1
             β a1D−σ                a                 a X 1 FD σ −1                   k
(7)       ∆=            1 + τ 1−σ ( X )1−σ + k  ;      = ( ) ;               β≡        >1
             β −1                   aD                aD τ FX                       σ −1
The regularity condition β >1 ensures that the integrals converge. Employing (7), the aD cut-off
condition implies:


1
  We are dealing with a continuum of varieties, so the I-sector produces an uncountable infinity of varieties every
period, so, by the Central Limit theorem, there is no aggregate uncertainty.
2
  Total sector profits are δn times ΠI, since δn is the steady-state sectoral output.
3
  Total operating profit per nation is E/σ, so the expected operating profit per firm, before ‘a’ is known, is E/σn.
                                                                                                                6
                          L( β − 1) / FD                                    FX 1− β
(8)                  n=                  ;                 0 ≤ Ω ≡ τ −k (      ) ≤1
                          δ σ β (1 + Ω)                                     FD
where Ω (mnemonic for ‘openness’) measures the combined protective effects of higher export-
market entry costs and iceberg trade costs (Ω=0 with infinite τ and/or FX/FD, Ω=1 with free trade
and FX=FD).

From (8), E/σnδ equals βFD(1+Ω)/(β-1), so the fact that G[aX]/G[aD] equals (τ1/1-σFD/FX)k and
G[aD]=(aD/a0)k allow us to solve the zero profit condition (4) for aD. We get:

                                                 1/ k                              1/ k
                          ( β − 1) FI / FD                    Ω( β − 1) FI / FX 
(9)                 aD =                              , aX =                          < aD
                               1+ Ω                                1+ Ω         
Here we have also used the solution for aD together with the solution for aD/aX in (7) to get the
solution for aX. A first main result of the Melitz model is:

Result 1: Only some firms export; exporting firms are larger and have higher productivity.

                                  2.2.       Productivity effects of liberalisation
A major finding of Melitz (2003) is that trade liberalisation raises industry productivity. His
analysis focuses on average productivity expressed in physical units of output per unit of labour
since all varieties are measured in the same units. Physical output cannot be added across varieties
in most industries, so econometricians typically rely on measured productivity, namely the per
worker value of a firm’s output divided by a producer price index. Total sales and labour input per
nation are E and L respectively, so the value of sales per worker is E/L=1 from (6) (by (4), the flow
of operating profit exactly pays for I-sector labour needed to replace dying varieties). The producer
                                             aD
price index for national firms is n ∫ (a /(1 − 1 / σ )1−σ f [a]da raised to the power of 1/(1-σ). Solving
                                             0

the integral, measured labour productivity is the inverse of the price index, where this equals
aD(βn/(β-1)1/(1-σ) times (1-1/σ)(σ-1). Using (9), measured labour productivity is:

                                                                                                      1−1 / β
                                                      1              1+ Ω                       
(10)                 avg measured productivity = n(1 − ) σ −1                                  
                                                      σ         ( β − 1) FI / FD                 
where n is given by (8). Since freer trade lowers aD and n, we have the main Melitz finding:

Result 2: Freer trade raises an industry’s average productivity level.
This result also holds for a productivity measured in terms of physical units of output.


1
    See Melitz (2003) for a more formal proof.
                                                                                                                    7
    3. STATIC VERSUS DYNAMIC PRODUCTIVITY GAINS: A DYNAMIC MELITZ MODEL
Our main comment is that the set-up assumed in the Melitz model displays a trade off between
static and dynamic efficiency gains under standard assumptions. That is, although freer trade
improves industry productivity in a level sense, it harms it in a growth sense. To make this point as
simply as possible, we introduce a slight modification to the model that endogenises the growth rate
of industry productivity.

The only modification necessary concerns the assumption of constant returns in Melitz’s innovation
technology. More specifically, using our re-interpretation of Melitz’s assumptions, we assume that
knowledge generation is subject to a sector-wide learning curve, so that the marginal cost (in terms
of labour) of knowledge falls as the cumulative output of knowledge rises. The assumed knowledge
production function and learning curve are (see Grossman and Helpman 1991 and Romer 1990 for a
justification based on knowledge spillovers):

                                           1
(11)                                bI =
                                           n

where this assumes that the relevant cumulated learning is proportional to the stock of ‘active’
varieties (i.e. innovators gain cost-lowering experience only from ‘winning varieties’ and the
relevance of the experience depreciates along with the varieties). Our results would carry through
qualitatively even if we took the world stock of varieties, 2n, or the stock of consumed varieties in a
typical country, so we stick with (11) since it is standard in the endogenous growth literature.

Given (11), the average units of labour needed to developed an active variety is bI F , so with a
constant death-rate of δ, n grows according to (see appendix for details):

(12)              g = LI / F     − δ

where g is the growth rate of n, and LI is I-sector employment, and F is defined in (4). Since n
grows at the steady-state rate of ‘g’, operating profits of the average firms, namely E/σn, fall at the
rate g. An income stream that falls at g and is discounted at δ has a present value of π/(δ+g) 1. Thus,
the I-sector’s free entry condition is (using (6) since it still holds):

                                       L               
(13)                       Π I =              − bI F  = 0
                                   nσ (δ + g )         


1
 For example, the ex ante expected operating profit per variety is E/σn; with n growing at g and a constant death
probability of δ, the present value is ∫e-(δ+g)(E/σn)dt. Integrating from t=0 to infinity yields the result.
                                                                                                         8
Note that falling sunk costs have no impact on the cut-off points in (9) since all the sunk costs fall
in tandem as the marginal cost of knowledge drops with learning. Also, note that n cancels out from
the new free entry condition, (13), since bI=1/n. Thus, in the dynamic Melitz model the growth of n
rises to eliminate pure profits just as the level of n did in the static Melitz model. Solving (13):

                                   L                         βFD (1 + Ω)
(14)                         g=      −δ ;            F=
                                  σF                           β −1

where we have used the equilibrium expressions for the cut-offs to simplify F . By inspection of the
expression for average measured productivity (10), average productivity grows at a rate of g. To
summarise, we write:

Result 3: Freer trade slows the growth rate of new varieties since it raises the expected fixed
cost of an active variety, bI F , without affecting the expected reward. Consequently, average
measured productivity grows more slowly.
The static versus dynamic productivity trade off is schematically illustrated in Figure 1.

Figure 1: Static versus dynamic productivity effects of freer trade



  Average
  measured
  productivity   liberalisation             Pre-liberalisation path

                                            Post-liberalisation
                                            path




                                                                  time




Note that if the econometrician can add physical units across varieties and defines average
productivity as ∆, then the growth rate of n has no effect on average productivity. In this case, the
Melitz prediction holds without modification, even in the dynamic version.

                                     3.1.     Extension to many sectors
As is well know from Grossman and Helpman (1991), it is simple to put multiple sectors into this
sort of dynamic model. If consumers have Cobb-Douglas preferences, and learning and trade costs
                                                                                                         9
are sector specific, each sector will have its own sector-specific growth rate. Given this, and Figure
1, there will be a tendency for the (historically) most closed sectors to be the most productive. Thus,

Result 4: The Melitz prediction of a positive correlation between openness and productivity
levels may hold within an industry over time, but might not hold across sectors.

                                  REFERENCES
Baldwin, Richard E. (1988). "Hysteresis in Import Prices: The Beachhead Effect," American
       Economic Review, 78, 4, pp 773-785.
Baldwin, Richard E. and Paul Krugman (1989). "Persistent Trade Effects of Large Exchange Rate
       Shocks," Quarterly Journal of Economics, pp 635-654, No. 419.
Bernard, Andrew, Jonathan Eaton, J. Bradford Jensen, and Peter Schott (2003). “Falling Trade
       Costs, Heterogeneous Firms and Industry Dynamics”, mimeo, Tuck
Bernard, Andrew, J. Bradford Jensen, and Samuel Kortum (2003). “Plants and productivity in
       international trade”, American Economic Review, 93, 4, 1268-1290.
Dixit, Avinash (1988). "Entry and exit decisions under uncertainty," Journal of Political Economy,
       97, 4, pp 620-638.
Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum (2002). “Technology, Geography and Trade,” Econometrica,
       70, 5, pp 1741-1780.
Grossman, Gene and Elhanan Helpman. (1991). Innovation and Growth in the World Economy.
       Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Helpman, Elhanan and Paul Krugman (1985), Market structure and Trade, MIT Press.
Helpman, Elhanan, Marc Melitz and Stephen Yeaple (2004). “Export versus FDI with
       heterogeneous firms,” American Economic Review, 94, 1, pp. 300-317.
Melitz, M. (2003). “The impact of trade on intraindustry reallocations and aggregate industry
       productivity,” Econometrica, 71, pp 1695-1725.
Romer, Paul (1990). “"Endogenous Technological Change," Journal of Political Economy, 98, S71-
       S102.
                                                                                                        10

Appendix A:              THE DYNAMIC MELITZ MODEL
This appendix presents and analyses the dynamic versions of the Melitz model more formally and
more completely. The basic assumptions concerning the static economy are described in Section 2
of the main text.

                                       A.1      Extra assumptions
As noted in the text, the only assumptions needed to make the Melitz model dynamic concern the
innovation technology and these are introduced in the main text. Here we provide a fuller
motivation.

Without loss of generality in the static model, we interpret the three fixed costs in the static Melitz
model as involving units of knowledge capital that are created by an ‘innovation sector’ (I-sector).
Specifically, the I-sector produces one unit of knowledge capital with bI units of L, so the marginal
cost of a unit of knowledge is bI. In the static model, bI=1. In the dynamic model, bI is a parameter
to individual I-firms, but it is generated by a sector-wide learning curve à la endogenous growth
literature (Romer 1990, and Grossman and Helpman 1991). That is, the marginal cost of producing
new knowledge declines as the sector's cumulative learning rises. Many justifications of this
intertemporal externality are possible. Romer (1990), for instance, rationalizes it by referring to the
non-rival nature of knowledge. Grossman and Helpman (1991) assert that it reflects the impact of
‘public knowledge’ that is created automatically along with the private, patentable knowledge. Here
we assume that learning only occurs from ‘winning’ varieties, i.e. D-types and X-types, and that the
relevance of the learning depreciates along with the knowledge capital itself, so the learning curve
is bI=1/n (i.e. the marginal cost of a developing a new variety falls as n rises).

Given the learning curve, I-sector labour, LI, produces a steady flow of new knowledge capital, with
the flow equal to LI/bI. The corresponding flow of winning varieties is this flow divided by the
average number of knowledge units per winning variety, namely F from (4). The change in the
number of active varieties is the gross creation, LI / bI F , less the depreciation loss, δn, i.e.:


(15)            g ≡ LI / F    −δ
where g is the growth rate of n. Importantly, the learning curve in knowledge creation means that
although the fixed costs in terms of units of knowledge, i.e. F , are time-invariant, in terms of the
numeraire, i.e. bI F they fall at the rate that ‘n’ rises.
                                                                                                               11
We assume an infinitely lived representative consumer (in each country) with preferences:

                                                                                        1
                             ∞
                                                                                   1−1 / σ
(16)            U=           ∫e
                                   − ρt
                                           ln Cdt ;          C =  ∫ c i1−1 / σ di 
                                                                                  
                            t =0                                  i∈Θ             
where ρ is the rate of time preference, σ is the constant elasticity of substitution among varieties,
and Θ is the set of produced varieties. Utility optimisation yields demand functions and an optimal
expenditure path that is characterised by a transversality condition and the standard Euler equation:

(17)             ED / E = r − ρ

where ‘r’ is the rate of return on investment. Expenditure on goods equals income less investment in
new knowledge capital, where income equals labour income L plus all operating profit E/σ, and
investment, in units of the numeraire, is LI. Thus, we have:

                             L − LI
(18)             E=
                            1 − 1/ σ

                      A.2                 Choice of state variable and equilibrium calculations
Although the equilibrium is unaffected by the choice of state variables, the ease of calculation
depends greatly on this choice. We choose LI as the state variable. Given this, (15), (17) and (18),
this choice implies that ‘g’ and E will be time invariant in steady state and r=ρ. This model has no
transitional dynamics, so g, r and E are always time invariant except perhaps just after parameter
changes. To summarise, our choice of state variable implies:

Result 5: Expenditure, E, the discount rate, r, and the growth rate of varieties, g, are all time-
invariant along the steady state growth path.
As we shall see, the growth rate rises up to the point where pure profit in innovation is eliminated,
so the first step is to calculate the pure profit of an I-firm and this, in turn, requires us to pin down
the cut-off levels of marginal cost. This was discussed in passing in the main text; here we review
the determination of the cut-offs in more detail.

The present value of selling to the local market is:

                     ∞                     s[a, t ]E
                 ∫0
                         {e − ( ρ +δ ) t
                                              σ
                                                       }dt                     aD ≤ a ≤ a X


since e-ρt reflects the classic discounting and e-δt is the probability that the variety is still alive at t
given the Poisson firm-death process; ∆ is time invariant, but s[a] depends upon time since n does.
Specifically:
                                                                                                         12
                              1 a1−σ      β aD1−σ        a X 1−σ + k 
                                                  1 + φ ( )
                                                                                       gt
(19)            s[t ; a] = (      )  ; ∆=                              ; n[t ] = n0 e
                             n[t ] ∆       β −1          aD          
Since n grows at the rate of ‘g’, the time integral is trivial to solve.

Simplifying and performing similar calculations for the present value for exporting, the D-type and
X-type cut-off conditions are almost identical to those in the static model, (1), with the discount rate
equal to δ+ρ+g instead of just δ. Specifically:

                s[a D ]E / σ              s[τa X ] E / σ
(20)                         = bI FD ;                   = bI FX
                δ +ρ+g                     δ +ρ+g

where s[a] is defined as in (19). Importantly, both the left-hand and right-hand sides of both cut-off
conditions involve 1/n, so the level of n cancels out. From Result 5 all other elements are time-
invariant, so the cut-off levels of marginal cost, aD and aX, are time invariant along the steady state
growth path. To summarise:

Result 6: The cut-offs, aD and aX, are time invariant along the steady state growth path.
Next, we turn to calculating the present value of new varieties. An I-firm that has sunk bIFI units of
labour to develop a new variety will inspect the associated ‘a’ and invest a further bIFD or bI(FX+FX)
in order to maximise the value of its innovation. Specifically, if the associated marginal cost is too
high (a>aD), the variety is dropped; if aD>a>aX only bIFD is invested, and if a<aX then bI(FX+FX) is
invested. The value of the resulting variety as a function of its associated marginal cost is:

                vN = 0                                     aD < a
                               a 1−σ E
(21)            v D [a] =                                   aD ≤ a ≤ a X
                            σ∆(δ + ρ + g )
                             (1 + φ )a1−σ E
                v X [a] =                                   a ≤ aX
                            σ∆(δ + ρ + g )

where ∆ is defined by (19). Intuition is served by noticing that the ex ante expected present value of
a ‘winning’ variety is much simpler. Total operating profit per period per market per firm is just
E/nσ. This falls at a rate of g, is discounted at a rate of ρ and dies with a probability of δ, so the
present value of a winner is E/nσ(δ+ρ+g). Pure profit per ‘winner’ thus equals this present value
less the expected fixed cost necessary to get a winner, which in terms of the numeraire is:

                                              aX k       a
(22)                     bI F ≡ bI ( FD + (      ) FX + ( 0 ) k FI )
                                              aD         aD
                                                                                                       13
given (3). The cut-off marginal costs are chosen to maximise I-sector profit but the growth rate of
active firms per nation, g, rises to eliminate ex ante pure profit in the innovation sector. The zero I-
sector profit condition is:

                                     E /σ              
(23)                     Π I =                − bI F  = 0
                                 n(δ + ρ + g )         

The three equilibrium variables, aD, aX and g, are defined by the two cut-off conditions, (20) and the
zero profit condition (23). As in the static model, calculations are facilitated by identifying the ratio
of cut-offs from (20):

                a X 1 FD σ 1−1     k
(24)               = ( ) ≤1 ; β ≡      >1
                aD τ FX           σ −1
We find aD from the zero profit condition (23) by noting that from (20), (19) and (24), E/σn(δ+ρ+g)
equals βbIFD(1+Ω)/(β -1), and using (24) in the expected fixed cost in (22), we can isolate aD since
G[aD]=(aD/a0)k. Solving and simplifying, and recalling our normalization a0=1, we get:

                                         1/ k
                       ( β − 1) FI / FD 
(25)             aD =                   
                            1+ Ω        
This is identical to aD in the static Melitz model. Using this and (24), we see that the formula for aX
is also identical to that of the static Melitz model.
The equilibrium growth rate of n is solved from (23) using our solutions for aD and aX, this yields:

                      E                               βFD (1 + Ω)
(26)            g=      −δ − ρ;                 F =
                     σF                                 β −1

All that is left is the calculation of the steady state E. As noted above, expenditure equals labour
income plus operating profit minus LI. From (23), total operating profit equals (δ + ρ + g) F and

from (15) we have LI equals (δ + g) F , thus we can write:


(27)            E = L + ρ nbI F
In other words, steady state expenditure equals ‘permanent income’ –labour income plus the interest
earned on ‘equity’. To see this, note that bI F is the average value of an active variety (due to zero
profit in the I-sector), so n times this is the value of the stock market (NB, nbI=1) and ρ times this is
the required reward for having postponed consumption. The static Melitz model ignores
discounting, i.e. sets ρ=0, so consumers/investors do not need to be compensated for foregone
                                                                                                   14
consumption and E=L. With this, (27) confirms the expression in the main text, (14). In the more
standard case of ρ>0, g is still diminishing in openness since F is more important in the
denominator of (26), and F rises as trade gets freer, i.e. as φ rises.
