                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             CORPORATE OWNERSHIP IN FRANCE:
                               THE IMPORTANCE OF HISTORY

                                            Antoin E. Murphy

                                          Working Paper 10716
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10716


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2004




My thanks to Michel Lutfalla, Roger Nougaret (Crédit Lyonnais), Cormac Ó Gráda (Department of
Economics, University College Dublin), Daniel Raff (Wharton School) and two anonymous referees for their
assistance with this paper. The usual disclaimer applies.The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Antoin E. Murphy. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Much Might Universal Health Insurance Reduce Socioeconomic Disparities in Health? A
Comparison of the US and Canada
Antoin E. Murphy
NBER Working Paper No. 10716
August 2004
JEL No. B1, Go, G3, N2

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper attempts to show the importance of history in influencing the structure of corporate

ownership in France. The strong concentration of family ownership in France is traced to historical

weaknesses in the money and capital markets that forced families to have recourse to self-financing.

The weaknesses in the money and capital markets were greatly influenced by two eighteenth century

financial traumas arising from John Law’s Mississippi System (1716-20) and the financing of the

French Revolution through the issue of the assignats in the 1790s.These financial traumas delayed

significantly the emergence of banks and the capital market. Further historical factors influencing

French corporate ownership were the changes in the inheritance law system at the start of the

nineteenth century and, more recently, the emphasis on a pay-as-you-go pension system.

Antoin E. Murphy
Department of Economics
Trinity College Dublin
Dublin 2
Ireland
aemurphy@tcd.ie
    The French model of corporate ownership and control is quite distinct from the Anglo-
American model. It has been described as an insider model because it contains a high degree of
concentration of ownership, while the wider dispersion of ownership characterised by the U.K.
and U.S. models has been termed an outsider model. Why are there such widely differing
models between France, and, indeed, many Continental European countries, on the one hand,
and the U.S. and the U.K., on the other? La Porta, Lopez-De-Silvanes and Shleifer (1998) have
advanced the view that ownership in capital markets is concentrated where there is an absence
of strong investor protection embodied in the legal system and regulatory arrangements. La
Porta et al. highlight the role of contemporary institutions but downplay, aside from legal
developments, the role of historical factors in shaping the structure of capital markets. More
recently La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer and Vishny (2000) asserted that:
         Common law countries have the strongest protection of outside investors – both
         shareholders and creditors – whereas French civil law countries have the weakest
         protection. (2000, 8)
Their explanation appears to be that the legal system and regulatory controls determine the
structure of corporate ownership. The civil law system is perceived to be linked to a system of
weaker control and protection for investors, ergo, it is natural to find a high degree of
concentration of ownership in countries such as France because of investors trepidation about
investing in a relatively unprotected investment environment. In a post Enron, Tyco,
WorldCom world French jurists and financiers might be permitted a wry smile at the
implication that the common law system is linked to a strong system of corporate control.1
    This paper emphasises the importance of history in the shaping of corporate ownership
structures. The theme of this paper is that historical elements can produce profound shocks and
deep after waves, the effects of which move through an economy for many generations
fashioning the collective psyche of people in such a way as to present barriers to innovation and
change. The financing of a corporation may arise in three ways: (1) bank borrowing; (2)
borrowing from the capital market; (3) self-financing through the use of retained profits.
Borrowing from the banking sector and the capital markets dilutes the ownership of a

1
  By the end of December 2000 Enron had a market capitalization of over $60 billion and had been ranked, by
Fortune Magazine as the most innovative large company in the United States. Its bankruptcy raises the issue
of corporate governance in the U.S. Healy and Palepu (2003) made the following observations:
‘Despite what they call an elaborate corporate governance network, Enron was able to attract large sums of
capital to fund a questionable business model, conceal its true performance through a series of accounting and
financial manoeuvres and hype its stock to unsustainable levels.’



                                                                                                             2
corporation. Self-financing, on the other hand, strengthens the concentration of ownership. In
France over the last three hundred years historical factors have produced a weak capital and
banking structure. Because of these weaknesses there has been, until relatively recently, a
significant reliance on self-financing. Self-financing in turn implies that ownership remains
concentrated in the hands of individuals and families.
  Chart 1 outlines some of the most significant historical factors that have influenced the
structure of corporate ownership in France. The presentation starts with two major financial
traumas in the eighteenth century. These were (1) the rise and collapse of John Law’s
Mississippi System and (2) the hyperinflationary experience generated by the assignats during
the French Revolution. It is contended that these financial traumas, reinforced in the nineteenth
century through the collapses of the Crédit Mobilier and the Union Générale, produced a weak
banking and capital market structure in France. Deprived of access to banks and capital markets
entrepreneurs developed the tradition of reliance on self-financing. This self-financing led to
high degrees of concentration of ownership in France. Chart 1 suggests that this self-financing
tradition was reinforced by a further historical factor, namely the changes in the inheritance law
introduced at the start of the nineteenth century by Napoleon. Primogeniture had been
perceived by the revolutionaries as a system that had aided and abetted the survival and
strength of the aristocracy. The new post-revolutionary regime, embodied in the Napoleonic
code, destroyed the system of primogeniture and replaced it with one based on an equal
allocation of property rights amongst all the children in the family. Younger children could no
longer be disinherited. The property of the parents was deemed, in large part, to be the property
of the children after the death of the former. Paradoxically, this element involves a legal
dimension, but not the type of legal dimension that La Porta et al. (1998, 2000) envisaged. In
the French civil law it is practically impossible to disinherit one’s offspring. Faced with the
potential ‘idiot heir’ problem families have successfully used the grandes écoles system to
provide educated new leaders of the next generation. Adept recourse to trusts (les indivisions)
and insurance has enabled family wealth to be transferred from generation to generation,
minimising in the process the burden of inheritance taxes. Add to this legal change favouring
the rights of all the children, a type of cultural mentalité that each generation is just the
temporary custodian of the family’s property (patrimoine) faced with the objective of passing it
on in even better shape to the next generation, and one finds a different set of factors that
helped shape the development of France’s corporate ownership structure.




                                                                                            3
 Chart 1 also incorporates a section dealing with state involvement in the economy. The state
has always been a major player in the French economy since the days of Jean Baptiste Colbert
(1619-83), who, during his period as Controller General of Finances, provided a template for
sizeable intervention by the state in the economy. Further manifestations in the form of
nineteenth century Saint-Simonianism and, later, socialism meant that France experienced
bouts of nationalizations and privatizations that greatly influenced the balance between state
and private sector ownership of French companies. Finally, the state’s approach to pension
funding is believed to be an important recent contributory factor to the ownership mix in that
the pay-as-you-go system in France has led to relatively small pension fund/insurance
involvement in the equity market.
 These factors emphasising the historical factors that created the tradition of reliance on self-
financing, the legal and cultural mix inherent in property ownership and the state’s invovement
in the market are presented as helping to explain, at least in part, the current structure of family
corporate ownership in France.
  This paper starts with an overview of the current situation relating to corporate ownership in
France. From there it moves back to the past to show how the failures of the banking system in
1720 and the assignats experiment in the 1790s, along with the collapse of the stock market in
1720, had deep effects on the emergence of the an efficient banking and capital market
structure in France. It will be contended that reliance on the self-financing of corporations was
a natural outcome of the difficulties of both the banking system and the capital market. The
change in the inheritance laws at the turn of the nineteenth century will be shown to have been
a further contributory factor in the embedding of the family in French corporate life. The
pension system in France will be presented to explain the sluggish growth of institutional
investment in French companies relative to their counterparts in the U.S. and U.K. in the
second half of the twentieth century.
  Finally, three examples of the growth of family controlled companies, car manufacturers
Peugeot, cosmetic producer L’Oréal, and tyre manufacturers Michelin are presented to provide
some support for the underlying themes of the paper. These companies also serve to counter
Easterbrook’s (1997) view that ‘a high concentration of ownership is associated with lesser
efficiency’.




                                                                                              4
The Current Corporate Ownership Structure in France


  The ownership of companies in France has frequently been a very hot political issue. In the
1930s the Prime Minister, Edouard Daladier, vehemently criticised the two hundred ‘grandes
familles’ whom he contended controlled all aspects of French business life as well as the
Banque de France, the stock exchange and the press. Daladier’s two hundred big families have
been shown to be a myth (Anderson, 1965). Nevertheless, a wider range of families does
exercise a highly significant part in the ownership of French companies.
 Three salient features of France’s current corporate ownership structure are (1) concentration
of ownership; (2) extensive family ownership; (3) the role of holding companies. Bloch and
Kremp (2001) in their recent study of French companies have shown that ‘concentration of
direct ownership and voting power is very high in France’. They found that ‘Around 40% of
unlisted firms have, as first shareholder, individuals owning directly more than 50% of the
capital. For the CAC 40 firms, individuals are not the largest blockholder, but when they
effectively are present as blockholders, they hold around 30% of the voting rights and have the
control in fact’ (Bloch and Kremp, 2001, 123). A recent French study by Allouche and Amann
(1995) showed that, in 1992, 28.3% of the top 1,000 industrial companies were controlled by
families (foreigners 23.5% and state 28.2%). Furthermore, when excluding the state and foreign
owned companies from the analysis, families controlled 59% of the top 500 industrial
companies, an increase of 10% on the 1982 statistics. Blondel, Rowell and Van der Heyden
(2002) investigated the ownership structure of France’s 250 largest publicly traded companies
for both 1993 and 1998. They show that 57% of the listed SBF 250 companies were
patrimonial firms i.e. companies where individuals or families had an ownership stake
exceeding 10%. Furthermore, confirming Allouche and Amann’s (1995) results they noted that,
rather than being on the wane, patrimonial firms grew from 48% to 57% of the SBF 250 over
the period 1993-98, Taking all firms listed on the French stock exchanges between 1994-2000,
Sraer and Thesmar (2004) observed that approximately a third of the firms were widely held,
another third were founder controlled and the remaining third were heir controlled family firms.
Their results show that both founder controlled and heir controlled family firms largely
outperformed widely held corporations. In December 2002 the business magazine, Le Nouvel
Economiste, estimated that the five hundred richest families in France had a fortune of 106
billion euro. Within this group the fifty richest families had assets of 72 billion euro and the ten
richest had assets of 43 billion euro.



                                                                                              5
 Additionally, as distinct from the United States, where there has been a predominantly
multidivisional corporate structure, there are many holding-company structures controlling
large industrial groups in France. Lévy-Leboyer (1980) explained the development of these
holding companies as arising from banking and capital market limitations:
     …financial constraints, particularly the inability of the banks and the capital markets to
     cope with businesses’ new requirements, finally brought into being large industrial
     groups tied together by financial holding companies. (1980, p. 629)




History and Corporate Ownership – An Overview


 History is revelatory in identifying many of the key factors that have produced the current
corporate ownership structure in France. Analysing this historical evolution and development is
a complex task. Those looking for some type of linear progression with newer institutions
building on and evolving from older institutions may be disappointed for the last three hundred
years embrace a wide range of diverging tendencies. There are many discontinuities. In this
respect the history of corporate finance in France is quite distinct from that of the U.K. In the
latter country political revolution, involving warring factions, had ended by the end of the
seventeenth century and a significant part of the financial revolution had taken place by the
third decade of the eighteenth century. In Britain one can see a type of linear progress as
institutions built on institutions. Through the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries British banks
and insurance companies became increasingly adept at channelling savings to investors. The
stock exchange efficiently raised finance to fund the borrowing requirements of the Exchequer
and to provide capital to the trading companies that were extending Britain’s imperial and
colonial power. The political system hovered around the centre rarely oscillating excessively to
the left. Additionally, and importantly, Britain was not invaded.
 France was to have a more tumultuous three hundred year history. During the eighteenth
century it was involved in a number of long and expensive wars (The War of the Spanish
Succession, 1701-14; the War with Spain 1718-20; the War of the Polish Succession, 1733-38;
the War of the Austrian Succession, 1740-48; the Seven Years’ War, 1756-63; the War for
American Independence, 1778-1783; the wars that emerged from the Revolution 1792 to the
start of the Napoleonic Wars). It possessed a monarchy until the revolution of 1789, followed
by a revolutionary government until the arrival of Napoleon. From there political life



                                                                                           6
experienced the tumult of the restorations of the monarchy and of the Napoleonic dynasty. Add
to these the siege of Paris by the Germans in 1870 and the commune in Paris when twenty to
thirty thousand citizens were killed in a mini-civil war in 1871. The German invasion of 1870
was the prelude to two further invasions during the two World Wars of the twentieth century.
These political developments frequently meant that industrial developments had to play second
fiddle to the political orchestrations of wars, civil wars and invasions. And yet, notwithstanding
these developments on the home soil, France became one of the largest colonial powers of the
last three centuries ruling sizeable tracts of land in Africa, North and South America and Asia.
 Because France was frequently at war, both internally and externally, the political instability
of the country was accompanied by financial instability. Wars and revolutions require
financing. This financing in turn created significant state borrowing and debt. Perforce the
banking system and the capital market were heavily tapped to provide finance for these wars.
As a corollary to this the state’s heavy recourse to borrowing left substantially less available for
the banks and the capital markets to provide to the private sector. The next two sections show
the development of (1) the banking sector and (2) the capital market against this background of
long periods of warfare.




The Evolution of the French Banking System


  This section highlights three elements in the early development of banking that cast a long
shadow over France’s financial history. They are: (1) John Law’s Mississippi system; (2) the
surrogate banking system provided by the French notaires; (3) the assignats experience during
the French revolution. It will then show the knock-on effects that these developments had for
the banking system in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.
 Renaissance Italy, seventeenth century Holland and Sweden, and, belatedly, England, with
the establishment of the Bank of England in 1694, grew through the establishment and
development of their respective banking systems. While the English banking system evolved
and helped to finance the war against Louis XIV, the French banking system remained
underdeveloped to the point that Louis XIV had to rely on the protestant Genevan based
bankers – many of whom he had persecuted and forced out of France through the revocation of
the Edict of Nantes - to finance a large part of his budgetary deficit.




                                                                                              7
 The death of Louis XIV essentially left France bankrupt creating an environment in which the
Scottish born John Law (1671-1729) could present a new financial architecture aimed at (1)
relieving the shortage of money through the establishment of a note issuing bank and (2)
reducing the state’s indebtedness through the creation of a trading company which would have
as one of its objectives the conversion of government securities into equity of the company.
Both of these developments were to have a profound effect on banking and the capital markets
in France. In the immediate short-term Law’s System would make France the most innovative
country with respect to corporate financing and banking in Europe. In the long-term it would
leave a deep hostility and mistrust towards banks and financial innovation.
 The General Bank was established by Law in May 1716 – see Murphy (1997). It was
modelled on the Bank of England in that it obtained its banking privileges from the state in
return for taking up part of the national debt - part of the outstanding amount of short term
billets d'état. The early success of the General Bank enabled Law to embark on the second
aspect of his macroeconomic strategy, namely the management of the national debt. To do so
he needed to create a trading company modelled on the lines of the British trading companies
such as the East India Company and the South Sea Company. In August 1717 he established
the Company of the West (Compagnie d'Occident), which was given monopoly-trading rights
over French Louisiana - an area representing half of the landmass of the United States today
(excluding Alaska). It acquired these trading rights in return for re-structuring, and accepting a
lower interest rate, on part of the outstanding amount of billets d'état. The Company benefited
in that it acquired rights to exploit the agricultural and mineral potential of this huge area. The
state benefited in that part of its floating short-term debt was converted into long-term debt,
which bore a lower rate of interest. Shareholders in the new company, who swapped billets
d'état in return for the company's shares, had the prospect of large capital gains if the wealth of
Louisiana was properly exploited. The nominal value of each share, which came to be known
as mères, issued by the Company of the West was 500 livres, but, as they were purchased with
billets d'état, then standing at a discount of over 70%, it meant that the initial shareholders
purchased their shares at a price of around 150 to 170 livres. It took nearly two years for the
shares to reach their nominal issue price of 500 livres.
 Initially there was little interest in the Company and Law had difficulty in selling its shares.
A year after its establishment Law started to use the Company of the West to mount a series of
spectacular takeovers and mergers. At the same time he developed the General Bank by




                                                                                             8
ensuring that it was used as the government's bank for the receipt and disbursement of state
funds.
 In August 1718 the Company of the West acquired the lease of the tobacco farm, while in
December it took over the Company of Senegal. In the same month the General Bank's
operations were re-organised and it was re-named the Royal Bank. In May 1719 Law merged
the enlarged Company of the West with the Company of the East Indies and China to form the
Company of the Indies. Further acquisitions in the form of the Company of Africa and the lease
of the Mint were made in June and July of that year. These acquisitions and mergers required
financing. Law arranged this through the issue of two tranches of shares known as the filles,
and petites filles. It has already been shown that the mères, issued in 1717 on the establishment
of the Company of the West, were subscribed for in billets d'état, which were standing at a very
sizeable discount, effectively costing the first shareholders only 150 livres. The second issue of
shares, the filles, were issued in June 1719 at 550 livres. The share price jumped in July
enabling Law to issue a further batch of shares, the petites filles, this time at l,000 livres each.
 By the end of July 1719 Law's Company had issued 300,000 shares with a nominal value of
150 million livres. As the share price had jumped from 150 livres in 1717 to over l,000 in July
1719, the stage was set for further leverage of Europe's first major stock market boom. This
boom was linked to Law's wish to take-over France's national debt by swapping shares for
government securities. The sheer magnitude of this operation proved to be breathtaking.
  On August 26, 1719 the Regent presented Law's proposal for the Mississippi Company, as it
was popularly known, to take over the tax farms and the remainder of the national debt. Law's
plan was to lend the King 1.2 billion livres at an interest rate of 3% so as to repay the national
debt. This money would be used to repay the long-term state debts, the annuities (rentes), the
remaining short-term floating debt (billets d'état), the cost of offices (charges) that had been or
would be suppressed, and the shares of the tax farms.
  Under the plan holders of government securities were forced to give up government
securities, bearing a 5% rate of interest, while at the same time they were offered the possibility
of acquiring shares of the Company yielding far less in terms of dividend but possessing the
prospect of sizeable capital gains. With the share price jumping from 2,250 on August 1 to
2,940 on August 14, to 5,000 and over in mid-September, capital gains rather than dividends
occupied the minds of most transactors. By these measures Law proposed 'the radical cure' for
the French economy. He aimed to transform the Company from a trading company to a trading-




                                                                                                 9
cum-financial conglomerate, controlling the State's finances most notably tax collection and
debt management.
  The sharp price rose sharply during August. On August 1, 1719 the original shares, the
mères, which, as has been shown, could have been bought for around 150 livres in 1717 stood
at 2,750 livres. By August 30 they had risen to 4,100 and by September 4 they were at 5,000
livres, with the filles and petites filles rising pari-passu. The debt holders recognising the
prospect of a capital gain were quite happy to transfer their debt into shares rather than bonds.
They needed the prospect of an expected capital gain to compensate for the interest reduction
on their securities from 4% to 3%. Their difficulty in fact became one of converting quickly
enough into the shares of the Company as the price of the shares rose very sharply during
September.
  Within a three-week period in September/October the Company issued 324,000 shares, of
which 300,000 were sold to the public at 5,000 livres a share, amounting in all to 1.5 billion
livres. The Company had now started to operate in a different manner to that characterising its
operations between August 1717 and August 1719 when it raised around 106 million through
the first three share issues.
  The shares reached a 1719 high of 10,000 on December 2. At this point the market valuation
of the Mississippi Company was 6.24 billion livres. Concomitant with these developments the
banknote issue of the Royal Bank had been increased from 160 million livres in June to l
billion livres by the end of 1719 as money was lent to existing shareholders to purchase further
shares. France was awash with liquidity, particularly after the Company guaranteed a floor
price of 9,000 livres a share in early 1720 through the establishment of a buying and selling
agency known as the 'bureau d'achat et de vente'. Effectively, the workings of this agency
monetized shares.
  In February 1720 the Royal Bank and the Company of the Indies were formally merged
together. At this juncture, Law, who had been appointed Controller General of Finances, in
January 1720, wrote:
          One sees here a sequence of ideas which are interlinked and which reveal more and
          more the principle on which they are based. (Law, 1934, iii, 98-99)
For a while the System, in all its unifying beauty, seemed to work. Economic activity boomed,
the national debt appeared to be under control, money was plentiful and the interest rate had
been driven down to 2%.




                                                                                          10
 Law had created a financial system the long-term viability of which was crucially dependent
on the growth of the real economy. There had to be some equilibrium relationship between the
financial system and the real economy. For a while a temporary equilibrium existed, as
transactors seemed content to remain within the financial circuit trading money for shares, and
shares for money. However, once money started spilling too quickly from the financial circuit
into the real economy problems arose. The real economy proved to be incapable of generating a
sufficient growth in commodities to match the monetary expansion so that the excess money
created inflation and balance of payments problems. Law had always believed that the growth
in the real economy, spurred on by monetary expansion, would be sufficient to mop up the
newly created money. Indeed, in Money and Trade (1705) he went further and argued that
monetary expansion would lead to a balance of payments surplus. For a period Law tried to
lock transactors into the financial circuit by a series of measures ranging from prohibitions on
the holding of more than 500 livres of specie or bullion, to the demonetization of gold and a
phased monthly demonetization of silver. Temporarily these measures worked. But there was
still too much liquidity in the System. On May 21, 1720 an arrêt was published stipulating that
shares were to be reduced by four ninths (from 9,000 to 5,000) and banknotes by half (eg. a
banknotes worth l0,000 livres to be reduced to 5,000 livres) between May and December.
 This was an attempt to reduce the liquidity of the System thereby bringing the financial
circuit back into line with the real economy. Despite the revocation of this May 21 arrêt a
couple of days later - due to public pressure - the effect on confidence was so great that the
System never recovered from it. The price of shares and banknotes fell continuously during the
summer (ironically, at this point the shares in the South Sea were rising rapidly) and the
autumn of 1720. Law was forced to flee the country, with the aid of the Regent, in December.
  Law had shown that he was able to conceptualize and establish, if only for a short period, a
modern non-metallic world at the start of the eighteenth century. He had shown, albeit for a
brief three years period, the massive potential of the capital market and the way in which
positive wealth effects from this market could drive the economy to greater growth. It would
take economists and financial leaders another couple of centuries to produce for the global
economy what Law had briefly achieved in France in France during 1719-20. Du Tot realised
the full extent of this achievement:
      In this state, this construction was admired by everyone in France and was the envy of
     our neighbours who were really alarmed by it. Its beauty even surpassed all the hopes
     that had been placed in it since it made people despise and refuse gold and silver. It was



                                                                                         11
     a type of miracle which posterity will not believe. However, it is clear that there was a
     period, of many months, when no one wanted them [gold and silver]. (Du Tot, 1935, i,
     106)
 The failure of Law’s System produced a very strong reaction against banks, credit and
financial innovation. It also heralded a retour en arrière for the French financial system to the
old one dominated by religious directives controlling the methods of borrowing and lending
and the state constituting the main borrower of funds through the creation of rentes (annuities).
In this strange financial no man’s land where interest could not be explicitly charged, contracts
had to be drawn up separating the ownership of savings from the streams of revenue it
generated. The notaires (notaries) were at the centre of this system. Indeed their role was so
central, in the absence of traditional style bankers, that they became surrogate bankers.


The Notaires as Bankers


 The credit market in eighteenth century post-Lawian France cannot be interpreted as one in
which there was a free flow of funds between surplus and deficit units with the rate of interest
acting as an equilibrating factor in the allocation of funds.
 The usury laws, allied with the failure of Law’s Royal Bank, created an environment in which
the standard evolution of banking from goldsmiths to credit creating deposit banks did not take
place in France in the eighteenth century. Between 1720 and the Revolution, aside from
bankers who discounted bills of exchange – an important media of exchange for merchants
much neglected by historians - and one or two scattered sightings of banks such as the short-
lived, Caisse d’Escompte, eighteenth century France existed without a formalised banking
structure. While the Genevan based protestant bankers became major lenders to the government
and big merchant companies, the question arises as to how the more mundane business of
banking was carried out in the absence of clearly constituted banks in France during this
century.
 Recently Hoffman, Postel-Vinay and Rosenthal (2001) have advanced the thesis that the
French notarial system, in particular, the Parisian notaires, provided a sophisticated surrogate
banking system. Because of the usury laws they were the intermediaries for every transaction
embodying an implied rate of interest as they were the only agents who could notarise financial
instruments in the form of obligations, rentes constitutuées and rentes viagères. The analysis of
Hoffman et al. shows that the notaires acted as bankers by intermediating as agents between



                                                                                            12
savers and borrowers. However, notwithstanding the pervasiveness of their intermediating
activities, the notaires were for the most part only demi-bankers acting as a conduit for savers
with surplus funds to borrowers, most notably the state. The notaires were usually not
principals in these transactions nor did they did act as bankers in the sense of lending credit to
some multiple of the funds deposited with them. Furthermore most of the lending activity that
they arranged was of a long-term nature. Their banking role was narrowed down further in that
most of the lending that they intermediated was to the government on a long term basis through
the acquisition of rentes or loans for the purchase of lands or property. Hoffman et al.
(2001,361) admit in a footnote that the development of long term credit in both Britain and
France initially was more beneficial for the public debt and the housing market than for
industry and trade (2001, 361). Whatever about the validity of their reflection on the British
situation, it is revealing in that it shows that French lending activity was concentrated in two
sectors, the state and real estate. The rentier mentality – a natural successor to the earlier
financier mentality - has deep roots in French history.
 The thesis of Hoffman et al. is that the notaires provided a type of golden age in banking
acting as highly efficient intermediaries between savers and borrowers. Their information base
– they were able to pool and share information up to the early part of the nineteenth century -
provided detailed knowledge on the assets of borrowers and whether they were encumbered or
not. This information enabled them to provide high quality borrowers for savers with surplus
funds. The utilisation of this information provided a stable background for lenders in which
there was a low risk of default. This stability in turn generated confidence in the system and
increased the number of lenders prepared to act through the notarial system.
 An alternative interpretation is to view this surrogate banking system as costly, highly
conservative and inefficient because of the additional complication that the usury laws
prevented the rate of interest from allocating credit between savers and borrowers. The notaires
operated a highly effective cartel. In 1659 there were 113 notaires in Paris. Despite the growth
of Paris the number of notaires remained the same until they rose to 122 in 1859! The system
was costly in that transactors were subject to notarial fees and excluded from the market if they
did not have appropriate asset backing. The usury laws, which set a ceiling rate of interest of
5%, effectively ensured that the notaires faced with excess demand for credit could filter out
borrowers by the value of their asset collateral rather than the quality of the intended
investment project. The system was conservative in that the vast bulk of lending was to the
government and property sectors. Incipient industrialists would have found it practically



                                                                                           13
impossible to borrow through the notaires. Above all it must be pointed out that the notarial
system was not a banking system in the sense of providing a flexible structure for the
expansion of credit. All the notaires did was to increase the velocity of circulation of money by
making it easier for some borrowers to access savers. However, they were not principals in the
financial transactions and were in no way capable of lending money against reserves deposited
with them.


The Assignats Experiment


  The revolutionaries were quick to recognise the strait-jacket of the Ancien Régime’s financial
system. In October 1789 they repealed the legislation that criminalized the stipulation of a rate
of interest on a contract. In July 1796 they abolished the ceiling rate of interest. Between these
two dates they set up a paper money system. The revolutionaries, copying in many respects
Law’s earlier theoretical plans for a land bank in Scotland, financed the early stages of the
revolution through the issue of the assignats, a paper money initially assigned, or,
collateralized, by confiscated ecclesiastical property. When first issued through a decree of
December 19, 1789, the assignats bore a rate of interest of five per cent. The interest payments
were quickly stopped and the assignats were transformed into fiat money in 1790. The creation
of the assignats produced heated debate in the French Assembly with partisans of the System
maintaining that they were not inflationary financial instruments because they were fully
backed by the confiscated ecclesiastical property. Other parliamentarians tellingly reminded
their listeners of Law and his System. Though seventy years had elapsed between the end of
Law’s System and the Revolution, the memories of Law’s attempted financial revolution were
still fresh in the minds of those sitting in the Assembly. Indeed, John Law was the most cited
economist in the debates that took place in the Assembly on the assignats. In September 1790,
the Abbé Maury held up a fistful of banknotes in the Assembly remarking:
       Alas! At this moment I hold in my trembling hands many of Law’s banknotes, these
       fictive pledges of an immense and illusory capital, which I drew from a huge depot
       where they have been held for the instruction of posterity. With sorrow I look at these
       paper instruments of so many crimes, I see them still covered with the tears and blood
       of our fathers and I offer them today to the representatives of the French nation as
       beacons placed on the reefs so as to perpetuate the memory of this massive shipwreck.
       (Archives Parlementaires, vol. 19, September 28, 1790, 300)



                                                                                           14
 Maury’s melodramatic warning words were not accepted. The assignats were much needed to
finance the early stages of the Revolution with Harris contending that they kept fourteen armies
in the field (1930, 53). They were first issued on April 1, 1790 for a total of 400 million. By
September 1792 they had risen to 2.7 billion and a year later that were over 5 billion. By March
1795 they had reached 8 billion rising to 20 billion in the same year. When they were
eventually taken out of circulation in 1796 45.6 billion had been issued of which 32.8 billion
were still in circulation (Lafaurie, 1981, 169). The over-issue of assignats led to massive
hyperinflation. Taking a price index of 100 in January 1791, White (1989) showed that it rose
to 30,411 by March 1796! Kindleberger concluded that the assignats ‘…embedded paranoia
about paper money and banks more deeply in the French subconscious, and helped establish
Napoleon successively as consul and emperor.’ (1984, 99)
 It was not until 1800 that a quasi-central bank, the Banque de France was established and
even here the primary reason for its establishment was to lend money to Napoleon’s
government. Additionally, jealous of its monopoly issuing powers, the Banque de France spent
its first fifty years trying to block the creation of other banks. The massive difference in
progress between the British and French banking systems may be seen by reading Henry
Thornton’s An Enquiry into the Nature and Effects of the Paper Credit of Great Britain (1802)
on the role of the paper credit system in Britain. Thornton, a professional banker, attacked
Adam Smith for his lack of understanding of the extent to which banknotes and bank credit had
become central to the financing of the British economy. He showed the sophisticated layers of
different types of paper credit that had been introduced in Britain to finance economic activity
and the central role of the Bank of England in the provision of credit. The London banks
depended on the Bank of England and the country banks in turn depended on the London
banks. Furthermore, Thornton showed the ways in which the Bank of England could improve
its function as a lender of last resort to the banking system. Thornton’s analysis demonstrated
that Great Britain had a far more sophisticated banking system than that of France with the
Bank of England acting as a quasi Central Bank, all this at the very time that the Banque de
France had just been established!
 The hyper-inflationary experience of the assignats, reinforcing the earlier collapse of Law’s
System, strengthened a strong anti-banking and financial innovation view in France. It
intensified the French public’s bas de laine mentality i.e the hoarding of gold and silver in
woollen socks underneath the mattress. Not only did the French hoard gold and silver, but, they
also used specie as the main medium of exchange for most of the nineteenth century. This



                                                                                         15
strong preference for specie meant that it constituted 95% of the money supply in 1803, 82% in
1845, and 68% in 1870. By 1885 it still amounted to over 52% of the money supply (Cameron,
1967, 116). Flandreau (2004) has recently shown that, notwithstanding the growth of banking
in the north-eastern half of France in the 1850s, specie holding greatly increased across the
country in that decade due to a combination of factors – the growth in farm incomes, the
absence of a banking network in country areas and the inflow of new supplies of gold from the
Californian Gold Rush. The French love of gold continued through to recent times as evidenced
by the reporting of the daily price of small gold bars (les lingots) and gold coin (le Napoleon)
alongside news of stock price movements on radio and television.
 The vesting of significant monopoly powers in the Banque de France, along with the
extensive use of specie as a circulating medium, meant that the banking system remained
underdeveloped for the first half of the nineteenth century. This view runs counter to that
developed by Lévy-Leboyer in Les Banques européennes et l’industrialisation internationale
dans la première moitié du XIX siècle (1964). In this work Lévy-Leboyer concluded that,
contrary to conventional opinion, the banking system was highly effective and that by 1843
‘the financial market gave the impression of having become the living part of the economy’
(1964, 699). However, a couple of pages later, Lévy-Leboyer equivocated with respect to this
strong conclusion admitting that, aside from Paris, it was financial centres outside France,
based in Geneva and Basle, that provided banking facilities for the merchants of Lyons and
Mulhouse. Lévy-Leboyer equivocated further by admitting that:
        It should not be forgotten that, in many regions, credit was unheard of: in the
       countryside, the usage of banknotes continued to be unknown; in the manufacturing
       towns bills of exchange were continually used for ordinary transactions, and in most
       cases, even in Alsace, those wishing to borrow money were obliged to go to the
       notaires (there were nearly 10,000 in France in 1840) or to less recommended business
       agents (1964, 705).
This latter description, showing the continued use of notaires, does not suggest that there was a
highly effective banking system in France at the time.
 There were still considerable constraints preventing the emergence of a proper credit based
banking system. How could a paper based media of exchange system emerge when, up to 1847,
the smallest denomination note of the Banque de France was 500 francs? This, as Cameron
(1967, 117) has pointed out, was greater than the annual per capita income in France at the
time. How could a credit creating banking system thrive when the currency (i.e. gold and silver



                                                                                          16
coins) to deposits ratio was so high? Furthermore the Banque de France systematically blocked
the emergence of other banks in order to maintain its monopoly banking powers. It was not
until 1848 that legislation was introduced to charter joint-stock banks. The change in legislation
enabled the Pereire brothers to establish the Crédit Mobilier in 1852 and in that same year the
Crédit Foncier, which in turn established the Crédit Agricole and the Comptoir de l’Agriculture
as subsidiaries, started business. In 1859 the Crédit Industriel et Commercial was created while
in 1863/64 the Crédit Lyonnais and the Société Générale were established. Notwithstanding
the creation of these banks, cheques were not legally recognized until 1865 and the public still
had a strong bias in favour of specie. Cameron concluded on the French banking system up to
1870:
        Comparisons with English and Scottish data reveals that the complaints of French
        businessmen were justified: bank facilities were too few, and bank resources pitifully
        inadequate. At the end of its ‘take-off’ period the French economy had approximately
        the same bank density as Scotland had had in the middle of the eighteenth century.
        France had fewer bank assets per inhabitant in the mid-nineteenth century than
        England or Scotland had had in 1770 and in 1870 had not reached the position that
        they had held before the beginning of the nineteenth century’ (1967, 110)
  Furthermore it continued like this with specie still constituting the preferential form of money
up to World War 1. By 1913, despite the expansion of bank deposits from 17.2% in 1880 to
44.3% of M1 defined as coin, banknotes and bank deposits, they still constituted only a small
part of the overall money supply. In the U.S. and U.K. bank deposits represented about 88% of
M1 at this point in time. This conservatism with respect to deposit creation had its counterpart
in the area of credit expansion.
  Gueslin observed that between the 1880s and 1930s companies had to rely on self-financing
rather than bank credit ‘…banking credit remained more or less limited and the financing of the
economy came about through the accumulation of savings: primarily as companies directly
used parts of their cash flow, but also by the transfer of domestic savings via the financial
market’ (1992, 63). This meant that the banking sector, despite its expansion in the middle part
of the nineteenth century, continued to play a predominantly conservative role in the extension
of credit to the industrial sector.
  Between the two World Wars the relative imbalance between the development of banks in
France and in Great Britain and the U.S. was very great. One indicator of this was the size of
bank deposits per head of the population. Gueslin noted that in 1937 per capita bank deposits



                                                                                           17
amounted to 1,700 francs in France as against 12,000 francs per inhabitant in the U.S. and
10,100 francs in the U.K.
        The apparent backwardness of France can be explained by the lesser importance there
        of bank deposits, the existence of channels for financial savings, the competition of the
        savings banks …and by the probable existence of hoarding, reflecting the still
        essentially rural nature of the country (Gueslin, 1992, 87).
 In Gueslin’s view ‘It was only after 1966, and not without difficulty, that the commercial
banks of France were really able to flourish’. The road, from John Law’s Royal Bank in 1720
to an efficient commercial banking system in France in 1966, had been a long one.


Capital Market Developments


 As has been shown, over-borrowing by Louis XIV left France effectively bankrupt and
created the conditions for John Law to embark on the most dramatic macroeconomic and
corporate financing experiments of the eighteenth century. The apparent success of his
Mississippi System showed the potential for an economy to operate without metallic money
and to innovate with respect to re-structuring the national debt. Fears that Law had discovered
the Philosopher’s Stone led the British to follow suit and use the South Sea Company to re-
structure the public debt. The strong anti-banking mentality that arose from the collapse of the
Royal Bank in 1720 was accompanied by a strong official reaction to joint stock companies.
Again the events of 1720 were central to this reaction. Ironically, in a bid to corner the market
for loanable funds, the South Sea Company pressurised the British government to introduce the
Bubble Act of 1720. The Act nullified bubble companies that had been established without
joint stock charters from Parliament. It backfired in the face of the South Sea Company, for, in
precipitating a collapse of the smaller bubble companies, it forced holders of such fallen stock
to sell South Sea in order to pay for these losses. These sales in turn caused the price of the
South Sea Company to collapse. The far greater consequence of the Bubble Act was that it
effectively prevented most British companies from obtaining joint-stock charters for more than
a century. This remained the situation in Britain until the repeal of the Bubble Act in 1825 and
the introduction of the Companies Act – popularly known as the Limited Liability Acts – in
1862.
 It was a similar, if not longer, story in France. From 1721 onwards, due to the collapse of
Law’s Mississippi Company, it was particularly difficult for companies to obtain full limited



                                                                                          18
liability status. Investors, wishing to form joint stock companies, could only do so by acquiring
permission from the government and undergoing a cumbersome process of establishing their
charters through complicated legal procedures. Through the eighteenth and the first half of the
nineteenth century French jurisprudence confined, all but a restricted number of companies in
areas such as insurance and transportation, to two legal structures:
       (1) Simple partnerships (Sociétés en nom collectif)
       (2) Limited partnerships (Sociétés en commandite)
 In the simple partnerships all partners were equally liable for the firm’s debts. In the case of
the limited partnerships the ‘sleeping partner’ (the commandite) who subscribed the capital
only risked the amount that he subscribed, whereas the active partner or partners assumed
unlimited liability. For example, the Irish born economist Richard Cantillon, who made a
fortune out of the Mississippi System, ensured that he was the ‘sleeping partner’ in his bank in
1718-1720 so that his liability was limited to the capital that he subscribed. (Murphy, 1986)
 The simple and limited partnerships were unsatisfactory corporate structures for the
development of large sized companies. Many owners and managers did not want to face the
problem of unlimited liability. Additionally, there were very high transaction costs for partners
wishing to withdraw their capital. Say and Chailley summarised the problems with this system:
       This was really a deplorable system because of the slowness that it entailed in the
       establishment of companies, because of its arbitrariness, and because, in the case of
       bankruptcy, shareholders blamed the government, and, believed themselves entitled to
       demand it to compensate them for their losses (1892, ii, 887).
  Lévy-Leboyer noted that the Council of State, to which companies had to submit their plans
for going public, instead of helping the formation of share issuing companies ‘…continually
looked for ways of increasing its own powers without regard for the companies that it
discredited nor for the economy the expansion of which it braked’ (1964, 702).
 Cameron contended that ‘the depression of 1857 revealed the undesirability of excessive
reliance on the commandite form of organization for large-scale industry and commerce’ (1967,
109). The Council of State started to liberalize its approach to company incorporation. The
change in the British legislation in 1862, along with the incipient financing needs of the newly
created railroads, further increased the pressure to change which started in 1863 and continued
through the introduction of the Limited Liability Acts (Loi sur les sociétés) on July 24, 1867.
This Act ensured that companies could be established freely under a limited liability charter
without having to seek the formal and costly authorisation of the Council of State. The new act



                                                                                           19
encouraged the growth of limited liability companies, but, the ability of these companies to tap
the capital market was constrained. Aside from the railway companies, domestic French
companies had difficulties in initially attracting French investors. Lévy-Leboyer has focused
attention on the relative immaturity of capital markets in France as against those of the U.S. and
U.K. in the latter part of the nineteenth century and the first decades of the twentieth century.
This lack of maturity prevented mergers developing to produce growth in the industrial sector.
He observed:
       Before 1913 and during World War 1, the volume of security issues and the number of
       mergers remained rather low-probably because of a widespread prejudice against
       industrial shares and the lack of experience in marketing these securities on the part of
       banks and brokerage houses, which had previously dealt primarily in railroad bonds,
       public utilities and foreign securities. (1980, 600)
 In pre-World War I France there was a tendency on the part of French people to invest in
government bonds or foreign securities rather than in equities. A German remarked at the time
‘If they do not succeed in changing the attitudes of the higher classes of the population, then
nothing will stop France from becoming a nation of rentiers. The organization of her banking
system is well designed to produce such an outcome’ (Gueslin, 1992, 72). Pollard (1985) has
shown that in 1870 over a third of French domestic savings were invested abroad and by 1910
this figure had risen to over 50%. The oral tradition in France provides many stories of
ancestors who lost fortunes in railway shares and loans to Russia and other eastern European
countries. Trunks full of these useless shares and bonds are to be found in family attics and in
junk shops.
  Bonin, writing of the Belle Epoque period from 1895-1914, noted that the majority of
companies ‘…remained hostile to external capital, to increases of capital, to borrowing and to
the banks. Self-financing dominated (two thirds in 1913) due to profits, the quick amortization
of capital expenditure, financial reserves and a treasury the abundance of which was revealed
by the expansion of bank deposits’ (1988, 40). Using Teneul and Lévy-Leboyer’s estimates
Gueslin concluded that’…even if there were some exceptions, most investment on the eve of
the First World War did come from undistributed profits’. (1992, 81) So self-financing was the
norm for French companies. Notwithstanding Gueslin’s conclusion Rajan and Zingalese (2001)
have recently presented statistics indicating that, on the eve of World War 1, France had a
relatively high stock market capitalisation/GDP ratio of .78, double that of the U.S. (.39) and
not too far from that of the U.K. (1.09). However, this statistic appears to be very much an



                                                                                           20
outlier as the stock market /GDP capitalisation statistics for the rest of the twentieth century
produced by Rajan and Zingalese (2001: 61) show:


Year                   French Stock Market Capitalisation/GDP
1939                                  0.19
1950                                  0.08
1960                                  0.28
1970                                  0.16
1980                                  0.09
1990                                  0.24
1999                                  1.17


  So, while it appears that the French briefly flirted with the stock market in the first decade of
the twentieth century, this flirtation, unlike the U.S. and the U.K., did not persist through the
twentieth century. The statistics for 1999, most probably reflecting the privatisations of major
French companies in the 1980s and the rise in their market value in the 1990s, show some
revival of interest.


Conclusion on Historical Elements influencing Corporate Ownership


  By this stage some the main themes of this paper have started to emerge. For a great part of
its three hundred year history since the rise and fall of John Law’s Mississippi System, France
has been underbanked and has had a weak capital market. Unlike Great Britain, where the Bank
of England was not brought down by the fall of the South Sea Company, the stock market crash
of l720 involved the complete destruction of the Royal Bank’s banknotes and confidence in the
banking system. The collapse of the fiat money system created considerable hostility to banks,
credit and financial innovation. This anti-banking mentality was later exemplified in Turgot’s
magnum opus, Réflexions sur la formation et la distribution de la richesse (Reflections on the
Formation and the Distribution of Wealth), first published in 1769/70. In the Réflexions Turgot
introduced the concept of capital into economics for the first time and showed the link between
savings and investment in the generation of economic growth. The work was to have a
profound influence on the theory of capital formation in the 19th century. Yet, for all its
brilliance, Turgot missed out because his analysis on the process of capital formation was



                                                                                            21
confined to the time warp of eighteenth-century France, an economy in which banks did not
exist and in which the capital market was the exclusive preserve of the government. Turgot
maintained that savings financed investment and that savings were generated by abstention
from consumption expenditure. He saw no role for the banking system in this process of capital
formation. There is no mention of the words bank or credit in the Réflexions! Thus, we are left
with the paradox that one of the outstanding economic works on capital formation has only a
very elementary link with modern works on corporate finance because it is based exclusively
on an internal financing model.
 Turgot’s strong antipathy towards banks, which started, when, as a young seminarian at the
Sorbonne, he pilloried John Law and his System (1749 [1913, I]), was symptomatic of
eighteenth-century French attitudes towards money, banks, credit and financial innovation. Add
to this antipathy, the hyperinflationary experience created by the assignats, and the French
public’s desire to use specie rather than money created by banks becomes clearer. The heavy
reliance on specie as a medium of exchange made it difficult for banks to emerge. In turn their
ability to expand credit was limited by their difficulties in building up sufficient reserves of
specie to create deposits. This view ties in with that of Kindleberger who maintained that
‘…France lagged behind Britain in financial institutions and experience by a hundred years or
so…” ((1984: 113). This is not to say that there were no banks operating in France in the first
half of the nineteenth century but that their influence was relatively weak. Even the ‘haute
banque’ which started to pioneer the art of merchant banking in the early part of the nineteenth
century was so ‘haute’ that it did not cater for most of the emerging industrial sectors. It
concentrated on investments in the railways, real estate, public works (roads, bridges, canals)
and insurance. The Crédit Mobilier, a bank established by the Pereire brothers in 1852, was an
attempt to find more broadly based support from stock market investors. It competed with the
‘haute banque’ by investing in public works and railways not only in France but across the
European continent. Its collapse in 1867 along with the later collapse of the Union Générale,
which lasted a mere four years from 1878-1882, reinforced French attitudes on the riskiness of
banks.
  Meanwhile the stock market, aside from financing the government, had difficulties in
generating equity issues because of the legal restraints that prevented the creation of limited
liability companies up to 1867. Even after this companies did not use the capital market
intensively. A great deal of the later nineteenth century French investment in the stock market
was in railway stocks and foreign investments.



                                                                                         22
  A second historical element that is important in the French case relates to the role of
inheritance law. Napoleon, when he introduced the Code Civil, moved the inheritance system
from one based on primogeniture to a new system based on equal rights for all the children in a
family. This change is important to note in that, unlike the U.S. and the U.K., where a testator
can leave his/her estate to a charitable foundation this is not possible in France. The children
are stakeholders in the parents’ estate. So, almost by definition, the family, due to the
inheritance laws, becomes a major player in the ownership of French corporations. The only
way to keep the family out of the corporation is to sell the company prior to death and spend
the proceeds. As the French have lived through three German invasions in the last one hundred
and forty years, few of them are inclined to spend all of their wealth on current consumption
because of the fear that they may face the days of the 'vaches maigres' prior to death.
Furthermore, in order to prevent the state appropriating the family estate through death duties,
parents frequently transfer assets from the older to the younger generation via trusts (les
indivisions) that give the parents the usufruits of the assets while bestowing on the children the
nominal ownership of these assets. Thus, at the death of the patriarch or matriarch, there is only
a small part of the estate that may be subject to death duties. Additionally, a change in the
inheritance laws in 1905 stipulated that estate duties would only be payable on the net rather
than the gross estate. This sent out a clear signal to the owners of wealth to shift from equity
financing to loan financing because the latter could be used to offset their gross wealth position
whereas the former method would add to overall tax liabilities for their offspring. The French
are also very adept at using insurance policies on the lives of the older generation to provide tax
free money to cover any death duties that may arise on the estate at inheritance. Combine these
elements with a different cultural approach which sees property as part of the 'patrimoine' and
that the perceived obligation of property holders is to pass on the 'patrimoine' in a better state to
future generations the reason why there is a high degree of concentration of ownership of
corporations by families in the French model may be understood. Against such a background, it
is not surprising to find family ownership, often concealed through a wide network of holding
companies, exercising such a significant role in France’s corporate ownership structure.
  Finding companies that span the three hundred years that we are investigating which might fit
this particular historical template is a difficult task. It is the nature of companies to rise or fall,
to be taken over or merged. Few remain in the same direct ownership over a prolonged period
of time. One company that remained in the same family ownership for the period investigated
was the printing and publishing company, Didot, which later became Firmin-Didot. Founded in



                                                                                                23
1698 it remained in business for three hundred years. It was a major book publisher, it was the
company that printed the assignats during the Revolution, and it was a publishing house always
to the fore in the area of printing technology – it was the first to introduce, for example, the
Stanhope press in France in 1818 (Jammes, 1998). Throughout its long history the predominant
form of financing for Didot was through the use of retained profits. Even when it issued shares
it was only to family members for the purpose of facilitating the transfer of ownership from one
generation to another. Blondel and Van der Heyden (1999) examined another family with a
long history of corporate ownership, that of the Wendel family, involved in iron and steel
production, which was founded in 1704.
 Three companies with a strong family involvement and a corporate history spanning a
hundred years or more have been selected to show the importance of self-financing in the
evolution of their corporate histories. Each of these companies started with simple products, a
rubber ball, a hair dye and a pepper mill. From these simple origins they developed into global
companies in which descendants of the founders still have very sizeable holdings and
representation in the management and direction of the companies. The companies are Michelin,
L’Oréal, and Peugeot (PSA Peugeot Citroen). A sample of three does not prove the thesis of
this paper. However, it is believed that these three companies are illustrative of a trend in
French corporate life where family ownership is still so strongly embedded. They are also three
of the most powerful and profitable French companies, employing a total of three hundred and
seventy thousand workers.
 Because they have been family owned and controlled companies it is difficult to penetrate
into the decision making of these companies. Families are discreet and, in many cases, reluctant
to open their archives to the public. An alternative method is to side-tunnel into the activities of
these companies by examining the archives maintained on them by one of their bankers, the
Crédit Lyonnais. These archives show the assessments of this bank’s financial analysts towards
these companies over a long period of time. They constitute an invaluable, and much under-
utilised, source into decision making across all sectors of corporate France over the last one
hundred and fifty years. Loubet (1999) has edited a range of archival extracts specifically
related to the links between the automobile industry and the bank.




                                                                                             24
MICHELIN


 Michelin is Europe’s biggest manufacturer of tyres. It employs around 128,000 workers who
produced sales of 15.7 billion euro in 2002. The history of Michelin traces back to 1829 when a
young Scotswoman, Elizabeth Pugh Barker, a niece of the Scottish scientist Charles Macintosh,
married Edouard Daubrée. The new Madame Daubrée used the vulcanised rubber solution,
discovered by her uncle, to make playing balls for her children. The use of rubber in this way
attracted the attention of two of her husband’s cousins, Aristide Barbier and Nicolas Edouard
Daubrée. In 1832 they established a small factory using vulcanized rubber products for the
manufacture of seals, belts, valves and pipes that could be used in agricultural machinery. In
1889 André and Edouard Michelin took over their grandfather, Aristide Barbier’s agricultural
equipment business. Edouard Michelin diversified the business into the manufacture of tyres
and managed the company for the next fifty years. He was assisted by his brother, André, a
marketing genius, who promoted the company in its early days via schemes such as the
sponsorship of motor car races where the entrants were obliged to use Michelin tyres, the
identification of these tyres with Monsieur Bibendum, a caricature of a rotund man made of
tyres, and through the creation of the Michelin Guide Rouge, a publication that later developed
into a gastronomic guide with its use of the star rating system for restaurants. The combination
of Edouard’s managerial and engineering skills along with André’s marketing flair enabled
Michelin to develop from a small-scale artisan enterprise to becoming an international tyre
manufacturer. By the time of Edouard’s death in 1940 he had built Michelin into a company
employing 25,000 employees. Today the Michelin family is estimated to own 25 per cent of the
company and its wealth in 2002, has been estimated at 1.1 billion euro.
 How has the Michelin family kept such a sizeable amount of the ownership of the company?
The first point to note about Michelin is its rather unusual corporate status in that it is still a
partnership (commandite) but with the capacity to issue shares. Because of its partnership status
the Michelin family members who are involved in this partnership are liable for the company’s
debts in the case of a bankruptcy. On the other hand the partnership gives the family control
over the company. The family has been able to maintain this position through reliance on self-
financing. From its very inception self-financing appears to have been the mot d’ordre of the
Michelin family. When Edouard assumed control of the company in 1886, he turned to the
family rather than to the banks in order to provide the much-needed finance for new capital



                                                                                            25
expenditure. He went to his aunt, Emilie Mage, and asked her if she could lend the company a
sizeable sum of money, the equivalent of 1.3 million euro. She asked Edouard to wait for a day.
Then, having clarified with some nuns, the Petites Soeurs des Pauvres, that they would offer
her a room in their convent, if she became destitute due to the non-payment of her loan, she lent
Edouard Michelin the money which helped turn the company around (Lottman, 1998). Family
ties can run deep at moments of crisis!
 The nature of Michelin’s business was transformed as it moved into the manufacture of tyres
for automobiles. Keeping up production with the growth of the automobile market meant that
the company had considerable financing requirements. The family met these financing
requirements by ploughing back retained profits into capital expenditure. When these profits
were insufficient to meet their capital requirements they resorted to long-term bond issues. This
in turn caused problems for their bankers because of their limited access to information on the
company’s balance sheet. In 1930 when Michelin was seeking a loan of 200 million francs the
analysts of the Crédit Lyonnais attempted to uncover the financial situation of the company so
as to determine whether the bank would provide some of the capital required. It is obvious
from reading the analysts’ report of May 1930 that it was difficult determining the profitability
of the company, which, because of its partnership status, was not obliged to publish any public
accounts. The analyst did provide the following for the period 1925-28:


End year              Profits Distributed            Amounts put aside in Reserves
                                     Francs millions
1925                          29                            29
1926                          31                           126
1927                          58                            58
1928                          60                            60


Assuming that the banking analyst had access to part of the company’s accounts – although he
did state that he did not know how this ‘réglement de l’exercice’ had been compiled - the above
statistics show that Michelin appeared to have had a policy of retaining a very significant
amount of its profits. The retention rate amounted to 50% of its profits in the years 1925, 1927
and 1929. In 1926, on the back of very significant growth, it retained 126 million francs of its
profits, over four times the amount it retained in 1925. The analyst concluded that ‘the




                                                                                          26
development of the business has been made almost exclusively by recourse to retained profits
and the management appears to be very prudent’. (CL 4908/3, May 1930, p. 7)
 By this stage Michelin, still a family business (‘une affaire de famille’) had become the
dominant manufacturer of tyres in France – its main factory at Clermont-Ferrand was
producing 4 to 5 million tyres annually - and it was exporting more tyres than its competitors in
the United States.
 In 1930 it was successful in borrowing 300 million francs at 4.5% repayable from 1931 to
1960. In 1946, with its main factory at Clermont-Ferrand badly damaged by Allied bombing,
Michelin went back to the banks with a request to borrow 500 million francs. The banking
analysts threw their hands in the air in trying to make sense of the accounts provided The
‘réglement de l’exercise’ which had shown results of as high as 126 million francs in 1927 had
dropped to 6 million in 1934 and then risen to a high of 40 million in 1939! Because of the lack
of knowledge on the distributions of profits to the shareholders and the management the
balance sheet was impossible to decipher properly.
  The extent of Michelin’s recourse to self-financing may be seen from a further report by the
Crédit Lyonnais in 1959 when Michelin was contemplating an issue of bonds to help finance its
long term investment. The investment programme envisaged expenditure between 1958 and
1963 of 55.4 billion old francs. Of this sum 75% was to be met by self-financing.
 Again, in 1972, when Michelin decided to expand its North American plants to produce
radial tyres, $250 million of the $400 million investment came from their reserves while the
other $150 million came from a group of New York based banks (Lottman, 1998, 403).
 The second key factor in maintaining the Michelin family’s control over the company was
through the use of dual-class shares. Control of the company was kept in the family through the
use of the partnership’s shares and strict rules as to who could hold these shares. In 1928 these
rules stipulated how shares would be kept in the family:
       …they [holders’ shares] may be passed on to descendants or their relations up to the
       fourth degree [of consanguinity] or to someone who is already a shareholder. In all
       other cases the transfer is subordinate to the agreement of the Inspection Board and its
       managers, and, in default of this agreement, to the right of preemption that is formally
       reserved to the other shareholders. (CL, 4908/3, Mai, 1930)
With respect to the ordinary shares of the company the articles of association stipulate that
shares held for more than four years by residents of a country within the European Union have
double voting rights.



                                                                                          27
L’ORÉAL


 L’Oréal, one of the leading fashion and cosmetics manufacturers in the world, was listed by
the Wall Street Journal as the seventy first largest global public company ranked by market
value ($47 billion) at the end of August 2003. In 2002 with a labour force of nearly 50,000 it
had sales of $15 billion. The origins of L’Oréal trace back to 1909 when a simple partnership
trading as Schueller and Spery was established to sell a newly created synthetic product for
dyeing hair. Eugène Schueller, a chemist by training, manufactured the hairdye in his home and
sold it under the brand name Auréole. The name of the company summed up its activities, the
French Company for the Harmless Dyeing of Hair (La Société Française de Teintures
Inoffensives pour Cheveux). Starting with a capital of 135,000 francs it was transformed into a
limited liability company (société anonyme) in 1939 by a merger with Foncière Driant under
the name Société l’Oréal. The new company had a capital of 7 million francs. In 1950 it
merged with Monsavon, a company that it would later sell to Procter and Gamble. In 1953 its
turnover was 60 million francs with net profits of 1.85 million. Over the next fifty years it grew
at a very fast pace so that by 2002 it had net profits of 1.2 billion euros. This performance has
made it one of the outstanding shares on the French stock exchange.
  With such a sizeable growth it might be natural to expect a wide diffusion of ownership of
the shares of the company. This is not the case with closely held shares accounting for 352
million of the 655 million shares outstanding. Its founder, Eugène Schueller, and more recently
his daughter, Ms. Liliane Bettencourt, since the death of her father in 1957, have been the
major shareholders. In 1967 analysts at the Crédit Lyonnais estimated that Madame Bettencourt
owned over 50% of the capital of the company (CL Etude 9011/4, February 9, 1967) at a time
when its turnover amounted to about 295 million francs and its market capitalisation was 528
million francs. In 1974 she sold nearly half of her L’Oréal stock to the Swiss multi-national
Nestlé, combining with the latter to establish a French holding company, Gesparal which owns
54% of L’Oréal. Madame Bettencourt and her family currently own 51% of Gesparal with
Nestlé controlling the other 49%. So although Madame Bettencourt’s ownership of L’Oréal has
been reduced, she still has over twenty five per cent of a far larger company. Effectively,
through the link with Nestlé, Gesparal can ensure that no corporate predator takes over L’Oréal.
The French business magazine, Le Nouvel Economiste, valued Madame Bettencourt’s fortune
at 13.7 billion euro in 2002 making her the richest person in France.



                                                                                           28
 It was not always plain sailing for L’Oréal. In the early 1950s it was regarded as a poor credit
risk for long-term lending and the difficulty the company had borrowing from the banking
system at this stage in its development may be observed from the caution that its bankers had
lending it money in 1951 shortly after its takeover of Monsavon. At that time the conclusion of
the Crédit Lyonnais’ analyst was:
       A slowing down of its sales could quickly place the Company in difficulties: this
       slowdown has already manifested itself for some of the Oréal lines (permanent waves,
       hair dyes, Ambre Solaire, shampoos, etc.). The Company has announced some cutback
       measures: reductions in seasonal employments, and a cutback of 20% on the publicity
       budget but overhead costs have not been noticeably reduced, the Company contending
       that the two merged businesses cannot use the same sales representatives and that
       reductions in the advertising budget will take time. (CL, 5 July 1951)
 The analyst was obviously intrigued as to how a company could boil and filter ‘tallow (60%),
palm oil (20%), the residual elements of pork butcher’s meat (10%) and horse grease (10%)’
into soap and sell it as a quality product. He expressed misgivings as to the amount spent on
advertising – a sine qua non of the cosmetics business - commenting on its ‘flashy publicity’
(‘une publicité tapageuse’). He recommended that the bank should be prudent and only lend to
L’Oréal on a short term rather than a long-term basis.
 Faced with conservative bankers who found it difficult to detect the growth of a business in
this dubiously perceived area of ladies fashion (‘la mode féminine’) the Schueller/Bettencourt
family concentrated to a significant extent on self-financing to meet its capital expenditure
requirements. In May 1971 another analyst emphasised the extent of this self-financing and the
company’s low level of indebtedness:
       For the period 1971-74 the group l’Oréal has an important investment programme
       amounting to a total of nearly 330 million francs. Its financing will be easily assured by
       the recent borrowing of 75 million francs and by self-financing (depreciation +
       retained profits 1970: about 81 million francs). No numerical increase in capital is
       expected, particularly because the level of indebtedness is only about 30 per cent of the
       group’s permanent capital. (CL Etude 9011/8, 26 Mai, 1971).
  The reliance on self-financing provided L’Oréal with a strong balance sheet that enabled it to
borrow long-term from the banking system to finance new acquisitions. By the 1970s ‘ladies
fashion’ had become recognized as a very strong growth market and L’Oréal was well
positioned to become the global fashion leader that it has since become.



                                                                                          29
PEUGEOT

 Peugeot is the leading French constructor of automobiles. It is the second largest automobile
company in Europe. In 2002 it employed over 190,000 workers and produced sales of 54.4
billion euro. Peugeot, as a family controlled company, has had a long and fascinating history.
The origin of the Peugeot manufacturing dynasty stretches back to the water mill construction
business of Jean Pequignot Peugeot in the eighteenth century. An ability to adapt to new trends
and technologies has always been the hallmark of this family. In 1815 the brothers Jean-Pierre
and Jean Frédéric Peugeot teamed up with Jacques Maillard-Salins to run a steelworks and a
saw blade factory in the area of Montbéliard. The establishment of the saw blade factory was
helped by loans from Swiss bankers in Basle – see Lévy-Leboyer (1964, 349). In 1842, Jean-
Frédéric invented the peppermill, still an essential element of the average kitchen. But this was
only one of many ironmongery objects that the company specialized in. Saws, razors, sewing
machines, clocks, stays and hoops for crinoline skirts etc were produced in the factory. Its
ironmongery experience led to it producing the spokes of bicycle wheels and this in turn led to
it becoming the biggest bicycle manufacturer in France. Bicycle production in turn led to
automobile production.
 In 1896 Armand Peugeot established the ‘Société Anonyme des Automobiles Peugeot’
despite the misgivings of some members of the family who refused to allow him to use the
Peugeot ‘lion’ logo for a further fourteen years. The nominal capital of the company was
800,000 francs divided into 800 shares of 1,000 francs each. 350 shares were granted to
Armand Peugeot as a payment for ‘his contribution in bringing in the factory at Audincourt, the
patents, cars in the process of production, leases, etc’ (CL November, 1908). In 1898 the
nominal capital was increased to 2,400,000 francs through the creation of another 1,600 shares
of 1,000 francs each.
 This increase in capital was to help finance the establishment of a new factory at Lille. By
1900 Peugeot was producing the Peugeot Phaeton Type 28 with a speed of 35 kilometres an
hour. Over its first ten years the company’s balance sheet showed losses alternating with profits
as the technology of the automobile industry underwent sizeable transformations as the
following table, compiled by a Crédit Lyonnais analyst, shows:
                                 Year                   Francs
                                1896/7                  -53,000




                                                                                          30
                                1897/8                 169,000
                                1898/9                 360,000
                                1899/0                 532,000
                                1900/1                -345,000
                                1901/2              -1,001,000
                                1902/3                 464,000
                                1903/4                 827,000
                                1904/5                 315,000
                                1905/6               1,164,000
                                1906/7               1,585,000
  The large losses experienced between 1900-1902 were due to expenditure incurred on
outdated models and heavy depreciation of the stock of spare parts for these models, as well as
losses on the hiring of commercial vehicles. Over the twelve-year period from 1896 to 1907 the
company made profits of 3,547,000 francs of which 2,104,000 francs (59%) were distributed as
profits and 1,443,000 (4l%) put into reserves. From this it may be seen that from the very start
Peugeot had a policy of re-investing a considerable part of its profits. So was Peugeot, at the
turn of the twentieth century, a company that could be considered as a good lending
opportunity for the bank. The analysts of the Crédit Lyonnais considered that the industrial and
financial situation of the company was ‘good and solid’. They then qualified this by noting
‘Nevertheless because of the risks inherent in the automobile industry arising from the intense
competition both from French and international companies, the company is not guaranteed to
produce regular profits in the future’ (CL, November 1908, p. 33). They were correct in this
assessment because survival in the automobile industry at this time was difficult due to
technological shocks ranging from changes in engine and chassis types to transformations in
assembly line techniques.
  The Peugeot family almost lost control of the company in the late 1920s due to financing
problems. The Crédit Lyonnais blamed this policy on the arrival of three newcomers to the
company between 1923-29 - Lucien Rosengart (1923-28) and Ricardo Gualino and Albert
Oustric between 1928-30. Rosengart was first employed by the Peugeot family to assist in the
financing of the company. His financing technique was to set up a separate company and to use
it to borrow against the inventories held by Peugeot. He drew bills of exchange against these
inventories and discounted them at the Banque de France, an activity that split the management
of Peugeot during Rosengart’s five year employment at Peugeot – see Loubet (1999, 179). He



                                                                                         31
even briefly took over, as Managing Director from Robert Peugeot as a result of the latter’s
long illness. Rosengart, described as someone who ‘passait pour avoir des idées originales en
matière de construction automobile,’ was criticized by the Crédit Lyonnais for changing the
company’s policy to one of expanding dividends at the expense of making sufficient provision
for depreciation and increasing reserves. The analyst at the Crédit Lyonnais argued that rapid
technological progress created the need for continuous re-tooling of factories suggesting that
annual depreciations of 20 million francs should have been made rather than the 12 to 13
million francs as practiced between 1925-26 to 1928-29 at a time when dividend payments had
been annually increased from 10 to 21 million francs. Rosengart was forced to resign in
January 1929. Peugeot, in need of financial assistance, linked up with Gualino and Oustric.
This was to be a very short arrangement for the bankruptcy of the latter’s bank in 1930 led to
considerable losses at Peugeot. The family took back control of the company appointing three
out of the five board directors - Robert Peugeot, Jean-Pierre Peugeot and Jules Peugeot.
 The brief association with financial controllers such as Rosengart and bankers such as
Oustric, allied with the temporary move away from a policy of heavy reliance on self-
financing, created a near catastrophic result for the Peugeot family in the early 1930s. This
experience appears to have hardened the family to returning to its tried and tested policy of
investing through self-financing. Chadeau, describing how Peugeot emerged as the market
leader between 1932-40 in France, focused on the self-financing strategy of the company:
       …Peugeot’s leadership decreed that each model launched had to be profitable in its
       own right, rather than as apart of a range. Whatever the rationale, the strategy made
       self-financing feasible and left family ownership intact. (1993, 195)
 Loubet observed that up to 1963 it is clear that Peugeot gave priority to reducing
indebtedness or not taking on debt, quite the contrary to the approach of state owned
companies, Simca and Renault (Loubet, 1995: 81). By the 1970s Peugeot was sufficiently large
for it to acquire 90 per cent of Citroen’s capital and then in 1977 it bought out Chrysler’s
European operations. Notwithstanding the acquisitions and mergers of Peugeot, and the use of
dynamic outsiders such as Jacques Calvet and Jean-Pierre Folz as CEOs, the family’s holding
in Peugeot currently amounts to 27 per cent. Even more significantly the Peugeot family
controls over 40% of the voting rights. The family’s wealth was estimated at 2.67 billion euro
in 2002 by Le Nouvel Economiste.




                                                                                           32
Conclusion


    This paper has attempted to show that historical phenomena have had a major impact in the
determination of France’s corporate ownership structure. Corporate finance is generated from
three sources – banks, the capital market and self-financing. If we consider them as the three
channels leading to corporate investment, then, history shows that two of these channels, the
banks and the capital market, were subject to considerable upheaval rendering them inoperable
as financing channels for a long period in France’s corporate history. The major financial
shocks arose as a result of the rise and collapse of John Law’s Mississippi System and the
hyper-inflationary experience generated by the assignats. These events traumatized the
generation that experienced them. Furthermore, the strong oral tradition that emphasized the
failures of Law and the assignats soured further generations towards financial innovation.
Kindleberger (1989) emphasized the extent that these episodes traumatized the French:
         There [France] the trauma of the Mississippi Bubble and the collapse of John Law’s
         System slowed down the development of banking and the expansion of industry.
         Together with the collapse of the Directorate in the 1790s, it made the French neurotic,
         or even paranoid, about banking for years. (1989: 234)
    The counterparts of this reaction against financial innovation was the continued recourse to
notaires to fulfill a demi-banking role and the development of a strong specie holding mentality
amongst the French. This in turn made it difficult for banks to develop fully even after the
establishment of the big multi-branch banks, such as the Crédit Lyonnais and the Société
Générale, in the 1860s. Faced with restricted access to the banks and capital markets, business
entrepreneurs had to have recourse to a do it yourself approach, namely reliance on self-
financing as a method of growing their business.2 This restricted access, along with the banks’

2
  The question may well be posed that if the thesis of a weak banking and capital market structure is accepted
what happened to the performance of the French economy. Initial economic research by scholars at the
Research Center in Entrepreneurial History at Harvard, encapsulated in Landes (1969), suggested that the
French economy had been backward relative to the British economy during the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries. Poor French entrepreneurship was put down as a causative factor to the inadequate performance.
More recent quantitative research initiated by the Institut de Science Economique Appliquée, under the
direction of Jean Marczewski, has challenged this retardationist approach and provided strong evidence that
this was not the case – for a review of this literature see Cameron and Freedeman (1983). If this latter
revionism is accepted then it may be argued that, because the French economy on average performed
satisfactorily relative to its neighbours, the thesis that the banking and capital market structures were weak
does not hold up. Two alternative interpretations may arise (1) the French economy would have produced
even greater economic growth if it had been underpinned by a strong financial sector. There is a growing
literature showing the way in which the financial sector has assisted total factor productivity – see, for
example, Levine (1997) and Beck et al (2000). This literature would imply that if France had possessed a



                                                                                                            33
apparent willingness to invest outside France, may also have been responsible for having
generated an anti-banking sentiment on the part of French entrepreneurs. This anti-banking
sentiment was forcibly advanced by Louis Renault, the founder of Renault, when he stated:
         Bankers are not philantrophists, they are money merchants and one should as often as
         possible not have any business with them. (Loubet, n.d.)
Self-financing in turn enabled these entrepreneurs and their descendants to retain sizeable
shareholdings in the family controlled business. Hence, from an historical perspective, it is not
surprising to see French families owning such a large proportion of French corporations.
Examples of this reliance on self-financing drawn from the experiences of the Michelin,
Bettencourt/Schueller, and Peugeot families have been shown above. Furthermore this style of
ownership ties in with the French mentality that asset ownership is an inter-generational
phenomenon. The objective of holding wealth is to pass on to the next generation of the family
assets that, hopefully, have risen in value.
  Though this does not square with the Berle and Means (1932) approach as to the way
corporations should be owned and controlled it does not necessarily mean that the French
owned corporations are less efficient than their American counterparts. Family control can
enable companies to take long term investment decisions without all the emphasis of short-
termism that widely diffused stock market ownership may necessitate. While Landes (1949,
1969) was of the view that France was hobbled by family control of companies there is a strong
counter argument to make that many of these family owned companies provided France with
dynamic leadership promoting rather than retarding French economic activity.
  This paper has emphasized the importance of history in the evolution of France’s corporate
ownership structure. There are of course other more recent elements that help explain the high
degree of concentration of corporate ownership by families in France. The absence of funded
pension schemes has led to a far lower profile by pension funds and assurance companies in the
French stock market. In 1997 pension funds and assurance companies constituted 49% of
household savings in the United Kingdom and 30% in the United States as against 18% in
France. Recent industrial unrest in France has been exactly about this issue with trade unions
arguing that it is the state that should provide long and generous pensions on a pay-as-you-go
basis. The continuation of this approach to pensions implies, given the demographic structure,


more sophisticated financial sector between the eighteenth and twentieth centuries that it would have achieved
an even higher rate of growth than that ascribed to it by economic historians; (2) the reliance on self-financing
enabled entrepreneurs to make long-term investment decisions free from the constraints of a capital market
emphasising short term results.



                                                                                                              34
that the percentage of GDP devoted to retirement payments will rise from 12 per cent at present
to 16 per cent by 2040.The consequences of this for taxation are probably unsustainable in the
long run. If so, there will be increasing emphasis on funded pension schemes which will
produce greater investment by pension funds and assurance companies in the French stock
market.
 Changes in governments in France produced waves of nationalizations between 1945 and
1982. More recently this process has been reversed. The privatizations of the Chirac
government in the 1980s increased the number of French shareholders from 1.7 million in 1982
to 6.2 million in 1987 (Goldstein, 1996, 463).
 The different corporate ownership structure in France, and, indeed, in many continental
European countries, to that of the Anglo-American model raises the issue as to why there has
not been a universalist convergence to the latter. Has it been due to the inadequate corporate
governance in the civil versus the common law countries as La Porta et al. (1998, 2000) have
stressed? This paper has tried to show that there have been strong historical factors at work that
help explain France’s current corporate ownership structure. One of these factors has been the
way financial collapses, such as the Mississippi System, and the assignats have fashioned
attitudes towards money, banks, credit and financial innovation – the major props of corporate
finance. The Mississippi System – the biggest attempt at corporate re-structuring in the
eighteenth century - and the assignats both aimed to remove the Midas fixation on gold in
France and replace specie with banknotes and credit. Ironically, their respective failures
actually reinforced the Midas fixation. The result of this was that financial innovation was
frowned upon and the banking sector, from 1720 until the 1930s, was only allowed to grow
within the constraints of a specie based monetary system. France’s historical experience
generated opposition to external finance that in turn led to internal finance and concentrated
ownership. Another one of the historical factors highlighted in this paper is the different
approach to inheritance. In France even if one wanted to disinherit the ‘idiot heir’ one could not
do so. All one can do is to educate him/her. The French ‘grandes écoles’ have been intensively
used by the large corporate owning families to ensure that their successors are capable to
handling the ‘patrimoine’ in an appropriate manner. The continued participation of the
Michelins and Peugeots in the management of the companies created by their ancestors in the
nineteenth century shows the strength of the French family model.
 Family control of companies is not necessarily the bad thing that some Anglo-American
commentators make it out to be. Family ownership may prevent new blood coming into a



                                                                                           35
company but sometimes the old blood is able to take a longer term perspective and to
concentrate more resources on research and development than a young corporate raider whose
leitmotif may be one of asset stripping at the expense of all that has been historically built up by
a company. Evidence to support this view for France has recently emerged in Sraer and
Thesmar’s paper (2004). Furthermore for the U.S. Anderson and Reeb (2003) have shown that
family owned owned companies in the S & P 500 had a 6.65% better return on assets and that
their assets and were valued 10% higher by the stock market in the U.S. Keeping it in the
family may be good for not just the insiders but also outsider shareholders.




                                                                                             36
Bibliography
Allouche, José and Bruno Amann (1995). ‘Le retour triomphal du capitalisme familial’ in De
Jacques Coeur à Renault: Gestionnaires et Organisation (Presses de l’Université des Sciences
Sociales de Toulouse)
Anderson, Malcolm (1965). ‘The Myth of the Two Hundred Families’. Political Studies, June.
Anderson, Ronald and David Reeb (2003). ‘Founding-Family Ownership and Firm
Performance: Evidence from the S&P 500’. Journal of Finance, vol. 58, no. 3.
Barca, Fabrizio and Marco Becht (2001). The Control of Corporate Europe (OUP, Oxford).
Baskin, Jonathan and Paul Miranti (1997). A History of Corporate Finance (CUP, Cambridge)
Beck, Thorsten, Ross Levine and Norman Loayza (2000). ‘Finance and the Sources of
Growth’, Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 58.
Bellon, Bertrand (1980). Le Pouvoir financier et l’industrie en France (Seuil, Paris).
Berle, Adolf, and Gardiner Means (1932). The Modern Corporation and Private Property
(MacMillan, New York).
Bloch, Laurence and Elizabeth Kremp (2001). ‘Ownership and Voting Power in France’ in
Barca and Becht.
Blondel, Christine and Ludo Van der Heyden (1999). ‘The Wendel Family: ‘Affectio
Societatis’. The Story of A French Industrial Dynasty (1704-1976)’ (Working paper, INSEAD,
Fontainebleau)
Blondel, Christine, N Rowell and Ludo Van der Heyden (2000). ‘Prevalence of Patrimonial
Firms on Paris Stock Exchange: Analysis of the top 250 Companies in 1993 and 1998’
(Working Paper, INSEAD, Fontainebleau)
Bonin, Hubert (1988). Histoire économique de la France depuis 1880 (Masson, Paris).
Bonin, Hubert (1992). ‘The Political Influence of Bankers and Financiers in France in the
years, 1850-1960’ in Cassis.
Cassis, Youssef (1992). Finance and Financiers in European History 1880-1960. (C.U.P.,
Cambridge).
Cameron, Rondo (1961, re-print 2000). France and the Economic Development of Europe
1800-1914 (Princeton University Press,1961; reprinted Routledge 2000).
Cameron, Rondo, Olga Crisp, Hugh T. Patrick and Richard Tilly (1967). Banking in the Early
Stages of Industrialization (OUP, Oxford)



                                                                                         37
Cameron, Rondo and Charles E. Freedeman (1983). ‘French Economic Growth A Radical
Revision’ Social Science History, vol. 7 no. 1.
Chadeau, Emmanuel (1993). ‘The Large Family Firm in Twentieth-Century France’. Business
History, vol. 35, no. 4, October.
Du Tot, [Nicolas] (1738). Réflexions politiques sur les finances et le commerce (Paul Harsin,
ed. Paris, 1935).
Easterbrook, F.H. (1997). ‘International Corporate Differences: Market or Law?’ Journal of
Applied Corporate Finance, vol. 9 no. 4.
Flandreau, Marc (2004). The Glitter of Gold. France, Bimetallism, and the Emergence of the
International Gold Standard, 1848-73 (Oxford University Press)
Goldstein, Andrea (1996). ‘Privatizations and Corporate Governance in France,’ Banca
Nazionale del Lavoro Quarterly Review, no. 199.
Gueslin, André      (1992). ‘Banks and State in France from the 1880s to the 1930s: the
Impossible Advance of the Banks’ in Cassis.
Harris, S.E. (193). The Assignats (Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass.)
Healy, Paul M. and G. Krishna Palepu (2003). ‘The Fall of Enron’ Journal of Economic
Perspectives, vol. 17, no. 2.
Hoffman Philip T., Gilles Postel-Vinay and Jean-Laurent Rosenthal (2001). Des Marchés sans
prix (EHESS, Paris).
Jammes, André (1998). Les Didot. Trois siècles de typographie et de bibliophilie 1698-1998
(Paris).
Kindleberger, Charles (1978; re-published 1898) Manias, Panics and Crashes (Macmillan,
London)
Kindleberger, Charles (1984) A Financial History of Western Europe (Allen & Unwin,
London)
Landes, David S. (1949). ‘French Entrepreneurship and Industrial Growth in the Nineteenth
Century,’ Journal of Economic History, vol. 9.
Landes, David S. (1969). The Unbound Prometheus (Cambridge University Press)
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-De-Silanes and Andrei Shleifer (1998). ‘Corporate
Ownership Around the World’, Journal of Finance, vol. L1V, no. 2, April.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-De-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny (2000).
‘Investor Protection and Corporate Governance’, Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 58.




                                                                                       38
Lafaurie, Jean (1981) Les Assignats et les papiers-monnaies émis par l’état au XVIIIe siècle
(Le Léopard d’Or, Paris)
Law, John (1934). Oeuvres Complètes ed. Paul Harsin, (Paris)
Levine, Ross (1997). ‘Financial Development and Economic Growth: Views and Agenda’
Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 35.
Lévy-Leboyer, Maurice (1964). Les Banques européennes et l’industrialisation internationale
dans la première moitié du XIXe siècle (P.U.F., Paris)
Lévy-Leboyer, Maurice (1980). ‘The Large Corporation in Modern France’ in Chandler, A. and
Daems H. (eds.). Managerial Hierarchies: Comparative Perspectives on the Rise of the Modern
Industrial Enterprise (Harvard University Press)
Lottman, Herbert (1998). Michelin 100 ans d’aventures (Flammarion, Paris)
Loubet, Jean-Louis (ed.). Citroen, Peugeot, Renault. Histoire de stratégies d’enterprises
Loubet, Jean-Louis (ed.) (1999). L’Industrie automobile 1905-1971 (Droz, Geneva).
Luthy, Herbert (1959). La Banque protestante en France (S.E.V.P.E.N., Paris).
Murphy, Antoin E. (1986). Richard Cantillon: Entrepreneur and Economist (OUP, Oxford).
Murphy, Antoin E. (1997). John Law: Economic Theorist and Policy-Maker (OUP, Oxford).
Plessis, Alain (1992). ‘Bankers in French Society 1860s-1960s’ in Cassis.
Pollard, Sidney (1985). ‘Capital Exports, 1870-1914’. Economic History Review, 2nd ser. 38,
November.
Rajan, Raghuram G. and Luigi Zingales (2001) ‘The Great Reversals: The Politics of Financial
Development in the 20th Century’ NBER Working Paper 8178 (Cambridge, Mass.)
Teneul, G.F. (1961). Le financement des enterprises en France depuis la fin du XIXe siècle à
nos jours (Paris).
Turgot, Anne Robert Jacques (1769/70). ‘Réflexions sur la formation et la distribution de la
richesse’ in Éphémérides du citoyen, vols. 11-12 (1769) and vol. 1 (1770).
Turgot, Anne Robert Jacques (1749, [1913]). Oeuvres de Turgot ed. Gustav Schelle (Alcan,
Paris)
Say, Léon and Joseph Chailley (1891). Nouveau dictionnaire d’économie politique (Paris).
Sraer, David and David Thesmar (2004) ‘Performance and Behavior of Family Firms:
Evidence from the French Stock Market’. Unpublished paper, CREST-INSEE, Malakoff,
France.
White, Eugene (1989). ‘Was there a Solution to the Ancien Régime’s Financial Dilemma’
Journal of Economic History, Vol. 49.



                                                                                            39
 Chart 1
        Factors Influencing France’s Corporate Ownership Structure


               Corporate Ownership                       State


                                                        Nationalizations/Privatizations
                  Family Ownership                      Pension System – Pay-as-
                                                        you-go
                                                        Legal Structure – Rules on
                                                        mergers/take-overs


Historical   Inheritance             Self-financing



                                                      Weak banking and capital
                                                             markets



                                                        Financial traumas of
                                                         Law’s System, the
                                                           assignats, etc




                                                                           40
