                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                    NEGOTIATING FREE TRADE

                                             Phillipe Aghion
                                               Pol Antràs
                                            Elhanan Helpman

                                          Working Paper 10721
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10721


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2004




We thank Ran Spiegler for a useful discussion, Gene Grossman and Davin Chor for comments on an earlier
draft, Jane Trahan for editorial assistance, and Helpman thanks the National Science Foundation for financial
support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Philippe Aghion, Pol Antràs, and Elhanan Helpman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Negotiating Free Trade
Philippe Aghion, Pol Antràs, and Elhanan Helpman
NBER Working Paper No. 10721
August 2004, Revised December 2006
JEL No. C78, F13

                                               ABSTRACT

We develop a dynamic bargaining model in which a leading country endogenously decides whether to

sequentially negotiate free trade agreements with subsets of countries or engage in simultaneous multilateral

bargaining with all countries at once. We show how the structure of coalition externalities shapes the choice

between sequential and multilateral bargaining, and we identify circumstances in which the grand coalition

is the equilibrium outcome, leading to worldwide free trade. A model of international trade is then used to

illustrate equilibrium outcomes and how they depend on the structure of trade and protection. Global free

trade is not achieved when the political-economy motive for protection is sufficiently large. Furthermore, the

model generates both “building bloc” and “stumbling bloc” effects of preferential trade agreements. In

particular, we describe an equilibrium in which global free trade is attained only when preferential trade

agreements are permitted to form (a building bloc effect), and an equilibrium in which global free trade is

attained only when preferential trade agreements are forbidden (a stumbling bloc effect). The analysis

identifies conditions under which each of these outcomes emerges.

Philippe Aghion                      Pol Antràs                           Elhanan Helpman
Department of Economics              Department of Economics              Department of Economics
Harvard University                   Harvard University                   Harvard University
Littauer Center                      1805 Cambridge Street                Cambridge, MA 02138
Cambridge, MA 02138                  Littauer Center 230                  and NBER
and NBER                             Cambridge, MA 02138                  ehelpman@harvard.edu
paghion@fas.harvard.edu              and NBER
                                     pantras@fas.harvard.edu
1       Introduction
One of the most debated issues in international economics is whether regionalism or multilat-
eralism is the most eﬀective strategy for achieving global free trade. According to Bhagwati
(1993), the first wave of regionalism took place in the 1960s, and it failed to spread because
the U.S. supported a multilateral approach. But the U.S. changed positions, and – starting
with the 1980s – has favored regional trade agreements. This led to a second wave of region-
alism, which brought about a multitude of such agreements. The gradual enlargement of the
European Union, the U.S.-Canada Free Trade Agreement, NAFTA and MERCOSUR, are
examples of this trend. Between 1958 and March 2004, the GATT/WTO secretariat received
notification of 203 agreements.1 The recent stalling of the Doha round further suggests that
multilateralism, which was the dominant force towards free trade in the first few decades
after World War II, is falling out of fashion.
    Economists disagree on whether preferential trade agreements are “building blocs” that
facilitate the attainment of global free trade, or “stumbling blocs” that derail the process of
trade liberalization. The latter view has been forcefully promoted by Bhagwati (1991, 1993),
who coined these terms.2 In this view, even when preferential trade agreements generate static
welfare gains they reduce the incentives to seek further trade liberalization. The importance
of this “dynamic path” question was clearly laid out by Bhagwati (1993) and Krugman (1993).
The latter also showed that in some circumstances welfare reaches a minimum when the world
consists of two or three customs unions.3 The welfare consequences of stalled multilateralism,
caused by the rise of regionalism, could therefore be significant.
    Other economists, such as Summers (1991), think that preferential trade agreements
do not impede global free trade. They argue that partial trade liberalization is better than
none, and that the consolidation of a large number of countries into a small number of trading
blocs facilitates multilateral negotiations. And Baldwin (1996) argues that a deepening of
integration between a subset of countries may raise the incentives of outside countries to seek
accession to the free trade area. Under these circumstances preferential trade agreements
encourage further trade liberalization and the expansion of the free trading blocs.4
    1
     Many preferential trade agreements are not regional. The U.S.-Israel free trade agreement is a notable
example. Following Bhagwati (1993, p. 22), we use a terminology in which ‘regionalism’ is “...defined broadly
as preferential trade agreements among a subset of nations.” That is, we downplay the geographical nature
of preferential trade agreements and emphasize instead the fact that they constitute an agreement between a
subset of countries.
   2
     See Panagariya (2000) for a recent survey of this literature.
   3
     See Deardorﬀ and Stern (1994), Bond and Syropoulos (1996), and Frankel, Stein and Wei (1996) for an
analysis of this issue in alternative economic frameworks.
   4
     Furthermore, if an existing trading bloc follows a policy of “open” regionalism, by which accession is
sequentially granted to all countries that demand it, this sequential process is likely to lead to worldwide free
trade. See Yi (1996) for a discussion of “open” versus “closed” regionalism. In complementary work, Ethier
(1998) presents a model in which multilateral liberalization among a subset of developed countries raises
the incentives of outside (less developed) countries to seek preferential free trade agreements with particular


                                                       1
     Another way to pose the question of regionalism versus multilateralism is to ask whether
multilateral bargaining or sequential bargaining are more likely to lead to global free trade.
In multilateral bargaining all countries simultaneously participate in a single round of trade
negotiations. In sequential bargaining negotiators proceed through several rounds, with dif-
ferent subsets of countries participating at diﬀerent stages of the process. In this paper we
compare these two negotiation strategies. Since trade negotiations involve bargaining, we
believe that it is important to address these issues in a framework that fully specifies the
bargaining process.5
     We develop a dynamic bargaining model of coalition formation, where a coalition consists
of a preferential trade agreement. A leading country decides endogenously whether to nego-
tiate sequentially with only a subset of countries or simultaneously with all countries. If the
leading country chooses the sequential path, it also has to decide which follower countries to
approach first, which second, and so on. We follow Bhagwati (1993) in adopting the view
that the U.S. has been the leading country in the post—World War II period, and that it
has disproportionately aﬀected the process of trade liberalization. For this reason we model
the bargaining game as a game in which one country, the leader, has special agenda-setting
power.
     In Section 2 we develop a simple transferable-utility game between three countries. One
of the countries is the leader with agenda-setting power. In the first stage the leader decides
to negotiate multilaterally or sequentially. If it chooses multilateral bargaining, the leader
makes a simultaneous oﬀer to form a coalition with the two follower countries. If it chooses
the sequential path, the leader also decides which follower country to approach first. At each
stage of the game the agenda-setter makes take-it-or-leave-it oﬀers. This bargaining game
allows us to identify the payoﬀ of every coalition as a function of the coalition structure,
i.e., the value function, and this mapping allows us then to characterize the solution to the
bargaining game.
     We first take the value function as given, and define two properties of this function that
play a central role in the subsequent analysis: coalition externalities and grand-coalition
superadditivity. A coalition is subject to coalition externalities when its payoﬀ depends on
which other coalitions form. In the simple three-country setup, this means that coalition
externalities emerge whenever the size of a country’s payoﬀ depends on whether the other
two countries form a coalition or not. Payoﬀs exhibit grand-coalition superadditivity when the
payoﬀ of the grand coalition is larger than the payoﬀ of all countries combined in alternative
coalition structures. This condition is satisfied in various models of international trade when
free trade is Pareto-eﬃcient and every country seeks to maximize its aggregate welfare. The
members of the initial group of liberalizing countries.
   5
     Although the desirability of free trade can be questioned, for the purpose of this paper we assume that
free trade is desirable, and we seek to identify negotiation strategies that lead to global fee trade.



                                                     2
concepts of externalities and superadditivity have been used by Ray and Vohra (1997, 1999),
Gomes (2003) and Maskin (2003) in various applications.
    With these concepts in hand, we describe in Section 3 a benchmark result: if the payoﬀs
are grand-coalition superadditive and no coalition externalities exist, then the agenda-setter
is indiﬀerent between multilateral and sequential bargaining and the grand coalition forms
in equilibrium. Crucial for this result is the ability of countries to transfer utility within
coalitions by means of side payments. This ensures that the leader country is able to in-
ternalize the welfare gains from the grand coalition. In the absence of such transfers global
free trade may not be the equilibrium outcome, as Riezman (1985) showed in a cooperative
game-theoretic model.6 We believe, however, that it is realistic to model trade negotiations
as games with transferable utility, because the exchange of concessions on non-trade-related
issues often serves the role of transfers that redistribute the gains from trade liberalization.7
    The benchmark result relies on the assumption that there are no coalition externalities.
As we show in Section 4, however, non-zero coalition externalities are the rule in the formation
of free trade areas. Intuitively, if the reduction in trade barriers associated with a free trade
area (FTA) aﬀects world prices, the welfare of outside countries or trading blocs will be
aﬀected by the FTA.8 Importantly, we show that externalities can be positive or negative,
depending on whether the FTA raises or lowers the world price of certain goods, and whether
outside countries are net importers or exporters of these goods.
    The generic presence of coalition externalities motivates our analysis in Section 5, in
which we show that if the payoﬀs are grand-coalition superadditive and the coalition exter-
nalities are nonzero, then the leader is not indiﬀerent between multilateral and sequential
bargaining. In particular, the leader strictly prefers sequential bargaining when the coalition
externalities are negative in at least one country, and it strictly prefers multilateral bargain-
ing when the coalition externalities are positive in both follower countries. Furthermore, we
show that – regardless of the sign and size of coalition externalities – the grand coalition
forms in equilibrium, leading to global free trade. We label this result as our “Free Trade
Proposition”.9
    6
      Burbridge et al. (1997) develop an alternative coalition-formation game in which the grand coalition fails
to form even with transfers within customs unions. Their result is, however, driven by the static nature of the
game and special features of the coalition-formation process.
    7
      Non-trade-related concessions include agreements on product and labor standards, and political reforms,
such as the reforms that Mexico was expected to pursue in order to participate in NAFTA. Bagwell and Staiger
(2004a) justify the modelling of lump-sum transfers in a similar manner. Their analysis is focused, however,
on diﬀerent issues of trade negotiations.
    8
      Bagwell and Staiger (2002) argue that the WTO’s principles of reciprocity and nondiscrimination have
been designed to neutralize such externalities. But preferential trade agreements rely on GATT’s Article XXIV,
which specifies exceptions to the principle of nondiscrimination, and these exceptions create discriminatory
rates of protection. See Bagwell and Staiger (2004b) for further details about this point. Chang and Winters
(2002) provide evidence of externalities caused by MERCOSUR, and Winters (1997) reviews the evidence of
such externalities in the process of European integration.
    9
      Our eﬃciency result is distinct from the Kemp and Wan (1976) result about customs unions. In our


                                                       3
    In Section 6 we use two examples to illustrate these results. In the first example sequential
bargaining is the equilibrium outcome, and it leads to global free trade. In the second example
multilateral bargaining is the equilibrium outcome, and it also leads to global free trade. We
show how these equilibria depend on trade structure and the structure of protection.
    A corollary of the results from Sections 5 and 6 is that, when grand-coalition superadditiv-
ity holds, preferential trade agreements are neither building blocs nor stumbling blocs on the
way to worldwide free trade. Although, as in Levy (1997) and Krishna (1998), a preferential
trade agreement may raise the reservation payoﬀ of member countries in subsequent negotia-
tions, grand-coalition superadditivity ensures that the leader has an incentive to strike deals
that bring about global free trade. Similarly, although a preferential trade agreement may
exert a negative externality on outside countries, as in Baldwin (1996), and make sequential
negotiations more attractive for the agenda-setter, grand-coalition superadditivity ensures
that multilateral negotiations also lead to global free trade. As a result, preferential trade
agreements aﬀect the distribution of payoﬀs but not the attainment of global free trade.
    In Section 7 we explore implications of the failure of grand-coalition superadditivity.
In particular, we derive conditions for the emergence of stumbling bloc and building bloc
equilibria. A stumbling bloc equilibrium is one in which the agenda setter prefers sequential
bargaining that does not lead to global free trade rather than multilateral bargaining that
leads to global free trade. And a building bloc equilibrium is one in which the agenda
setter prefers sequential bargaining that leads to global free trade rather than multilateral
bargaining that preserves the status quo. We illustrate such equilibria with two examples in
which negotiators maximize a function that describes a political objective, using an extreme
version of the Grossman and Helpman (1994) model of politics with special interest groups
in which this political-objective function coincides with aggregate profits.
    In the first example, political pressure from special interests does not prevent multilateral
bargaining from leading to free trade. Nevertheless, world profits are highest when the leader
forms a free trade area with one country only, and the leader prefers this limited FTA to
every other feasible outcome. Therefore the leader chooses sequential bargaining that does
not lead to global free trade. In this case preferential trade agreements are stumbling blocs
to worldwide free trade. If the WTO rules limited negotiations to multilateral bargaining,
general model, global free trade is attained for coalitions that can be customs unions, free trade areas, or
economic unions. In particular, in the analysis of free trade areas that we use to illustrate the broader logic of
these results the external tariﬀs of countries in a coalition do not change as a result of the formation of an FTA.
Moreover, the impact of the coalition on outside countries is precisely what determines the choice between
sequential and multilateral bargaining. Unlike Kemp and Wan’s result, our eﬃciency result is driven by the
transferability of utility, which ensures that one country fully internalizes the gains from trade liberalization.
   Our result is also distinct from the main result in Furusawa and Konishi (2004), who consider a network
of bilateral FTAs. Using network formation games, they show that in the presence of transferable utility the
global free trade network is pairwise stable.




                                                        4
these constraints would ensure a free trade outcome in economies of this sort.10
    In the second example multilateral bargaining does not lead to global free trade, because
the leader’s status-quo profits are higher than the residual profits it can get from an all-
encompassing FTA that the follower countries are willing to join. Moreover, the leader prefers
sequential bargaining, in which it gradually builds the grand coalition. In this case WTO
rules that restrict trade negotiations to multilateral bargaining would harm the prospects of
global free trade, whereas preferential trade agreements would encourage it.
    In Section 8, we restore our assumption of GC superadditivity and explore alternative
mechanisms that generate deviations from our global free trade result.11 In particular, we
show that an agenda setter who makes take-it-or-leave-it oﬀers to follower countries may
not be suﬃcient for global free trade when (i) following a rejection of its oﬀer by a follower
country in the first stage of the sequential subgame, the leader is allowed to make an oﬀer to
the second follower country in stage two; or (ii) the leader cannot commit to a payoﬀ to the
follower country in the first stage of the sequential bargaining subgame. These modifications
in the bargaining protocols can enhance the bargaining power of the follower countries to a
level at which the agenda-setter finds it too costly to attract both follower countries into a
FTA. We also show in Section 8 that under these circumstances sequential bargaining can be
a stumbling bloc for free trade but never a building bloc. Finally, we show that the structure
of coalition externalities shapes the choice between multilateral and sequential bargaining in
a way that is similar to the original model, as analyzed in Section 5. We oﬀer a summary of
the main results and suggestions for further research in Section 9.


2        The Bargaining Game
We consider a transferable-utility game between three countries: a, b, and c. We describe the
game in partition form. We define a coalition structure as a partition Γ of {a, b, c}. That is,
every country belongs to exactly one coalition. We interpret a coalition as a free trade area
(FTA) in which member countries trade at zero tariﬀs.
    10
     In Krishna (1998) the stumbling bloc eﬀect is derived in a model in which (i) markets are imperfectly
competitive and internationally segmented; (ii) governments maximize domestic profits; and (iii) side payments
between coalition members are not available. Our analysis suggests that the second of these features can
produce a stumbling bloc eﬀect. Furthermore, our analysis suggests that this feature can also produce a
building bloc eﬀect, which Krishna (1998) derives in footnote 20, but chooses to de-emphasize. Saggi and
Yildiz (2006) also study the choice between bilateral and multilateral trade negotiations in an economic
environment similar to Krishna (1998). We will discuss their contribution in Section 8.
  11
     At the end of Section 5, we show that our global free trade result holds in a variety of bargaining games:
games with many countries in which a rejection of the leader’s oﬀer ends the process of coalition formation,
games with many countries in which a rejection of the leader’s oﬀer transfers the agenda-setting power to a
diﬀerent country in a predetermined order, and games with many countries in which a rejection of the leader’s
oﬀer transfers stochastically the agenda-setting power to another country. We also show that it holds when
the leading country is allowed to oﬀer two subsequent FTAs to each of the two follower countries. Section 8
considers alternative bargaining protocols where our global free trade result may not hold.


                                                      5
                                                                                                                                    pts    Γ = {a, b, c}
                                                                                                 c                     b       acce
                                                                                                      makes offer to b

                                                                                  ept
                                                                                      s                                        rejec
                                                                                                                                     ts    Γ = {a, c}, {b}
                                                                               acc
                                                                           a
                                                                       a                             Γ = {a}, {b}, {c}
                                                             r to              rejects
                                                      o   ffe
                                                  kes
                                                ma                                                                               pt s      Γ = {a, b, c}
                                            c                                                c                          a    acce
                                                                                                     makes offer to a
                              ing
                           ain                                                        pts
                        arg                     mak                            acce                                          reje
                                                                                                                                           Γ = {b, c}, {a}
                     l B                           e   s of                                                                       c   ts
             u en
                 tia                                          fer          b
          Seq                                                     to   b
     c
                                                                                reje
                                                                                                 Γ = {a}, {b}, {c}
                                                                                    c   ts
         Mu
           ltil
                  ate
                     r   al B
                             arg
                                ain
                                   in   g   c   makes offers to a and b            a, b      a and b accept
                                                                                                                            Γ = {a, b, c}
                                                                                             ao
                                                                                                  rb
                                                                                                       rej
                                                                                                          ect

                                                                                                                            Γ = {a}, {b}, {c}



                                                                  Figure 1: Game tree


    For every partition Γ and every coalition C ∈ Γ the value function v (C; Γ) assigns a
payoﬀ to C given the coalition structure Γ. This payoﬀ is gross of lump-sum transfers. In
this and the next section we treat these value functions as given, but later we will show how
to construct them in specific models of international trade. The payoﬀ functions have to be
constructed from the objective functions that countries use to evaluate trade agreements.
    The game is played as follows: One country is the leader, which means that it is the
agenda-setter. Without loss of generality we assign this role to country c. In the first stage of
the game the leader decides whether to enter multilateral or sequential bargaining, as shown
in Figure 1.
    If c chooses multilateral bargaining, it makes a simultaneous take-it-or-leave-it oﬀer to
the follower countries a and b. The oﬀer consists of an FTA that includes all countries and
a system of lump-sum transfers. The transfers determine the payoﬀs P (a) and P (b) to
countries a and b, respectively. If the oﬀer is accepted by both countries, Γ = h{abc}i is the
resulting coalition structure and the game ends. In this case Γ has a single element, consisting
of the grand coalition, and the FTA leads to worldwide free trade. This sequence of events
is described in the lower part of the game tree in Figure 1.
    If one of the follower countries rejects c’s oﬀer, then the coalition {abc} does not form and



                                                                                  6
the game ends with no agreement. In this event the coalition structure is Γ = h{a} , {b} , {c}i.12
This too is depicted in the lower part of the game tree in Figure 1.
    Next consider the subgame in which c chooses sequential bargaining. In this event c has
to decide whether to make the first take-it-or-leave-it oﬀer to a or to b. If it makes the first
oﬀer to a, the oﬀer consists of an FTA between a and c and lump-sum transfers between them
that provide a with a payoﬀ P (a). If a accepts the oﬀer, P (a) is a’s payoﬀ independently
of whether the FTA is expanded to include country b.13 If a rejects the oﬀer the game ends
and the coalition structure is Γ = h{a} , {b} , {c}i.14
    Whenever a accepts c’s oﬀer, country c proceeds to make a take-it-or-leave-it oﬀer to
b, which consists of an expansion of the FTA to include all three countries and lump-sum
transfers that provide b with a payoﬀ P (b). If b accepts the oﬀer the coalition structure
is Γ = h{abc}i, and there is free trade. If b rejects the oﬀer the coalition structure is Γ =
h{ac} , {b}i, i.e., a and c form a free trade area in which b is not included.
    The subgame in which country c makes its first oﬀer to b is symmetric and we omit its
discussion. The upper part of Figure 1 describes the branches of the sequential bargaining
subgame.
    Note that in this game global free trade can emerge when the leader chooses either multi-
lateral or sequential bargaining, and lack of free trade can also occur under both bargaining
procedures. We seek a subgame perfect equilibrium. Country c chooses the bargaining
   12
      We believe that this is a reasonable specification for multilateral trade negotiations because the rules
of the WTO (in particular, Article IX of the Marrakesh Agreement) state that the WTO should continue
the GATT practice of decision-making by “consensus,” where “the body concerned shall be deemed to have
decided by consensus on a matter submitted for its consideration, if no Member, present at the meeting
when the decision is taken, formally objects to the proposed decision.” It is important to emphasize, however,
that our assumption does not make full justice to the subtleties and nuances involved in the decision-making
process within the WTO. First, the same Article IX mentioned above states that “when a decision cannot be
arrived at by consensus, the matter at issue shall be decided by voting.” Hence, it is not strictly true that a
stubborn-enough country could single-handedly block a multilateral agreement. Second, even when decisions
are reached by consensus, in reaching that consensus it is usually the case that a larger weight is given to views
of particularly powerful countries in the trading system (see Jackson, 1997). Third, in the particular case of
market access negotiations, the WTO allows countries to negotiate bilateral or small-numbers agreements,
provided that that the provisions of these agreements are extended to the remaining members of the WTO on
an MFN basis (see Bagwell and Staiger, 2004a, for a theoretical treatment). Because the focus of our paper
is on a broad comparison of sequential trade liberalization versus multilateral trade liberalization, we have
decided to abstract from these important details and assume the bargaining protocol in Figure 1.
   13
      In the sequential bargaining subgame we assume that when c approaches country a first, it oﬀers a a
non-contingent payoﬀ P (a) for joining the FTA. See Section 8.2 for a discussion of contingent payoﬀs and the
role of commitment in the leading country’s oﬀers.
   14
      This assumption is relaxed in Sections 5 and 8.




                                                        7
method that maximizes its payoﬀ.15,16
   In order to simplify the notation, we define the following functions, which describe gross
payoﬀs (i.e., exclusive of lump-sum transfers):

                            W (j) ≡ v (j; {a} , {b} , {c}) for all j = a, b, c,

             WF (j) ≡ v (j; {j} , {k }) for all j, k, = a, b, c and j 6= k, j 6= , k 6= ,

             W (k ) ≡ v (k ; {j} , {k }) for all j, k, = a, b, c and k 6= , k 6= j,           6= j,

                                       W (abc) ≡ v (abc; {a, b, c}) .

In this notation W (j) is country j’s payoﬀ when there are no free trade agreements; WF (j)
is country j’s payoﬀ when the other two countries form an FTA in which j is not included;
W (k ) is the joint payoﬀ of countries k and when they form an FTA in which the third
country is not included; and W (abc) is the joint payoﬀ of all three countries when they form
an all-inclusive free trade agreement.17
    A coalition C is not subject to coalition externalities when its payoﬀ is independent of
what other coalitions form. In our three-player game this suggests a simple definition:

Definition: Coalition Externalities There are positive coalition externalities in country
     j when WF (j) > W (j), negative coalition externalities when WF (j) < W (j), and no
     coalition externalities when WF (j) = W (j).

       We also need a concept of superadditivity, which we define as follows:
  15
      This formulation of the game shows clearly that if utility were nontransferable, the agenda setter would
strictly prefer sequential bargaining only if it expected to form an agreement with only one follower country,
excluding the other from the FTA. The reason is that when utility is not transferable, the agenda setter’s
payoﬀ from a coalition structure is independent of the path through which this coalition structure is attained
(and this is true for all coalition externalities). Thus, for example, the agenda setter obtains the same payoﬀ
from the grand coalition independently of whether it has been formed via multilateral or sequential bargaining.
Under these circumstances preferential trade agreements cannot be building blocs of global free trade when
global free trade is not the equilibrium outcome in the multilateral bargaining subgame.
   16
      Our game is also relevant for European integration. See CEPR (1995), and especially Section 3.3 on
principles of flexible integration strategies.
   17
      The gross payoﬀs W (·) and WF (·) will typically depend on the lump-sum transfers across countries, as
is well known from the early work of Samuelson (1952, 1954), and the subsequent work of Jones (1970) and
Bhagwati, Brecher and Hatta (1983), among others. This dependence stems from the fact that a transfer
aﬀects the terms of trade of the giving and receiving countries, as well as the terms of trade of other trading
countries. Yet there are special cases, such as the economic model we develop in Section 6, in which transfers
do not change international prices, and they therefore have no impact on the gross payoﬀ functions. It is
easiest to think about these special cases when interpreting our bargaining model, but we shall argue below
that it is possible to reinterpret the payoﬀ functions W (·) and WF (·) in a way that makes the theory more
generally applicable.




                                                      8
Definition: Grand-Coalition (GC) Superadditivity There is GC superadditivity if

                                   W (abc) > W (a) + W (b) + W (c) , and

                              W (abc) > WF (j) + W (k ) for all j 6= k, j 6= .

In other words, grand-coalition superadditivity requires the joint payoﬀs of the three countries
to be larger under global free trade than under no free trade agreements whatsoever or a free
trade agreement between any two countries k and .


3     Benchmark
In this section we characterize equilibria for games with GC superadditivity and no coalition
externalities in the follower countries. This helps in developing the intuition and provides a
benchmark for more general games.
    First consider the subgame with multilateral bargaining. Let c oﬀer a free trade agreement
between all countries, with payoﬀs P (a) and P (b). If W (a) > P (a) country a rejects the
oﬀer, because a gets a higher payoﬀ in the coalition structure Γ = h{a} , {b} , {c}i. And if
W (b) > P (b) country b rejects the oﬀer. When the oﬀer is rejected by either a or b, the
leader’s payoﬀ is
                                         P (c) = W (c) .

   It is evident that under these circumstances c has to oﬀer a at least W (a) and it has to
oﬀer b at least W (b) for the FTA to be accepted by both countries. Therefore c’s highest
payoﬀ from oﬀers that are accepted by a and b is

                                    P (c) = W (abc) − W (a) − W (b) ,                                         (1)

where P (a) = W (a) and P (b) = W (b) are c’s oﬀers. GC superadditivity implies, however,
that
                           W (abc) − W (a) − W (b) > W (c) .

Therefore in the subgame of multilateral bargaining c prefers to make an oﬀer that the follower
countries accept, which leads to the formation of the grand coalition and to worldwide free
trade.18
   18
      Suppose that the payoﬀ of the grand coalition depends on transfers, and let Ŵ [abc; P (a) , P (b)] be this
payoﬀ as a function of the payoﬀs of countries a and b. But assume that Ŵ [abc; P (a) , P (b)] − P (a) − P (b) is
declining in P (a) and in P (b). This is the case if a transfer of income from country c to a or from c to b leads
to a loss of welfare in c, after accounting for changes in the terms of trade. That is, this assumption excludes
the possibility that, say, a transfer of income from c to a will improve c’s terms of trade to such an extent that
it will gain on net from the transfer. Under this assumption the argument in the text applies when W (abc)



                                                        9
    Next consider the subgame with sequential bargaining, and examine the case in which c
approaches a first and oﬀers it an FTA with a payoﬀ P (a). If W (a) > P (a) the oﬀer is
rejected and c’s payoﬀ is P (c) = W (c). Therefore c has to oﬀer a at least W (a) for a to
accept the oﬀer, and it is in c’s interest to oﬀer just W (a). If c then proceeds to make b an
oﬀer that b rejects, the leader’s payoﬀ is

                                        P (c) = W (ac) − W (a) .

If, instead, c wants to make b an acceptable oﬀer, c has to oﬀer b a payoﬀ of at least W (b),
and c has no interest in making a higher oﬀer.19 Therefore (1) also describes c’s payoﬀ from
an oﬀer that b accepts. But GC superadditivity implies that

                            W (abc) − W (a) − W (b) > W (ac) − W (a) .

Therefore c prefers to make acceptable oﬀers to both follower countries rather than only to
a. Note also that under GC superadditivity

                                  W (abc) − W (a) − W (b) > W (c) ,

which implies that country c prefers to make acceptable oﬀers to the follower countries rather
than an oﬀer that a rejects.
    Similar results obtain when country c makes its first oﬀer to b. In fact, in the subgame with
sequential bargaining the leader’s payoﬀ is the same independently of whether it approaches
a or b first. In both cases c prefers to make oﬀers that both follower countries accept, which
leads to the formation of the grand coalition and to worldwide free trade.
    We note that in both the multilateral and sequential bargaining subgames, the grand
coalition forms, and (1) is country c’s payoﬀ. We have therefore proved the

Benchmark Proposition If there are no coalition externalities in the follower countries
    and there is GC superadditivity, then:

 (i) the leader is indiﬀerent between multilateral and sequential bargaining; and

 (ii) the grand coalition forms and there is global free trade.

   This proposition establishes our benchmark. Deviations from this benchmark can result
from coalition externalities or from the failure of GC superadditivity. We first show in the
is interpreted to be W (abc) ≡ Ŵ [abc; W (a) , W (b)]. The gross payoﬀ functions can be redefined in similar
fashion for other arguments in the main text. For ease of exposition, however, we shall think about economic
models of the type developed in Section 6, in which transfers do not aﬀect the terms of trade.
   19
      More accurately, c has to oﬀer b at least WF (b), but WF (b) = W (b) because there are no coalition
externalities in b.


                                                     10
                          price
                                                                  X c [2 ]




                       τa p
                                                                   X c [1]
                       τc p
                                                                   Ca − X a



                                                                        imports , output
                           0


                                      Figure 2: Coalition externalities


next section that coalition externalities are generic features of free trade agreements, and
we characterize in the subsequent section equilibria with such externalities and GC superad-
ditivity. There we argue that GC superadditivity is satisfied in a competitive environment
in which the objective function of every country is to maximize the aggregate welfare of its
residents.


4         Coalition Externalities
We show in this section that free trade agreements lead naturally to coalition externalities.
We interpret an FTA as an agreement that removes tariﬀs on trade between members of
the FTA whereas every country in the FTA maintains its original rates of protection vis à
vis countries outside the FTA. This interpretation is consistent with GATT/WTO Article
XXIV.
    Consider a particular industry whose goods are imported from b by countries a and c and
in which the rate of protection is higher in a than in c. Figure 2 depicts the import demand
function in country a, Ca − Xa , where Ca represents demand and Xa represents supply in a,
as well as two possible supply functions in c, Xc [1] and Xc [2].20 The international price of
the product is p whereas τ a and τ c represent 1 plus the rate of protection in countries a and
c, respectively. By assumption, τ a > τ c , and therefore the consumer and producer price in
a, τ a p, exceeds the consumer and producer price in c, τ c p. We also assume that the export
    20
         This discussion borrows from Grossman and Helpman (1995). See also Richardson (1993).



                                                       11
supply function of country b, not drawn in the figure, is upward sloping.
     First suppose that Xc [1] is the supply function in c and let us examine how the joint excess
demand of countries a and c changes as a result of an FTA between them. It is evident from
the figure that if the price in a were to decline to the price τ c p in c, then country c would
be able to supply the entire import demand of a at this lower price. For this reason the
price in a declines to τ c p and a switches to import the product from c without violating
the rules of origin, which are standard provisions of such agreements.21 This is a case of
reduced protection, which leads to trade creation within the free trade area. Since prices do
not change in c, c’s net import demand Cc − Xc [1] does not change as well. It follows that,
at the original international price p, the joint import demand of a and c rises. As a result,
the world’s excess demand for the product rises, leading to a higher international price p.
The increase in the international price aﬀects the payoﬀ of country b. If, for example, the
objective function of country b is to maximize the aggregate welfare of its residents, then the
FTA between a and c imposes a positive coalition externality on b, because it improves b’s
terms of trade. In this event WF (b) > W (b). Naturally, this discussion is confined to one
industry only and a proper evaluation of coalition externalities requires an examination of
the aggregate eﬀects across all sectors. Yet the main message of this example is broad: we
should expect nonzero coalition externalities when free trade areas form.22
     Coalition externalities can be positive or negative. We showed in the previous paragraph
that they can be positive. Now we show that they can be negative.
     Suppose that the supply function in country c is Xc [2]. In this event, suppliers in c do
not oﬀer enough output at the price τ a p to satisfy country a’s import demand at this price,
so even if country a were to purchase all of c’s output it would still need to import from b.
As a result an FTA between a and c does not change the consumer and producer prices in
country a, which remain τ a p, and it does not change the consumer price in c, which remains
τ c p. However, it does change the producer price in c, which rises to τ a p, the price in a. The
producer price in c rises because the FTA permits these producers to sell in a without the
tariﬀ impediments, and the price in a is higher than in c. As a consequence producers in c sell
their entire output in a and consumers in c import their entire consumption from b. This is a
case of enhanced protection; the FTA leads to higher (producer) prices. Since the consumer
prices do not change while the producer price rises in c and does not change in a, the joint
import demand of countries a and c declines. Therefore p declines, worsening b’s terms of
trade. This worsening of the terms of trade generates a negative coalition externality on b if
  21
     Note that the FTA reshuﬄes trade flows. Country a ceases to import from b despite a’s expansion of
imports. But country c increases its imports from b in order to allow a to purchase goods in c. Yet standard
rules of origin are not violated, because a can import from c only products that are produced in c. There is
no need for products that c imports from b to be exported from c to a in order to meet a’s demand.
  22
     This example delivers precise answers about coalition externalities when the economic structure is of the
type discussed in Section 6.



                                                     12
b’s objective is to maximize the joint welfare of its residents, i.e., WF (b) < W (b).
    It is now clear that there are very good reasons for nonzero coalition externalities in free
trade agreements.23 We therefore proceed to discuss solutions to the bargaining game in the
presence of such externalities.


5        Free Trade with Coalition Externalities
Consider payoﬀs v (C; Γ) that exhibit coalition externalities, but which are GC superadditive.
This specification deviates from the benchmark in Section 3 by allowing coalition externalities.
Under these circumstances the payoﬀ of c from multilateral bargaining is the same as in the
benchmark case, i.e. (1), because the solution to the multilateral subgame depends only on
GC superadditivity and not on coalition externalities. It follows that multilateral bargaining
leads to the formation of the grand coalition and to free trade.
    Next consider sequential bargaining. If c first oﬀers a an FTA and a payoﬀ P (a) = W (a),
then a accepts the oﬀer.24 In this event c has to oﬀer b a payoﬀ P (b) = WF (b) for b to join
the FTA. Since GC superadditivity implies that

                             W (abc) − W (a) − WF (b) > W (ac) − W (a) ,

country c gains from expanding the free trade area to include b once it has formed an FTA with
a, because the left-hand-side of this inequality represents c’s payoﬀ from an all-encompassing
free trade area while the right-hand-side represents c’s payoﬀ from a free trade area with
a only. It follows that c’s payoﬀ from making acceptable oﬀers in a sequential bargaining
subgame in which c approaches a first is

                                  P a,b (c) = W (abc) − W (a) − WF (b) .

By similar argument c’s payoﬀ from making acceptable oﬀers in a sequential bargaining
subgame in which c approaches b first is

                                  P b,a (c) = W (abc) − W (b) − WF (a) ,
    23
      The empirical evidence points in the same direction. Reviewing the literature on European economic
integration, Winters (1997) reports that most studies find what amounts to negative coalition externalities.
Chang and Winters (2002) find that MERCOSUR has worsened the terms of trade of a number of non-
member countries, including the U.S. and Japan. MERCOSUR is a customs union between Argentina, Brazil,
Paraguay and Uruguay. Unlike a free trade area, a customs union imposes common external tariﬀs on non-
member countries. Chang and Winters find that foreign prices charged to Brazil by non-MERCOSUR countries
declined as a result of Brazil’s lowering of tariﬀs on goods imported from Argentina.
   24
      Note that a accepts every oﬀer that satisfies P (a) ≥ W (a), but it is in c’s interest to oﬀer W (a). In what
follows we restrict c’s oﬀers to the lowest payoﬀs P (j) that the other parties accept, which is a condition for
subgame perfection.



                                                        13
as long as there is GC superadditivity. Comparing P a,b (c) with P b,a (c) we see that c is
indiﬀerent between which country it approaches first if and only if WF (a)−W (a) = WF (b)−
W (b), i.e., the coalition externalities are the same in the two follower countries. This holds in
the benchmark case, in which the coalition externalities are zero. Moreover, a comparison of
these payoﬀs shows that c strictly prefers to approach the country with the higher coalition
externalities first, i.e., it prefers to approach a first if WF (a) − W (a) > WF (b) − W (b)
and it prefers to approach b first if WF (a) − W (a) < WF (b) − W (b). The reason is that
by approaching the country with the higher coalition externalities first the leader reduces
the joint outside options of the follower countries. We conclude that c’s highest payoﬀ from
sequential bargaining with acceptable oﬀers is

       Paccept (c) = W (abc) − W (a) − W (b) − min {WF (a) − W (a) , WF (b) − W (b)} .                        (2)

Now note that c has the option of making oﬀers that are rejected by the first country. A
rejection gives c the payoﬀ W (c). For this reason c does not proceed with acceptable oﬀers
unless W (c) ≤ Paccept (c).
    It remains to compare the leader’s payoﬀs from multilateral and sequential bargaining.
Comparing (1) with (2) implies

                 Paccept (c) = Pmulti (c) − min {WF (a) − W (a) , WF (b) − W (b)} ,

where Pmulti (c) = W (abc) − W (a) − W (b) is c’s payoﬀ in the multilateral subgame. It
follows immediately that c prefers sequential bargaining when

                              min {WF (a) − W (a) , WF (b) − W (b)} < 0

and multilateral bargaining when25

                              min {WF (a) − W (a) , WF (b) − W (b)} > 0.

Moreover, whichever subgame c prefers leads to the formation of the grand coalition and to
global free trade. We have thereby proved

Free Trade Proposition If there is GC superadditivity, then:

 (i) the leader is indiﬀerent between multilateral and sequential bargaining if and only if there
  25
     Note that min {WF (a) − W (a) , WF (b) − W (b)} < 0 implies Paccept (c) > Pmulti (a) > W (c), where the
last inequality results from GC superadditivity. Therefore in this case c prefers sequential bargaining with
acceptable oﬀers to sequential bargaining in which the first oﬀer is rejected. The only case in which c prefers
sequential bargaining in which the first oﬀer is rejected rather than accepted is when c also prefers multilateral
to sequential bargaining.


                                                       14
      are no coalition externalities in the follower countries;

 (ii) the leader strictly prefers sequential bargaining when there are negative coalition exter-
       nalities in at least one of the follower countries;

 (iii) the leader strictly prefers multilateral bargaining when there are positive coalition ex-
       ternalities in both follower countries; and

 (iv) the grand coalition forms and there is worldwide free trade.

This proposition states that global free trade is the unique equilibrium outcome when payoﬀs
are GC superadditive. It also identifies conditions under which sequential or multilateral
bargaining is the equilibrium outcome. Sequential bargaining is the equilibrium outcome
when negative coalition externalities exist in at least one follower country, while multilateral
bargaining is the equilibrium outcome when positive coalition externalities exist in both
follower countries.26
    Our Free Trade proposition has important implications.27 Consider a neoclassical world
in which production sets are convex, tariﬀs are the only distortions, and all markets are com-
petitive. Also suppose that the payoﬀ of every country is represented by the aggregate welfare
of its residents and that the marginal utility of income is constant. Then GC superadditivity
holds, because global free trade is Pareto-eﬃcient. That is, in this sort of world, lump-sum
transfers ensure that the joint welfare of all three countries combined is higher under free
trade than under limited free trade agreements or no free trade agreement at all. Under these
circumstances our free trade proposition applies, and trade negotiations lead to global free
trade.
    It follows from this proposition that in the presence of GC superadditivity countries need
not be restricted to multilateral bargaining – as favored by Bhagwati (1991) – in order to
safeguard free trade, because it is not in the interest of the leading country to choose sequential
bargaining unless it leads to free trade. True, an institutional prohibition on sequential
bargaining secures free trade. But, as we will show in Section 7, the potential advantage
of multilateral bargaining disappears when payoﬀs are not GC superadditive. Finally, note
that even with GC superadditivity, restrictions on bargaining have distributional implications.
The leading country’s payoﬀ is higher when it is free to choose whether to bargain sequentially
or multilaterally than when it is restricted to bargaining multilaterally, unless it prefers
  26
     Note that country c has an incentive to pursue policies that hurt the outside option WF (j) of country j
when c seeks to bring j into the FTA in the last stage of the sequential bargaining subgame. If this option is
feasible, then such policies can be built into the payoﬀ functions so that the payoﬀs reflect the implementation
of these policies.
  27
     Although our focus is on free trade agreements, this type of analysis can be applied to other international
agreements. In environmental agreements, for example, the coalition externalities are positive; see Carraro
and Siniscalco (1993).



                                                      15
multilateral bargaining. Recall, however, that the leader prefers sequential bargaining if and
only if at least one follower country has negative coalition externalities. In this case a switch
from unrestricted bargaining to mandatory multilateral bargaining redistributes payoﬀs from
the leading country to the follower country with the largest negative coalition externalities.28

5.1    Generalizations
Our Free Trade Proposition can be generalized, and we oﬀer four such generalizations.
    First, consider the case in which the leader country is allowed to sign two subsequent
bilateral FTAs with each one of the two follower countries. For this purpose we expand the
definition of GC superadditivity to also cover the coalition structure Γ = h{ac} , {bc}i, which
consists of two FTAs, one between a and c, the other between b and c. To the definition of
GC superadditivity we now add the requirement that W (abc) > W (ac, bc), i.e., aggregate
welfare is higher under the grand coalition than under Γ = h{ac} , {bc}i.
    To see that this modification does not aﬀect our Free Trade Proposition, consider the
branch of the sequential subgame on which c approaches a first and b second (the other case
is analogous). Suppose c makes a an oﬀer that a accepts and they form an FTA. Next c
approaches b, and now allow c to not only oﬀer global free trade to b, but also to oﬀer b
the possibility of a bilateral FTA. At this point a and c have formed a bilateral FTA, so
regardless of the nature of c’s second-stage oﬀer, country b’s reservation price is WF (b).
    Now roll back and consider the negotiation between c and a in stage one. Since a rejection
of c’s oﬀer leaves a with the payoﬀ W (a), and this payoﬀ is independent of what c might
oﬀer b in the second stage should a accept the oﬀer, the agenda setter has to pay W (a)
in order to bring a into any coalition. It follows that c has to pay WF (b) + W (a) for the
formation of the grand coalition as well as for the formation of Γ = h{ac} , {bc}i. In other
words, the two alternative coalition structures are equally costly to the agenda setter. But
GC superadditivity implies that W (abc) > W (ac, bc). Therefore c prefers to form the grand
coalition. In sum, a pair of subsequent FTAs is a dominated strategy in our sequential
subgame and therefore the Free Trade Proposition holds in this case too.
    Three further generalizations and modifications, based on part (iv) of the proposition –
which states that the grand coalition forms, leading to global free trade – are oﬀered in
Appendix A. The first generalization considers a world with many countries, but maintains
the assumption of the simple model that the game ends when the leader’s oﬀer is rejected
by one of the follower countries. As in the simple game, the leader can make a simultaneous
oﬀer to all follower countries, which we refer to as multilateral bargaining. Alternatively,
  28
    To illustrate, suppose that WF (b) − W (b) < WF (a) − W (a) and WF (b) − W (b) < 0. Then a’s payoﬀ is
W (a) under sequential and multilateral bargaining, but b’s payoﬀ is WF (b) under sequential bargaining and
W (b) under multilateral bargaining. Evidently, b prefers multilateral bargaining while c prefers sequential
bargaining.



                                                    16
it can engage in sequential bargaining, in which case it makes an oﬀer to a subset of the
follower countries. If this oﬀer is rejected the game ends and there are no FTAs. If the
oﬀer is accepted, the leader can make a second oﬀer to a subset of countries that are not
yet included in the FTA. If the oﬀer is rejected the game ends and the coalition structure
consists of the FTA formed in round one. If the oﬀer is accepted, the FTA is expanded and
the leader country can make a new oﬀer to a subset of countries that are still outside the
FTA. This process continues until either an oﬀer is rejected by one of the follower countries
or all the countries are included in the free trade area.
    The second extension also considers a world with many countries, but this time a rejection
of the leader’s oﬀer does not end the game. Instead, the agenda-setting power is transferred
to another country in a predetermined order. That is, if the original leader’s oﬀer is rejected
by one of the follower countries, then the agenda-setting power is transferred to a follower
country. The country chosen is the first in the queue for leadership among the countries that
are not members of the first leader’s FTA. The new leader can form a new FTA by oﬀering
membership to countries that are not yet members of an FTA. In this way a new FTA forms.
When an oﬀer of the new leader is rejected, the agenda-setting power is again transferred to
a country that is not a member of an FTA, using the predetermined queue. And the process
continues in the same way with additional leaders. The game ends when all countries are
members of FTAs, some of which may consist of one country only, and there are no more
leaders to whom the agenda-setting power can be transferred. Unlike the original game, this
one allows for multiple FTAs.
    In our final extension a rejection of the leader’s oﬀer again leads to the transfer of agenda-
setting power to a follower country that is not a member of an FTA. This time, however, the
next leader is chosen randomly from the eligible set of countries, defined as countries that are
not members of an FTA and were not leaders in earlier rounds of negotiations. This setup is
similar to Gomes (2003).29
     We conclude from these extensions and modifications that GC superadditivity is a power-
ful feature; it ensures the formation of the grand coalition and global free trade for a variety of
bargaining protocols, independently of the structure of coalition externalities.30 The coalition
externalities aﬀect the sequence in which the FTA expands, but not the equilibrium coalition
structure. They also aﬀect the equilibrium payoﬀs, i.e., the distribution of the gains from
trade negotiations. Moreover, although multilateral negotiations ensure the formation of the
grand coalition in all the above cases, the equilibrium bargaining process need not consist of
an oﬀer to all follower countries combined; the leader may gain more from sequential oﬀers.
     Finally, note that our results also apply to situations in which countries organize them-
selves into free trade areas prior to the beginning of the game. In this event a country
 29
      We are grateful to Eddie Dekel and Attila Ambrus for referring us to this paper.
 30
      See, however, our discussion in Section 8 for diﬀerent alternatives.


                                                      17
can be interpreted as a bloc of countries that have formed an FTA, and all the arguments
made above remain valid. This means that if there are regional trade agreements or other
preferential trade agreements prior to the beginning of our negotiation process, then these
limited agreements do not prevent the attainment of global free trade when payoﬀs are GC
superadditive.31


6        Illustrations of the Free Trade Proposition
In this section we construct an economic model that gives precise meaning to the payoﬀ
functions W (·) and WF (·), and we use the model to illustrate the free trade proposition. In
this model importing countries impose tariﬀs and a coalition consists of a free trade area.
Standard rules of origin apply in the FTA and they prohibit a member country from importing
goods from outside the FTA via another member country that has lower tariﬀs.
    We assume that the utility function of the residents of country j is quasi-linear, given by

                                            Uj = yj + uj (xj ) ,                                           (3)

where yj is their consumption of good y and xj is their consumption of good x. The function
uj (·) is increasing and concave. Good y is the numeraire; its price is one and it is not
protected by tariﬀs. As is well known, if such consumers have enough income to consume
both goods, which we assume to be the case, the demand for x depends only on its price,
xj = Cj (qj ), and this demand function is downward sloping. Then country j’s indirect utility
function is
                                      Vj = Ij + Sj (qj ) ,

where Ij is its income and Sj (qj ) ≡ uj [Cj (qj )] − qj Cj (qj ) is the consumer surplus function.
By standard arguments Sj0 (qj ) = −Cj (qj ).
   Assume that good y is produced with 1 unit of labor per unit output, whereas x is
produced with labor and a sector-specific input under constant returns to scale. Then the
wage rate equals 1 as long as the country produces y, which we assume to be the case, and
the income of the sector-specific input, which we shall identify with profits, is an increasing
    31
     Although, as we have shown, the bargaining protocol need not be restricted to sequential or multilateral
bargaining in order to achieve global free trade when payoﬀs are GC superadditive, restrictions on bargaining
may be desirable for other reasons. Imagine, for example, a world of three countries in which payoﬀs are GC
superadditive and countries are symmetric in the sense that (i) W (j) = w for j = a, b, c and WF (j) = wF
for j = a, b, c; and (ii) every country has an equal chance of becoming the agenda setter. Moreover, coalition
externalities are negative, i.e., w > wF . Under these circumstances the country that becomes the agenda setter
chooses sequential bargaining, which gives it the payoﬀ W (abc)−w −wF , one of the follower countries gets the
payoﬀ w and the other follower country gets the payoﬀ wF . Then, behind a Rawlsian veil of ignorance these
countries prefer to restrict the bargaining protocol to multilateral bargaining only, which gives the agenda
setter the payoﬀ W (abc) − 2w and each one of the follower countries the payoﬀ w. This restriction raises the
payoﬀ of the least fortunate country, meeting the Rawlsian criterion of seeking to minimize the downside risk.


                                                      18
convex function Πj (qj ). By standard arguments Π0j (qj ) = Xj (qj ), where Xj (qj ) is an
upward sloping supply function of x.
    Let τ j be 1 plus the MFN tariﬀ rate on imports of x.32 If x is exported by country j we
set τ j = 1. That is, we assume that there are no export taxes or subsidies. Then qj = τ j p
is the consumer and producer price in the absence of free trade agreements, where p is the
international price of good x. Tariﬀ revenue is distributed to country j’s residents, who
also own the country’s labor and sector-specific input. Under these circumstances income Ij
consists of labor income, profits and tariﬀ revenue. Therefore in the absence of free trade
agreements the indirect utility function is33

                 Vj = Lj + Πj (τ j p) + (τ j − 1) p [Cj (τ j p) − Xj (τ j p)] + Sj (τ j p) ,              (4)

where Lj is labor supply. In the absence of free trade agreements the international price p is
determined by the market clearing condition
                                     X
                                              [Cj (τ j p) − Xj (τ j p)] = 0.
                                    j=a,b,c


Evidently, the international price depends on the rates of protection.
    In the following examples we assume that W (j) equals the indirect utility Vj that country
j attains in the absence of free trade agreements; W (jk) equals the sum of the indirect utilities
Vj + Vk that countries j and k attain when they form an FTA that does not include the third
country; WF (j) equals the indirect utility Vj that j attains when it is not included in a free
trade area formed by the other two countries; and W (abc) equals the sum of the indirect
utilities Va + Vb + Vc that the three countries attain under free trade. As is well known, under
these circumstances free trade yields the highest sum of utilities and therefore the payoﬀs are
GC superadditive. These payoﬀs are generated by governments that maximize the aggregate
welfare of their residents.

       Example 1: Equilibrium Sequential Bargaining

   Suppose that in the equilibrium with no trade agreements country c exports x while
countries a and b import x. Moreover, a and b impose tariﬀs τ a > 1 and τ b > 1. Also
suppose that if c forms a free trade area with one of the follower countries the FTA leads to
reduced protection (recall the discussion of reduced and enhanced protection in Section 4).
  32
     An MFN tariﬀ is one in which the same tariﬀ rate applies to imports from all sources, according to the
most favored nation (MFN) clause. We use this specification in the examples, but our free trade proposition
applies also when the tariﬀs do not satisfy this requirement.
  33
     As we have seen in Section 4, free trade agreements can produce a deviation of the consumer price from
the producer price. The formulation of the indirect utility function has to be modified in an obvious way when
this happens.


                                                        19
                  international price
                                                                            X c − Cc




                      pn




                                                                        ∑ (C j − X j )
                                                                       j = a ,b
                                                                            imports, exports
                       0


                                 Figure 3: FTA raises b’s import price


Then the free trade area with one of the follower countries raises the international price of x.
     This is illustrated in Figure 3 for an FTA between c and a. The supply of exports
by c is represented by Xc (p) − Cc (p) while the aggregate import demand function of the
                        P
follower countries is j=a,b [Cj (τ j p) − Xj (τ j p)]. In the absence of free trade agreements the
international price is determined by the intersection of these two curves, identifying pn as the
equilibrium price.
     An FTA between c and a shifts rightward the aggregate import demand curve of countries
a and b to the broken-line curve, because the import demand function of country a shifts from
Ca (τ a p) − Xa (τ a p) to Ca (p) − Xa (p).34 The international price rises, worsening b’s terms of
trade. As a result Vb declines. In this event there are negative coalition externalities in b.35
Therefore our proposition implies that in this example the equilibrium consists of sequential
bargaining in which c makes an oﬀer to the country with the larger coalition externalities
first, and an oﬀer to the country with the smaller coalition externalities second, which in this
case is negative.36
  34
     Reduced protection requires Ca (pn ) − Xa (pn ) < Xc (pn ).
  35
     Note that (4) implies
                                ∂Vj                                          
                                    = − (Cj − Xj ) τ j + (τ j − 1) p Cj0 − Xj0 τ j .
                                 ∂p
This is negative if j imports x, and it is positive if j exports x and τ j = 1.
  36
     This example also illustrates the dangers of inferring the sign and size of coalition externalities from the
available studies of regional trade agreements (see footnote 23 for references). Our model calls attention to
the existence of an important selection bias, since we predict that these partial agreements will be signed only
when they create a negative externality for the country that is temporarily left out. This suggests that positive
externalities might well exist in the data, but we might never observe them in studies of partial agreements.



                                                       20
                  international price

                                                                    ∑ (X j − C j)
                                                                   j = a ,b




                       pn



                                                                  Cc − X c

                                                                     imports, exports
                        0



                                   Figure 4: FTA raises b’s export price


      Example 2: Equilibrium Multilateral Bargaining

     Suppose that in the equilibrium with no trade agreements country c imports x from each
of the follower countries and c’s MFN tariﬀ is τ c > 1. Figure 4 depicts c’s import demand
                                                                      P
function Cc (τ c p) − Xc (τ c p) and the joint export supply function j=a,b [Xj (p) − Cj (p)] of
the follower countries. With no free trade agreements the equilibrium international price is
pn .
     Now suppose that c forms an FTA with a, and assume that the FTA leads to reduced
protection.37 Then the price in c declines to the price in a, which equals the international
price. As a result the import demand function Cc (τ c p) − Xc (τ c p) changes to Cc (p) − Xc (p),
which is depicted in the figure by a rightward shift of the Cc − Xc curve to the broken-line
curve, and the international price rises. Unlike the previous example, however, this time the
price hike concerns b’s exports. Therefore b’s terms of trade improve and Vb rises. Evidently,
b has positive coalition externalities.
     We can establish in similar fashion positive coalition externalities in a. Under these
circumstances our proposition implies that multilateral bargaining takes place in equilibrium.

   These two examples together with the examples discussed in Section 4 suggest that the
equilibrium bargaining method depends not only on the pattern of trade, but also on finer
details of the supply and demand functions. To see why, reconsider Example 2. We assumed
 37
      Namely, Cc (pn ) − Xc (pn ) < Xa (pn ).


                                                    21
in the example that the formation of an FTA between c and either one of the follower
countries leads to reduced protection. This resulted in positive coalition externalities in the
follower countries. Now suppose instead that the formation of an FTA between c and a
leads to enhanced protection. Namely, Cc (τ c pn ) − Xc (τ c pn ) > Xa (τ c pn ). In this event b
is subject to negative coalition externalities, because – by raising the supply price in a to
the supply price in c – the FTA raises the export supply of country a, thereby reducing the
international price. The lower international price of x is detrimental to b, which exports x.
In this event our proposition implies sequential bargaining in equilibrium, because negative
coalition externalities exist in one of the follower countries. Evidently, the same pattern of
trade can lead to diﬀerent equilibrium bargaining protocols.


7        No GC Superadditivity
GC superadditivity is central to our benchmark and free trade propositions. In particular,
when GC superadditivity fails, free trade is not necessarily the unique equilibrium outcome.
We argued in the previous section that GC superadditivity holds when the aggregate welfare
of a country’s residents is used as its payoﬀ, no distortions exist other than tariﬀs, production
sets are convex, and all markets are competitive. A modification of any one of these features
can destroy GC superadditivity. If, for example, markets are not competitive, then free trade
is not Pareto-eﬃcient, and GC superadditivity may not hold.38
    Of particular interest is lack of GC superadditivity that stems from political economy con-
siderations. Suppose that the payoﬀ from a free trade agreement is not represented by the
aggregate welfare of a country’s residents, but rather by a political-objective function. Fol-
lowing Grossman and Helpman (1994), think about countries whose political activities lead
to policies that maximize a function of aggregate welfare and political contributions. Then
the interaction of the government with special interest groups leads to the maximization
of a weighted average of aggregate welfare and the welfare of the special interests.39 Un-
der these circumstances GC superadditivity may fail, and equilibria without free trade can
emerge.40 When this happens, it is possible to evaluate in a meaningful way the desirability
of restrictions on the bargaining protocol.
    Our approach follows the logic of constitutional design, where one seeks restrictions on the
executive that yield desirable outcomes. The desirable outcomes do not necessarily include
    38
     GC superadditivity may also fail when some sectors are excluded from the preferential trade agreements,
or when tariﬀs are reduced, but not to zero, among the parties to an agreement. Exclusion of some sectors,
and slow phasing in of other sectors, are common features of preferential trade agreements.
  39
     See Grossman and Helpman (2001) for a systematic discussion of such political objective functions and
the ways in which they can arise in various polities.
  40
     Note that GC superadditivity holds when the weight on aggregate welfare is suﬃciently higher than the
weight on contributions. This follows from continuity and the fact that when this relative weight goes to
infinity GC superadditivity holds.


                                                    22
objectives of the political players, but they do include objectives of the polity at large. Under
these circumstances constitutional features seek to achieve the desirable outcomes despite the
fact that the political players may have diﬀerent objectives from the polity. In our context
this means that we are interested in identifying situations in which free trade is attained even
when policy makers do not seek to maximize aggregate welfare. Despite a possible lack of
congruence between the objectives of policy makers and the polity at large, our Free Trade
Proposition shows that with GC superadditivity in the policy makers’ objective functions,
free trade — which maximizes aggregate welfare under neoclassical conditions — is the unique
equilibrium outcome.
    As discussed in the introduction, economists disagree about the merits of restricting trade
negotiations to multilateral bargaining. Some prominent economists, Bhagwati (1991) among
them, hold the view that preferential trade agreements that do not include all countries are
detrimental to the achievement of worldwide free trade. We interpret this position as an
objection to sequential bargaining in the formation of trade agreements. Using Bhagwati’s
terminology, preferential trade agreements are “stumbling blocs” rather than “building blocs”
on the way to global free trade. We argue in this section that this is not necessarily the case.
Without GC superadditivity partial agreements may serve as stumbling blocs or building
blocs of global free trade. Which case applies depends on identifiable features of the world
economy.
    We have developed two examples to illustrate these points (see Appendix B). In the first
example we construct a world in which multilateral negotiations lead to free trade while
sequential negotiations lead to an FTA between two countries only. Nevertheless, the leader
prefers sequential negotiations. This is the sense in which the availability of partial agreements
may prevent the attainment of free trade. In this sort of world a rule that prohibits partial
agreements and forces the countries to engage in multilateral bargaining leads to global free
trade. In the second example we construct a world in which multilateral negotiations are
doomed to fail, i.e., they do not lead to global free trade. Yet sequential bargaining does lead
to global free trade, as the leader oﬀers an FTA first to one follower country and afterwards
induces the second follower country to join. In this case, rules that restrict trade negotiations
to multilateral bargaining harm the prospects for global free trade.
    In both examples we use aggregate profits as a country’s payoﬀ. This political-objective
function arises in the Grossman and Helpman (1994) framework when policy makers at-
tach zero weight to aggregate welfare and the ownership of sector-specific inputs is highly
concentrated.41 But we also provide a general analysis of stumbling bloc and building bloc
equilibria, which does not depend on the precise reasons for the failure of GC superadditivity.
And this analysis identifies conditions under which stumbling bloc or building bloc equilibria
  41
     Many studies use political-objective functions that attach diﬀerential weights to producer and consumer
surplus. See, for example, Laﬀont and Tirole’s (1993) analysis of economic regulation.


                                                    23
are more likely to exist.

7.1      Stumbling Blocs
In Example 3 in Appendix B, there is an outside good y with constant marginal utility,
which serves as numeraire, and a product x with diminishing marginal utility; both are
traded internationally. The utility function of country j is given by equation (3). Countries a
and c import x in the initial equilibrium; both impose import tariﬀs; and the tariﬀ is higher
in a. Goods in sector y are freely traded. Every country seeks to maximize its profits in
sector x.
    Under these circumstances global free trade leads to a higher international price of x,
because the removal of tariﬀs raises import demand in countries a and c. But the hike in
the international price is not enough to compensate producers in a and c for the removal of
the tariﬀs. As a result, profits decline in countries a and c and rise in country b. But the
increase in profits in b more than compensates for the decline in profits in a and c, leading
to a rise in aggregate world profits. Therefore multilateral bargaining leads to the formation
of the grand coalition and to global free trade.
    When c chooses sequential bargaining, it finds that its payoﬀ is highest when it approaches
country a first. But an FTA between countries a and c leads to reduced protection, with the
price of x in a declining to the international price times the rate of protection in c. This, in
turn, leads to an increase in aggregate world demand, thereby bidding up the international
price. As a result profits rise in b and c and decline in a, because the rise in the international
price does not compensate producers in a for the fall in the rate of protection. The resulting
aggregate world profits exceed aggregate world profits under global free trade. In this event
country c’s payoﬀ is higher from forming a free trade area with a only than from forming
a free trade area with a and b. For this reason the equilibrium in the sequential bargaining
subgame consists of an FTA between a and c only. Country c prefers the outcome of the
sequential subgame to the outcome of the multilateral subgame. In this event sequential
bargaining is a stumbling bloc to worldwide free trade
    The key features of this example, which are general requirements for a stumbling bloc
equilibrium in which c forms an FTA with a only, are the following:42 Multilateral bargaining
leads to the formation of the grand coalition, therefore W (abc) − W (a) − W (b) > W (c).
But, c prefers an FTA with a to multilateral bargaining, i.e., W (ac) − W (a) > W (abc) −
W (a) − W (b), and c has no incentive to attract b to the FTA with a, i.e., W (ac) − W (a) >
W (abc) − W (a) − WF (b). These conditions hold if and only if
                                                                          X
                      W (ac) + min {W (b) , WF (b)} > W (abc) >                   W (j) .
                                                                        j=a,b,c
 42
      A symmetric set of conditions can be formulated for the case in which c forms an FTA with b.


                                                     24
Finally, c prefers to approach a first and b second in sequential bargaining, which requires

                    W (ac) > W (a) − W (b) + max {W (bc) , W (abc) − WF (a)} .

It is evident from these inequalities that a large payoﬀ W (ac) and large and positive coalition
externalities increase the likelihood that this sort of stumbling bloc equilibrium will emerge.

7.2      Building Blocs
In Example 4 in Appendix B, we also have two sectors, x and y, and preferences given by (3).
Both goods are traded internationally and there are no impediments to trade in y. Countries
a and b export x, and c has a tariﬀ on imports of x. Every country seeks to maximize profits.
    As in the previous example, free trade leads to an increase in c’s imports of x, thereby
bidding up its international price. As a result, profits rise in countries a and b and decline
in c, because the rise in the international price does not compensate producers in c for the
removal of the tariﬀ. In this case, however, the fall in c’s profits is larger than the rise in the
joint profits of a and b. Therefore GC superadditivity fails, and c prefers the status quo to
oﬀers of an FTA that countries a and b will accept in the multilateral subgame. In this event
multilateral bargaining does not lead to global free trade.
    In the sequential subgame, c prefers to approach a first. An FTA between a and c leads
to enhanced protection; namely, the producer price in a rises to the tariﬀ rate in c times the
international price. This raises the aggregate world supply of x and depresses its price. The
lower international price hurts profits in b, but it raises profits in a, because the decline in
the international price is smaller than the tariﬀ rate in c. The new aggregate world profits
are lower, however, than the profits under free trade. For this reason c has an incentive to
bring b into the FTA. It follows that sequential bargaining leads to the formation of the grand
coalition and to global free trade. Moreover, the equilibrium payoﬀ to c exceeds c’s payoﬀ
from multilateral bargaining. Thus, in this example a restriction to multilateral bargaining
does not lead to global free trade, yet the choice of sequential bargaining, which c prefers,
leads to global free trade following a stepwise buildup of the FTA by adding a first and then
b. In this case the FTA between a and c is a building bloc to worldwide free trade.
    The key features of this example, which are general requirements for a building bloc
equilibrium in which c forms an FTA with a first, are the following:43 First, country c prefers
the status quo to the grand coalition in multilateral bargaining, i.e., W (c) > W (abc) −
W (a) − W (b). Second, c prefers b to join its FTA with a, which requires W (abc) − W (a) −
WF (b) > W (ac) − W (a). Third, c’s payoﬀ from sequential bargaining with a first and b
second is higher than from multilateral bargaining, i.e., W (abc) − W (a) − WF (b) > W (c).
 43
      A symmetric set of conditions can be formulated for the case in which c forms an FTA with b.



                                                     25
Together these conditions hold if and only if
                 X
                         W (j) > W (abc) > max {W (ac) , W (a) + W (c)} + WF (b) .
               j=a,b,c


Finally, c’s payoﬀ from approaching a first in the sequential subgame is higher than its payoﬀ
from approaching b first, or

            W (abc) > W (a) − W (b) + max {W (bc) , W (abc) − WF (a)} + WF (b) .

Evidently, these conditions are more likely to be satisfied the smaller are W (ac) and W (bc)
and the more negative are the coalition externalities in b. In particular, no such building bloc
equilibrium exists when the coalition externalities are positive in the follower countries.

    We conclude from this discussion that stumbling bloc equilibria are more likely to exist
the larger is the value of a bilateral FTA between c and one of the follower countries and
the larger are the coalition externalities in the follower countries. Building bloc equilibria
are more likely to exist the smaller are the values of bilateral FTAs between c and each one
of the follower countries and the more negative are the coalition externalities in one follower
country. Building bloc formation is furthered by an asymmetry in coalition externalities, i.e.,
a large negative externality in one follower country and a large positive externality in the
other. Without negative coalition externalities there are no building bloc equilibria. Naturally,
there can be equilibria that are neither stumbling nor building blocs of free trade.44


8        On Alternative Features of the Bargaining Protocol
A major aim of this paper has been to show that free trade can be attained when countries
may choose between multilateral and sequential bargaining, a choice that the WTO makes
available to its member states. What our Free Trade Proposition provides is a set of suﬃcient
conditions for the bargaining protocols and the objective functions of policy makers, i.e., GC
superadditivity, which guarantee this outcome. Naturally, free trade may not emerge as an
equilibrium outcome in other polities in which GC superadditivity fails, as discussed in the
previous section, or when countries use diﬀerent bargaining protocols.
    As an example consider Saggi and Yildiz (2006). They construct an economy with recipro-
cal dumping a la Brander and Krugman (1983) in which there are two alternative bargaining
    44
    It has been suggested to us that a more realistic formulation of the bargaining game would allow for a
reversion to sequential bargaining when multilateral negotiations fail. But in such a case the leader’s payoﬀ
under multilateral bargaining would always coincide with that under sequential bargaining, and the choice
between these two negotiation protocols would become indeterminate. Interestingly, however, stumbling and
building bloc equilibria would still arise under the conditions discussed in the main text.



                                                     26
protocols, which they term FTA and No FTA. As in our model there are three countries a,
b and c, but no agenda setter and no transfers. In the FTA game, every country announces
which of the other two countries it wants to form a free trade area with; the announcement
can name one or both of the other countries. Then FTAs are formed among the countries
that have announced each other. If, for example, a includes b in its announcement and b
includes a, the two countries form an FTA. But if a includes b and b does not include a these
two countries do not form an FTA. Alternatively, in the No FTA game, which represents
multilateral bargaining, a country can only announce whether it is in favor or not of global
free trade. If all three countries are in favor, there is free trade. If at least one country
objects, the status quo prevails.
    Evidently, these bargaining protocols diﬀer from ours, and they lead to multiple equilibria
even when the three countries are symmetric. Nevertheless, Saggi and Yildiz show that
free trade is the unique stable (coalition proof) equilibrium in the No FTA game but not
necessarily in the FTA game. In other words, there are conditions under which global free
trade as well as a free trade agreement between two countries only are stable equilibria in
the FTA game.45
    Interestingly, in the symmetric case (or small deviations from symmetry) their objective
functions of the policy makers, which consist of aggregate welfare, are GC superadditive,
despite the presence of markups and reciprocal dumping (see their Lemma 1). Moreover,
their model exhibit negative coalition externalities (an FTA between any two countries hurts
the third). Under these circumstances we can apply the Free Trade Proposition to our
bargaining protocols. The implication is that when our bargaining protocols are applied to
their symmetric world, then free trade is the unique equilibrium outcome and it is achieved
via sequential bargaining.
    As this discussion illustrates, details of the bargaining protocol can be important. For this
reason we discuss in the rest of this section two modifications of our sequential bargaining
protocol in order to explore how they aﬀect the equilibrium outcomes. One modification
concerns the continuation game after a rejection. We assumed that when c, the agenda
setter, makes an oﬀer to one of the follower countries which the follower country rejects,
the game ends. In Section 8.1 we explore what happens if under these circumstances c can
proceed to make an oﬀer to the other follower country. In Section 8.2, we consider a diﬀerent
modification. We assumed that c can commit to a payoﬀ when it makes an oﬀer to a follower
country, where this payoﬀ is independent of the final outcome of the game. This hinges on
two issues: whether transfers from c to a follower country can be contingent on the outcome
of the game and whether c can make firm commitments. We shall examine the roles of these
  45
     Saggi and Yildiz (2006) also analyze equilibria in asymmetric setups, in which two countries have identical
marginal costs while the third country has higher marginal costs. Their model also delivers building and
stumbling bloc equilibria.



                                                      27
features in the bargaining protocol.

8.1   Rejection does not end the game
Consider a modification of the sequential bargaining game in which a rejection in the first
stage does not end the game. Instead, after a rejection, country c can proceed to make an
oﬀer to the next follower country. We call it the S2 game. The rest of the game is the same
as in the original formulation.
    Does the Free Trade Proposition hold under these circumstances? The answer is No, yet
a number of important elements of this proposition, such as the role of coalition externali-
ties in the choice between sequential and multilateral bargaining, remain similar. A major
implication of this modification is that GC superadditivity does not guarantee free trade
as the equilibrium outcome. It therefore dispels a possible conclusion from our Free Trade
Proposition that whenever the agenda setter can make take-it-or-leave-it oﬀers to the other
countries, then GC superadditivity is suﬃcient for free trade to be attained. In other words,
this finding suggests that the Free Trade Proposition requires more than GC superadditivity
and an agenda setter who can make take-it-or-leave-it oﬀers.
    To understand the source of diﬀerences between S2 and the original bargaining protocol,
consider sequential bargaining in which the agenda setter approaches a first and b second.
In the original specification a rejection by a gave c the payoﬀ W (c). Under S2, a’s rejection
gives the agenda setter max {W (c) , W (bc) − W (b)}. Why? Because after the rejection c
can make b a small oﬀer that b rejects, in which case c gets W (c). But c can also make b an
oﬀer that b accepts. Since W (b) is the smallest oﬀer that b accepts, this strategy gives c the
payoﬀ W (bc) − W (b). If W (bc) − W (b) > W (c) then c prefers to form a coalition with b.
   Next note that if W (bc) − W (b) > W (c) then the agenda setter has to make a an oﬀer
WF (a) in the first stage for a to accept, because if a rejects the oﬀer then c will form a
coalition with b. But if W (bc) − W (b) < W (c) then c is expected not to form a coalition
with b in case a rejects the oﬀer, in which case c has to oﬀer a the payoﬀ W (a) for a to
accept. It follows from this reasoning that if

                                max W (zc) − W (z) < W (c)                                 (5)
                               z∈{a,b}


then the agenda setter never forms an FTA in the second stage of the game, after its oﬀer
has been rejected in the first stage. Under these circumstances our Free Trade Proposition
holds not only with our original sequential bargaining game but also with S2.
   The question that arises is therefore whether there are circumstances in which sequential
bargaining under S2 and GC superadditivity can tempt the agenda setter to form a coalition
with one country only. We show in Appendix C that under S2 and GC superadditivity, free


                                              28
trade is not an equilibrium outcome if and only if the following two conditions are satisfied:

           max W (zc) − W (z) > W (abc) − min {W (a) + W (b) , WF (a) + WF (b)} ,                        (6)
         z∈{a,b}


                                     min W (zc) − W (z) > W (c) .                                        (7)
                                   z∈{a,b}

These conditions have an important implication (see Appendix C): they require the follower
country z ∗ , where z ∗ = arg maxz∈{a,b} W (zc) − W (z), to have positive coalition externalities
and the other follower country to have negative coalition externalities. As a result free
trade is the equilibrium outcome when either both follower countries have positive coalition
externalities or both have negative coalition externalities.46
    We also show in Appendix C that the agenda setter chooses multilateral bargaining when
both countries have positive coalition externalities and sequential bargaining when both coun-
tries have negative coalition externalities. In either one of these cases free trade results.
Moreover, the agenda setter chooses sequential bargaining when the aggregate coalition ex-
ternalities are negative, i.e., W (a)+W (b) > WF (a)+WF (b). The last condition is obviously
satisfied when the coalition externalities are negative in each one of these countries, but it
also can be satisfied when they are positive in one country and negative in the other. It fol-
lows that negative coalition externalities favor sequential bargaining while positive coalition
externalities favor multilateral bargaining. This is the sense in which coalition externalities
play a similar role in the S2 bargaining protocol and in the original bargaining protocol.
    What explains the failure of free trade under S2 and GC superadditivity when conditions
(6) and (7) are satisfied? The intuition is as follows. The agenda setter’s payoﬀ after a
rejection of an oﬀer in the first round is now aﬀected by what happens later in the game.
If one follower country has suﬃciently high positive coalition externalities and the other one
has suﬃciently high negative coalition externalities, then it may be too costly for c to induce
them both to join the coalition. When first approaching the country with positive coalition
externalities, say country a, this country demands a high payoﬀ WF (a) in order to joint the
coalition, because it expects c to form a coalition with b when its oﬀer is rejected (this is
ensured by our necessary and suﬃcient conditions). On the other hand, when c approaches
the negative-externality country first, which is country b, then once b accepts the oﬀer it
becomes expensive to attract country a to the coalition in the second stage because it has to
be paid again WF (a). So either way the cost of forming the grand coalition via sequential
bargaining is high, because the country with positive coalition externalities has to be paid
WF (a). In the original protocol this could be avoided by approaching country a with positive
  46
     Note that in a world of reciprocal dumping we discussed above, where countries are symmetric, the
equilibrium outcome is sequential bargaining with free trade because this economic environment satisfies GC
superadditivity and the coalition externalities are negative. It follows that in this economic environment S2
and the original bargaining protocol yield the same outcomes.


                                                     29
externalities first paying it W (a) < WF (a), and then approaching country b with negative
externalities paying it WF (b) < W (b). Under S2 this is not possible, which makes the
formation of the grand coalition more costly.
    It also follows that under S2, GC superadditivity and conditions (6)-(7), sequential bar-
gaining is a stumbling bloc on the way to free trade. Moreover, when conditions (6)-(7) are
not satisfied there is no equilibrium in this game in which sequential bargaining is a building
block on the way to free trade. This contrasts with our findings in the previous section, where
we examined lack of GC superadditivity; there sequential bargaining could be a stumbling
or a building block of free trade.

8.2   Lack of commitment and non-contingent transfers
We now go back to the original bargaining protocol in which the rejection of an oﬀer in the
first stage of sequential bargaining ends the game. In this formulation we assumed that the
agenda setter can make oﬀers that secure fixed payoﬀs to the follower countries. This is
without loss of generality in the last stage of the game, because at this stage the oﬀer and
outcome are both final. It raises, however, the question of what is required to justify this
assumption in the first stage.
     For concreteness consider the case of negative coalition externalities in b and positive
coalition externalities in a, i.e., WF (b) < W (b) and WF (a) > W (a), and the sequential
subgame in which c approaches a first and b second. Then, we have argued, the agenda
setter oﬀers a the payoﬀ W (a) which a accepts, followed by an oﬀer WF (b) to b which b
accepts. Under GC superadditivity this is an equilibrium of this subgame, giving c the payoﬀ
W (abc) − W (a) − WF (b). Evidently, it is assumed in this specification that c can commit
in the first stage of the game to secure payoﬀ W (a) for country a at the end of the game.
     To understand what is involved, let Wz (abc) be the payoﬀ of country z in the absence of
transfers when the grand coalition forms, and let Wz (jk) for z = j, k be the payoﬀ of country
z in the absence of transfers when the coalition jk forms. In this event
                                   X
                                           Wz (abc) = W (abc) ,
                                 z=a,b,c

                                   X
                                           Wz (jk) = W (jk) .
                                   z=j,k

Then there are two ways to support the equilibrium in the above described subgame. First,
country c can commit in stage one to a transfer Ta = W (a) − Wa (abc) to country a at the
end of the game if a joins the coalition and a grand coalition forms, and a transfer Ta =
W (a) − Wa (ac) if country b does not join the coalition. With these commitments country a
gets a payoﬀ W (a) when it agrees to joint the coalition independently of whether b joins. In


                                                30
response a accepts the oﬀer and c has the incentive to oﬀer b a transfer Tb = WF (b)−Wb (abc)
for joining the coalition, which b accepts.
    A second way to support the above equilibrium is by having the agenda setter oﬀer a
a transfer Ta = W (a) − Wa (abc) in the first stage of the game if a joints the coalition
coupled with a commitment by c to make an acceptable oﬀer to b in stage two. Under
the circumstances, a accepts the oﬀer and c has the incentive to oﬀer b a transfer Tb =
WF (b) − Wb (abc) for joining the coalition, which b accepts. Note that in both cases the
strategies work because the agenda setter can make credible commitments; without credible
commitments a promise of W (a) in the first stage is not credible. In addition note that, in
the first case, a is oﬀered contingent transfers; one transfer when the grand coalition forms
and another transfer when it does not. In the second case the transfer can be made upfront,
because it is not contingent on the resulting coalition structure. But the commitment to
include country b in the coalition has to be credible for a to receive the payoﬀ it expects.
    This discussion clarifies an important point: when the agenda setter can commit to
a course of action it can use non-contingent transfers to support our equilibrium.47 The
remaining issue we discuss in this section is what happens when contingent transfers are not
available and the agenda setter has no ability to commit to a course of action. As is well
known, in such circumstances c may be tempted to behave opportunistically, and the question
becomes what are the consequences of such opportunistic behavior.
    To this end we now consider a modified version of the sequential subgame, call it S3.
Under this protocol the agenda setter has no commitment power. As a result it oﬀers non-
contingent transfers and it cannot commit in stage one to a course of action in the second
stage. The rest of the game is the same as before.
    Let us reconsider the sequential subgame a, b under S3 when country b has negative
coalition externalities and country a has positive coalition externalities. To support the
equilibrium described above the agenda setter has to oﬀer a the non-contingent transfer
Ta = W (a) − Wa (abc). If a accepts the oﬀer then c has an incentive to expand the coalition
to include b if and only if

                         W (abc) − W (ac) − WF (b) ≥ Wa (abc) − Wa (ac) .                                    (8)

In other words, GC superadditivity is no longer suﬃcient to ensure c’s desire to expand the
free trade area. Why? Because if c does not expand the FTA it gets a payoﬀ Wc (ac)−Ta and if
it expands the FTA it gets a payoﬀ Wc (abc)−Ta −Tb . Therefore c is willing to include b in the
coalition if and only if Wc (abc) − Tb ≥ Wc (ac). But since Tb = WF (b) − Wb (abc), we obtain
  47
    We did not specify the payoﬀ to c when b rejects the oﬀer to joint the coalition after c committed to a to
bring b into the coalition. The reason is that this payoﬀ does not matter because c makes b a take-it-or-leave-it
oﬀer and b has the incentive to accept every oﬀer Tb ≥ WF (b) − Wb (abc).



                                                       31
(8). In case (8) does not hold, which by GC superadditivity implies Wa (abc) > Wa (ac), the
agenda setter does not want to expand the free trade area. Then a’s payoﬀ is

                    Wa (ac) + Ta = W (a) + Wc (ac) − Wc (abc) < W (a) .

Anticipating this outcome a rejects the non-contingent transfer Ta = W (a) − Wa (abc) and
our equilibrium cannot be supported. In short, when Wa (abc) is much larger than Wa (ac)
promises of c to a to bring country b into the coalition are not credible.
    It follows from this discussion that when (8) holds and a similar condition holds for
country b then our Free Trade Proposition remains valid under S3, and when these two
conditions on preferences are not satisfied other equilibrium outcomes are possible. We show
in Appendix C that when the coalition externalities are positive in both follower countries
and GC superadditivity holds then multilateral bargaining is the equilibrium outcome under
S3 and free trade prevails. This is similar to our Free Trade Proposition. It follows that in
this case too negative coalition externalities are needed for sequential bargaining to be an
equilibrium outcome. But unlike the original bargaining protocol, under S3 negative coalition
externalities may result in sequential bargaining with free trade or sequential bargaining with
a partial coalition.


9    Concluding Comments
We have developed a dynamic model of bargaining with transferable utility in order to eval-
uate the relative merits of multilateral and sequential trade negotiations. An evaluation of
this sort is needed to assess the articles of agreement of the WTO. We believe that an explicit
modelling of the bargaining process is necessary for this purpose. Although we recognize the
limitations of our model, which may be too simple for the task at hand, we also feel that
it provides valuable insights into these issues. In particular, it identifies superadditivity and
coalition externalities in the structure of payoﬀs as important determinants of the relative
performance of these bargaining protocols. True, the nature of these influences may vary with
the bargaining procedure, but we believe that superadditivity and coalition externalities are
important in every realistic bargaining procedure.
    Our main findings can be summarized as follows: First, in the absence of coalition exter-
nalities and under GC superadditivity global free trade is the unique equilibrium outcome,
independently of whether preferential trade agreements are allowed or forbidden. This re-
sult extends to allowing for positive or negative coalition externalities under our assumptions
that: (i) a rejection in the first stage under sequential bargaining prevents the leader country
from making other oﬀers in the second stage; (ii) the leader country can commit to a given
course of action or to contingent transfers in advance. Therefore, although we have discussed


                                               32
only coalitions that consist of free trade areas, it is evident that our results also apply to
customs unions, economic unions, and other forms of trade liberalization. This follows from
the fact that the leading country is a residual claimant on the surplus from global free trade,
and that it has the ability to compensate other countries for the abandoning of suboptimal
agreements.
    Second, under GC superadditivity the leading country strictly prefers sequential bargain-
ing when coalition externalities are negative in at least one follower country. The reason is
that in this case the leading country gains more from first forming an FTA with the country
that has the higher coalition externalities and then expanding the free trade area to encom-
pass all countries, than from making simultaneous oﬀers to all follower countries. The key
is that once an FTA exists, it is cheap to “buy” a country with negative coalition exter-
nalities. Conversely, the leading country prefers multilateral bargaining when the coalition
externalities of the follower countries are positive, because then sequential bargaining makes
it expensive to “buy” outside countries.
    Third, when payoﬀs are not GC superadditive, global free trade may not occur in equilib-
rium. We showed that in this event preferential trade agreements facilitate the achievement
of global free trade when coalition externalities are negative, and hamper it when coalition
externalities are positive. Evidently, the structure of coalition externalities is an important
determinant of which bargaining protocol secures global free trade.
    We illustrated these conclusions with a simple competitive model of international trade
in which global free trade is Pareto-eﬃcient. The model clarifies the sources of coalition
externalities. They are related to trade structure and the structure of protection. They also
depend on features of demand and supply in each country. A free-trade agreement removes
tariﬀs on trade between members of the FTA, whereas FTA members maintain their original
rates of protection vis à vis outside countries. In this model, coalition externalities stem from
the impact of FTAs on world prices, which aﬀect the welfare or political objectives of the
trading partners. Coalition externalities on welfare-maximizing nonmember countries tend to
be negative when an FTA reduces the prices of their exportables, and positive when an FTA
reduces the prices of their importables. If every country’s negotiators maximize aggregate
welfare and trade taxes are the only distortions, then GC superadditivity holds and global
free trade is attained in equilibrium. If, however, special interests induce country negotiators
to maximize a politically-motivated objective function, then GC superadditivity may fail to
hold and preferential trade agreements can be either building blocs or stumbling blocs to free
trade, as explained above.
    Finally, we showed how stumbling blocs can also emerge when; (i) following a rejection
in the first stage, the agenda setter can still make an oﬀer in the second stage, or; (ii) the
agenda setter cannot commit to a fixed payoﬀ to the first country which is independent of
what happens in the second stage. Even in those cases we found, however, that negative

                                               33
externalities tend to favor sequential bargaining while positive externalities tend to favor
multilateral bargaining.
    Our model of trade negotiations has special attributes, yet our methodology of using
dynamic bargaining models of coalition formation to study trade negotiations can be explored
and pursued in several interesting directions. First, we have examined cases in which the
agenda setter is predetermined. Yet agenda setting power can be related to a country’s
characteristics, such as it economic size, the level of its technology, financial development and
the like. Under these circumstances the characteristics of the leader will be correlated with
the coalition externalities that its FTA imposes on nonmember countries. Second, it would
be interesting to study the lack of GC superadditivity that emanates from diﬀerent sources.
Alternative sources of nonadditivity can be lack of competition, distortions in labor markets,
or institutional constraints on economic transactions. It would be interesting to understand
how these diﬀerent reasons for lack of superadditivity impact the building and stumbling bloc
eﬀects of preferential trade agreements. Third, our model disregards geography. Many of the
preferential trade agreements are regional, however. What features of geography drive this
bias? And do these features aﬀect the choice between sequential and multilateral bargaining?
Fourth, we have assumed that the players’ payoﬀ functions are common knowledge. A more
realistic formulation might involve the agenda setter facing some level of uncertainty about
the follower countries’ payoﬀ functions. We believe that such asymmetric information might
influence our results in interesting ways.48
     Finally, our analysis abstracts from issues related to bargaining costs. Typically, these
costs should depend upon whether negotiations take place sequentially or multilaterally. Yet
it is not obvious which of the two would be larger. One may argue that multilateral negoti-
ations skip bargaining stages and thus reduce the delay in reaching free trade. On the other
hand, bargaining costs may increase with the number of agents simultaneously involved in
the bargaining, which plays against multilateral bargaining. Future research will clarify how
these considerations interact with coalition externalities and properties of objective functions
in shaping the outcomes of trade negotiations.




  48
    Indeed, we have worked out an example in which the leader views the follower countries’ payoﬀs as
uniformly distributed random variables. We found that, with this type of asymmetric information, negative
externalities may promote the emergence of stumbling bloc equilibria.


                                                   34
                                                 Appendix A

      We discuss in this appendix three generalizations and modifications of the Free Trade Proposition.

     Many countries
     We first generalize the bargaining model to a world of many countries. Let country c be the
agenda setter, and assume that there are N ≥ 2 follower countries indexed by c1 , c2 , ..., cN . The set
of all countries, the grand coalition, is denoted by CG = {c, c1 , c2 , ..., cN }, and the set of all follower
countries is denoted by CO = {c1 , c2 , ..., cN }.
     The game is played as follows. In stage one country c chooses to make an oﬀer to any subset
S1 ⊂ CO of the follower countries. The oﬀer consists of a coalition CF,1 = c ∪ S1 , i.e., an FTA among
all the countries in CF,1 , and payoﬀs P (j) for all j ∈ S1 . If the oﬀer is rejected by at least one
country in CF,1 the game ends. If, however, all countries accept the oﬀer, the game moves to the
second stage. In the second stage c makes an oﬀer to a subset S2 of the remaining follower countries,
i.e., S2 ⊂ CO \S1 . The oﬀer consists of a coalition CF,2 = CF,1 ∪ S2 and payoﬀs P (j) for all j ∈ S2 .
If the oﬀer is rejected by at least one country, the game ends. Otherwise the game continues to the
third round. More generally, if c’s oﬀers where not rejected in the first t − 1 rounds, then in round t
country c makes an oﬀer to a subset St ⊂ CO \ ∪t−1  i=1 Si of the follower countries, which consists of a
coalition CF,t = CF,t−1 ∪ St and payoﬀs P (j) for all j ∈ St . The game ends at some stage T when
either c’s oﬀer is rejected or the grand coalition forms, i.e., CF,T = CG . It is self-evident that this
game collapses to our three-country game when N = 2. In particular, when c makes a simultaneous
oﬀer to all follower countries we say that c has chosen multilateral bargaining. And when c chooses
to follow any other branch of the game tree, we say that c has chosen sequential bargaining.
     We now need a more general notion of grand-coalition superadditivity, which we generalize as fol-
                                                    P
lows: GC superadditivity exists if v (CG ; hCG i) > C∈Γ v (C; Γ) for every Γ 6= hCG i. In other words,
GC superadditivity ensures that the aggregate payoﬀ of the grand coalition exceeds the aggregate
payoﬀ of every other coalition structure.
     We now show that GC superadditivity implies that the grand coalition forms in equilibrium and
global free trade emerges. Suppose to the contrary that Γ = hCF,T , {h1 } , {h2 } , ..., {hM }i is the
equilibrium partition in this bargaining game, where CF,T 6= CG and h1 , h2 , ..., hM are the countries
not included in the FTA. Let P (j; Γ) be j’s payoﬀ in this equilibrium.
     Now suppose that instead of making an oﬀer that is rejected in stage T , country c invites countries
h1 , h2 , ..., hM to join the FTA by oﬀering hi the payoﬀ P (hi ; Γ) = v ({hi } ; Γ), i = 1, 2, ..., M . This
oﬀer is accepted by every country. As a result, c’s payoﬀ is

                                                M
                                                X                          X
                             v (CG ; hCG i) −         v ({hi } ; Γ) −                  P (j; Γ) .
                                                i=1                     j∈CF,T ,j6=c

      P
But      j∈CF,T   P (j; Γ) = v (CF,T ; Γ). Therefore c’s payoﬀ equals

                                                                             M
                                                                             X
                            P (c; Γ) + v (CG ; hCG i) − v (CF ; Γ) −               v ({hi } ; Γ) ,
                                                                             i=1




                                                            35
and GC superadditivity implies that this payoﬀ exceeds P (c; Γ). Therefore Γ is not an equilibrium
partition. Thus, the grand coalition forms in equilibrium.

     Additional leaders
     In the previous game a rejection of an oﬀer ended the game. We now modify the game and assume
instead that when an oﬀer is rejected the agenda-setting power shifts to another country. In particular,
and without loss of generality, suppose that c is the first leader whereas countries c1 , c2 , ..., cN are the
leaders in the natural order of their subscript. This ordering means the following: When an oﬀer of
country c is rejected, where an oﬀer consists of an invitation to a subset of follower countries to join
c’s FTA and payoﬀs to these countries, the agenda-setting role shifts to country ci with the lowest
index i among the countries that are not already members of c’s FTA. From this point on, the new
agenda-setter, say country ĉ1 , is the leader until its oﬀer is rejected. ĉ1 is allowed to make oﬀers to
follower countries that are not members of c’s FTA. As in the case of country c, an oﬀer consists
of an invitation to a subset of these countries to join ĉ1 ’s FTA, including payoﬀs to these countries.
When ĉ1 ’s oﬀer is rejected the leadership role shifts to the lowest index country ci that is in neither
the FTA formed by c nor by ĉ1 , say country ĉ2 . And so on. The game ends when either the last
free-standing follower receives agenda-setting power or it joins the FTA formed by the country that
gained agenda-setting power in the previous round.
     We argue that with GC superadditivity the grand coalition forms in the equilibrium of this game
and global free trade emerges. To prove the argument, assume to the contrary that the equilibrium
partition is Γ = hCc , C1 , ..., CL i 6= hCG i, where Cc is the coalition formed by country c and Ci is the
coalition formed by country ĉi , i = 1, 2, ..., L. That is, there is one free trade area Cc formed by c,
possibly consisting of country c only, and L free trade areas Ci formed by countries ĉi , i = 1, 2, ..., L,
with Ci possibly consisting of country ĉi only. Let P (j; Γ) be the payoﬀ of country j in this equilibrium.
     Now suppose that after forming Cc country c invites all countries not in Cc to join its FTA, oﬀering
payoﬀs P (j; Γ) to all j ∈ / Cc . If Γ is a subgame perfect equilibrium, then these countries accept the
oﬀer. As a result c’s payoﬀ is

                                              L X
                                              X                         X
                           v (CG ; hCG i) −              P (j; Γ) −                P (j; Γ) .
                                              i=1 j∈Ci                j∈Cc ,j6=c

                    PL P               PL                 P
Note, however, that i=1 j∈Ci P (j; Γ) = i=1 v (Ci ; Γ) and j∈Cc P (j; Γ) = v (Cc ; Γ). Therefore
c’s payoﬀ can be expressed as

                                                           L
                                                           X
                           P (c; Γ) + v (CG ; hCG i) −           v (Ci ; Γ) − v (Cc ; Γ) .
                                                           i=1


GC superadditivity implies, however, that this payoﬀ exceeds P (c; Γ). Therefore Γ is not an equi-
librium partition. It follows that the grand coalition forms in equilibrium and leads to global free
trade.

   Random leaders
   In the previous version of the bargaining game the order in which countries gain agenda-setting
power is predetermined. An alternative is to assign agenda-setting power randomly to one of the

                                                         36
countries that do not belong to an existing coalition. Thus, for example, if at stage t the partition is
Γt = hCc , C1 , ..., CL , {h1 } , {h2 } , ..., {hM }i and an oﬀer of the agenda-setter ĉL is rejected, then one
of the countries j ∈ {h1 , h2 , ..., hM } becomes the leader, and the leadership is determined by a draw
from some distribution function Ht over {h1 , h2 , ..., hM }. The distribution function Ht can be time
dependent and it obviously depends on the set of eligible countries {h1 , h2 , ..., hM } at stage t. The
other details of the game are the same as above. We argue that in this case too the grand coalition
forms in equilibrium and worldwide free trade occurs when the payoﬀs are GC superadditive.49
                                                                                                ­              ®
    Suppose to the contrary, that the equilibrium partition is random, with Γk = Cc , C1k , ..., CLk k
for k = 1, 2, ..., K having positive probability, and Γk 6= hCG i for some k. Note that Cc is the same
in all these partitions, because the uncertainty arises only after c’s oﬀer is rejected, and it stems
from uncertainty regarding the identity of future agenda-setters. In this event the expected payoﬀ of
                                   ¡       ¢
country j is P (j; Cc ) = EP j; Γk , where E is the expectations operator over Γk .
    Now consider the following strategy of country c at stage t, after it has formed the coalition Cc in
stage t − 1. Country c invites all countries not in Cc to join the FTA and oﬀers each one the payoﬀ
P (j; Cc ), for all j ∈/ Cc . The payoﬀs to countries in Cc remain P (j; Cc ) for j ∈ Cc \c. Under these
circumstances the countries not in Cc accept the oﬀer while the follower countries in Cc obtain the
payoﬀ that they were promised. The resulting payoﬀ to country c is
                                                               X
                                        v (CG ; hCG i) −                P (j; Cc ) .
                                                           j∈CG \c


Note, however, that
                                                          ⎡                            ⎤
                X                      X                               Lk X
                                                                       X
                                               ¡     ¢      ¡       ¢        ¡        ¢
                      P (j; Cc ) = E          P j; Γk = E ⎣v Cc ; Γk +      v Cik ; Γk ⎦ .
               j∈CG                    j∈CG                                        i=1 j∈Cik


Therefore, by taking expectations over Γk , c’s payoﬀ can be expressed as
                                                      ⎡                            ⎤
                                                                   Lk X
                                                                   X
                                                           ¡    ¢        ¡        ¢
                      P (c; Cc ) + v (CG ; hCG i) − E ⎣v Cc ; Γk +      v Cik ; Γk ⎦ .
                                                                              i=1 j∈Ci


GC superadditivity implies, however, that
                                                                    k
                                                                   L X
                                                                   X
                                                 ¡     k
                                                           ¢                   ¡        ¢
                            v (CG ; hCG i) − v Cc ; Γ          −              v Cik ; Γk > 0
                                                                   i=1 j∈Ci


for every k = 1, 2, ..., K. Therefore c’s payoﬀ under the proposed strategy exceeds P (c; Cc ) and Γk ∈/
hCG i cannot have positive probability in equilibrium. It follows that the grand coalition forms with
probability 1, leading to free trade. Naturally, the game with random agenda setters is a generalization
of the game with predetermined agenda-setters and therefore this result is a generalization of the result
for the previous subsection.
  49
     Gomes (2003) provides a general analysis of a coalition-formation game with randomly assigned agenda-
setting power. His model is somewhat diﬀerent but closely akin to ours. He shows that the grand coalition
forms with probability 1 when GC superadditivity holds and the future is not discounted.


                                                           37
                                              Appendix B

   In this appendix we provide the details corresponding to Examples 3 and 4 in the main text.

   Example 3: Stumbling Blocs
   Assume that uj (x) is quadratic, implying the demand functions

                                               Ca (q) = 4 − q,

                                                Cb (q) = 3 − q,

                                                Cc (q) = 8 − q,

where q is a price. We also assume that the profit functions Πj (q) are quadratic, given by

                                                              5
                                                 Πa (q) =       q,
                                                              4
                                                  5     1
                                                    q + q2 ,
                                             Πb (q) =
                                                  2     2
                                                  17     1
                                         Πc (q) =    q + q2 .
                                                  4      2
These profit functions yield the supply functions

                                                               5
                                                 Xa (q) =        ,
                                                               4
                                                     5
                                               Xb (q) =+ q,
                                                     2
                                                    17
                                           Xc (q) =    + q.
                                                     4
In the initial equilibrium, countries a and c import x while b exports it. The tariﬀ rates are τ a = 2,
τ b = 1 and τ c = 1.5. Under these circumstances the equilibrium international price of x, pn , can be
solved from the market clearing condition
                                  X                          X
                                           Cj (τ j pn ) =             Xj (τ j pn ) .
                                 j=a,b,c                    j=a,b,c


This yields pn = 1. In addition, countries maximize profits. Therefore

                                       W (a) = Πa (τ a pn ) = 2.5,

                                           W (b) = Πb (τ b pn ) = 3,

                                       W (c) = Πc (τ c pn ) = 7.5.

   Next note that under free trade the equilibrium international price p (abc) is solved from the




                                                       38
market clearing condition
                                       X                           X
                                               Cj [p (abc)] =             Xj [p (abc)] ,
                                     j=a,b,c                    j=a,b,c

which yields p (abc) = 1.4. Therefore the payoﬀ of the grand coalition is
                                                      X
                                      W (abc) =               Πj [p (abc)] = 13.16.
                                                    j=a,b,c


It follows that in the multilateral bargaining subgame country c’s payoﬀ from oﬀering the follower
countries P (j) = W (j), j = a, b, is

                                 Pmulti (c) = W (abc) − W (a) − W (b) = 7.66.

This payoﬀ exceeds W (c) = 7.5. Therefore in this subgame the grand coalition forms, leading to
global free trade.
     Now consider sequential bargaining, and suppose that c approaches a first. The tariﬀ rate is higher
in c than in a, therefore, as we have seen in Section 3, this can lead to enhanced or reduced protection.
But in this example Ca (τ c pn ) − Xa (τ c pn ) < Xc (τ c pn ). Therefore, an FTA between a and c leads to
reduced protection, i.e., the price in a declines from τ a times the international price to τ c times the
international price. As a result, the new equilibrium international price p (ac) is the solution to the
market clearing condition
                  X                                                X
                          Cj [τ c p (ac)] + Cb [τ b p (ac)] =           Xj [τ c p (ac)] + Xb [τ b p (ac)] ,
                  j=a,c                                         j=a,c


which is p (ac) = 14/13. Under these circumstances the joint payoﬀ of a and c is
                                                    X
                                      W (ac) =             Πj [τ c p (ac)] = 10.189
                                                   j=a,c


whereas the payoﬀ of b is
                                         WF (b) = Πb [τ b p (ac)] = 3.2722.

It follows that
                                  W (abc) − W (ac) − WF (b) = −0.3012 < 0.

That is, GC superadditivity does not hold and c has no incentive to oﬀer b the payoﬀ P (b) = WF (b)
in order to induce b to join the FTA. As a result c’s payoﬀ from forming an FTA with a only, which
is the highest payoﬀ from sequential bargaining when c approaches a first, is

                                       P a,b (c) = W (ac) − W (a) = 7.6893.

Note that this payoﬀ exceeds W (c) = 7.5 as well as Pmulti (c) = W (abc) − W (a) − W (b) = 7.66.
Therefore sequential bargaining dominates multilateral bargaining from the point of view of country
c.
    It remains to examine sequential bargaining in which c approaches country b first. Note that
Cc (pn ) − Xc (pn ) < Xb (pn ). Therefore an FTA between b and c leads to reduced protection. In this


                                                              39
event the international price p (bc) is determined by the market clearing condition
                    X                                          X
                           Cj [p (bc)] + Ca [τ a p (bc)] =           Xj [p (bc)] + Xa [τ a p (bc)] ,
                   j=b,c                                     j=b,c


which yields p (bc) = 7/6. As a result, the joint payoﬀ of b and c is
                                                  X
                                      W (bc) =           Πj [p (bc)] = 9.2361
                                                 j=b,c


and a’s payoﬀ is
                                      WF (a) = Πa [τ a p (bc)] = 2.916 7.

It follows that
                                 W (abc) − W (bc) − WF (a) = 1.0072 > 0,

which implies that once c has formed an FTA with b, country c gains by oﬀering a a payoﬀ of
P (a) = WF (a) in order to induce a to join the FTA. That is, if c approaches b first, then the subgame
perfect equilibrium leads to global free trade. But note that under these circumstances c’s payoﬀ is

                              P b,a (c) = W (abc) − W (b) − WF (a) = 7.2433,

and this payoﬀ is smaller than the payoﬀ P a,b (c) = 7.6893 from making a an oﬀer first. Therefore,
despite the fact that one branch of the sequential bargaining subgame leads to worldwide free trade, the
leader prefers the other branch, that leads to a free trade agreement between a and c only. Moreover,
as we have seen above, the leader also prefers the FTA between a and c only to the global free trade
outcome under multilateral bargaining. Therefore c chooses sequential bargaining and it approaches a
first. Evidently, in this situation sequential bargaining produces a stumbling bloc to global free trade.


    Example 4: Building Blocs
    Now the demand functions are
                                                Ca (q) = 1 − 2q,

                                                Cb (q) = 15 − 2q,

                                                 Cc (q) = 8 − q,

and the profit functions are
                                                Πa (q) = 2q + q 2 ,
                                                              1
                                              Πb (q) = 15q + q 2 ,
                                                             2
                                                  Πc (q) = 3q.

As a result, the supply functions are
                                                Xa (q) = 2 + 2q,

                                                Xb (q) = 15 + q,


                                                          40
                                                      Xc (q) = 3.

In the initial equilibrium, country c imports x from both a and b, and τ a = 1, τ b = 1, τ c = 1.5. In
this event market clearing requires
                                       X                           X
                                               Cj (τ j pn ) =             Xj (τ j pn ) ,
                                     j=a,b,c                    j=a,b,c


yielding the equilibrium price pn = 0.47059. Every country maximizes profits. Therefore

                                         W (a) = Πa (τ a pn ) = 1.1626,

                                          W (b) = Πb (τ b pn ) = 7.1696,

                                          W (c) = Πc (τ c pn ) = 2.1177.

   Under free trade the equilibrium international price p (abc) is solved from the market clearing
condition
                               X                  X
                                   Cj [p (abc)] =       Xj [p (abc)] ,
                                   j=a,b,c                      j=a,b,c

which yields p (abc) = 1/2. Therefore the payoﬀ of the grand coalition is
                                                    X
                                    W (abc) =                Πj [p (abc)] = 10.375.
                                                   j=a,b,c


It follows that in the multilateral bargaining subgame country c’s payoﬀ from oﬀering the follower
countries P (j) = W (j), j = a, b, is

                                      W (abc) − W (a) − W (b) = 2.0428,

which falls short of W (c) = 2.1177. Under these circumstances c’s payoﬀ from multilateral bargaining
is W (c), and this payoﬀ is attained by making an oﬀer that is rejected by either a or b.
    Next consider sequential bargaining. If c makes the first oﬀer to a and a accepts it, then the FTA
between a and c leads to enhanced protection, because Cc (τ c pn ) − Xc (τ c pn ) > Xa (τ c pn ). In this
event the international price p (ac) is determined by the market clearing condition
                         X                            X
                                  Cj [τ j p (ac)] =           Xj [τ c p (ac)] + Xb [τ b p (ac)] ,
                        j=a,b,c                       j=a,c


which is p (ac) = 0.42105. Under these circumstances the joint payoﬀ of a and c is
                                                   X
                                     W (ac) =             Πj [τ c p (ac)] = 3.5568
                                                  j=a,c


whereas the payoﬀ of b is
                                       WF (b) = Πb [τ b p (ac)] = 6.4044.




                                                              41
It follows that
                                W (abc) − W (ac) − WF (b) = 0.41385 > 0.

In this event c has the incentive to expand the FTA to include b. Therefore, if c approaches a first,
then the grand coalition forms, leading to global free trade. The leader’s payoﬀ is then

                              P a,b (c) = W (abc) − W (a) − WF (b) = 2.808.

This payoﬀ exceeds W (c) = 2.1177. Therefore c prefers sequential to multilateral bargaining.
    It remains to examine whether in sequential bargaining c prefers to approach a first or b. If c
approaches b first and they form an FTA, this leads to reduced protection, because Cc (pn )−Xc (pn ) <
Xa (pn ). Therefore this FTA leads to global free trade, because it reduces c’s price to the international
price. In this event the international price p (bc) is equal to p (abc). Therefore, global free trade is
also achieved on this branch of the sequential subgame. However, in this case c’s payoﬀ is

                              P b,a (c) = W (abc) − W (b) − WF (a) = 2.0428.

And since P b,a (c) = 2.0428 < P a,b (c) = 2.808, country c prefers to approach a first. In the subgame
perfect equilibrium of this game an FTA between a and c is a building bloc to free trade; this FTA
is expanded in the second stage to include country b. In this example sequential bargaining leads to
global free trade while multilateral bargaining does not.




                                            Appendix C

       In this Appendix we provide formal proofs of the statements in Sections 8.1 and 8.2.

     Rejection does not end the game
     Let us start with a derivation of the results under the bargaining protocol we have labelled S2. It is
useful to start by expressing the payoﬀ that the leader country c obtains under alternative strategies.
This is illustrated in Table C.1. The derivation of these payoﬀs is straightforward given the discussion
in the main text.50 The term “skip” in the table refers to a situation in which country c makes a low
enough oﬀer to the first country being approached to ensure that this oﬀer is rejected.
     Failure of global free trade corresponds to cases in which the largest payoﬀ in sequential bargaining
is either W (ac) − W (a) or W (bc) − W (b). We can further narrow our search for necessary conditions
for free trade to fail by noting that the leader will never make an acceptable oﬀer in the first stage
and choose not to attract the third country. This follows directly from GC superadditivity as proved
in Section 5.




  50
     We are not considering the case in which the leader makes unacceptable oﬀers to both countries because
this is strictly dominated by multilateral bargaining (given GC superadditivity).


                                                    42
                         Table C.1: Country c’s payoﬀs in the S2 game
 Multilateral Bargaining        W (abc) − W (a) − W (b)
                                ⎧
                                ⎪
                                ⎪ W (ac) − W (a)                   if   attracts a but not b
                                ⎪
                                ⎨ W (bc) − W (b)                   if   “skips” a and attracts b
 Sequential Bargaining a, b
                                ⎪
                                ⎪ W (abc) − W (a) − WF (b)         if   attracts both and W (bc) − W (b) < W (c)
                                ⎪
                                ⎩
                                  W (abc) − WF (a) − WF (b)        if   attracts both and W (bc) − W (b) > W (c)
                                ⎧
                                ⎪
                                ⎪ W (bc) − W (b)                   if   attracts b but not a
                                ⎪
                                ⎨ W (ac) − W (a)                   if   “skips” b and attracts a
 Sequential Bargaining b, a
                                ⎪
                                ⎪ W (abc) − WF (a) − W (b)         if   attracts both and W (ac) − W (a) < W (c)
                                ⎪
                                ⎩
                                  W (abc) − WF (a) − WF (b)        if   attracts both and W (ac) − W (a) > W (c)


     Next note that if W (ac) − W (a) < W (c), country c will never want to skip b and later attract
a, but it will not want to skip a and later attract b either because by doing so it would obtain
W (bc) − W (b), which is (by GC superadditivity) less than W (abc) − WF (a) − W (b), a payoﬀ c can
obtain by first attracting b and later a (see Table C.1). By similar reasoning we can conclude that a
failure of free trade is inconsistent with W (bc)−W (b) < W (c). In sum, a failure of free trade requires
condition (7) in the main text. It thus follows that in searching for further necessary conditions for
free trade to fail, we can abstract from the first and third rows of each sequential bargaining branch
in Table C.1. It then becomes clear that a failure of free trade can only occur if W (bc) − W (b) or
W (ac) − W (a) are larger than max {W (abc) − W (a) − W (b) , W (abc) − WF (a) − WF (b)} , which
we can express as condition (6) in the main text. We have proved that (6) and (7) are both necessary
conditions for free trade to fail. But note also that if these two conditions are met, then it is necessarily
the case that free trade will fail in equilibrium as the leader will “skip” one country and attract the
third one. Hence, conditions (6) and (7) are necessary and suﬃcient for free trade to fail.
     We can next use Table C.1 to further characterize the equilibrium process of coalition formation
under bargaining protocol S2. Consider first the case in which externalities are negative in both
countries. It is easy to verify that in such cases (6) cannot hold and global free trade will be attained.
This is because when WF (z) < W (z) for z = a, b, condition (6) reads

                           W (z ∗ c) − W (z ∗ ) > W (abc) − WF (z ∗ ) − WF (q) ,

where z ∗ = arg maxz∈{a,b} {W (zc) − W (z)} and q = {a, b}−{z ∗ }. But this cannot possibly hold given
GC superadditivity (W (abc) − W (z ∗ c) − WF (q) > 0) and negative externalities in z ∗ (WF (z ∗ ) <
W (z ∗ )). Hence, in searching for the equilibrium with negative externalities in both countries, we
can ignore the payoﬀs in the Table C.1 associated with a failure of global free trade. As a result,
inspection of the table indicates that no matter whether (7) holds or not, country c can obtain a
strictly higher payoﬀ under some form of sequential bargaining than under multilateral bargaining
(since WF (z) < W (z) for z = a, b).
     In a similar fashion, we can show that global free trade will be attained when both countries have
positive externalities, and that the leader will strictly prefer multilateral bargaining in such cases. To
see this, note that with positive externalities, (6) can be written as

                            W (z ∗ c) − W (z ∗ ) > W (abc) − W (z ∗ ) − W (q) ,

                                                     43
but again this cannot possibly hold under GC superadditivity (W (abc) − W (z ∗ c) − WF (q) > 0) and
positive externalities in q (WF (q) > W (q)). Focusing on the relevant payoﬀs in Table C.1, it is clear
that multilateral bargaining is then the preferred strategy for the leader country.
    We have thus shown that free trade will prevail unless externalities are positive in one country
and negative in the other. Using the above notation, we can further show that, when free trade fails,
the country with positive externalities has to be z ∗ . In particular, note that

                            W (z ∗ c) − W (z ∗ ) > W (abc) − W (z ∗ ) − W (q)

is inconsistent with GC superadditivity and W (q) < WF (q), while

                          W (z ∗ c) − W (z ∗ ) > W (abc) − WF (z ∗ ) − WF (q) ,

is inconsistent with GC superadditivity and W (z ∗ ) > WF (z ∗ ). So for condition (6) to hold with
externalities of opposite sign in each follower country, we must have W (q) > WF (q) and W (z ∗ ) <
WF (z ∗ ).
     The main diﬀerence between these results and those in the Free Trade Proposition in Section 5
is that negative coalition externalities in one country are no longer suﬃcient to lead to sequential
bargaining. To see this it suﬃces to produce an example. So consider the case in which (i) WF (a) +
WF (b) > W (a) + W (b); (ii) WF (a) − W (a) > 0 > WF (b) − W (b) ; and (iii) W (bc) − W (b) >
W (c) > W (ac) − W (a). In such cases, ruling out the obvious dominated strategies in Table C.1, we
find that multilateral bargaining is chosen despite WF (b) < W (b) because

               W (abc) − W (a) − W (b) > W (abc) − WF (a) − W (b) > W (bc) − W (b)

and
                       W (abc) − W (a) − W (b) > W (abc) − WF (a) − WF (b) ,

where we have used (i)-(iii) as well as GC superadditivity.
    Even though one negative externality is not suﬃcient to induce the leader to choose sequential
bargaining, it is still the case that a suﬃciently negative externality is suﬃcient to lead to sequential
bargaining. In particular, provided that WF (a) + WF (b) < W (a) + W (b), it is clear from inspection
of Table C.1, that the leader is strictly better of by choosing some form of sequential bargaining.

     Lack of commitment and non-contingent transfers
     We next provide a formal proof of the claim in the main text of Section 8.2 that, even in the absence
of commitment, multilateral bargaining is the preferred strategy of the leader whenever externalities
are positive in both countries.
     To show this, it suﬃces to focus on situations in which global free trade is not attained (when it is,
the analysis is analogous to that in the Free Trade Proposition). So consider the sequential subgame
a, b in which country c finds it optimal to only attract a. Then for this strategy to be preferred to
multilateral bargaining we need

                             W (ac) − W (a) > W (abc) − W (a) − W (b) ,



                                                    44
which we can alternatively write as

                            W (b) − WF (b) > W (abc) − W (ac) − WF (b) .

Given GC superadditivity, this condition can only hold if there are negative externalities in b. Similarly,
we can show that a failure of free trade in the sequential subgame b, a can occur only if there are
negative externalities in a, i.e., W (a) − WF (a). We therefore conclude that whenever externalities
are positive in both countries, multilateral bargaining is the optimal strategy for the leader country.




                                                    45
References
 [1] Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger (2002), The Economics of the World Trading System
     (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press).

 [2] Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger (2004a), “Backward Stealing and Forward Manipulation
     in the WTO,” NBER Working Paper No. 10420.

 [3] Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger (2004b), “Multilateral Trade Negotiations, Bilateral Op-
     portunism and the Rules of GATT/WTO,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 63, Issue
     1, pp. 1-29.

 [4] Baldwin, Richard E. (1996), “A Domino Theory of Regionalism,” in Baldwin, Richard E., Pertti
     J. Haaparanta, and Jaakko Kiander (eds.), Expanding the Membership of the EU (Cambridge:
     Cambridge University Press).

 [5] Bhagwati, Jagdish N. (1991), The World Trading System at Risk (Princeton: Princeton Univer-
     sity Press).

 [6] Bhagwati, Jagdish N. (1993), “Regionalism and Multilateralism: An Overview,” in De Melo,
     Jaime and Arvind Panagariya (eds.), New Dimensions in Regional Integration (Cambridge: Cam-
     bridge University Press).

 [7] Bhagwati, Jagdish N., Richard A. Brecher and Tatsuo Hatta (1983), “The Generalized Theory
     of Transfer and Welfare (I): Bilateral Transfers in a Multilateral World,” American Economic
     Review, Vol. 73, pp. 606-618.

 [8] Burbidge, John B., James A. DePater, Gordon M. Myers, and Abhijit Sengupta (1997), “A
     Coalition-Formation Approach to Equilibrium Federations and Trading Blocs,” American Eco-
     nomic Review, Vol. 87, No. 5, pp. 940-956.

 [9] Bond, Eric W., and Constantinos Syropoulos (1996), “The Size of Trading Blocs Market Power
     and World Welfare Eﬀects,” Journal of International Economics, Volume 40, Issues 3-4, pp.
     411-437.

[10] Brander, James A. and Paul R. Krugman (1983), “A ‘Reciprocal Dumping’ Model of International
     Trade,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 15, pp. 313-323.

[11] Carraro, Carlo and Domenico Siniscalco (1993), “Strategies for the international protection of
     the environment,” Journal of Public Economics, Volume 52, Issue 3, pp. 309-328.

[12] CEPR (1995), Flexible Integration: Towards a More Eﬀective and Democratic Europe, Monitoring
     European Integration 6 (London: Center for Economic Policy Research).

[13] Chang, Won, and L. Alan Winters (2002), “How Regional Blocs Aﬀect Excluded Countries: The
     Price Eﬀects of MERCOSUR,” American Economic Review, Vol. 92, No. 4, pp. 889-904.

[14] Deardoﬀ, Alan V. and Robert M. Stern (1994), “Multilateral Trade Negotiations and Preferen-
     tial Trading Arrangements,” in Deardoﬀ, Alan V. and Robert M. Stern (eds.), Analytical and
     Negotiating Issues in the Global Trading System (Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan Press).



                                                46
[15] Ethier, Wilfred J. (1998), “Regionalism in a Multilateral World,” Journal of Political Economy,
     Vol. 106, No.6, pp. 1214-1244.

[16] Frankel, Jeﬀrey A., Ernesto H. Stein, Shang-Jin Wei (1996), “Regional Trading Agreements:
     Natural or Supernatural?” American Economic Review, Vol. 86, No. 2, pp. 52-56.

[17] Furusawa, Taiji and Hideo Konishi (2004), “Free Trade Networks with Transfers,” mimeo, Boston
     College.

[18] Gomes, Armando R. (2003), “Multilateral Contracting with Externalities,” mimeo University of
     Pennsylvania.

[19] Grossman, Gene M., and Elhanan Helpman (1994), “Protection for Sale,” American Economic
     Review, Vol. 84, No. 4, pp. 833-850.

[20] Grossman, Gene M., and Elhanan Helpman (1995), “The Politics of Free Trade Agreements,”
     American Economic Review, Vol. 85, No. 4, pp. 667-690.

[21] Grossman, Gene M., and Elhanan Helpman (2001), Special Interest Politics (Cambridge, MA:
     The MIT Press).

[22] Jackson, John H. (1997), The World Trading System: Law and Policy of International Economic
     Relations, Second Edition (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press).

[23] Jones, Ronald W. (1970), “The Transfer Problem Revisited,” Economica, Vol. 37, No. 146, pp.
     178-184.

[24] Kemp, Murray C., and Henry Y. Wan Jr. (1976), “An elementary proposition concerning the
     formation of customs unions,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 6, No. 1, pp. 95-97.

[25] Krishna, Pravin (1998), “Regionalism and Multilateralism: A Political Economy Approach,”
     Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 113, No. 1, pp. 227-251.

[26] Krugman, Paul R. (1993), “Regionalism Versus Multilateralism: Analytical Notes,” in De Melo,
     Jaime and Arvind Panagariya (eds.), New Dimensions in Regional Integration (Cambridge: Cam-
     bridge University Press).

[27] Laﬀont, Jean-Jacques and Jean Tirole (1993), A Theory of Incentives in Procurement and Reg-
     ulation (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press).

[28] Levy, Philip I. (1997), “A Political-Economic Analysis of Free-Trade Agreements,” American
     Economic Review, Vol. 87, No. 4, pp. 506-519.

[29] Maskin, Eric S. (2003), “Bargaining, Coalitions, and Externalities,” mimeo.

[30] Panagariya, Arvind (2000), “Preferential trade liberalization: the traditional theory and new
     developments,” Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 38, No. 2, pp. 287-331.

[31] Ray, Debraj and Rajiv Vohra (1997), “Equilibrium Binding Agreements,” Journal of Economic
     Theory, Vol. 73, No. 1, pp. 30-78.

[32] Ray, Debraj and Rajiv Vohra (1999), “A Theory of Endogenous Coalition Structure,” Games
     and Economic Behavior, Vol. 26, No. 2, pp. 286—336.

                                                47
[33] Richardson, Martin D. (1993), “Endogenous Protection and Trade Diversion,” Journal of Inter-
     national Economics, Vol. 34, No. 3/4, pp. 309-324.

[34] Riezman, Raymond G. (1985), “Customs Unions and the Core,” Journal of International Eco-
     nomics, Vol. 19, No. 3/4, pp. 355-366.

[35] Saggi, Kamal and Halis Murat Yildiz (2006), “Bilateral Trade Agreements and the Feasibility of
     Multilateral Free Trade,” mimeo.

[36] Samuelson, Paul A. (1952), “The Transfer Problem and Transport Costs, I: The Terms of Trade
     when Impediments are Absent,” Economic Journal, Vol. 62, No. 246, pp. 278-304.

[37] Samuelson, Paul A. (1954), “The Transfer Problem and Transport Costs, II: Analysis of Eﬀects
     of Trade Impediments,” Economic Journal, Vol. 64, No. 254, pp. 266-289.

[38] Summers, Lawrence H. (1991), “Regionalism and the World Trading System,” in Policy Impli-
     cations of Trade and Currency Zones, Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank.

[39] Winters, L. Alan (1997), “Regionalism and the Rest of the World: Theory and Estimates of the
     Eﬀects of European Integration,” Review of International Economics, Special Supplement, pp.
     134-147.

[40] Yi, Sang-Seung (1996), “Endogenous Formation of Customs Unions Under Imperfect Competi-
     tion: Open Regionalism Is Good,” Journal of International Economics, Volume 41, Issues 1-2,
     pp. 153-177.




                                                48
