WHY DO COUNTRIES MATTER SO MUCH FOR CORPORATE GOVERNANCE?

                         Craig Doidge
                      G. Andrew Karolyi
                        René M. Stulz

                     Working Paper 10726
                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     WHY DO COUNTRIES MATTER SO MUCH FOR CORPORATE GOVERNANCE?

                                              Craig Doidge
                                           G. Andrew Karolyi
                                             René M. Stulz

                                         Working Paper 10726
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10726


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2004




René Stulz is grateful for the hospitality of the Kellogg Graduate School of Management at Northwestern
University and the George G. Stigler Center for the Study of the Economy and State at the University of
Chicago. Andrew Karolyi is grateful to the Dice Center for Research in Financial Economics for financial
support. We thank Ian Byrne for providing the S&P Transparency and Disclosure ratings. We are grateful
to participants at the American Economic Association meetings, the NBER Summer Institute, and at seminars
at Delaware, London Business School, Ohio State, Northwestern, University of British Columbia, Virginia,
Wilfred Laurier, and Yale, and to Lucian Bebchuk, Bernard Black, Kent Daniel, Olivier Jeanne, Kose John,
Simon Johnson, Han Kim, Mitch Petersen, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Bernard Yeung for useful
comments. Rodolfo Martell and Carrie Pan provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Craig Doidge, G. Andrew Karolyi, and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Why Do Countries Matter So Much for Corporate Governance?
Craig Doidge, G. Andrew Karolyi, and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 10726
August 2004
JEL No. G15

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper develops and tests a model of how country characteristics, such as legal protections for
minority investors, and the level of economic and financial development, influence firms' costs and
benefits in implementing measures to improve their own governance and transparency. The model
focuses on an entrepreneur who needs to raise funds to finance the firm's investment opportunities
and who decides whether or not to invest in better firm-level governance mechanisms to reduce
agency costs. We show that, for a given level of country investor protection, the incentives to adopt
better governance mechanisms at the firm level increase with a country's financial and economic
development. When economic and financial development is poor, the incentives to improve firm-
level governance are low because outside finance is expensive and the adoption of better governance
mechanisms is expensive. Using firm-level data on international corporate governance and
transparency ratings for a large sample of firms from around the world, we find evidence consistent
with this prediction. Specifically, we show that (1) almost all of the variation in governance ratings
across firms in less developed countries is attributable to country characteristics rather than firm
characteristics typically used to explain governance choices, (2) firm characteristics explain more
of the variation in governance ratings in more developed countries, and (3) access to global capital
markets sharpens firm incentives for better governance, but decreases the importance of home-
country legal protections of minority investors.

René M. Stulz
Fisher College of Business
Ohio State University
806A Fisher Hall
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
and NBER
stulz_1@cob.osu.edu

Craig Doidge
University of Toronto

Andrew Karolyi
The Ohio State University
1. Introduction

    Corporate governance deals with the mechanisms that ensure that investors in corporations

get a return on their investments (Shleifer and Vishny, 1997). Corporate governance varies

widely across countries and across firms. Better governance enables firms to access capital

markets on better terms, which is valuable for firms intending to raise funds. We would, therefore,

expect firms that plan to access capital markets – especially those with valuable growth

opportunities that cannot be financed internally – to adopt mechanisms that commit them to better

governance.

    With the availability of data on corporate governance and disclosure practices of individual

companies around the world, provided first by the Center for International Financial Analysis and

Research (CIFAR) and, more recently, by Credit Lyonnais Securities Asia (CLSA) and Standard

and Poor’s (S&P) among others, several studies have investigated whether governance and

transparency scores are related to firm characteristics, such as investment opportunities, external

financing needs, asset size, or ownership structure, and to the efficiency of the legal regime in

protecting minority shareholder interests (Durnev and Kim, 2004; Francis, Khurana, and Pereira,

2003; Klapper and Love, 2003; Krishnamurty, Sevic, and Sevic, 2003). In general, they find

supporting evidence that the quality of governance practices is positively related to growth

opportunities, the concentration of ownership, the need for external financing, and the protection

of investor rights. However, until now, the importance of other country characteristics, such as

the financial and economic development of the country in which a company is domiciled, and

how that importance is affected by financial globalization, has not been investigated. This is

surprising since a number of studies show that other country characteristics besides measures of

investor   protection   have     a   significant       impact   on   country-level   measures   of




                                                   2
governance.1 In this paper, we find that firm characteristics, such as investment opportunities,

asset size, ownership, and cash holdings, explain almost none of the variation in CLSA scores.

Though firm-specific variables are more successful in explaining variation in S&P scores, their

explanatory power is dwarfed by the explanatory power of country characteristics.

    Why then do countries matter so much for corporate governance? Countries matter because

they influence the costs that firms incur to bond themselves to good governance and the benefits

they receive from doing so.2 Better governance reduces a firm’s cost of funds only to the extent

that investors expect the firm to be governed well after the funds have been raised. It is, therefore,

important for the firm to find ways to commit itself credibly to higher quality governance.

However, mechanisms to do so may be unavailable or prohibitively expensive in countries with

poor investor protection and poor economic development. For instance, credible external

verification of a firm’s income disclosures may not be available because insufficient economic

development means that the necessary infrastructure for such verification is not available (see

Ball, 2001; Black, 2001). Consequently, a firm can have potentially valuable growth

opportunities, yet it takes no steps to have good governance because the tools required are too

expensive or not even available in its country. Perhaps the most important benefit to a firm from

having good governance is that it facilitates access to capital markets. But, this benefit is

worthless if a firm is located in a country with poor financial development. Because of this poor

development, the firm finds it expensive to raise funds, so that it chooses to raise a smaller

amount of funds and, hence, benefits less from better governance. As a result, firms with good


1
  Bushman and Smith (2003) show that political characteristics are important for some types of disclosure.
Dyck and Zingales (2003) show that a high level of diffusion of the press is negatively related to benefits of
control. Finally, Stulz and Williamson (2003) and Hope (2003) find that proxies for cultural heritage and
religion are related to disclosure.
2
  Our focus is on why firms in different countries have different governance quality when measured by
governance indices rather than on why governance systems differ across countries. We take the governance
system as exogenously given. It affect firms’ corporate governance decisions. There is a large literature that
contrasts governance systems across countries (see Allen and Gale, 2000). Some of that literature has
focused on development as a determinant of the financial system (see, for instance, John and Kedia (2003,
2004), who show theoretically that financial development and the quality of monitoring technologies of a
country affect the choice of governance mechanisms).


                                                      3
growth opportunities may have poor governance because they are in a country where financial

development and investor protection are poor. In other words, it is not worth it for the firm to take

steps to bond itself to better governance.

    If a country is poorly developed and protects investors poorly, it will be difficult for firms to

find ways to commit to good governance and the rights of minority shareholders will be mostly

determined by the characteristics of the country. Therefore, we expect country characteristics to

play an overwhelming role as a determinant of governance in poorly developed countries. At the

same time, we would expect that financial globalization should reduce the importance of the

country determinants of governance and increase firm-level incentives for good governance in

two ways. First, firms that have access to foreign capital markets and financial institutions are

less dependent on the development of their country. As a result, firms from poorly developed

countries find it easier to obtain capital and, therefore, have greater incentives to adopt good

governance. Second, financial globalization enables firms to “borrow” the investor protection of

countries where protection is high. For instance, firms can list their shares for trading in the U.S.

by initiating an American Depositary Receipt (ADR) program. A number of researchers have

argued that this action subjects or “bonds” the firms to U.S. securities laws (see Coffee, 1999,

2002; Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz, 2004; Doidge, 2004; Reese and Weisbach, 2002; and Stulz,

1999). Though there are limits to the extent to which securities laws can be enforced on foreign

firms (see Black, 2001; Licht, 2003; Siegel, 2004), there may well be no substitute mechanisms

for firms from some countries to credibly bond themselves to good governance (see Ball, 2001,

and Perino, 2003).

    If it were costless for firms to adopt good governance mechanisms, regardless of the

standards in the home country, then all firms would do so when they access capital markets for

the first time (unless, of course, the firm’s owners value control and discretion for non-pecuniary

reasons). Hence, even though countries would protect investor rights differently, there would be

no differences across countries in the degree to which investors are expropriated by controlling


                                                 4
shareholders. Therefore, differences in the costs and benefits from implementing good

governance mechanisms must be taken into account to explain why their adoption differs across

countries. We construct a model where countries differ not only in how they protect investors but

also in the cost of accessing capital markets and in the cost of implementing firm-level

governance mechanisms. This model enables us to analyze the determinants of governance in a

richer setting than previous models. If it is costlier to implement good firm-level governance and

to raise funds in countries with low development, firms in such countries can find the benefit

from good firm-level governance to be too small to justify the cost. Since investor protection is

generally poor in countries with low development, firm-level governance may be infeasible

precisely when it is needed most.

    In our empirical work, we test the model’s predictions using the CLSA corporate governance

ratings and the S&P transparency and disclosure ratings. These ratings measure both firm-level

governance attributes adopted by firms and attributes imposed on firms through legislation and

regulation. We show that almost 39% of the variance for CLSA ratings and 73% of the variance

for the S&P scores can be explained by country-level dummy variables. Adding firm-specific

variables does not increase the explained variation for developing countries, so these variables

explain none of the variation in governance for these countries. The same firm-specific variables

explain roughly 8% of the variation in transparency scores for developed countries, so that

governance is better explained by firm characteristics in these countries. Our preferred

interpretation of the results is that countries matter more than firm characteristics. Of course, it is

not the only possible explanation since our various specifications do not explain all of the cross-

sectional variation in ratings. We discuss alternate interpretations and explain why we believe that

the results are consistent with our preferred interpretation.

    In this paper, we use a broader sample of firms for the S&P ratings than that used in earlier

papers. As a result, we are able to estimate regressions separately for developed and developing

countries, which is not possible for CLSA since almost all countries included in that sample are


                                                  5
countries with GNP per capita below the median of the countries in the S&P sample. We find that

firm-specific variables are more informative about firm-level governance for firms from more

developed countries, which is consistent with the key prediction of our model. In particular, firm

characteristics are not significant in explaining the S&P ratings in the countries with low

development, but they are significant in countries with high development. Though splitting the

sample according to economic development identifies a significant difference in how firm

characteristics are correlated with governance, the same result does not obtain when we split the

sample according to a measure of investor protection. For instance, the investor-protection

variable used by Durnev and Kim (2004) is constructed in such a way that some countries with a

low value for that variable are extremely prosperous. These are countries where the anti-director

index of La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998) has an extremely low value.

Interestingly, in these countries, firm characteristics do matter for governance.

    We then investigate whether financial globalization enables firms to partly escape the country

determinants of governance and thereby sharpens the incentives for firms with growth

opportunities to have good governance. In support of our hypothesis, firm characteristics are

jointly significant for firms with New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) or NASDAQ traded (“Level

2 or 3”) ADR programs from low development countries, but they are not for purely local firms.

Further, country-level investor protection is not a significant determinant of corporate governance

for global firms in developed countries. Less supportive of our hypothesis is the result that adding

firm characteristics to a regression that controls for country effects through dummy variables does

not increase the adjusted R-squared differently for global firms than for non-global firms.

    There is a related but distinct literature on the impact of globalization on governance. We

distinguish between investor protection from the state and investor protection chosen by the firm

to improve on the investor protection granted by the state, which we call “firm-level governance.”

In this paper, we focus on firm-level governance. The literature demonstrates that globalization

has an impact on the investor protection granted by the state. For instance, as shown by


                                                  6
Smarzynska and Wei (2000) and Bonaglia, de Macedo, and Bussolo (2001), countries that are

more open have less corruption, so that governance and openness are related.

    The paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we examine the choice of firm-level governance

mechanisms in a model in which the cost of implementing these mechanisms and the cost of

access to capital markets depend on the country in which a firm is located. In Section 3, we

present our sample of firms and governance ratings. We demonstrate the paramount importance

of country-specific factors and the limited importance of firm-specific factors as explanatory

variables for the corporate governance ratings in Section 4. We also show that firm-specific

factors are more important in more developed countries. In Section 5, we provide evidence that

globalization makes the governance of firms less dependent on country-specific characteristics

and more dependent on firm-specific characteristics. We conclude in Section 6.



2. A model of choice of governance attributes by firms and financial globalization

    La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (1999) show that most firms outside the U.S. are

controlled by large shareholders. Large shareholders can extract private benefits from control of

the corporation. A number of recent papers model the extraction of private benefits from the firm

by controlling shareholders (Johnson, Boone, Breach, and Friedman, 2000; Lombardo and

Pagano, 2001; La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny, 2002; Durnev and Kim, 2004;

Shleifer and Wolfenzon, 2002; and Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz, 2004). These models assume

either that the extraction of private benefits is costly to the firm, or that it is costly to the

controlling shareholder. Regardless of the approach taken, they establish that controlling

shareholders consume fewer private benefits in countries where the cost of extracting private

benefits is higher.

    The deadweight costs associated with the extraction of private benefits increase the cost of

outside funds for the controlling shareholders. As a result, controlling shareholders for which

access to capital markets is important have incentives to find ways to commit to expropriate


                                               7
fewer private benefits. The literature has shown that by increasing their ownership of cash flow

rights, controlling shareholders make the extraction of private benefits more costly because they

pay for more of these private benefits out of the shares they own. As the extraction of private

benefits becomes more costly, it becomes optimal for controlling shareholders to consume fewer

such benefits. Firms can also make extraction of private benefits more costly through better

governance. For instance, by increasing the firm’s transparency, controlling shareholders make it

easier for outsiders to measure their consumption of private benefits and to take actions to reduce

it. In this paper, we allow for a role for corporate governance.

       We assume that there is a cost to improving governance. For instance, greater transparency

could increase political pressures on the firm and lead to expropriation from the state (see Leuz

and Oberholzer-Gee, 2003); having independent directors could be time-consuming for

management and controlling shareholders and might reduce their discretion over the firm’s

investment policy. There is considerable skepticism in the literature that credible mechanisms,

whereby the controlling shareholders commit to consume fewer private benefits, can even be

adopted in countries with the worst protection of minority shareholders. In other words, in these

countries, the cost of such mechanisms might be prohibitive. 3 The reward to a controlling

shareholder from committing to better governance is that he reduces the deadweight costs

associated with the consumption of private benefits when he raises funds in public markets. It is

generally assumed in the literature that these deadweight costs increase with the amount of funds

raised. Consequently, the reward to better governance for the controlling shareholder is small if

the extent to which he can access the capital markets is limited because of poor financial

development and if the costs from committing to less expropriation are high.

       Like Shleifer and Wolfenzon (2002), we consider the problem of an entrepreneur who has to

raise funds to finance an investment opportunity. This entrepreneur has control of the firm, so that

he is the controlling shareholder. We assume that he controls the firm regardless of the fraction of

3
    See Glaeser, Johnson, and Shleifer (2001).


                                                  8
cash flow rights he owns. The key difference between our model and theirs is that we allow the

firm to improve the investor protection that applies to its shareholders through better governance

at a cost. We, therefore, focus our presentation on the implications of that difference. We consider

an entrepreneur with wealth W. This entrepreneur has an investment opportunity available. An

investment of capital K will return aKα, the firm’s cash flow before expropriation, where 0 < α <

1 and where a > 0, after which the firm will pay a liquidating dividend. The diminishing-returns-

to-scale production function is required to insure that the model has a solution when investor

protection is such that it is optimal for the entrepreneur to expropriate nothing. The entrepreneur

has to decide the scale of the project. If K > W, the entrepreneur must raise external funds.

    The entrepreneur extracts private benefits after having raised funds and after the cash flow is

realized. Consequently, when the entrepreneur raises funds, investors form expectations about the

proportion of the firm’s cash flows that he will expropriate, f. In this model, the entrepreneur pays

a cost for expropriating shareholders on personal account; in other words, the cost is not

subtracted from the firm’s cash flows. The cost could represent the expected value of the

punishment imposed on the controlling shareholder if he is caught expropriating minority

shareholders, as in Shleifer and Wolfenzon (2002), or it could correspond to expenses that the

entrepreneur incurs for setting up mechanisms through which to extract private benefits. It is

assumed to be a convex function of f, bf 2, where b can be a positive constant or a function, and it

increases linearly with the firm’s investor protection and with the firm’s cash flows. This cost is

given by:

    0.5bf 2 aK α ( p + q)

The cost of extracting private benefits increases with both firm-level governance and with the

investor protection granted by the state. The country’s investor protection is equal to p, where a

higher value of p means greater investor protection. The investor protection that applies to




                                                  9
investors in the firm is equal to p + q, where q is the investor protection under the control of the

firm.

    It seems reasonable to assume that the cost of increasing investor protection at the firm-level

is not sensitive to firm size but increases with the amount of protection acquired. We assume that

the marginal cost of firm-level governance is increasing in the quality of firm-level governance,

so that we choose the functional form for the cost of firm-level governance to be mq2, where m is

a positive constant. To take into account differences in financial development across countries,

we assume that it costs n(K – W) to raise K – W, where n corresponds to a proportional cost of

raising capital. An improvement in financial development corresponds to a decrease in n, where n

is a constant between 0 and 1. Though existing models assume that q = 0, Shleifer and Wolfenzon

(2002) have a differential cost of funds between a closed economy and an open economy.4 In our

model, the payments n(K – W) and mq2 reduce the wealth of the entrepreneur dollar-for-dollar

whether these amounts are paid by him out of his own pocket or through the firm. It simplifies the

analysis, but does not change anything of substance, if we assume that n(K – W) and mq2 are paid

by the entrepreneur out of the liquidating dividend paid to him by the firm. Further, we assume

until stated otherwise that b is a constant.

    The model has no risk, so that shares have to return the risk-free rate. We assume an interest

rate of zero for simplicity and minority shareholders have unlimited opportunities to earn that rate

of interest on other investments. Therefore, the minority shareholders acquire a fraction (1 – k) of

cash flow rights only if their expected dividend, equal to (1 – k)(1 – f)aKα, is at least equal to their

initial investment of K – W (this is the minority shareholders’ participation constraint). Since the

entrepreneur will not give money away to the minority shareholders, it must be that the

participation constraint of minority shareholders is binding:

    (1 − k )(1 − f )aK α = K − W                                                                (1)

4
 The exception is Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2004), where firms can choose to have an ADR program
which increases investor protection. There is no implementation cost to them, so m = 0. However, the firm
does not have that choice when it is set up.


                                                   10
    In this model, the entrepreneur wants to maximize the total cash flows of the firm net of the

cost of extracting private benefits and of the dividend to be paid to minority shareholders:

    S = aK α − n( K − W ) − mq 2 − 0.5bf 2 aK α ( p + q ) − ( K − W )                          (2)

Equation (2) assumes that the participation constraint of minority shareholders is binding since

that is the case we focus on. The entrepreneur maximizes (2) by choosing three variables: K, q,

and f. In maximizing (2), the entrepreneur has to satisfy two constraints. First, he will only invest

if S is positive (the entrepreneur’s participation constraint). Second, since f is chosen after funds

have been raised from shareholders, it has to be consistent with maximization of the

entrepreneur’s welfare at the time that it is chosen (the entrepreneur’s incentive compatibility

constraint).

    In a world of perfect markets, there are no transaction and contracting costs, so n = m = 0. In

such a world, the entrepreneur would choose contracts that constrain him to select f = 0. If it is

costless for the firm to choose mechanisms that constrain the entrepreneur from expropriating

minority shareholders, the entrepreneur has nothing to gain by not using these mechanisms since,

ultimately, only the entrepreneur pays the deadweight costs of expropriation. If the cost of

committing to a lower level of expropriation is convex and increasing in the level of commitment,

as it is in our model, it will never be optimal for the entrepreneur to commit to no expropriation.

    After the entrepreneur has chosen q and K, shares are sold to outside investors for an amount

equal to K – W. The entrepreneur then owns a fraction k of cash flow rights, given by 1 – (K –

W)/(1 – f)aKα, where the denominator of the second term is the firm’s cash flow after

expropriation, which depends on f. After raising funds, the entrepreneur chooses how much to

expropriate by maximizing the following expression with respect to f and subject to the constraint

that f has to be nonnegative and cannot exceed one:

    k (1 − f )aK α − 0.5bf 2 aK α ( p + q ) + faK α                                            (3)




                                                  11
The first term of the expression corresponds to the dividends received by the entrepreneur. The

second term is the entrepreneur’s cost of extraction of private benefits. Finally, the third term

represents the private benefits extracted by the entrepreneur. The solution for f when the

participation constraint of minority shareholders is binding is:

             1− k
     f =                                                                                      (4)
           b( p + q )

For given k, the fraction of cash flow expropriated falls as the level of investor protection

provided by the state, p, increases, as in earlier models. In contrast to earlier models, the

entrepreneur gets to choose the level of investor protection provided by the firm, q, and he

extracts private benefits at a lower rate when q is higher. Further, f and k are negatively related, so

that an entrepreneur with a larger stake in the firm expropriates less.

    Using the participation constraint of minority shareholders, equation (4) can be written as:

         K −W            1
     f =           α 
                                                                                              (5)
         (1 − f )aK  b( p + q )

    Rewriting this equation, we get a quadratic equation in f. The solution for f has to be such that

f = 0 if it is infinitely costly to expropriate shareholders. With this requirement, there is only one

possible solution for f:

                                             0.5
          1 1       K −W    1            K −W    1
      f = − 1 − 4      α           if 4     α 
                                                              <1
          2 2       aK  b( p + q)        aK  b( p + q )                                 (6)
      f = 0 otherwise

When the entrepreneur chooses q and K, he also picks f, so that f can be written as f (K,q). For a

given level of K, f falls with q and with the productivity of physical capital.

    When investors invest in the firm, they want to receive back their investment since the

interest rate is zero. The investment opportunity must be good enough given f and the level of

investor protection sufficiently high to guarantee this outcome. This means that, as in Shleifer and

Wolfenzon (2002), there will be investment opportunities for which the entrepreneur will not be



                                                   12
able to raise funds. If m is low, the firm can improve cheaply on its country’s investor protection,

so that some firms, that would not go public if they had to rely on the country’s investor

protection alone, will choose to do so after spending to improve the firm’s investor protection

through better governance. In our model, the cost to a firm of improving its governance does not

depend on its size. Consequently, firms that raise a small amount of outside equity – namely,

those with poor growth opportunities – will not gain from improving their governance because

the cost of doing so will be amortized over fewer dollars raised. We therefore expect larger firms

to have better governance; further, firms have better governance when m is low and when they

have good investment opportunities. A high n reduces the incentives of firms to improve on

corporate governance because it reduces the amount of funds raised. If m is high enough, firms do

not adopt firm-level governance mechanisms that improve on the investor protection granted by

the state. In contrast, if m is zero, then all firms have the same level of investor protection and

there is no expropriation. Except for Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2004), the literature has

effectively assumed that m is infinite.

    Substituting (6) into (1) and using the minority shareholders’ participation constraint, the

controlling shareholder maximizes:

    S = aK α − n( K − W ) − mq 2 − 0.5bf ( K , q) 2 aK α ( p + q) − ( K − W )                 (7)

    The nonlinearity of this expression in K and q makes it impossible to obtain closed-form

solutions for K and q when b is fixed. However, our analysis leads to the following result:



    Proposition 1. If m = 0, all firms that raise external funds choose a value of q high

    enough so that f = 0, and the protection of investors by the state is not relevant. As m

    becomes large, q becomes very small, and the protection of investors depends almost

    exclusively on the protection granted by the state, p. As p becomes large and m > 0, q

    becomes very small because firm-level governance mechanisms become redundant but




                                                 13
    are costly. Finally, for n large enough, q = 0 since the firm does not expect to raise

    external capital.



The important point of this proposition is that a firm’s choice of governance mechanisms depends

critically on the cost of implementing these mechanisms and on the cost of raising funds. These

costs are determined partly by a country’s investor protection but also by the country’s economic

and financial development. It, therefore, necessarily follows that the choice of governance

mechanisms depends on country characteristics other than investor protection. If investor

protection is high enough, no expropriation takes place and the adoption of firm-level governance

mechanisms is not optimal. If development is too low, there is no point to the adoption of such

mechanisms because firms cannot raise a sufficient amount of funds to make good governance

pay. Proposition 1 implies the existence of a threshold level of economic development below

which firms’ incentives for good governance are trivially small and a threshold level of investor

protection by the state such that, if a country reaches that level, there is little gain for firms to try

to improve on that level of investor protection on their own account.

    We can obtain additional results using the first-order conditions for K and q. These first-order

conditions are, respectively, for K and q:

    aα K α −1 = 1 + n + [bf ( K , q ) f K aK α + 0.5bf ( K , q) 2 aα K α −1 ]( p + q)           (8a)

    2mq = −bf q f ( K , q )aK α ( p + q ) − 0.5bf ( K , q ) 2 aK α                              (8b)

where fK is the partial derivative of f (K,q) with respect to K and is positive and fq is the partial

derivative of f with respect to q, which we already know to be negative. The left-hand side of

equation (8a) is the marginal revenue from investing an additional dollar in production. The right-

hand side is the marginal cost of the additional dollar raised for the entrepreneur. In perfect

financial markets, the cost would be $1. With imperfect investor protection and financial markets,

the additional terms on the right-hand side of the equation are positive, so that the cost of capital



                                                      14
is higher than what it would be in perfect markets. As a result, the amount of capital invested is

lower than that in perfect markets. In equation (8b), the left-hand side is the marginal cost of

better governance, while the right-hand side is the marginal benefit.

    We can use equation (8b) to study the comparative statics of q treating K as a parameter. In

this case, q increases with K and a, but falls as m and p increase. The intuition for these results is

as follows. As K and a increase, cash flow increases. For a constant f, the total amount of

expropriation increases and expropriation becomes more costly for the entrepreneur. He partly

offsets this increase in the cost of expropriation by increasing q. As m increases, it becomes more

costly for the entrepreneur to acquire better governance and he therefore acquires less of it.

Finally, p and q are substitutes. An increase in p decreases the marginal benefit from better firm-

level investor protection and the entrepreneur decreases the amount of firm-level investor

protection he acquires. Equation (8b) does not depend on n directly. Though we can derive

comparative statics using equation (8b) in a straightforward way, we have to use a linear

approximation of (8a) in q and K to obtain results. Using the linear approximation, equation (8a)

implies that an increase in n decreases K. It therefore follows from equations (8a) and (8b) that an

increase in n leads to a decrease in investor protection through its impact on q. With this analysis,

the entrepreneur purchases more investor protection if the investment opportunity is more

valuable (higher cash flow before expropriation), if the cost of purchasing investor protection is

lower, if financial development is higher, and if investor protection guaranteed by the state is

lower.

    A closed-form solution for S can be obtained for the case where b is equal to B(1 – k), where

B is a constant. The literature has assumed that the cost of expropriation depends on p but not on

firm characteristics other than cash flow. The assumption that b is equal to B(1 – k) implies that

the overall cost of expropriation for the controlling shareholder falls linearly with his ownership

stake in the firm. The assumption that the cost of expropriation falls as k increases does not seem

unreasonable. Suppose that the controlling shareholder owns 99.99% of the firm. Presumably, if


                                                 15
he has some money and he is caught expropriating, he can always buy out the shareholders who

own 0.01%. In contrast, if the controlling shareholder owns 40% of the firm and gets caught,

many more individuals will be affected and pressure on politicians to punish the controlling

shareholder is likely to be much higher. So, it is reasonable to think that the political system is

likely to punish more severely the controlling shareholder who owns 40% of the shares than the

one who owns 99.99%. A controlling shareholder who owns 40% of the shares and expropriates

10% of the cash flow of the company is also more likely to get caught than one who owns

99.99% and who expropriates the same fraction of the cash flows because the shareholders who

get expropriated lose a much larger dollar amount in the former case than in the latter.

    With this assumption, we can replace b in equation (3) with B(1 – k), so that f now equals

1/B(p + q) and no longer depends on k. The value of the firm is (1 – f) times the firm’s cash flow

before expropriation:

        B( p + q) − 1 α
    V =               aK                                                                 (9)
        B( p + q) 

It then follows that k is equal to:

         ( B( p + q ) − 1)aK α − B( p + q )( K − W )
    k=                                                                                     (10)
                     ( B ( p + q ) − 1)aK α


Replacing f by 1/B(p + q) and b by B(1 – k) in equation (7), where k is defined by equation (10),

we obtain a new expression for S:


                                                1 − 2 B( p + q) 
    S = aK α − n( K − W ) − mq 2 + ( K − W )                                             (11)
                                                2( B( p + q) − 1) 


    The entrepreneur maximizes S by choosing q and K. In this case, if the entrepreneur raises

funds, he chooses K to be given by:




                                                  16
                                                     1
                α a(2 B( p + q) − 2)              1−α
    K =                                                                                  (12)
        (2 B( p + q ) − 2)n + 2 B( p + q ) − 1 



    There are four important comparative statics for K in equation (12):

        1) An increase in a increases K. An increase in a means that the investment opportunity

           of the entrepreneur is better, so that the marginal product of capital increases and he

           invests more.

        2) An increase in n decreases K. If n is high, as in poorly developed financial markets, it

           is more expensive to raise funds, so that the entrepreneur raises a smaller amount of

           funds and invests less.

        3) An increase in investor protection from the firm, q, is associated with an increase in K

           because expropriation falls.

        4) An increase in investor protection from the state, p, is associated with an increase in K

           since the entrepreneur expropriates less.



    In equation (12), K depends on q. We can substitute equation (12) in the first-order condition

for q. This yields a polynomial in q. The comparative statics are straightforward to evaluate when

S is a concave function of q, which has to be the case for an interior solution for q to exist.

Consequently, we obtain the following result:



    Proposition 2. Provided that there is an interior solution for q and the entrepreneur raises

    outside equity, a lower q is chosen, or in other words, the firm adopts fewer restraints on

    the expropriation of investors, as:

        P1. The cost of adopting these restraints, m, increases;

        P2. The protection of investor rights through the state, p, increases;




                                                     17
        P3. The cost of accessing capital markets, n, increases;

        P4. The investment opportunities of the firm, a, worsen.



    Note that Proposition 2 has the same results as those obtained earlier when evaluating the

first-order conditions (8a) and (8b) and using a linear approximation in the comparative static

analysis. The intuition for the results is the same as the one given then.

    If we view Ω = p + q as the measure of investor protection that takes into account the

protection granted by the state, p, and the additional protection granted by the firm, q, Ω increases

with p, falls with m, increases with a, and falls with n. The impact of an increase in p on Ω is less

if m is low because p and q are closer substitutes.

    Our model provides a richer and, we believe, more realistic analysis of the determinants of

corporate governance at the firm level. With this model, bad institutions and low levels of

economic and financial development limit the incentives of firms to improve corporate

governance on their own. Firms sell shares to the public in countries that differ strongly in the

degree of protection of investor rights and in the level of economic development. Though existing

models focus on the protection of investor rights, the extent to which firms improve corporate

governance depends critically on the development of capital markets. To see this, suppose that

capital markets differ across countries in the extent to which they can absorb equity issues. In

other words, firms in a country with poorly developed markets are constrained in issuing equity

while firms in countries with well-developed markets are not. In our model, this is equivalent to

making n a step function, so that, beyond a given level of capital raising activity, n is large

enough to prevent more capital raising activity. Among constrained firms, the benefit of

improving governance is limited since doing so does not enable them to raise more funds.

Suppose now, however, that a constrained firm gains access to global markets. In this case, it




                                                  18
becomes more valuable for the firm to improve governance because it can raise more funds as a

result of doing so.

    We have considered a firm at inception. We assumed that the exogenous variables are given

and are non-stochastic. Since the solutions for q and K depend non-linearly on the exogenous

variables, making these variables stochastic would complicate the problem considerably.

Suppose, however, that a firm has chosen q and K, has sold equity, and unexpectedly faces a

change in one of the exogenous variables. In this case, any improvement in firm-level governance

has an additional cost, which is that it creates a wealth transfer from the controlling shareholder to

the other investors in the firm. For constant α, the firm will not move to the level of firm-level

governance it would have chosen at its inception with that level of the exogenous variable.

Therefore, if a unexpectedly increases, so that it would be optimal to expand production, improve

firm-level governance, and raise more funds, the firm will do some of that if m and n are not too

high. But the extent to which it changes firm-level governance will be limited by the

redistribution cost. More generally, we have the following result:



    Proposition 3. Provided that m and n are not too large, firm-level governance improves

    following an unexpected decrease in p, an unexpected decrease in n, an unexpected

    decrease in m, and an unexpected increase in a keeping α constant.



    With this result, we expect globalization to reduce n by opening up new capital markets for

firms and creating more competition in the financial intermediation industry. It should also reduce

m by enabling firms to access new contracting technologies and by expanding the range of

financial services accessible to firms. Hence, from this perspective, we would expect financial

globalization to lead to an increase in q for firms that would benefit from financial globalization.




                                                 19
3. Data

    We want to explain firm-level choices of corporate governance. For that purpose, we use the

Credit Lyonnais Securities Asia (CLSA) and the Standard and Poor’s (S&P) corporate

governance and transparency ratings. The CLSA ratings cover emerging countries and newly-

emerged countries. The S&P ratings cover both developed and emerging economies. Both ratings

evaluate many objective and some subjective indicators of firm governance practices, including

categories related to managerial incentives, timely and accurate disclosures, board independence,

board accountability, enforcement and management accountability, minority shareholder

protection and social responsibility. While the S&P ratings leave relatively little room for

subjectivity compared to the CLSA rating, subjectivity is also limited in the CLSA rating.

    Our sample construction begins with the list of firms included in the two ratings systems. The

CLSA survey was conducted in 2001 and it rates the corporate governance practices of 495 firms

from 25 countries.5 This survey has been used in a number of recent papers (for instance, Chen,

Chen, and Wei, 2003; Palepu, Khanna, and Kogan, 2002; Durnev and Kim, 2004; Klapper and

Love, 2003; and Krishnamurty, Sevic, and Sevic, 2003). The main criterion for including firms in

the CLSA survey is firm size and investor interest. The CLSA corporate governance rating is

based on a questionnaire given to financial analysts who responded with “Yes” or “No” answers

to 57 questions related to seven categories: management discipline, transparency, independence,

accountability, responsibility, fairness, and social responsibility. A composite governance rating

is computed by giving an equal weight of 15% to the first six categories and a weight of 10% to

social responsibility. Percentage scores on the composite governance ratings range from 13.9 to

93.5. We do not include financial firms both because they are often subject to regulations and

laws that other firms are not and because financial ratios have a different meaning for them. After

removing financial firms, there are 376 firms in the CLSA sample.

5
 See Amar Gill, 2001, Credit Lyonnais Securities Asia, Corporate Governance in Emerging Markets:
Saints and Sinners, Who's Got Religion? Khanna, Kogan, and Palepu (2002) provide an evaluation of the
quality of the CLSA data set.


                                                 20
    In addition to the CLSA survey, we use transparency and disclosure ratings provided by

Standard and Poor’s.6 The Standard and Poor’s ratings have also been used in recent research

(Khanna, Palepu, and Srinivasan, 2003; Durnev and Kim, 2004). The sample provided to us by

Standard and Poor’s in April 2003 covers 901 firms from 40 countries. S&P compiles the ratings

by examining firms’ annual reports and standard regulatory filings for disclosure of 98 items,

divided into three sections: financial transparency and information disclosure (35 items), board

and management structure and process (35 items), and ownership structure and investor relations

(28 items). S&P uses a binary scoring system in which one point is awarded if a particular item is

disclosed. The scores are added and converted to a percentage score, with scores ranging from

15.22 to 88.78. After removing financial firms, there are 711 firms from 39 countries.

    Table 1 describes the sample constructed from the two surveys. It is immediately apparent

that S&P covers many more countries than CLSA. Further, the number of firms covered within a

country differs sharply across countries. In some countries, like Argentina for CLSA and New

Zealand for S&P, only one firm is covered. We, therefore, check if all of our results reported

below differ if we include all countries covered by a survey or if we include only countries for

which at least five firms are rated. We find that including only countries for which five firms are

rated makes little difference. It is also clear that there is substantial variation in ratings within

countries as well as across countries. For CLSA, the lowest-rated country is Indonesia with an

average score of 37.06, with scores ranging from 13.90 to 64.90, and the highest-rated country is

South Africa with an average score of 68.38, with scores ranging from 45.00 to 82.60. For S&P,

the lowest-rated country is Colombia (one firm with a score of 19.15) and the highest-rated is

Finland (average score of 75.70). We also give information in the table on the number of firms in

each sample that have a Level 2 or 3 ADR program. Firms with Level 2 or 3 ADRs are firms

listed either on the NYSE/AMEX or on NASDAQ. Level 3 ADR firms have also raised equity in


6
 See Patel, Balic, and Bwakira (2002) for a description of the S&P measure. Bushee (2003) provides an
extensive discussion of the properties of the S&P ratings.


                                                 21
the U.S.7 To determine if a firm is listed on a U.S. exchange, we use information obtained from

the Bank of New York, Citibank, the NYSE, and NASDAQ. Listing dates are verified using

Lexis-Nexis searches and by examining 20-Fs filed with the SEC and firm’s annual reports.

       To test our hypotheses, we require data on firm and country characteristics. Firm-level data

for sales growth, total assets, ownership, cash holdings, and SIC (Standard Industrial

Classification) codes are from Thomson Financial’s Worldscope database. Sales growth is

measured as the two-year geometric average of annual inflation-adjusted growth in sales from

1998-2000. Sales growth is winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles to reduce the impact of

outliers. Total assets, for the year 2000, are measured in millions of U.S. dollars. Ownership is the

data item reported as “Closely-held shares” for the year 2000. Worldscope defines closely-held

shares as shares held by insiders, which include senior corporate officers and directors, and their

immediate families, shares held in trusts, shares held by another corporation (except shares held

in a fiduciary capacity by financial institutions), shares held by pension/benefit plans, and shares

held by individuals who hold five percent or more of shares outstanding. In Japan, closely-held

shares represent the holdings of the ten largest shareholders. For firms with more than one class

of shares, closely-held shares for each class are added together. The ownership measure is far

from perfect since it relies on information disclosed by firms and this disclosure is often

voluntary and unmonitored. Cash holdings correspond to liquid assets held by firms and are

normalized by total assets.

       Sales growth is a widely used proxy for growth opportunities (see, for instance, La Porta,

Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny, 2002). The difficulty with sales growth is that it is

affected by a country’s institutions and business conditions. As an alternative measure of growth

opportunities that does not suffer from that problem, we also use a measure of dependence on

external finance (Rajan and Zingales, 1998) defined as capital expenditures minus cash flows

from operations divided by capital expenditures. This latter variable for these non-U.S. firms is

7
    See Table 1 of Foerster and Karolyi (1999) for more details on types of ADR listings.


                                                      22
computed using data on capital expenditures and cash flows for firms from the same industry in

the U.S. The motivation for this approach is that, assuming that growth opportunities of firms in

the same industry have a significant common component across countries, the level of external

financing of U.S. firms is the level that firms in other countries would have if they were not

constrained by the poor development of the country in which they are located. Francis, Khurana,

and Pereira (2003) use this measure to explain CIFAR disclosure scores and find that the 1991-

1993 scores are positively related to the original Rajan and Zingales (1998) measure. We do not

use the original measure because the CLSA and S&P scores are for the early 2000s and the

original Rajan and Zingales (1998) estimates are for the 1980s. We match U.S. and non-U.S.

firms by industry at the three-digit SIC code level. Data for this measure is obtained for all U.S.

firms included in S&P’s Compustat database from 1995-2000. For each firm, the use of external

finance is summed from 1995-2000 and it is divided by the firm’s total capital expenditures from

1995 to 2000. At the three-digit SIC code level, we take the industry median. Sample firms with

the same three-digit SIC are assigned the industry median value.

    Finally, we use a number of country-level variables in our analysis. The indices of anti-

director rights, rule of law, and risk of expropriation are measures of shareholder rights,

enforcement, and property rights obtained from La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer and Vishny

(LLSV, 1998). These variables are not available for China, Hungary, Poland, or Russia in the

LLSV study. Values for anti-director rights and rule of law for these countries are taken from

Pistor, Raiser, and Gelfer (2000). However, the index of the risk of expropriation is not available

in their study. We follow Durnev and Kim (2004) and define “Legal” as the product of anti-

director and rule of law. Stock market capitalization divided by GDP (Gross Domestic Product) is

from Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine (2001) and Gross National Product (GNP) per capita is

from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators database.

    The surveys create two selection biases. The first bias is related to country coverage. Less-

developed countries and those in which financial and legal institutions are especially poor will not


                                                23
be represented in the survey because they will not have firms in which the survey-sponsoring

organizations would have any interest. In these countries, firms will not have been able to

overcome country characteristics to draw interest from the survey-sponsoring organizations. This

bias leads us to understate the potential importance of country characteristics.

    The second bias is related to company coverage within countries. Only a subset of firms is

rated in each country. To investigate this bias, we collected data on almost 15,000 non-financial

firms available on Worldscope that are in countries covered by the surveys. We then estimated

logit regression models to predict which firms have a CLSA rating and which firms have an S&P

rating. In the logit regressions, the dependent variable takes a value of one if a firm is in the

CLSA or S&P samples and the explanatory variables are the firm characteristics that we

subsequently use to explain the ratings in our empirical work. The results are presented in the

Appendix. It is interesting to note the similarities and differences in the firm coverage for the two

samples. In both logit regressions, firm size is significant with a positive coefficient. However,

inside ownership has a positive and significant coefficient in the CLSA rating regression and, by

contrast, a negative and significant coefficient in the S&P rating regression. Finally, the ratio of

cash holdings to total assets has a positive significant coefficient in the S&P rating regression and

firm sales growth has a positive and significant coefficient in the CLSA regression. The

explanatory power of these two models differs dramatically. Firm characteristics explain

proportionally much less of the selection process by CLSA (pseudo R2 of 13.15%) than of the

selection process by S&P (pseudo R2 of 44.51%). It is clear from this that larger firms are more

likely to have a rating. Our theory shows that larger firms may have more incentives to adopt

good governance. If that is the case, our study may understate the importance of firm

characteristics because the firms in the CLSA and S&P sample are more homogeneous than the

population of firms.




                                                 24
4. How important are country and firm characteristics for governance ratings?

    In this section, we evaluate the importance of country and firm characteristics in explaining

firm-level governance choices. We first regress the governance ratings on firm characteristics.

The governance ratings combine investor protection granted by the state and investor protection

chosen by firms beyond the requirements of the state. Using the notation of the model, the

governance ratings are proxies for p + q. Our theory is about q. We assume that the part of the

rating corresponding to investor protection granted by the state is uniform across firms, so that it

does not depend on firm characteristics. If we find that the rating does depend on firm

characteristics, we assume it is because these characteristics influence the firm’s choice of firm-

level governance.

    The analysis of Section 2 predicts that firms with a greater demand for external finance are

firms that will adopt more constraining governance practices. We, therefore, add sales growth to

the regression since it is a measure of investment opportunities that has been frequently used in

the literature. Existing papers show that sales growth is significant in explaining the CLSA

ratings in regressions that control for firm characteristics and investor protection (Durnev and

Kim, 2004; Klapper and Love, 2003). In addition, we include the Rajan and Zingales measure of

dependence on external finance as an alternative measure of growth opportunities.

    We also use firm size as a firm characteristic. Our model assumes that the cost of good

governance is a fixed cost but the benefit is amortized over all of a firm’s security issues. We,

therefore, expect that large firms are more likely to adopt such practices. However, it is also

possible that large firms face a greater cost of transparency. This could arise because large firms

may benefit more from connections to the political authorities than other firms, which may lead

them to seek less transparency to hide these benefits, or because they may be more likely to be

expropriated by the state (see Zimmerman, 1983).

    Ownership by the controlling shareholders affects the choice of governance practices at the

firm level. There is a subtle distinction, however, between the impact of ownership on the firm’s


                                                25
level of expropriation of minority shareholders and on the governance practices adopted by the

firm. In existing models, greater concentration of ownership leads to less expropriation because

the controlling shareholder expropriates more from himself as his stake increases, so that the

payoff from expropriation falls. This result holds even if the controlling shareholder does not take

actions at the firm level to reduce his ability to expropriate shareholders, so that it has nothing to

do with the firm or the governance mechanisms of the firm. Our model is focused on the choice

of governance mechanisms by the firm. As the controlling shareholder owns more shares, we

would expect him to invest less in firm-level governance mechanisms if those are costly because

his incentives to expropriate are lower. This makes it difficult to make predictions about how

ownership and governance scores are related. To the extent that CLSA partly measures the extent

of expropriation, ownership could be positively related to the score. It seems less likely that the

S&P scores measure expropriation and more likely that they reflect the adoption of firm-specific

governance mechanisms. We would, therefore, expect a negative relation between S&P scores

and ownership.

    Finally, we employ a variable that computes the ratio of cash holdings to total assets. We

would expect firms with more cash to be less likely to access the capital markets. Consequently,

we would expect a negative relation between cash holdings and governance. However, firms that

have just accessed the capital markets may also have higher cash holdings, and these firms should

also have better governance ratings. Further, cash holdings may also proxy for growth

opportunities, in which case we would also expect them to be positively associated with

governance.

    Panel a of Table 2 reports the regression estimates for the CLSA ratings. Model (1) shows the

regression of governance ratings on firm characteristics. Two firm characteristics, sales growth

and the cash-to-assets ratio, are significant and both with a positive coefficient. In all

specifications, we report an F-statistic for a test of the joint significance of all firm and/or country

variables. In Table 2, these F-statistics for firm-level variables are always significant at the 1%


                                                  26
level. The adjusted R2 from an OLS regression is 4.24%. The t-statistics and F-statistics are

reported from a regression that takes into account the potential clustering of the error terms within

countries.8 In the next specification (2), we investigate the role of country characteristics. We use

country variables used in the literature before, namely the “Legal” variable used by Durnev and

Kim (2004), the log of GNP per capita, and the ratio of stock market capitalization to GDP. We

see that these country variables explain much more of the variation in ratings than firm-specific

characteristics. Legal and GNP per capita are extremely highly correlated, but Legal has a

significant positive coefficient while the other two country characteristics are insignificant. In the

next specification, we regress the ratings on both sets of country characteristics and firm-specific

characteristics. The adjusted R2 increases and the F-statistics indicate that both firm and country

characteristics are both jointly significant. All the variables that were significant in models (1)

and (2) remain significant.

    In model (4), we estimate a statistical upper-bound on the importance of country-specific

characteristics by regressing the governance ratings on country dummy variables. We see that the

adjusted R2 of that regression is about two and a half times the adjusted R2 of model (2). This

indicates that variables that researchers have focused on capture only a fraction of the country

characteristics that can potentially influence governance scores. Comparing model (4) to model

(1), we see that the adjusted R2 of the country dummy regression is nine times that of the

regression with firm-specific variables. Consequently, the country characteristics dominate firm

characteristics in explaining the variation in firm governance ratings. In model (5), we estimate

(1) but with country dummies. The improvement in adjusted R2 obtained by adding firm-specific

variables to (5) is trivial. Further, sales growth is no longer significant. In other words, part of the
8
  A model using country random effects would also correct for within-country correlation. However,
Hausman tests indicate that the assumptions of the model are not met and that the random effects estimator
is not valid. Therefore, we use OLS regressions with clustered robust standard errors to account for within
country correlation of the error terms – observations within a country are not treated as independent, but
observations across countries are. The clustered standard errors are similar to heteroscedasticity-consistent
standard errors (White, 1980) except that the weights are sums over each country (cluster). See Rogers
(1993) and Williams (2000) for further details.



                                                     27
success of sales growth seems to be explained by its correlation with country characteristics. The

only firm-specific variable that is significant is the cash-to-assets ratio, with a coefficient of 11.51

and a t-statistic of 2.15.

    We turn next to the S&P governance ratings. The results are reported in Panel b of Table 2. It

is immediately striking that firm characteristics explain much more of the variation in the S&P

ratings than they do of the variation in the CLSA ratings. Model (1) regresses the S&P ratings on

firm-specific characteristics. The adjusted R2 is 22.49%, which is more than five times the

adjusted R2 of the same regression for the CLSA rating. Surprisingly, sales growth is not

significant but the measure of dependence on external finance is and with a positive coefficient.

As in Panel a, the cash-to-assets ratio has a positive and significant coefficient. Further, firm size

is also significant. In the regression with country characteristics, Legal is not significant but the

log of GNP per capita is. The adjusted R2 is roughly twice the adjusted R2 for the comparable

regression in Panel a. Model (3) adds the set of firm characteristics to model (2). The only

significant variables in that regression are the measure of dependence on external finance and

firm size. None of the country characteristics are significant, though the F-statistic associated

with the joint test that they equal zero is rejected (F-statistic of 4.60). As in Panel a, country

characteristics capture much less of the variation in governance ratings than country dummy

variables. We find in model (4) that the R2 using country dummy variables is 73% – more than

twice the R2 using country characteristics. Finally, when we combine firm characteristics with

country dummies in model (5), the adjusted R2 increases by a relatively small amount. Again,

only the dependence on external finance and firm size are significant.

    It follows from the regressions in Table 2 that firm-specific characteristics have very little

explanatory power for the CLSA ratings and only some explanatory power for the S&P ratings.

Irrespective of the rating system, country characteristics explain more of the variation in ratings

than firm characteristics. The greater importance of country characteristics is most obvious when




                                                  28
we use country dummy variables. The country characteristics used in the literature capture only a

fraction of the variation in ratings due to country effects.

    Our model predicts that firm characteristics matter more as development increases, up to a

point. We next investigate whether firm characteristics explain more of the variation in the ratings

for developed countries relative to less developed countries. A comparison of developed and less

developed countries is more meaningful for the S&P ratings. We therefore restrict our analysis to

these ratings. Table 3 presents the results.

    Panel a of Table 3 splits the sample of the countries for which S&P ratings are available into

highly developed and less developed countries. We do this by splitting the countries into

countries with above-median GDP per capita, the highly developed countries, and below-median

GDP per capita, the less developed countries. The results are striking. First, when we regress the

ratings on firm characteristics, the adjusted R2 is 15.54% for the highly developed countries and

2.19% for the less developed countries. None of the firm characteristics are significant in

explaining the ratings of the less developed countries. The F-statistic of 13.40 is significant for

the highly developed countries, but not for the less developed countries (F-statistic of 0.81). In the

highly developed countries, the rating increases with dependence on external finance, falls with

ownership concentration, and increases with firm size as predicted by our model. Country

dummies explain 51.72% of the variation in ratings for the highly developed countries and

48.12% for the less developed countries. Adding the firm characteristics to the regression with

only country dummies increases the adjusted R2 from 51.72% to 59.81% for highly developed

countries and decreases from 48.12% to 48.00% for the other countries. The F-statistic of the

joint test of the firm-level variables is significant for the highly developed countries (F-statistic of

7.25) and insignificant for the less-developed countries (F-statistic of 1.60) This finding confirms

that firm characteristics are not useful to understand governance ratings in countries with low

economic development and are more useful to understand these ratings in countries with high

economic development.


                                                  29
    As discussed in the previous section, the governance ratings measure governance mandated

by the state and how a firm goes beyond the requirements of the state. While the ratings measure

p + q, we would like to isolate q, the firm-level governance. In Panel b of Table 3, we assume that

p is proxied by the lowest firm score in a country. In other words, we assume that firms with

higher scores achieved these scores because of firm-level governance. We then introduce a new

dependent variable, which is based on a difference of scores among firms within a country and

which we define as (Firm score - Country minimum)/(100 - Country minimum). Multiplied by

100, this new dependent variable takes values from 0 to 100 like the S&P score itself. It is useful

to think of this new variable as the firm-level governance score. It will depend on country

characteristics, since the benefit from improving governance at the firm level depends on country

characteristics. When we regress the firm-level governance difference score on firm

characteristics, we find that these characteristics explain much more of the variation of the score

in developed countries than in less developed countries. However, country dummies explain more

of the variation of the difference score than firm characteristics irrespective of the level of

development. Finally, we also see that adding firm-level characteristics to the regression with

country dummy variables increases R2 much more for more developed countries than for the

other countries. The F-statistics for the significance of firm characteristics are always significant

for highly developed countries (14.82 in model (1), 20.18 in model (3), and 9.63 in model (5)),

but only marginally so in model (8) and not at all in models (6) and (10) for less developed

countries.

    In Table 4, we split the S&P sample using the legal index in which high (low) investor-

protection countries are those with Legal scores above (below) the median. The firm-specific

variables are jointly significant relative to country factors and even country dummies for not only

firms in high investor-protection countries but also those in low investor-protection countries.

The results do not draw the same sharp distinction as with GNP per capita in Table 3. One issue is

that, whereas GNP per capita works well at separating the sample of countries into two very


                                                 30
distinct groups of countries, the same cannot be said for the Legal variable. GNP per capita and

Legal have a correlation of 0.52. However, Legal takes low values for countries that have a low

anti-director index. For instance, Argentina and Malaysia have an above-median Legal index in

contrast to the Netherlands, Germany, and Switzerland, but Argentina and Malaysia have a

below-median GNP per capita, in contrast to these European countries.

    In our regression analysis, we focus on an index of the legal system (Legal), a measure of

economic development (GNP per capita), and a measure of financial development (Stock market

cap per GDP) as the country-specific explanatory variables. One might argue that other country

variables should affect firm governance. Most importantly, the extent to which property rights are

enforced is important. Recent research (see Acemoglu and Johnson, 2003) shows that the respect

of property rights is an important determinant of economic growth. In the model of Section 2,

poor respect of property rights would make it less valuable to invest in governance since

controlling shareholders who are more likely to be expropriated by the state gain less from

investing in corporate governance. However, respect of property rights is strongly correlated with

GNP per capita, so that our specifications might already account for the effect of this property-

rights variable. Nevertheless, we re-estimated our regressions with country characteristics with an

additional variable that captures respect of property rights. This variable is the risk of

expropriation index used by LLSV (1998). This index takes values from one through 10, where a

value of one indicates the highest risk of expropriation. Using this variable restricts our sample

size because it is not available for China or any of the former Eastern bloc countries. For the

regressions in Table 2 that have both country and firm characteristics, we find that the coefficient

on the expropriation index is not significant in the regression for the CLSA ratings, but it is

positive and highly significant in the regression for the S&P ratings. For the S&P ratings,

governance is inversely related to the expropriation index, so that countries with a higher risk of

expropriation have worse governance as we would expect. Consequently, the risk of

expropriation from the state is an important country characteristic. However, taking that


                                                31
characteristic into account changes none of our basic inferences, although it increases the

proportion of the cross-sectional variation in governance ratings that can be explained by country

characteristics.

    We have found evidence that is supportive of our hypotheses. At the same time, however,

there are important limitations to our approach. One such limitation is that we risk

underestimating the role of firm characteristics by virtue of our regression analysis. We know we

fully account for country characteristics whose impact is unrelated to firm characteristics through

the dummy variables, yet it could be that what we do not explain is simply related to firm

characteristics we do not observe. If this is the case for the S&P ratings, this would likely not

overturn our conclusions because country characteristics alone explain 73% of the variation in the

ratings. Since the country dummy variables explain only 38% of the variation of the CLSA

ratings, it is possible that firm characteristics we are omitting from the analysis somehow explain

more of the dispersion in the ratings than country dummy variables themselves. Part of the

problem here could be mechanical, however. The CLSA rating countries have much less variation

in country characteristics than those for the S&P ratings because there are simply fewer countries

represented in that sample. If we had a rating for just one country after all, it would not be

surprising that all of the variation in those ratings were found to be explained by firm

characteristics. This is precisely why we have focused more on the S&P ratings.

    We have restricted our focus on those firm characteristics that have been used most often in

the literature. We investigated whether other characteristics used would help explain the ratings

better and have not had success. To address the concern about omitted firm characteristics, we

collected Worldscope data on ten additional firm characteristics (profitability, turnover, and

leverage measures) and incorporated them into the existing regression specifications, not

worrying about multicollinearity since the focus is on overall explanatory power. By doing this,

we increase the adjusted R2 of model (1) in Table 3 from 17.74% to 21.74%, but the adjusted R2

of model (6) increases only from 1.74% to 2.77%, so that for less-developed countries, firm


                                                32
characteristics have trivial explanatory power even when we use the largest specification possible.

We estimated these regressions using three-year averages for firm characteristics, but the results

were similar. Since the S&P ratings are determined by objective criteria, it cannot be that the

analysts who prepared the ratings used information about firms that was not available to investors

in general.

    So, what would help explain more of the variation in the ratings? Two explanations are

consistent with noise being the explanation. First, it could be that there is simply random

variation in governance ratings. Suppose there are governance attributes that are cheap to adopt

but also have little impact. Some firms might adopt them, others not. Such attributes would be

economically unimportant, but they would drive down the R2 of our regressions. Second, there

could be systematic and idiosyncratic mistakes in the ratings.

    Could there be more at work in these ratings than noise? The limitations of our database

suggest that it ought to be so. With the rating, we do not know when a firm adopted a particular

provision. It might have done so in response to a change in some firm characteristic or the market

environment, but since then this change may have disappeared. Governance provisions are sticky,

so that even though firm characteristics changed, the provision might have remained in effect.

Unfortunately, there is nothing that we can do to deal with that issue. However, it suggests that

the time-series path of firm characteristics likely matters. Further, a firm might have adopted

governance provisions in response to specific attributes that we (and other researchers) have not

observed.



5. Does financial globalization reduce the importance of country characteristics?

    Our model predicts that country characteristics should be less important for firms that access

the global markets. To examine this issue, we re-estimate the regressions of Table 3 that use the

S&P ratings, but now we split each subsample further into two groups, namely firms with a Level

2 or 3 ADR (which we call “global firms”) and other firms (“non-global firms”). We expect from


                                                33
our theory that firm characteristics should be more relevant in explaining the S&P rating for firms

in highly developed countries and for global firms in less developed countries. We also expect

that country characteristics should be less relevant for these firms. Panel a of Table 5 shows

estimates for the regressions for firms in highly developed countries. For global firms, the F-

statistic for the joint test that firm characteristics are irrelevant always rejects the null (3.24 for

model (3) and 8.86 for model (5)). For non-global firms, the F-statistic for firm characteristics is

insignificant in the regression specification that has no other variables but firm characteristics.

However, when we add country characteristics or just country dummies, firm characteristics

become significant explanatory variables (F-statistic of 4.18 in model (8) and 3.10 in model (10)).

Two results are not supportive of our model, however. Country characteristics are significant for

global firms as well as for non-global firms and explain more of the cross-sectional variation in

governance ratings for global firms; firm characteristics increase the adjusted R-squared when

added to country dummy variables as much for non-global firms as they do for global firms.

    In panel b, we turn to firms in less developed countries. The F-statistic for firm characteristics

is always significant for global firms (2.53 in model (3) and 3.73 in model (5)). At the same time,

however, adding firm characteristics to the country dummy variables does not improve the overall

explanatory power of the regression, as the adjusted R2 declines from 0.4352 to 0.4301. When we

consider non-global firms, the F-statistic for firm characteristics is always insignificant (1.13 in

model (8) and 0.72 in model (10)). We also split the sample of CLSA firms in less developed

countries into global and non-global firms and these results are presented in panel c. We have

proportionally fewer “global” firms that have Level 2 or 3 ADRs in the CLSA sample.

Nevertheless, we find that when controlling for the country characteristics used in the literature,

firm characteristics are insignificant for non-global firms and significant for global firms. The

result has to be treated with caution, though, because it does not hold when country

characteristics are controlled for with dummy variables.




                                                  34
    Our theory also implies that home-country investor protection should be less important for

global firms. The evidence supportive of this prediction is limited for the S&P sample. For firms

from highly developed countries, we find that Legal is significant for firms that are not global, but

it is not for global firms. For less developed countries, Legal is negative and significant both for

global firms and non-global firms for the S&P sample. It is insignificant for global firms for the

CLSA sample and positive and significant for the non-global firms in that sample.



6. Conclusion

    In this paper, we distinguish between the investor protection granted by the state and investor

protection adopted by the firm. We show that the extent to which firms choose to improve upon

the investor protection granted by the state depends on the costs and benefits of doing so. In

countries with weak development, it is costly to improve investor protection because the

institutional infrastructure is lacking and good governance has political costs. Further, in such

countries, the benefit from improving governance is weaker because capital markets lack depth.

However, financial globalization reduces the importance of country characteristics, thereby

increasing the incentives for good governance.

    Using the CLSA corporate governance ratings and the S&P transparency and disclosure

ratings, we find that a large fraction of the variation in these ratings that can be explained is

attributable to country characteristics. Firm characteristics explain more of the cross-sectional

variation in corporate governance in more developed countries and country characteristics matter

less for firms that have access to global markets. A possible explanation for these results is that

the ratings are better at evaluating firm-level governance in more developed countries or for more

global firms. This would be more surprising for the S&P ratings than for the CLSA ratings

because the CLSA ratings have more of a subjective element. It could also be that firm

characteristics are measured more accurately in more developed countries. Finally, though we use

firm characteristics that the literature has believed to be associated with governance, it might be


                                                 35
that omitted firm characteristics or past values of firm characteristics play a more significant role

in explaining the ratings. Nevertheless, we believe that the evidence presented here is consistent

with the view that, while the investor protection granted by the state is an important determinant

of corporate governance, so are the levels of economic and financial development as well as the

openness of a country.




                                                 36
                                           References


Acemoglu, D., and S. Johnson, 2003, Unbundling Institutions, working paper, Massachusetts
      Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA.

Allen, F., and D. Gale, 2000, Comparing financial systems, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Ball, R., 2001, Infrastructure requirements for an economically efficient system of public
       financial reporting and disclosure, Brookings-Wharton Papers on Financial Services,
       127-169.

Beck, T., A. Demirguc-Kunt, and R. Levine, 2001, A new database on the structure and
       development of the financial sector, World Bank Economic Review.

Black, B., 2001, The legal and institutional preconditions for strong securities markets, ULCA
       Law Review 48, 781-855.

Bonaglia, F., J.B., de Macedo, and M. Bussolo, 2001, How globalization improves governance,
       CEPR working paper, London.

Bushee, B., 2003, Discussion of ’Disclosure practice of foreign companies interacting with U.S.
       markets,’ Journal of Accounting Research, forthcoming.

Bushman, R., J. Piotroski, and A. Smith, 2003, What determines corporate transparency?,
      working paper, University of Chicago.

Chen, K., Z. Chen, and K. Wei, 2003, Disclosure, corporate governance, and the cost of equity
       capital: evidence from Asia’s emerging markets, working paper, Hong Kong University
       of Science and Technology.

Coffee, J., 1999, The future as history: the prospects for global convergence in corporate
        governance and its implications. Northwestern University Law Review 93, 641-708.

Coffee, J., 2002, Racing towards the top? The impact of cross-listings and stock market
        competition on international corporate governance. Columbia Law Review, 102, 1757-
        1831.

Doidge, C., 2004, U.S. cross-listings and the private benefits of control: evidence from dual-class
       firms, Journal of Financial Economics 72, 519-553.

Doidge, C., A. Karolyi, and R. Stulz, 2004, Why are foreign firms listed in the U.S. worth more?,
       Journal of Financial Economics 71, 205-238.

Durnev, A., and Kim, E.H., 2004, To steal or not to steal: firm attributes, legal environment, and
       valuation, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Dyck, A., and L. Zingales, 2003, Private benefits of control: an international comparison, Journal
       of Finance, forthcoming.




                                                37
Foerster, S., and G. A. Karolyi, 1999, The effects of market segmentation and investor
        recognition on asset prices: evidence from foreign stocks listing in the United States,
        Journal of Finance 54, 981-1013.

Francis, J., I Khurana, and R. Pereira, 2003, Global evidence on incentives for voluntary
        accounting disclosures and the effect on cost of capital, working paper, University of
        Missouri at Columbia.

Gill, A., 2001, Credit Lyonnais Securities Asia. Corporate Governance in Emerging Markets:
        Saints     and      Sinners,      Who's      got     religion?,    available   at:
        http://www.worldbank.org/wbi/banking/finsecpolicy/domestic2003/readings.html.

Glaeser, E., S. Johnson and A. Shleifer, 2001, Coase versus the Coasians, Quarterly Journal of
        Economics 116, 853-899.

Henderson, B., N. Jegadeesh, and M. Weisbach, 2003, World markets for raising new capital,
       working paper, University of Illinois.

Hope, O.-K., 2003, Firm-level disclosures and the relative roles of culture and legal origin,
       Journal of International Financial Management and Accounting 14, 218-248.

John, K., and S. Kedia, 2003, Institutions, markets, and growth: a theory of comparative corporate
        governance, working paper, NYU.

John, K., and S. Kedia, 2004, Design of corporate governance: monitored debt, takeovers, and
       ownership structure, working paper, NYU.

Johnson, S., P. Boone, A. Breach, and E. Friedman, 2000, Corporate governance in the Asian
       financial crisis, Journal of Financial Economics 58, 141-186.

Palepu, K., T. Khanna, and J. Kogan, and, 2002, Globalization and similarities in corporate
        governance: a cross-country analysis, working paper, Harvard Business School.

Klapper, L., and I. Love, 2003, Corporate governance, investor protection and performance in
       emerging markets, Journal of Corporate Finance, forthcoming.

Krishnamurti, C., A. Sevic, and Z. Sevic, 2003, Legal environment, firm-level corporate
       governance, and expropriation of minority shareholders in Asia, working paper, Nanyang
       Technological University, Singapore.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, 1998, Law and finance, Journal of
        Political Economy 106, 1113-1155.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-De-Silanes and A. Shleifer, 1999, Corporate ownership around the world,
        Journal of Finance 54, 471-517.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-De-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, 2002, Investor protection and
       corporate valuation, Journal of Finance 57, 1147-1170.

Leuz, C., and F. Olberholzer-Gee, 2003, Political relationships, global financing, and
      transparency, working paper, The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania.


                                               38
Licht, A., 2003, Cross-listing and corporate governance: Bonding or avoiding? Chicago Journal
        of International Law, Vol. 4, Spring,

Lombardo, G. and M. Pagano, 2001, Law and equity markets: A simple model, in Corporate
      Governance Regimes: Convergence and Diversity, edited by Joe McCahery, Pieter
      Moerland, Theo Raaijmakers and Luc Renneboog, Oxford University Press, 2002, 343-
      362.

Patel, S., A. Balic, and L. Bwakira. 2002, Measuring transparency and disclosure at firm-level in
         emerging markets, Standard and Poor’s.

Perino, M., 2003, American corporate reform abroad: Sarbanes-Oxley and the foreign private
        issuer, European Business Organization Law Review, forthcoming.

Pistor, K., M. Raiser, and S. Gelfer, 2000, Law and finance in transition economies, The
        economics of transition 8, 325-368.

Rajan, R., and L. Zingales, 1998, Financial dependence and growth, American Economic Review
        88, 559-586.

Reese, W., and M. Weisbach, 2002, Protection of minority shareholder interests, cross-listings in
       the United States, and subsequent equity offerings, Journal of Financial Economics 66,
       65-104.

Rogers, W., 1993, Regression standard errors in clustered samples. Stata Technical Bulletin 13,
        19-23.

Siegel, J., 2004, Can foreign firms bond themselves effectively by renting U.S. securities laws?,
         Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Shleifer, A., and R. Vishny, 1997. A survey of corporate governance, Journal of Finance 1997,
        52, 737-783.

Shleifer, A., and D. Wolfenzon, 2002, Investor protection and equity markets, Journal of
        Financial Economics 66, 3-27.

Smarzynska, B., and S. Wei, 2002, Corruption and cross-border investment: firm-level evidence,
      working paper, NBER.

Stulz, R., 1999, Globalization, corporate finance, and the cost of capital, Journal of Applied
        Corporate Finance 12, 1999, 8-25.

White, H., 1980 A heteroskedasticity-consistent covariance matrix estimator and a direct test for
       heteroskedasticity, Econometrica 48, 817-838.

Williams, R., 2000, A note on robust variance estimation for cluster-correlated data, Biometrics
       56, 645 646.

Zimmerman, J., 1983, Taxes and firm size, Journal of Accounting and Economics 5, 119-149.



                                               39
Table 1. Sample description.
This table reports summary statistics for the CLSA corporate governance ratings and the S&P transparency and disclosure rating. Number of firms with Level 2
or 3 ADRs is the number of firms in each country that have an exchange-listed ADR at the end of 2000. Financial firms are excluded.

                                                  CLSA                                                                    S&P

                              # of Level                                                           # of Level
 Country               N                     Mean      Std dev      Min        Max          N                     Mean      Std dev      Min        Max
                              2/3 ADRs                                                             2/3 ADRs
 Argentina              1          1         66.70         .       66.70      66.70         6           3         28.63         5.32    23.40      37.23
 Australia              .          .           .           .         .          .          20           6         61.14          7.25   40.43      71.28
 Austria                .          .           .           .         .          .           2           0         49.70          9.45   43.01      56.38
 Belgium                .          .           .           .         .          .           3           0         54.16         14.37   37.23      65.96
 Brazil                28         14         61.91       8.28      45.40      76.50        27          12         32.75         12.04   19.57      59.18
 Chile                 16         10         62.12       5.75      46.70      71.30        17          11         34.33         11.01   15.22      54.26
 China                 13          6         46.22       7.36      29.90      51.50        16           8         48.58         11.31   28.72      63.44
 Colombia               1          0         57.90         .       57.90      57.90         1           0         19.15            .    19.15      19.15
 Czech Republic         1          0         51.40         .       51.40      51.40         .           .           .              .      .          .
 Denmark                .          .           .           .         .          .           5           3         52.17         17.37   24.47      67.35
 Finland                .          .           .           .         .          .           4           4         75.70          5.87   70.65      84.04
 France                 .          .           .           .         .          .          39          14         67.91          8.87   47.87      85.11
 Germany                .          .           .           .         .          .          26           9         55.90          9.66   38.78      73.12
 Greece                 .          .           .           .         .          .           1           1         68.04            .    68.04      68.04
 Hong Kong             25          5         61.91      12.65      41.50      84.10        13           1         47.47         3.23    43.62      52.13
 Hungary                2          1         52.85      10.68      45.30      60.40         .           .           .              .      .          .
 India                 70          4         54.74       9.93      39.10      93.30        37           3         38.75         10.23   20.21      62.37
 Indonesia             16          2         37.03      12.22      13.90      64.90        13           2         36.47          5.88   26.60      48.94
 Ireland                .          .           .           .         .          .           3           3         75.25          3.24   71.88      78.35
 Italy                  .          .           .           .         .          .          14           5         58.58         10.41   42.55      73.47
 Japan                  .          .           .           .         .          .          130         19         54.15          3.32   48.39      67.39
 Luxembourg             .          .           .           .         .          .           1           0         38.30            .    38.30      38.30
 Malaysia              36          0         55.25      14.45      24.60      77.80        34           0         45.44         7.33    35.11      62.77
 Mexico                 6          4         68.20       4.52      62.40      74.00        16           7         24.77         8.87    15.22      51.61




                                                                            40
Table1, continued

                                           CLSA                                                      S&P

                          # of Level                                            # of Level
 Country            N                  Mean    Std dev   Min      Max     N                  Mean      Std dev     Min     Max
                          2/3 ADRs                                              2/3 ADRs
 Netherlands         .         .         .        .        .        .     22        12       63.23         10.15   43.88   80.00
 New Zealand         .         .         .        .        .        .      1         0       55.91            .    55.91   55.91
 Norway              .         .         .        .        .        .      4         2       58.83         15.06   45.16   78.72
 Pakistan            9         0       34.69   14.94     18.90    65.60     8        0       39.76          6.55   32.98   48.94
 Peru                1         1       75.50      .      75.50    75.50    6         1       23.26         4.28    18.68   30.85
 Philippines        12         1       48.30   11.88     33.40    67.90    3         1       27.21         13.12   12.24   36.73
 Poland             2          0       36.20   3.11      34.00    38.40     .        .         .              .      .       .
 Portugal            .         .         .        .        .        .      5         2       55.00         9.83    41.49   64.95
 Russia              1         0       15.40      .      15.40    15.40     .        .         .              .      .       .
 Singapore          29         3       67.23    7.77     48.70    85.70    7         1       58.86         5.46    50.00   65.31
 South Africa       25         7       68.45    9.02     45.00    82.60     .        .         .              .      .       .
 South Korea        19         4       43.65    4.40     38.00    55.20   33         6       46.65         12.84   5.21    62.89
 Spain               .         .         .        .        .        .     13         4       52.67         12.12   32.98   72.34
 Sweden              .         .         .        .        .        .     13         3       61.51         8.98    45.74   75.51
 Switzerland         .         .         .        .        .        .      12        5       54.91         12.43   38.04   71.28
 Taiwan             35         5       55.97    8.15     43.40    77.10   34         4       21.63         7.15    14.89   38.14
 Thailand           17         0       54.49   13.29     33.80    77.80   15         0       51.63         9.45    27.17   65.98
 Turkey             11         1       43.67   10.58     29.40    59.40     .        .         .              .      .       .
 UK                  .         .         .        .        .        .     104       41       71.36         6.21    56.52   88.78
 Venezuela           .         .         .        .        .        .       2        1       30.65         17.48   18.28   43.01
 Total              376      69                                           711      194
 Average                               53.03      9.39   40.88    66.54                      48.43         9.30    35.73   61.03




                                                                 41
Table 2. The importance of country vs. firm characteristics.
The dependent variable in each regression is either the CLSA corporate governance rating (Panel a) or the
S&P transparency and disclosure rating (Panel b). Firm-level data is from Worldscope. Sales growth is
inflation adjusted two-year sales growth from 1998 – 2000 (winsorized at 1% and 99% tails). Ownership,
Total assets (US$ millions) and Cash/Assets are for 2000. Data for Dependence on external finance,
computed as capital expenditures minus cash flow from operations divided by capital expenditures, is from
Computstat from 1995-2000. Legal is Anti-director * Rule of law, which are from LLSV (1998). Log of
GNP per capita (U$) is for 2000 and is from the World Bank WDI Database. Stock market capitalization to
GDP is from Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine (2001). The standard errors are computed assuming
observations are independent across countries, but not within countries. t-statistics are in parentheses. The
F-statistic tests the hypothesis that the firm-level variables (country) are jointly equal to zero. *, **, and ***
indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
                                                          Panel a. CLSA governance rating.

                                            (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)

 Constant                                 54.57          35.67           37.73          44.19          48.24
                                        (12.82)***      (3.67)***      (4.55)***      (11.83)***      (8.62)***
 Sales growth                              5.44                          4.92                           1.86
                                         (2.74)**                       (2.16)**                       (1.13)
 Dependence on external finance            1.49                          1.56                           0.07
                                          (1.51)                        (1.57)                         (0.09)
 Ownership                                -0.76                          1.04                           2.40
                                          -(0.15)                       (0.24)                         (0.69)
 Log(Assets)                              -0.23                          -0.99                         -1.08
                                          -(0.30)                       -(1.40)                       -(1.43)
 Cash/Assets                              16.29                          8.13                          11.51
                                         (3.30)***                      (1.72)*                       (2.15)**
 Legal                                                    0.51           0.47
                                                                 **
                                                        (2.34)          (2.26)**
 Log GNP / capita                                         1.25           1.65
                                                         (0.93)         (1.18)
 Stock market capitalization / GDP                        -1.11          -1.21
                                                         -(0.40)        -(0.49)

 Country dummies                            no             no             no             yes            yes
 F-statistic: firm-level variables        9.06***                       6.25***                       4.00***
 F-statistic: country-level variables                    5.86***        6.66 ***
 Adjusted R2                              0.0424         0.1474         0.1818         0.3860         0.4074
 # of observations                         309            309             309            309            309
Table 2, continued.
                                                      Panel b. S&P transparency and disclosure rating.

                                          (1)                (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)

 Constant                                23.71               5.56           7.52          30.64           16.37
                                                 **                                              ***
                                        (2.33)              (0.54)         (0.77)       (5.18)           (3.88)***

 Sales growth                            -4.20                             -2.68                           0.29

                                        -(0.67)                           -(0.44)                         (0.19)

 Dependence on external finance           1.50                              1.97                           1.39

                                        (2.09)**                          (2.98)***                      (2.41)**

 Ownership                               -16.69                            -7.09                           1.20

                                        -(1.68)                           -(1.09)                         (0.49)

 Log(Assets)                              4.03                              2.75                           1.78

                                        (4.87)***                         (2.86)***                      (3.58)***

 Cash/Assets                             10.53                              3.70                           4.13
                                                 **
                                        (2.71)                             (1.06)                         (1.43)

 Legal                                                       0.23           0.24

                                                            (1.22)         (1.42)

 Log GNP / capita                                            3.80           1.35

                                                           (2.76)***       (1.00)

 Stock market capitalization / GDP                           4.97           5.37

                                                            (1.24)         (1.41)

 Country dummies                           no                 no             no            yes             yes
                                               ***                               ***
 F-statistic: firm-level variables      8.99                              5.77                           5.52***

 F-statistic: country-level variables                      9.05***        4.60***

 Adjusted R2                            0.2249             0.2996         0.3515         0.7338          0.7515

 # of observations                        667                667            667            667             667
Table 3. The importance of country vs. firm characteristics: the role of economic development.
The dependent variable in each regression is either the S&P transparency and disclosure rating (Panel a) or the difference in the S&P rating from the country
minimum, computed as: 100*((Firm score – Country minimum)/(100 – Country minimum)] (Panel b). In panel b, countries with less than five firms are excluded.
Firm-level data is from Worldscope. Sales growth is inflation adjusted two-year sales growth from 1998 – 2000 (winsorized at 1% and 99% tails). Ownership,
Total assets (US$ millions) and Cash/Assets are for 2000. Data for Dependence on external finance, computed as capital expenditures minus cash flow from
operations divided by capital expenditures, is from Computstat from 1995-2000. Legal is Anti-director * Rule of law, which are from LLSV (1998). Log of GNP
per capita (U$) is for 2000 and is from the World Bank WDI Database. Stock market capitalization to GDP is from Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine (2001).
Countries are in the high (low) economic development group if log of GNP per capita is above (below) the median. The standard errors are computed assuming
observations are independent across countries, but not within countries. t-statistics are in parentheses. The F-statistic tests the hypothesis that the firm-level
variables (country) are jointly equal to zero. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
                                                                              Panel a. S&P transparency and disclosure rating.
                                                       High economic development                                           Low economic development
                                          (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)              (6)          (7)         (8)        (9)         (10)
 Constant                                 52.37      222.77      213.27       71.13         48.10           39.89       66.86        62.07       30.64       27.31
                                        (6.79)***   (3.02)***   (3.20)***   (96.14)***   (10.43)***       (5.14)***    (4.20)***   (5.06)***   (4.36)***   (3.83)***
 Sales growth                              5.18                    -0.95                    -0.61           -2.49                    -1.80                   1.01
                                         (1.03)                  -(0.39)                   -(0.27)         -(0.67)                  -(0.60)                 (0.45)
 Dependence on external finance           1.53                      1.70                     1.25            1.60                     2.43                   1.33
                                         (2.05)*                (2.22)**                   (2.01)*          (1.14)                 (2.22)**                 (1.20)
 Ownership                               -16.47                   -11.35                     0.18            8.12                     5.26                   3.55
                                        -(2.37)**               -(2.30)**                   (0.07)          (0.99)                   (1.14)                 (0.78)
 Log(Assets)                               1.42                     2.57                     2.64           -0.74                     0.00                   0.34
                                         (2.06)*                (5.74)***                 (5.23)***        -(0.79)                   (0.00)                 (0.41)
 Cash/Assets                              -0.43                     6.12                     5.83            4.91                     0.83                   2.94
                                         -(0.09)                 (2.15)**                  (1.78)*          (0.92)                   (0.16)                 (0.55)
 Legal                                                0.18          0.18                                                 -0.50       -0.51
                                                     (1.73)      (2.35)**                                               -(1.87)*   -(1.96)*
 Log GNP / capita                                    -16.56       -17.63                                                  -3.57       -3.17
                                                    -(2.33)**   -(2.74)**                                               -(1.62)     -(1.49)
 Stock market capitalization / GDP                    1.10          1.21                                                 14.82       15.31
                                                     (0.31)       (0.41)                                               (4.01)***   (4.25)***
 Country dummies                          no           no          no          yes          yes              no           no           no        yes         yes
 F-statistic: firm-level variables      13.40***                14.73***                  7.25***           0.81                     1.81                    1.60
 F-statistic: country-level variables                2.55*       3.65**                                                 5.42***     6.17***
 Adjusted R2                            0.1554      0.2154      0.3481       0.5172       0.5981           0.0219       0.1228      0.1304     0.4812      0.4800
 # of observations                       422          422         422          422          422              245          245         245        245         245
Table 3, continued.
                                                                              Panel b. Difference in S&P rating from country minimum.
                                                        High economic development                                            Low economic development
                                          (1)          (2)          (3)            (4)          (5)             (6)          (7)          (8)         (9)         (10)
 Constant                                  3.91      342.01       321.53         33.59         -7.71           13.37       27.14         26.53       33.58       27.51
                                          (0.48)    (4.02)***    (4.40)***     (25.06)***      (0.91)         (1.41)       (1.44)        (1.62)    (10.50)***   (3.28)***
 Sales growth                             13.32                     -1.93                      -2.91           0.50                       0.55                    1.74
                                          (1.36)                  -(0.62)                     -(0.78)         (0.11)                     (0.13)                  (0.62)
 Dependence on external finance            3.13                      3.39                       2.39           2.32                       2.78                    1.37
                                        (2.37)**                  (2.62)**                   (2.23)**         (2.06)*                   (2.35)**                 (1.01)
 Ownership                                -17.69                   -14.47                       -0.51          0.28                       -1.35                   1.83
                                        -(2.31)**                -(2.51)**                    -(0.12)         (0.03)                    -(0.18)                  (0.33)
 Log(Assets)                               2.89                      4.07                       4.77           0.92                       0.82                    0.66
                                         (2.49)**                (4.46)***                   (5.25)***        (0.73)                     (0.76)                  (0.62)
 Cash/Assets                               -9.10                     6.34                      11.59           6.41                       2.96                    3.59
                                         -(0.95)                   (0.89)                     (1.55)          (0.93)                     (0.44)                  (0.53)
 Legal                                                 -0.25        -0.23                                                   -0.51        -0.54
                                                     -(1.55)      -(1.83)*                                                 -(1.05)      -(1.09)
 Log GNP / capita                                     -30.43       -31.77                                                    0.17         -0.47
                                                    -(3.77)***   -(4.43)***                                                (0.06)       -(0.16)
 Stock market capitalization / GDP                      1.50         2.21                                                    2.85         4.53
                                                      (0.32)       (0.58)                                                   (0.56)       (0.88)
 Country dummies                          no           no           no            yes           yes             no           no            no         yes         yes
 F-statistic: firm-level variables      14.82***                 20.18***                     9.63***          1.95                      2.70*                    1.23
 F-statistic: country-level variables                6.06***     8.48***                                                    0.51         0.61
 Adjusted R2                            0.1561       0.2274      0.3505          0.3927       0.4960         -0.0037       0.0421       0.0407      0.4080      0.4026
 # of observations                       405          405          405             405          405            237           237          237         237         237




                                                                                     45
Table 4. The importance of country vs. firm characteristics: the role of investor protection.
The dependent variable in each regression is either the S&P transparency and disclosure rating (Panel a) or the difference in the S&P rating from the country
minimum, computed as: 100*((Firm score – Country minimum)/(100 – Country minimum)] (Panel b). In panel b, countries with less than five firms are excluded.
Firm-level data is from Worldscope. Sales growth is inflation adjusted two-year sales growth from 1998 – 2000 (winsorized at 1% and 99% tails). Ownership,
Total assets (US$ millions) and Cash/Assets are for 2000. Data for Dependence on external finance, computed as capital expenditures minus cash flow from
operations divided by capital expenditures, is from Computstat from 1995-2000. Legal is Anti-director * Rule of law, which are from LLSV (1998). Log of GNP
per capita (U$) is for 2000 and is from the World Bank WDI Database. Stock market capitalization to GDP is from Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine (2001).
Countries are in the high (low) investor protection group if legal is above (below) the median. The standard errors are computed assuming observations are
independent across countries, but not within countries. t-statistics are in parentheses. The F-statistic tests the hypothesis that the firm-level variables (country) are
jointly equal to zero. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
                                                                                    Panel a. S&P transparency and disclosure rating.
                                                             High investor protection                                                 Low investor protection
                                          (1)          (2)             (3)              (4)       (5)              (6)          (7)             (8)             (9)    (10)
 Constant                                 22.88       -0.58             1.77       71.13         52.93           23.01        14.66             7.08        30.64      19.94
                                         (1.65)      -(0.04)          (0.14)     (10.49)***   (12.46)***        (2.29)**      (0.96)          (0.38)      (3.88)***   (2.05)*
 Sales growth                             -3.77                        -0.92                      2.65           -1.42                         -0.53                   -3.36
                                         -(0.37)                     -(0.15)                    (1.55)          -(0.28)                       (0.15)                  -(1.71)
 Dependence on external finance           1.14                          1.72                      1.07            2.33                          2.65                    2.24
                                         (1.31)                      (1.84)*                    (1.85)*          (1.61)                       (1.91)*                  (1.61)
 Ownership                               -19.29                       -10.98                      -1.11           -6.56                         5.46                    4.49
                                         -(1.64)                     -(1.26)                    -(0.53)         -(0.99)                       (0.81)                   (0.76)
 Log(Assets)                               4.37                         3.55                      2.04            3.21                          0.87                    1.27
                                        (3.51)***                    (2.78)**                  (4.42)***        (2.77)**                       (0.69)                  (1.10)
 Cash/Assets                              10.71                         7.26                      5.73            6.92                          2.16                    1.71
                                         (2.01)*                      (1.66)                     (1.71)          (1.03)                        (0.35)                  (0.29)
 Legal                                                0.92              0.87                                                   -0.24           -0.22
                                                     (1.09)           (1.13)                                                  -(0.49)         -(0.40)
 Log GNP / capita                                     2.17             -0.81                                                    3.45            3.23
                                                     (0.62)          -(0.26)                                                  (2.00)*         (1.82)*
 Stock market capitalization / GDP                    2.82              3.75                                                    7.06            7.42
                                                     (0.52)           (0.78)                                                   (1.31)          (1.34)
 Country dummies                          no           no              no           yes          Yes               no           no              no          yes        yes
 F-statistic: firm-level variables      8.46***                      9.40***                    7.25***          4.19**                        2.56*                  3.40**
 F-statistic: country-level variables                6.23***         6.11***                                                  4.29**          3.38**
 Adjusted R2                            0.2548       0.3339          0.4202        0.8113       0.8323           0.1165       0.2350          0.2451       0.4988     0.5139
 # of observations                       464          464             464            464          464              203          203             203          203        203
Table 4, continued.
                                                                              Panel b. Difference in S&P rating from country minimum.
                                                           High investor protection                                                Low investor protection
                                          (1)        (2)             (3)              (4)       (5)             (6)          (7)             (8)             (9)    (10)
 Constant                                 9.33     26.52           26.11         33.59         0.06            15.25        -0.30           7.16         33.58      17.94
                                         (0.71)    (1.76)          (1.74)      (28.32)***     (0.01)          (1.06)       -(0.02)         (0.34)      (8.37)***    (1.44)
 Sales growth                             7.15                      6.59                       3.20            -2.05                        -1.17                   -5.96
                                         (0.86)                    (1.35)                     (1.21)         -(0.36)                      -(0.24)                  -(1.71)
 Dependence on external finance           2.76                      2.74                       1.85            4.30                         4.57                     3.48
                                        (2.64)**                  (2.39)**                    (2.16)*        (2.60)**                     (2.56)**                  (1.63)
 Ownership                               -12.76                    -12.49                      -2.31          -10.02                        -4.81                    2.40
                                        -(1.48)                   -(1.85)*                    -(0.79)        -(1.35)                      -(0.77)                   (0.31)
 Log(Assets)                              2.03                      4.25                       3.79            2.00                         0.91                     2.17
                                         (1.16)                   (3.06)***                  (4.12)***        (1.54)                       (0.55)                   (1.30)
 Cash/Assets                              -9.37                     0.08                       10.24           5.68                         3.76                     4.98
                                        -(1.04)                    (0.01)                     (1.49)          (0.69)                       (0.40)                  (0.59)
 Legal                                              0.46            0.41                                                    -0.22          -0.31
                                                   (0.52)          (0.56)                                                  -(0.43)        -(0.56)
 Log GNP / capita                                   -2.43           -5.71                                                    3.25            1.93
                                                   -(0.66)        -(2.12)*                                                  (1.75)         (0.74)
 Stock market capitalization / GDP                  2.78            3.78                                                     1.70           2.69
                                                   (0.36)          (0.56)                                                   (0.37)         (0.56)
 Country dummies                          no         no              no           yes          yes              no           no               no         yes        yes
 F-statistic: firm-level variables      6.90***                    5.33***                   10.10***         9.20***                      4.11**                  2.97*
 F-statistic: country-level variables               0.26           3.43**                                                   2.20            0.63
 Adjusted R2                            0.1117     0.0445          0.1979        0.4578       0.5257          0.0698       0.0574          0.0755       0.2689     0.2982
 # of observations                       451        451             451            451          451             191          191             191          191        191




                                                                                        47
Table 5. The importance of country vs. firm characteristics: global vs. non-global firms.
The dependent variable in each regression is the S&P transparency and disclosure rating (panels a and b) or CLSA corporate governance rating (panel c). Results
for the S&P sample split on economic development and on global vs. non-global are in panels a and b. Countries are in the high (low) economic development
group if log of GNP per capita is above (below) the median. Firms are classified as global if they have a Level 2 or 3 ADR as of December 31, 2000. In panel c,
firms from high development countries using the cutoff from the S&P sample are excluded. Firm-level data is from Worldscope. Sales growth is inflation
adjusted two-year sales growth from 1998 – 2000 (winsorized at 1% and 99% tails). Ownership, Total assets (US$ millions) and Cash/Assets are for 2000. Data
for Dependence on external finance, computed as capital expenditures minus cash flow from operations divided by capital expenditures, is from Computstat from
1995-2000. Legal is Anti-director * Rule of law, which are from LLSV (1998). Log of GNP per capita (U$) is for 2000 and is from the World Bank WDI
Database. Stock market capitalization to GDP is from Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine (2001). The standard errors are computed assuming observations are
independent across countries, but not within countries. t-statistics are in parentheses. The F-statistic tests the hypothesis that the firm-level variables (country) are
jointly equal to zero. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
                                                                                        Panel a. High economic development.
                                                                Global firms                                                          Non-global firms
                                          (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)             (6)           (7)           (8)             (9)         (10)
 Constant                                70.00       226.31       234.33         75.09          61.83          57.99      191.82           200.99          68.62         52.01
                                        (8.03)***   (4.00)***    (4.23)***     (87.53)***    (19.88)***      (5.01)***    (2.38)**        (2.77)**       (87.42)***   (10.70)***
 Sales growth                             3.06                      -3.39                       -3.55          -1.21                        -4.08                        -3.67
                                         (0.56)                   -(1.08)                     -(2.20)**       (0.25)                       -(1.41)                      -(1.37)
 Dependence on external finance           0.36                       0.74                        1.06           1.16                         1.25                         0.83
                                         (0.58)                    (1.17)                     (2.53)**        (1.40)                        (1.63)                       (1.42)
 Ownership                               -11.78                     -6.55                       -0.04         -13.23                        -9.41                         0.04
                                        -(2.11)*                  -(1.61)                      -(0.02)       -(1.82)*                     -(2.22)**                      (0.01)
 Log(Assets)                              0.08                       0.66                        1.41           0.52                         2.37                         2.07
                                         (0.09)                    (1.33)                     (4.37)***       (0.51)                      (2.72)**                     (3.47)***
 Cash/Assets                              1.15                       6.47                        9.38          -5.71                         1.41                        -0.02
                                         (0.10)                    (1.08)                     (2.78)**        -(1.31)                       (0.59)                      -(0.01)
 Legal                                                -0.01         -0.05                                                    0.32            0.33
                                                     -(0.09)      -(0.53)                                                 (3.03)***       (4.22)***
 Log GNP / capita                                    -16.08        -17.21                                                   -14.07         -16.71
                                                    -(2.91)**    -(3.25)***                                                -(1.81)*       -(2.32)**
 Stock market capitalization / GDP                     4.54          4.51                                                    -0.72          -0.58
                                                     (2.08)*      (2.08)*                                                  -(0.23)         -(0.22)
 Country dummies                          no           no           no            yes           yes             no            no             no             yes         yes
 F-statistic: firm-level variables       2.30*                    3.24**                      8.86***          1.77                       4.18**                       3.10**
 F-statistic: country-level variables                4.66**       4.75**                                                   3.18*          5.95***
 Adjusted R2                            0.0600       0.3045       0.3219        0.6151        0.6598          0.1038      0.2389          0.3446          0.5898       0.6361
 # of observations                       126          126          126            126           126             296         296             296             296          296




                                                                                     48
Table 5, continued
                                                                                     Panel b. Low economic development.
                                                              Global firms                                                        Non-global firms
                                          (1)       (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)             (6)           (7)           (8)            (9)      (10)
 Constant                                20.79      59.82        62.10        43.01        37.44           48.01       71.85            70.03         18.28     21.64
                                        (1.80)*   (3.20)***    (3.12)***     (3.92)***    (2.17)**       (6.54)***    (4.06)***       (4.88)***      (1.95)*   (2.76)**
 Sales growth                             5.37                   -0.22                      5.22           -4.16                        -3.26                   -0.83
                                        (0.73)                  -(0.04)                    (0.89)         -(0.91)                      -(0.87)                 -(0.31)
 Dependence on external finance          4.73                     3.92                      4.63            0.51                         1.45                    0.02
                                        (2.02)*                 (2.00)*                   (2.23)**         (0.35)                       (1.15)                  (0.02)
 Ownership                                7.12                   -5.98                      -2.25            8.49                         5.97                   3.41
                                        (0.58)                  -(0.55)                   -(0.20)          (1.06)                       (1.29)                  (0.78)
 Log(Assets)                              1.85                    1.54                      0.49            -1.93                        -1.12                  -0.48
                                        (1.58)                  (1.01)                     (0.32)         -(1.68)                      -(1.17)                 -(0.43)
 Cash/Assets                            -14.31                  -14.12                      4.01            4.51                         1.08                    2.41
                                        -(0.58)                 -(0.56)                    (0.12)          (0.77)                       (0.21)                  (0.73)
 Legal                                              -0.62        -0.57                                                  -0.59            -0.60
                                                  -(2.78)**    -(2.36)**                                               -(1.70)        -(1.76)*
 Log GNP / capita                                   -3.00        -4.28                                                  -4.19            -3.09
                                                   -(1.18)      -(1.70)                                               -(1.79)*         -(1.37)
 Stock market capitalization / GDP                  31.21        30.73                                                  16.04           15.29
                                                  (2.91)**     (2.93)**                                               (3.26)***       (3.31)***
 Country dummies                         no          no           no           yes          yes             no            no             no           yes       yes
 F-statistic: firm-level variables      2.53*                   3.73**                     3.75**          1.82                        1.13                     0.72
 F-statistic: country-level variables             3.75**        3.91**                                                3.82**          4.55**
 Adjusted R2                            0.0157    0.1585        0.1551       0.4352        0.4301         0.0512      0.1446          0.1507         0.5234    0.5142
 # of observations                        57        57            57           57            57            188          188             188            188       188




                                                                                  49
Table 5, continued.
                                                                               Panel c. CLSA firms in low development countries.
                                                               Global firms                                                         Non-global firms
                                          (1)         (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)             (6)          (7)            (8)             (9)         (10)
 Constant                                 74.69      56.24        56.62         71.10         74.57          63.77       42.03            48.42          43.47        58.31
                                        (6.82)***   (2.80)**    (3.04)**      (11.02)***   (10.85)***     (16.06)***    (4.28)***       (5.05)***      (13.37)***   (6.30)***
 Sales growth                              7.78                    4.81                        6.11           8.34                         7.24                        2.41
                                         (1.34)                   (0.79)                      (1.25)       (3.74)***                    (2.89)***                     (1.21)
 Dependence on external finance           1.91                     2.20                        1.23          -0.16                        -0.61                       -1.43
                                         (0.73)                  (0.84)                      (0.54)         -(0.14)                      -(0.74)                     -(1.52)
 Ownership                                 2.85                     5.31                       8.94           -5.76                        -2.58                      -0.42
                                         (0.36)                  (0.88)                      (1.20)         -(1.15)                      -(0.62)                     (0.10)
 Log(Assets)                              -2.04                    -2.51                      -1.50          -1.67                        -2.14                       -2.21
                                         -(1.68)                -(2.83)**                   -(2.48)**      -(2.19)**                    -(1.98)*                    -(1.86)*
 Cash/Assets                              -3.45                    5.58                       24.48           5.80                         3.46                        8.43
                                         -(0.16)                 (0.25)                      (1.12)          (0.79)                      (0.41)                      (1.08)
 Legal                                               0.18          0.01                                                   0.55             0.56
                                                    (0.68)       (0.05)                                                 (2.43)**        (2.49)**
 Log GNP / capita                                    0.14           2.23                                                  -0.26             0.82
                                                    (0.05)       (1.02)                                                 -(0.20)           (0.50)
 Stock market capitalization / GDP                   2.12          3.20                                                   2.49             1.02
                                                    (0.36)       (0.59)                                                  (0.49)           (0.24)
 Country dummies                           no         no           no            yes          yes             no           no              no             yes         yes
 F-statistic: firm-level variables        1.76                   5.13***                    4.26***         4.06**                       2.04                        2.96**
 F-statistic: country-level variables                 0.34        0.79                                                    3.11*         4.05**
 Adjusted R2                            0.0437      -0.0085      0.0430        0.3151       0.3751          0.0584       0.1166         0.1694          0.3120      0.3534
 # of observations                        56           56          56            56           56             208           208            208             208         208




                                                                                    50
Appendix
The dependent variable in each logit equals one if a firm is in included the CLSA sample (Panel a) or the S&P sample (Panel b) and is zero otherwise. The non-
sample firms include all non-financial firms available on Worldscope that are in countries covered by the surveys. Sales growth is inflation adjusted two-year
sales growth from 1998 – 2000 (winsorized at 1% and 99% tails). Ownership, Total assets (US$ millions) and Cash/Assets are for 2000. Data for Dependence on
external finance, computed as capital expenditures minus cash flow from operations divided by capital expenditures, is from Computstat from 1995-2000 The
standard errors are computed assuming observations are independent across countries, but not within countries. t-statistics are in parentheses. *, **, and ***
indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
                                                                                       Panel a. CLSA sample.

                                         (1)                  (2)                    (3)                  (4)                (5)                  (6)

 Constant                               -3.65                -3.86                  -4.20                -6.96              -3.61                -7.38
                                      -(8.53)***          -(10.92)***             -(9.32)***           -(11.38)***       -(11.07)***           -(7.21)***
 Sales growth                           0.75                                                                                                     0.85
                                                **
                                       (2.04)                                                                                                   (1.70)*
 Dependence on external finance                              0.11                                                                                0.19
                                                            (0.98)                                                                              (1.53)
 Ownership                                                                          1.27                                                         1.24
                                                                                           ***
                                                                                  (2.87)                                                        (2.21)**
 Log(Assets)                                                                                              0.55                                   0.52
                                                                                                        (8.24)***                              (6.05)***
 Cash/Assets                                                                                                                -0.38                0.39
                                                                                                                           -(0.62)              (0.29)

 Pseudo R2                             0.0084               0.0008                 0.0167                0.1342            0.0004               0.1315
 # of observations                     10854                17001                  13592                 14227             14012                 8416




                                                                             51
                                                                            Panel b. S&P sample.

                                    (1)              (2)                  (3)                  (4)             (5)              (6)

Constant                           -2.76            -3.21               -2.67                 -10.60          -2.79           -10.41
                                            ***              ***                ***                   ***              ***
                                 -(21.69)         -(33.66)          -(15.14)                -(9.31)         -(25.72)         -(8.70)***
Sales growth                        0.26                                                                                       0.45
                                   (1.11)                                                                                     (1.09)
Dependence on external finance                      -0.03                                                                      0.10
                                                   -(0.39)                                                                    (0.88)
Ownership                                                               -0.71                                                  -2.01
                                                                        -(1.56)                                              -(3.93)***
Log(Assets)                                                                                    1.15                            1.21
                                                                                                      ***
                                                                                             (8.43)                          (8.75)***
Cash/Assets                                                                                                   -1.20            1.45
                                                                                                                      ***
                                                                                                            -(3.48)          (2.62)***

Pseudo R2                         0.0009           0.0001               0.0051               0.4280          0.0040           0.4451
# of observations                  10854            17001               13592                 14227           14012            8416




                                                                   52
