NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE US CURRENT ACCOUNT DEFICIT
AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT:
COLLATERAL FOR A TOTAL RETURN SWAP
Michael P. Dooley
David Folkerts-Landau
Peter M. Garber
Working Paper 10727
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10727
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2004

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2004 by Michael P. Dooley, David Folkerts-Landau, and Peter M. Garber. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The US Current Account Deficit and Economic Development: Collateral for a Total Return Swap
Michael P. Dooley, David Folkerts-Landau, and Peter M. Garber
NBER Working Paper No. 10727
August 2004
JEL No. F2, F32, F33

ABSTRACT
We argue that a chronic US current account deficit is an integral and sustainable feature of a
successful international monetary system. The US deficit supplies international collateral to the
periphery. International collateral in turn supports two-way trade in financial assets that liberates
capital formation in poor countries from inefficient domestic financial markets. The implicit
international contract is analogous to a total return swap in domestic financial markets. Using
market-determined collateral arrangements from these transactions we compute the collateral
requirements consistent with recent foreign direct investment in China. The data are remarkably
consistent with such calculations. The analysis helps explain why net capital flows from poor to rich
countries and recent evidence that net outflows of capital are associated with relatively high growth
rates in emerging markets. It also clarifies the role of the reserve currency in the system.
Michael P. Dooley
Department of Economics
University of California, Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
and NBER
mpd@ucsc.edu
David Folkerts-Landau
1331 21 Street, NW
Washington, DC 20036
Peter M. Garber
7 Seaview Drive
Barrington, RI
and NBER
vic2eroy@aol.com

In a series of papers we have argued that a revived Bretton Woods system
provides an explanation for periphery governments’ willingness to finance the US
current account deficit.1 However, we have not argued that a chronic current
account deficit for the center country is a logical consequence of the system. In
this paper we extend the analysis and provide a strong link between a successful
international monetary system and net flows of savings from periphery (poor)
countries to center (rich) countries, that is, for current account deficits for the
center and current account surpluses for the periphery. The link is provided by a
new approach to the role of collateral in the international monetary system. The
collateral approach to international capital flows ties together literatures on
sovereign debt default, development strategies and the international monetary
system.
The lack of collateral or the means to collect it has long been recognized as the
fundamental distinction between domestic and international debt markets. Models
of sovereign debt are based on some enforcement mechanism that is “almost as
good” as seizing collateral. The mechanisms include limiting future gains from
trade and consumption smoothing or the disruption of output while debt contracts
are renegotiated.2 Each of these is equivalent to some immediate forfeiture of
collateral triggered by nonpayment of debt. The relatively small value of these
collateral equivalents is often assumed to limit net capital flows to poor countries
as compared to flows warranted by expected return differentials. Capital formation
in poor countries is constrained and economic development delayed.
More recent work on the role of reserves in the international monetary system has
emphasized the role of domestic and international collateral during financial
crises.3 The basic idea here is that international credit is limited by a quite different
measure of collateral, namely, the expected proceeds of future sales of traded
goods. Residents of the debtor country can trade this international collateral
among themselves as long as domestic collateral is adequate to support such
lending. An intriguing result of these models is that accumulation of international
reserves by the government does not, in general, increase the real international
collateral available to a debtor country and can actually reduce the incentives for
private holdings of uncommitted collateral.
In this paper we explore the implications of a new concept and role for collateral in
the international monetary system. We assume that international collateral is
restricted to the equivalent value of cumulated net goods and services already
delivered to a foreign counterparty. Already delivered goods are collateral if the
1

Dooley, Folkerts-Landau and Garber (2003, 2004).
Eaton and Gersovitz (1981), Bullow and Rogoff (1989), Dooley (2000a).
3
Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2001), Feldstein (1999).
2

official sector in the ‘”center country” holding the goods is willing and able to default
on or freeze the net financial liabilities to foreigners who have posted the
collateral.4 An important implication of this definition is that the government and
the private sector of a country cannot borrow from private nonresidents in order to
accumulate collateral.5 The empirical counterpart to our definition of international
collateral is net international reserve position of the country posting collateral.6
We assume that poor countries need collateral to support balanced trade in
financial assets with the rest of the world. This assumption reflects the almost
universal requirement in domestic credit markets that less credit worthy (poor)
counterparties must post collateral with more credit worthy (rich) counterparties to
cover potential and actual losses on leveraged positions.
Our model provides a rationale for net savings flows from poor to rich countries (to
build collateral) and the recent empirical evidence that such flows are associated
with more rapid growth in the poor countries. More rapid growth in our framework
is the result of the export of gross savings from distorted domestic credit markets
that is then returned to the poor country in more efficient channels of financial
intermediation, usually in the form of direct investment. In this respect our
framework is similar to Obstfeld (1994). In that model growth results from two-way
trade in financial assets that allow relatively high risk and high return investment in
poor countries. As argued in that paper, such effects can be a very powerful
source of growth. The same mechanism would support our conclusions, although
the poor country in our framework has to do more than open its borders to foreign
investment, it has also to provide collateral for that foreign investment.
A striking implication of our argument is that the center or reserve currency country
in the system is the country most likely to freeze of otherwise default on its own or
its residents’ net liabilities to poor countries in reaction to a default in the periphery.
Private investors in rich countries have strong incentives to pool the collateral in a
center country that has a reliable judicial system and a history of willingness to
freeze foreign assets. In the current system the United States seems to us the
likely candidate. The US cannot accept the collateral unless it runs a current
account deficit. It follows that a structural current account deficit for the United
States is an important feature of the system in which large, poor countries are
anxious to develop rapidly.

4

The center country does not have to distribute the collateral to private creditors; it is enough that the center
country is willing and able to keep the goods already delivered by defaulting on its net liabilities. Of course the
center country must be expected to do so only in reaction to a default in the periphery. The system is more
efficient if the private creditors expect to be compensated by the center government. It may also be more efficient
if the center government can freeze its own liabilities to the foreign government, that is, its international reserve
liabilities.
5
We are not aware of other analyses based on this assumption. The existing literature on the demand for
international reserves and the role of reserves in preventing crises implicitly assumes that the country is a net
debtor (Dooley, 2002). It follows that reserve holding can only affect the liquidity of the government’s financial
balance sheet. Under some circumstances this can have real effects but, as emphasized by Caballero and
Krishnamurthy (2001), the baseline Ricardian result would be that the level of reserves would not affect the
equilibrium. Credits from other governments and international organizations might in some circumstances be
equivalent to “goods already delivered” and therefore provide collateral in addition to current account surpluses.
6
A less obvious source of collateral would include credit lines to the poor country from other rich governments and
international institutions See Dooley (2000b) for an empirical interpretation of financial crises as seizures of
collateral.

Gross Capital Flows and Growth
The underlying political economy that motivates periphery governments is set out
in Dooley, Folkerts-Landau and Garber (2004). The development strategy of fixed
exchange rate “trade account” countries requires rapid export growth and large
inflows of direct investment in order to absorb rapidly an initial stock of
underemployed labor. The primary policy tool is a real exchange rate that is
undervalued by conventional measures and accumulation of international reserves.
This undervaluation can be quite large depending on the initial stock of labor to be
absorbed by the industrial sector.
We have argued that if the exchange rate policy that generates the absorption of
excess labor at an optimal rate also generates a current account deficit for the
center, periphery governments will finance the center’s deficit through reserve
accumulation rather than sacrifice their development strategy.
It might seem natural to assume that the “undervalued” exchange rate would tend
to generate a trade surplus in the periphery and trade deficits in the center. But on
closer inspection it is also clear that the expected rate of appreciation of the real
exchange rate can be quite small because adjustment may last for decades. Since
traded goods are almost as cheap today as they will be tomorrow for the center
country, and almost as expensive today as they will be tomorrow in the periphery,
there is no reason to believe that an absorption relative to output will be tilted to
produce deficits in the center and surpluses in the periphery. Surpluses and
deficits cannot be explained by inter-temporal substitution.
Put another way, the development strategy we have set out has strong predictions
for patterns and magnitudes of gross international trade in goods and capital
markets but, as it stands, has little to say about the pattern of current account
imbalances between the center and the periphery. But it is exactly the large net
imbalances that have generated the most heat in international policy debates.
In this paper we extend our basic analytical framework in a direction that provides
a link between successful development strategies in the periphery and net flows of
savings from the periphery to the center. In contrast to the usual assumption that
capital “should” flow from capital rich countries to capital poor countries to equalize
rates of return, we reach the opposite conclusion.7 Our framework suggests that a
successful development strategy generates net capital flows from poor to rich
countries. Net capital inflows to the center provide collateral to center country
investors. Without this collateral the development strategy of the periphery is
derailed by a lack of international financial intermediation. Indeed, stripped down
to basics, this is what it means to be the “center country” or the provider of the
“reserve currency”—it is simply the country that is the best depository and
manager of collateral.

7

This is actually more than an assumption. It is the result of the dominant academic theories on net international
capital flows. A country that is going to grow rapidly should smooth out consumption by borrowing now as long as
the growth is somehow locked in. This last proviso is where the feeling that the dominant model is correct goes off
the tracks; if a growing country decides to party too early, the “locked-in” growth does not materialize and its debt
does not repaid.

Gross Capital Flows and Collateral
The basic idea is that financial intermediation by the center that facilitates growth in
the periphery also generates asymmetric risks for the center. Such international
financial intermediation facilitates periphery growth because it channels domestic
savings in the periphery through superior financial markets in the center. A simple
example would be the accumulation of direct investment claims by the center
matched one for one with the periphery’s accumulation of Treasury securities.
Balanced gross capital flows imply a balanced current account, in this case an
exchange of equity claims for low-yield fixed income claims.8
The main point of this paper is that the accounting balance described above does
not balance the economic risks faced by participants in international capital
markets. We argue below that if current accounts are balanced the periphery’s
development strategy generates a net exposure for direct investors that will
strangle intermediation and limit growth in the periphery. To relax this constraint,
the periphery must post collateral and, in fact, must post more collateral the more
successful is its development strategy. In our view, the only effective collateral
available to facilitate international intermediation is a net export of goods and
services from less creditworthy countries. It follows in the current environment that
the US must be willing to run a current account deficit in order to fulfill its role as
the center country in the system.

The Swap Analogy
We find it useful to compare the implicit economic contract between the center and
the periphery to a standard derivative contract: a total return swap. A total return
swap is a promise by one party to pay the total return (capital gains plus dividends)
on the notional amount of an asset such as an equity or equity index for some
future interval in exchange for receipt of fixed income on notional principle over the
same interval. In a typical private contract, a floating reference interest rate is set
by the market at LIBOR adjusted by 20-30 basis points so that the contract initially
has about zero market value.9 The interesting aspect of such contracts for our
argument is that the less creditworthy party to the contract is required to post
collateral for actual and potential mark to market losses. Failure to provide the
collateral terminates the contract, effectively a cancellation of principal on both
sides and a taking of collateral to cover at least the current market value.
The application of this contractual arrangement to the international monetary
system is straightforward. The periphery promises to pay the US the total return on
US direct equity investment in the periphery. The US promises to pay a fixed
interest rate on reserve assets. An important difference between a private total
return swap and the international contract is that most of the time in the latter there
8

See Garber (1998) for a discussion of the role of derivatives in risk sharing associated with net capital flows.
Suppose for example, that an AA bank agrees to pay the total return on $100 million notional value of a
corporate share and will receive Libor plus. It can hedge this by borrowing $100 million at Libor and buying $100
million of the corporate shares. This is why the swap starts at zero market value. In practice, there will be some
markup on the Libor it receives to provide for its costs, risks, and a profit margin.

9

is no direct contact between the counterparties. It is only in a default situation that
the two governments would consolidate their national claims and then net liabilities
against claims. But conceptually, the creditworthy (center) country should demand
collateral from the less creditworthy (periphery) country on a mark to market basis.
Since international default is a fairly common event, private investors have to
consider the value of their claims in the event that all foreign gross claims and
liabilities are nationalized and they are paid a part of the net result. Clearly, the
more negative the net investment position of the US the better is the value of gross
claims on the periphery and the more willing would investors be to acquire such
claims.
How Much Collateral and in What Form?
There are two additional complications. First, what is the mark to market value of
the international contract? Second, how does the periphery post collateral? For
the implicit international contract, we have shown elsewhere that there is a subsidy
element to the foreign direct investor on initiation of the contract. That is,
effectively, the equity leg of the deal is provided at below market value; so the
swap starts already in the money. Also, the interest rate on the fixed income leg is
determined by the risk free treasury rate. It follows that the initial expected present
value of the contract is positive for the US and negative for the periphery. For
simplicity, it is not a stretch to assume that the “original sin” of the periphery is that
it is born being a credit risk and that the entire expected present value of the swap
will have to be matched by collateral, as well as some additional coverage for
future valuation risk.
In typical total return swaps, collateral is determined by multiplying potential
volatility of the underlying asset over the next ten days by a factor dependent on
the credit risk of the counterparty. For example, a more creditworthy counterparty
might pay 15% collateral on an asset-based swap whose underlying 10-day
volatility is 10%, while a lesser credit might have to deliver 30%. An additional
factor might be added to cover foreign exchange risk and country risk for foreign or
emerging market underlying assets. Some examples of the range of collateral
actually required are: for a total return swap on a highly liquid US equity, a hedge
fund (less creditworthy) would be asked for 15%, for the S+P index 10% collateral
would be required, for Gazprom in Russia 50% initial margin would be required.
Swaps in listed China equities draw a similar haircut.
But this is only the initial collateral required for new investment. If, as seems likely,
the total return on direct investment exceeds the return on the fixed interest leg,
one hundred percent of the mark to market gain on private contracts must be
collateralized every day. The implication is that, in addition to the collateral
required for the new flow of direct investment, the mark to market gain on the stock
of direct investment requires additional variation margin.

Collateral and Growth
The mechanical but important implication is that a successful development
strategy—where investment pays off with large returns—generates capital gains

on direct investment and therefore rapid growth of collateral balances. Recent
empirical research suggests that rapid growth in emerging markets is correlated
with net lending from those successful economies to the rest of the world.
Aizenmann et al. (2004) conclude:
There is no evidence of any growth bonus associated with
increasing the financing share of foreign savings. In fact,
the evidence suggests the opposite: throughout the 1990s,
countries with higher self-financing ratios grew significantly
faster than countries with low self-financing ratios. This
result persists even after controlling growth for the quality
of institutions.10
This empirical result is clearly at odds with the conventional wisdom that net capital
inflows to emerging markets are necessary to augment domestic savings and
promote rapid growth of the domestic capital stock. The evidence is, however,
consistent with our analysis. In effect, net capital outflows are required to support
efficient domestic capital formation.
What is really at stake in economic
development is the quality rather than the quantity of domestic investment.
Table 1. Direct Investment and Collateral, USDbn
1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003
Direct Investment

3

11

34

66

99

137

179

220

257

295

332

379

426

2

4

12

16

17

19

21

21

18

19

19

23

23

Gain

0

1

3

7

10

14

18

22

26

29

33

38

43

Total Stock Collateral

2

7

22

44

71

104

142

185

229

277

329

391

457

22

21

22

53

75

107

143

149

158

168

216

291

408

13

20

8

15

17

24

61

92

113

134

151

187

233

1

30

59

82

116

154

219

278

326

385

390

399

397

50% Collateral Initial
Contract
100% Collateral Capital

Stock of Reserve Assets
Cumulated Current
Account
Private Claims on
Nonresidents
Source: IIF

We can get a feel for the economic importance of these effects by estimating what
collateral would be required by private investors for direct investment in China.
Table 1 applies the general concepts developed above to recent data for China.
The first row of the table shows annual data for the cumulated flow of foreign direct
investment into China from 1991 – 2003. At the end of 2003 the book value of the
stock of direct investment was about $426 billion.
Row 2 shows the new initial collateral that would be required for the flow of direct
investment in each year assuming that the aggregate implicit contract carries the
50% collateral required for private total return swaps with China. Row 3 shows the
10

Joshua Aizenman, Brian Pinto, and Artur Radziwill, (2004). Similar econometric results are reported in

Gourinchas and Jeanne, (2003).

new variation margin required each year for the net capital gain on the stock of
direct investment. This assumes that there is 100% collateral required against
mark to market gains and that net capital gains each year equal 10% of the book
value of direct investment. The implied cumulated stock of collateral is shown in
row 4. In 2003 the stock of collateral would be about $457 billion, an amount
slightly larger than the book value of direct investment because of capital gains.
The stock of international reserves is shown in row 5. In 2003 the stock was about
$408 billion, clearly the right order of magnitude if we interpret the government’s
reserve assets as the primary measure of collateral.
Rows 6 and 7 round out the balance of payments identity. Row 6 shows the
cumulated current account surplus over the period. The cumulated balance from
1991-2003 was about $233 billion, suggesting that net trade in goods and services
accounted for about half of the collateral accumulated. Net credits from bilaterals
and multilateral institutions and small net inflows from banks account for the
remaining net inflows. We assume that such credits require no collateral or less
collateral as compared to direct investment.
Direct investment inflows are matched by private capital outflows from China. The
cumulative stock of private Chinese claims on nonresidents, $397 billion in 2003, is
shown in row 7. The interesting conclusion is that private direct investment in
China has been roughly matched by private Chinese investments in the rest of the
world. These are analogous to the two matched legs in a total return swap. We do
not know much about the nature of these outflows since they are largely
unrecorded in official statistics. The social collateral needed to support this
international financial intermediation has been concentrated by accumulation of
reserve assets.
Delivering goods and services up front is a crude form of collateral. But there is no
credible alternative. Market participants individually could pledge financial assets in
the center country, but the only way that the aggregate of the periphery can
acquire assets in the US is to run a current account surplus. In an important
sense, the goods and services already delivered to the US support the stock of US
claims on the periphery; it is the collateral that powers the entire development
strategy.
The nature of the social collateral is so obvious it is hard to see. If the center
cannot seize goods or assets after a default, it has to import the goods and
services before the default and create a net liability. If the periphery then defaults
on its half of the implicit contract, the center can simply default on its gross liability
and keep the collateral. The periphery’s current account surplus provides the
collateral to support the financial intermediation that is at the heart of Asian
development strategies. The interest paid on the net position is nothing more than
the usual risk free interest paid on collateral.
Conclusions
The collateral approach to international capital flows ties together literatures on
sovereign debt default, development strategies and the international monetary
system. The mechanism of modern large scale development is straightforward.

Rapid industrialization in the periphery requires a large inflow of direct investment;
and, in turn, a large current account deficit for the center is required to provide the
collateral.
Contrary to almost universal opinion, successful economic development is
powered by net savings flows from poor to rich countries. The current account
imbalances of the rich countries do not pull the periphery by providing global
aggregate demand; they push the periphery by securing efficient capital formation.
Seemingly balanced shifts within a country’s capital account actually drive its
current account through a need to collateralize resulting risk imbalances. The US
current account deficit is an integral and sustainable result of its role as the center
country in the revived Bretton Woods system.

References
Aizenman, J., B. Pinto, and A. Radziwill, (2004) "Sources for Financing
Domestic Capital: Is Foreign Saving a Viable Option for Developing
Countries?" NBER Working Paper 10624, July.
Bulow, J. and K. Rogoff, (1989) “A Constant Recontracting Model of Sovereign
Debt,” Journal of Political Economy, 97, 166-177.
Caballero R. and A. Krishnamurthy, (2001) “International Liquidity Illusion: The
Risks of Sterilization,” NBER Working Paper 8141, February.
Dooley, M.P., (2000a) "International Financial Architecture and Strategic Default:
Can Financial Crises Be Less Painful?" Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on
Public Policy, 53, 361-377.
____________, (2000b) "A Model of Crises in Emerging Markets,” The Economic
Journal, 110, 256-272.
____________, (2002) "Responses to Volatile Capital Flows: Controls, Asset
Liability Management and Architecture," Journal of Emerging Market Finance, 1,
99-124.
Dooley, M.P., D. Folkerts-Landau and P.M. Garber, (2003) “An Essay on the
Revised Bretton Woods System,” NBER Working Paper 9971, September.
________________________________________, (2004) “Direct Investment,
Rising Real Wages and the Absorption of Excess Labor in the Periphery,“ NBER
Working Paper 10626, July.
Eaton, J. and M. Gersovitz, (1981) "Debt with Potential Repudiation: Theoretical
and Empirical Analysis,” Review of Economic Studies, 48, 289-309.

Feldstein, M., (1999) “Self-Protection for Emerging Markets,”NBER Working Paper
6907, January.
Garber, P.M., (1998) “Derivatives in International Capital Flows,” NBER Working
Paper 6623, June.
Gourinchas, P. and O. Jeanne, (2003) “Capital Flows, Capital Scarcity and
Economic Development,” mimeo, December.
Obstfeld M. (1994) “Risk-Taking, Global Diversification and Growth,” American
Economic Review, 84, 1310-1329, December.

