                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          THE MORE THE MERRIER? THE EFFECT OF FAMILY COMPOSITION
                         ON CHILDREN’S EDUCATION

                                           Sandra E. Black
                                           Paul J. Devereux
                                           Kjell G. Salvanes

                                        Working Paper 10720
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w10720


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2004




We thank Daron Acemoglu, Janet Currie, Mary Daly, and participants at the Society of Labor Economists
2004 Annual Meetings, the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, and the 2004 IRP Summer Institute for
helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Sandra E. Black, Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The More the Merrier? The Effect of Family Composition on Children’s Education
Sandra E. Black, Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes
NBER Working Paper No. 10720
August 2004
JEL No. I2, J1

                                            ABSTRACT

Among the perceived inputs in the "production" of child quality is family size; there is an extensive

theoretical literature that postulates a tradeoff between child quantity and quality within a family.

However, there is little causal evidence that speaks to this theory. Our analysis is able to overcome

many limitations of the previous literature by using a rich dataset that contains information on the

entire population of Norway over an extended period of time and allows us to match adult children

to their parents and siblings. In addition, we use exogenous variation in family size induced by the

birth of twins to isolate causation. Like most previous studies, we find a negative correlation

between family size and children's educational attainment. However, when we include indicators

for birth order, the effect of family size becomes negligible. This finding is robust to the use of twin

births as an instrument for family size. In addition, we find that birth order has a significant and

large effect on children's education; children born later in the family obtain less education. These

findings suggest the need to revisit economic models of fertility and child "production", focusing

not only on differences across families but differences within families as well.

Sandra E. Black                    Paul G. Devereux                    Kjell G. Salvanes
Department of Economics            Department of Economics             Department of Economics
UCLA                               UCLA                                Norwegian School of
9373 Bunche Hall                   devereux@econ.ucla.edu              Economics
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477                                             kjell.salvanes@nhh.no
and NBER
sblack@econ.ucla.edu
1. Introduction

        Economists have long been interested in understanding the factors that determine

child outcomes. However, despite years of research, evidence on the components of the

“production function” for children is still quite limited. Family environment is widely

believed to be a primary component, but it is difficult to parcel this out into specific

characteristics.

        Among the perceived inputs in the production of child quality is family size.

There is an extensive theoretical literature on the tradeoff between child quantity and

quality within a family. The models date back to Becker (1960), who was motivated to

explain the empirical regularity that families with higher income have fewer children. He

theorized that, as income rises, individuals may choose to increase the average quality

and reduce quantity. While the correlation between income and family size is clear, there

is little further evidence that speaks to this theory.

        A key element of the model is an interaction between quantity and quality in the

budget constraint that leads to rising marginal costs of quality with respect to family size;

this generates a tradeoff between quality and quantity. But is this tradeoff real? In

particular, is it true that having a larger family has a causal effect on the “quality” of the

children? Or is it the case that families who choose to have more children are

(inherently) different, and the children would have done worse regardless of family size?

        This paper attempts to isolate the causal effect of family size on children’s

outcomes by using data on the entire population of Norway and looking at the effect of an

exogenous increase in the size of a family on children’s educational attainment. Our

dataset covers an extended period of time and allows us to match adult children to their




                                                                                                 1
parents and siblings; as a result, we are able to overcome many limitations of earlier

research resulting from small sample sizes or limited information on children’s outcomes

after the children have left home. In addition, we have plausibly exogenous variation in

family size (induced by the birth of twins) to isolate the true causal effect.

        Like most previous studies, we find a negative correlation between family size

and children’s educational attainment. However, when we include indicators for birth

order, the effects of family size are reduced to almost zero. These results are robust to a

number of specifications, including the use of twins as an instrumental variable for family

size. The evidence suggests that family size itself has little impact on the quality of each

child but more likely impacts only the marginal children through the effect of birth order.

        Given that birth order effects appear to drive the observed negative relationship

between family size and child outcomes, we next turn our attention to birth order.

Previously, these effects have proven very difficult to estimate credibly due to rigorous

data requirements (Blake, 1989). Our unique dataset allows us to overcome these data

problems and, unlike the previous literature, we utilize family fixed effects models to

deal with unobserved family-level heterogeneity. We find evidence that birth order

effects are strong, regardless of our estimation strategy. Moreover, the effects appear to

be of similar magnitude across families of different sizes.

        The evidence suggests that correlations of family size with educational attainment

are driven by birth order effects; once birth order is controlled for, there is little if any

causal effect of family size on educational attainment. The implications of these findings

are quite different from the causal effect of family size on child quality implied by the




                                                                                                2
simple quality/quantity model and may suggest a reconsideration of the determinants of

child outcomes.

       While our results speak directly to the nature of quantity/quality tradeoffs, they

are also relevant to other questions. Family sizes continue to decline in developed

countries and it has been suggested that this should be of benefit to children. Our results

imply that, though average child outcomes may improve, there may be little effect on

first-born children.

       The paper unfolds as follows. Section 2 lays out the quantity/quality model and

describes the empirical literature on the effects of family size. Section 3 describes our

data. Section 4 presents our methodology and results. Section 5 turns to a more detailed

investigation of birth order effects. Section 6 presents family size and birth order

estimates for various subgroups of the sample. Section 7 presents some speculative

evidence on the determinants of birth order effects. Finally, Section 8 concludes.



                       2. Theoretical and Empirical Background

The Quantity/Quality Model

       Becker and Lewis (1973) showed that quality and quantity of children interact in

such a way as to make it possible, with reasonable elasticity values, to observe the

negative relationship between income and number of children that we observe

empirically. 1

       Consider a quantity/quality model in which each family acts as a unitary

household and has preferences over number of children (N), quality per child (Q), and a

composite commodity (S). The optimization problem is




                                                                                              3
                  max U ( N , Q, S ) s.t. I = PN N + PQ Q + Ps S + ΠNQ                    (1)

Here PN, PQ, and PS refer to the prices of quantity, quality per child, and the composite

commodity respectively. Total family income is denoted by I. The special feature of this

model is that the budget constraint is nonlinear; quantity and quality enter

multiplicatively, where Π is the price-weighted sum of the cost minimizing levels of

quality inputs required to increase the quality of one child by one unit. Rosenzweig and

Wolpin (1980) derive the effect of an exogenous increase in family size on child quality

for this model:

                  ∂Q (φ 12 − ΠPs2 λ)
                     =                                                                    (2)
                  ∂N       φ11

where λ is the marginal utility of income (positive), and φij is the cofactor from the ith

row and jth column of the Hessian matrix from the consumer model in which there is no

interaction term. Given the denominator is positive, the sign of the derivative depends

principally on the value of φ12 (which is negative if Q and N are substitutes, positive if Q

and N are complements), and the value of Π (theorized to be positive).2 Given that Q and

N are likely substitutes (suggesting φ12 is negative), a value of the derivative close to

zero would suggest that Π is close to zero so that the interaction term inherent in the

quality/quantity model would not be supported by the data.



The Empirical Literature




1
 These ideas are developed further in Becker and Tomes (1976).
2
 Note that if Π equals zero, the effects of an exogenous increase in family size on child quality depends
only on whether Q and N are substitutes or complements.


                                                                                                            4
           Though the theory is often cited, the empirical literature testing this model has

been limited. Evidence generally supports a negative relationship between family size

and child “quality” or outcomes, even after controlling for socio-economic factors.3

However, few of these findings can be interpreted as causal; family size is endogenously

chosen by parents and hence may be related to other, unobservable, parental

characteristics that affect child outcomes. 4

           This literature suffers from two additional limitations. First, typically the studies

do not have large representative datasets and do not study outcomes of economic interest,

such as completed education and earnings. Second, the absence of information on birth

order often means that birth order effects are confounded with family size effects. While

the literature is extensive, we discuss below some of the studies that attempt to deal with

some or all of these problems.

           Rosenzweig and Wolpin (1980), Lee (2003), and Conley (2004) all attempt to use

exogenous variation in family size to determine the causal relationship between family

size and child “quality”. Rosenzweig and Wolpin (1980), using data from India, and Lee

(2003), using data from Korea, both examine the effect of increases in fertility induced by

twin births and sex of the first child, respectively, on child quality. Rosenzweig and

Wolpin find that increases in fertility decrease child quality, while Lee finds that, if

anything, larger families result in more educational expenditures per child. However, in

both cases the sample sizes are small (25 twin pairs for Rosenzweig and Wolpin,

approximately 2000 families for Lee), the estimates imprecise, and any family size effect

could be confounded by the omission of birth order controls.

3
    See Blake (1989) and the numerous studies cited therein.




                                                                                                   5
         In one of the most thorough studies to date, Conley (2004) uses U.S. Census data

from 1980 and 1990 to examine the effect of family size on private school attendance and

the probability a child is “held back”. To identify the causal effect of family size, he uses

the sex composition of the first two children as an exogenous source of variation in

family size; parents who have two same-sex children are more likely to have a third than

the same parents who have two opposite sex children.5 Using this as his instrument,

Conley finds a significant negative effect of family size on private school attendance and

whether a child is held back; when he analyzes the effects separately for first-born

children and later children, he finds the effects are significant only for later-born children.

However, his work is limited by the absence of better data; because of the structure of the

Census data, he only has access to intermediate outcomes that may be weak proxies for

outcomes later in life, and does not know the structure of the family for families in which

some individuals do not live in the household. Also, a recent literature suggests that sex

composition may have direct effects on child outcomes (for example, Dahl and Moretti,

2004, Butcher and Case, 1994; Conley, 2000; Deschenes, 2002). Such effects imply that

sex composition may not be a valid instrument for family size. 6




4
  There is also a literature examining the effect of family size on parental outcomes. See, for example,
Bronars and Grogger (1994) and Angrist and Evans (1998).
5
  Goux and Maurin (2004) also use this instrument with French data and find no significant effect of family
size on the probability of being held back. However, this result is difficult to interpret as they also include a
variable measuring overcrowding in the home.
6
  Another strategy applied in the literature is to use siblings and difference out family level fixed effects.
Guo and VanWey (1999) use data from the NLSY to evaluate the impact of family size on test scores.
Although they are able to replicate the OLS pattern of a negative relationship between family size and
children’s outcomes, the authors find little support for this relationship when they do the within-sibling or
within-individual analysis. However, this strategy requires strong assumptions about parental decision-
making, relies on very small samples, and is identified from very small differences in family size. Phillips
(1999) provides as thoughtful critique of this work, pointing out that, though suggestive, there are a number
of factors that could explain these results even if there is an effect of family size on children’s outcomes.



                                                                                                               6
                                                  3. Data

         Our data are from matched administrative files that cover the entire population of

Norway who were aged 16-74 at some point during the 1986 to 2000 interval. We restrict

our sample to children who are at least 25 years of age so almost all have completed their

education.7 Educational attainment is reported by the educational establishment itself

directly to Statistics Norway, thereby minimizing any measurement error due to

misreporting. The data also contain identifiers that allow one to match parents to children

and siblings to each other.8 Given that we observe year of birth, we are able to construct

indicators for the birth order of each child. Data on twin status is also available from

Statistics Norway. A twin birth occurs in approximately 1.5% of families.

         Our family size measure is completed family size. We have two sources of this

information in that we have data on both the total number of children born to the mother

(from the Families and Demographics file from Statistics Norway) as well as a count of

the number of children who are sixteen or over in the 1986-2000 interval. These numbers

agree in 84% of cases. The primary reason for disagreement is families with children who

are too young to be in the 1986-2000 data (14% of cases). We calculate family size as

being equal to the maximum of the number of children reported in the Families and

Demographic File, and the number of children we count in the 1986-2000 files. We

restrict our sample to families in which the mother and all children are alive (and thus

observed in our data) at some point between 1986 and 2000. By doing this, we exclude


7
  4.6% of our sample are still in school.
8
  When matching children to parents, we match using the mother’s identifier, as almost all children over
this period would have grown up with their mother. However, for a small proportion of children (2%) the
father differs across children in the family, and for a larger proportion (16%) the father of some of the
children is unknown to Statistics Norway (so the father may be different across children). We have verified
that all results are robust to excluding families in which the father identifier differs across children or is
missing for some children.


                                                                                                             7
families with children younger than 16 in 2000. This makes it fairly certain that we have

completed family size, as it is unlikely that a child of 25 who has no siblings aged less

than 16 will subsequently have another sibling. Also, it allows us to accurately calculate

birth order and the spacing measures used in the paper. Table 1 presents summary

statistics for our sample and Table 2 shows the distribution of family sizes in our sample.

About 18% of families have one child, 41% have 2, 27% have 3, 10% have 4, and about

5% have 5 or more.



                                    4. Methodology and Results

         We take two approaches to distinguishing the true causal effect of family size on

children’s education. The first approach is to include controls for family background

characteristics and birth order in order to examine how much of the estimated effect of

family size on child education can be instead attributed to these observable factors. Our

second approach implements two stage least squares (2SLS) using the birth of twins as a

source of exogenous variation in family size.

         In Tables 3 and 3a, we show the mean educational attainment and the distribution

of education in the family by family size. There are two very clear findings. First, only

children have much lower education than the average child in 2 or 3 child families.

Indeed, only children have approximately the same level of education as children from 4

child families. Second, from family sizes of 2 to 10+, we see a monotonic relationship

that greater family size accompanies lower average educational attainment. This

observed negative relationship is generally found throughout the literature.9


9
 The negative effect of being an only child is sometimes found in the literature. See, for example, Hauser
and Kuo (1998).


                                                                                                             8
Regression Results

         The unconditional relationship between family size and education is only

suggestive; for example, it could simply represent cohort effects, as we know that family

sizes have declined over time as educational attainment has increased. To better

understand the relationship, we regress education of children on family size, cohort

indicators (one for each year of birth), mother's cohort indicators (one for each year of

birth), and a female indicator.

         The estimates are reported in Columns 1-3 of Table 4a. In the first column, we

report estimates for a linear specification of family size. The highly significant coefficient

of -0.18 implies that, on average, adding one child to completed family size reduces

average educational attainment of the children by just less than one fifth of a year.10

Because Table 3 suggests monotonicity of the effects of family size with the exception of

only child families, in the third column of Table 4a we augment the linear specification

with a dummy variable indicating whether the individual is an only child. The estimates

suggest that only children receive 0.3 (0.53 - 0.23) years less schooling than the average

education of children in 2-child families. Also, each subsequent increment in family size

reduces average attainment by almost one quarter of a year of education. Finally, in

Column 2, we replace the linear specification with indicator variables for family size.11

We observe the same pattern -- a penalty for only children, and a monotonically

decreasing average educational attainment for families of sizes 2 to 10 or more.


10
   In this regression, as in all others in the paper, the reported standard errors allow for arbitrary correlation
between errors for any two children in the same family.
11
   Because very few families have more than 10 children, we have placed all families with 10 or more
children in the same category.


                                                                                                                 9
Controlling for Family Background Characteristics

        We next examine whether our results are somehow an artifact of omitted family

background controls. In Columns 4-6 of Table 4a, we report analogous estimates in

which we add indicator variables for father's and mother’s education level (one for each

year of education), and father's cohort (one for each birth year).12 Adding these controls

cuts the family size effects approximately in half -- the effect of the linear term is now -

0.095. Likewise, the negative effect of being an only child is reduced in this specification.

However, even these smaller effects are still quite large as is clear from the coefficients

on the dummy variables -- children in families of 10 or more have on average 0.7 of a

year less schooling than children in two child families.



Controlling for Birth Order

        In the estimates so far, we may be confounding the effects of family size with

those of birth order. We next add nine dummy variables representing second child, third

child, etc. with the final dummy variable equaling one if the child is the tenth child or

greater. The excluded category is first child. These results are reported in Table 4b.

Although still statistically significant, the family size effects are reduced to close to zero -

- the coefficient on the linear term is now -0.01 — with the addition of the birth order

dummies. This becomes -0.04 when the only child dummy is added to the specification.

Although statistically significant, these numbers are much smaller than before and

suggest that family size has very little impact on educational attainment. This impression




                                                                                              10
is strengthened by the small coefficients on the family size dummy variables, many of

which are now statistically insignificant. Note that this is particularly interesting given

that our priors suggest that family size coefficients are likely biased upwards (in absolute

terms) due to the negative relationship between unincluded family characteristics (such as

income) and family size.13

         We estimate the regression by birth order in Table 5. Interestingly, we find

relatively small effects of family size at each birth order. The differences across birth

order are small and most coefficients are statistically insignificant. It does not appear that

any one birth order is particularly adversely affected by larger family size, suggesting

again that family size effects are very weak once birth order is controlled for.



Using Twins as an Instrument

         Rosenzweig and Wolpin (1980) first discuss the idea of using twin births as

unplanned and therefore exogenous variation in family size. In their model, parents have

an optimal N* number of children. The birth of twins can vary the actual N from the

desired N* and it is this arguably exogenous variation that is used to estimate the effects

of family size on child outcomes. Our general estimation strategy is as follows:

                  ED = β 0 + β1 FAMSIZE + Xβ 2 + ε                                (3)

                  FAMSIZE = α 0 + α 1TWIN + Xα 2 + υ                              (4)

In this case, ED is the education of the child and FAMSIZE is the total number of

children in the family. X is a vector of other individual characteristics that may affect

12
  Information on fathers is missing for about 16% of the sample. Rather than drop these observations, we
include a separate category of missing for father’s cohort and father’s education. As mentioned earlier, the
results are robust to dropping cases with missing father information.



                                                                                                          11
children’s educational attainment, including cohort effects for the child, cohort indicators

for both parents, the education of both parents, and birth order effects. Equation (4)

represents the first stage of the two stage least squares estimation, where equation (3) is

the second stage.

         The TWIN indicator is equal to 1 if the nth birth is a multiple birth, and equal to 0

if the nth birth is a singleton. We restrict the sample to families with at least n births and

study the outcomes of children born before the nth birth.14 In practice, we estimate the

specification for values of n between 2 and 6. By restricting the sample to families with at

least n births, we make sure that, on average, preferences over family size are the same in

the families with twins at the nth birth and those with singleton births. Also, by restricting

the sample to children born before birth n, we avoid selection problems that arise because

families who choose to have another child after a twin birth may differ from families who

choose to have another child after a singleton birth.15

         Our methodology avoids two possible pitfalls that can arise when twins are used

as instruments. The first is that, even if the per-pregnancy probability of a twin birth is

constant, families that desire more children are more likely to have a multiple birth

(simply because they have more births). By focusing on whether a twin birth occurs for


13
   Unfortunately, we do not have good measures of family income for the period over which the children
are growing up.
14
   Due to their small sample size, Rosenzweig and Wolpin (1980) use the ratio of the number of twin births
to the total number of births of the mother as their instrument for completed family size. This approach is
problematic, as the denominator is, at least partly, a choice variable for the mother. Thus, their instrument
is still likely to be correlated with preferences of the parents over number of children. In our methodology,
we are able to avoid this problem.
15
   In more concrete terms, if n equals 2, we study the outcomes of the first child born in the family.
Conceptually, we are comparing the outcomes of the first child in two-child families to that in three-child
families where the extra child arises from the presence of a twin birth during the second birth. Given that
most families in this period had at least two children, the sample restrictions required by this approach are
not particularly severe. We similarly estimate the effect of family size on second-born children by
comparing families with two singleton births, one of which has a twin birth as an outcome of the third
pregnancy and the other which has a single birth in the third pregnancy.


                                                                                                          12
the nth birth, we avoid the problem that twin births are more likely in families that have

more births.

         The second possible problem is that a twin birth both increases family size and

shifts downwards the birth order of children born after the twins. For example, if a twin

birth occurs at the second birth, the next child born is now the fourth born-child rather

than the third. Thus, any estimates using children born subsequent to a twin birth will

confound family size effects with birth order effects. By only using children born before

a possible twin birth, we are able to avoid this problem.16

         In the Appendix, we provide further evidence that twins provide a valid source of

exogenous variation, showing that twin probabilities are unrelated to parents’ education

and, conditional on mother’s age, unrelated to the gap between births. We also examine

the excludability of twin births from our regression.17



Results Using Twins

         The 2SLS estimates are presented in Table 6, along with the first stage

coefficients and the OLS estimates using the same sample. Again, these IV estimates

present the effect of a twin birth at birth n, on the outcomes of children born prior to this

birth, conditional on having at least n births in the family. The first stage is very strong

and suggests that a twin birth increases completed family size by about 0.7 to 0.8. As

expected, twins at higher parity have a larger effect on family size, presumably because


16
   Rosenzweig and Wolpin (1980) use outcomes of all children and so their estimates suffer from this
problem. In a later paper, Rosenzweig and Wolpin (2000), they recommend using whether or not the first
born child is a twin as an instrument in this type of context. This approach would also suffer from the
confluence of family size and birth order effects.
17
   One might also be concerned that twin probabilities differ geographically in a manner that is correlated
with child education. We have found that adding county dummies or municipality dummies has no effect
on the 2SLS estimates.


                                                                                                          13
they are more likely to push families above N* (the optimal number of children). The t

statistics from the first stage are typically around 60, indicating that there are no concerns

about weak instruments in this application.

       The 2SLS estimate of the effect on the first child of changes in family size

induced by the second birth being a twin birth is 0.038 (0.047). This suggests no adverse

effects of increased family size on educational outcomes. The equivalent estimate for

families that have at least 3 births is -0.017 (0.044), and for families that have at least 4

births is -0.018 (0.060). Taken together, these three estimates are all less negative than

the OLS estimates and are precisely enough estimated to rule out large negative effects of

family size on education. These three estimates encompass the bulk of the data because,

as shown in Table 1, only about 5% of families have 5 or more children. Unsurprisingly,

the remaining estimates, based on families that have at least 5 births, are imprecisely

estimated and not very informative. These results suggest that family size has a

negligible effect on children’s outcomes, once one controls for birth order.



Using Same-Sex as an Instrument for Family Size

       Recent evidence suggests sex composition may have an independent impact on

children’s outcomes by affecting divorce probabilities, labor supply, wages, and

educational outcomes. However, for completeness, we describe results using this

instrument here. We study the outcomes of the first two children and use whether or not

these two children are the same sex as the instrument. The first stage is strong – a

coefficient of 0.089 with a standard error of 0.002. The second stage estimate is 0.256

(0.056), implying that increased family size leads to significantly higher educational




                                                                                                14
outcomes for children. We do not find the magnitude of this estimate credible and suspect

that there are independent positive effects on outcomes of having a sibling of the same

sex. Future research of our own will examine the direct effects of family sex composition

on children’s outcomes.



                                        5. Birth Order

        We have seen that birth order effects are important in that the family size effect

becomes very close to zero when birth order effects are included. In addition, the

estimated birth order effects themselves are quite large; they are an order of magnitude

greater than the family size effects. In this section, we take a closer look at the nature of

these birth order effects.



Previous Literature

         Blake (1989) describes some of the factors that make empirical estimation of

birth order effects difficult. First, it is necessary to fully control for family size or one will

confound family size and birth order effects. Second, the presence of cohort effects in

educational attainment will tend to bias results to the extent that later born children are in

different cohorts from earlier born children. Thus, one needs to have multiple cohorts for

each birth order and include unrestricted cohort effects. Third, it is important to include

cohort effects for the parents, as, conditional on child cohort, the parents of first-borns are

likely to be younger than parents of third or fourth born children. Fourth, spacing of

births may differ by birth order -- for example, the last child might typically appear after




                                                                                               15
a longer lag than the second child. If spacing has an independent effect on child

outcomes, ignoring it will bias estimated birth order effects.

       Studies of the effects of birth order on education have been limited by the absence

of the large representative datasets necessary to thoroughly address these four issues. For

example, Behrman and Taubman (1986) use data on only about 1000 individuals from

the National Academy of Science/National Research Council twin sample and their adult

offspring. Hanushek (1992) uses a small sample of low-income black families collected

from the Gary Income Maintenance Experiment. Hauser and Sewell (1985) use the

Wisconsin Longitudinal Study; their data are less than ideal as, by definition, the survey

respondent has completed high school.18 Hauser and Sewell find no evidence for birth

order effects; Behrman and Taubman find some evidence later children have lower

education, and Hanushek observes a U-shaped pattern of achievement by birth order for

large families, with oldest and youngest children doing better than middle children

(although it is not clear that there are any statistically significant differences). However,

all these studies estimate birth order effects quite imprecisely and, due to small samples,

do not include the full set of family size indicators, cohort indicators, parental cohort

indicators, and spacing controls that we use in this paper.

       More recently, Iacovou (2001) uses the British National Child Development

Study (NCDS) and finds that later-born children have poorer educational outcomes than

earlier born. While this a very thorough study, it does suffer from some weaknesses. First

the sample size is small (about 18,000 initially) and there is much attrition over time

(about 50%) so estimates are imprecise and may be subject to attrition bias. Second, all




                                                                                            16
children in the sample are born the same week so birth order is strongly correlated with

parental age at birth and it is difficult to tease out separate effects of these two variables.

        The empirical literature on the effect of birth order on children’s outcomes is

quite extensive; despite this, however, there have been no strong conclusions due to data

and methodological limitations. Because of our large dataset on the population of

Norway over an extended period of time, we are able to overcome most of the limitations

of the prior literature. Unlike the previous literature, we use family fixed effects models

in addition to OLS.



Birth Order Results

        In Table 7, we report the average education level and distribution of education by

birth order. There is a clear pattern of declining education for higher birth orders.

However, as with the case of family size effects, these summary statistics can be

misleading in that we are not controlling for family size, cohort effects, or any other

demographic characteristics that may be influencing these statistics. As a result, we

estimate the relationship between birth order and educational attainment in a regression

framework, using the same set of control variables as in the family size analysis.

        Because of our large dataset, we can estimate regressions for the full sample as

well as by family size. In Column 1 of Table 8, we present estimates for the full sample,

including a full set of family size dummies (presented in Table 4, Column 8). Relative to

the first child, we observe a steady decline in child’s education by birth order. Each

subsequent column in Table 8 represents a separate regression for a particular family size.

18
  In related research, Kessler (1991) uses data from the NLSY to examine the effects of birth order and
family size on wages and employment status. This paper also suffers from small sample sizes (often there


                                                                                                       17
If we look across row one, we can see the effect of being a “second child” (omitted

category is first child) is large and negative for all family sizes. This is particularly

striking, given that earlier work found somewhat different effects for different family

sizes (Hanushek 1992).19 Note that the results become less precisely estimated as family

sizes become larger; this is undoubtedly due to the associated decline in sample sizes. As

in Column 1, we find a monotonic decline in average education as birth order increases.

This result appears to be quite robust across family sizes.

         As a final check, we study the effects of birth order by family size using family

fixed effects. While the regressions in Table 8 included demographic controls, family

fixed effects allow us to compare effects of birth order within families, thereby

differencing out any family specific characteristics that are affecting all children. In

addition, by estimating these equations by family size, we are also allowing for

differential effects of birth order by family size. Table 9 presents these results. The

estimates are almost identical to those without family fixed effects, suggesting that the

estimated birth order effects do not reflect omitted family characteristics.20




are fewer than 1000 observations in the wage equations).
19
   In his work, Hanushek also focuses on the effect of school quality by including such measures in the
estimation; although we do not have school quality measures, we have tried adding municipality effects
(schools are organized at the municipality level) and municipality-year effects to control for geographical
and temporal differences in school quality; the inclusion of these variables does not affect our family size
or birth order conclusions.
20
   The estimated birth order effects could be biased if spacing has an independent effect on outcomes
because spacing differs on average by birth order (see Table A1). To address this issue, we created 3
variables: (1) The number of children born within one year of the person, (2) the number of children born 2
or 3 years apart from the person, and (3) the number of children born 4 or 5 years apart from the person.
Adding these variables to the fixed effects model has no appreciable effect on the estimated birth order
effects (see Table A2). This specification should be treated with some caution as spacing may be optimally
chosen by families and, hence, is an endogenous variable.


                                                                                                         18
               6. Heterogeneous Effects of Family Size and Birth Order

       To better understand what is driving our results, we stratify the data by sex and at

different points of the education distribution. The first split, presented in Columns 1 and

2 of Table 10, breaks the data by sex. As one can see, the results are quite similar for men

and women, with significant OLS family size effects (presented in the first row; these

estimates include controls for family background) that become close to zero when birth

order is controlled for (row 2). When we estimate the family size coefficients using the

twin instrument, we get small and imprecisely estimated coefficients for both men and

women. (The third row presents the coefficient on family size for the first child for the

sample of families with at least two children, using twins at second birth as an

instrument; the fourth row is the effect of family size on the first two children

conditional on having at least three children using twins at third birth as an instrument,

and the fifth row is the effect of family size on the first three children conditional on

having at least four children using twins at fourth birth as an instrument.) While, overall,

the effects of family size for women seem smaller than those for men, in both cases we

see small family size effects. In contrast, birth order effects are larger for women than for

men.

       We next examine different points of the distribution of educational attainment to

see if there is one educational group that appears to be driving our results. Table 10,

Columns 3-5 present results from linear probability regressions that examine the effects

of family size and birth order on the probability that an individual has 12 or more years of

education (Column 3), the probability that an individual has 13 or more years of

education (Column 4), and the probability that an individual has 16 or more years of




                                                                                             19
education (Column 5). The results are quite similar in all cases, with small family size

effects once birth order is controlled for and large birth order effects (although a bit

smaller for the probability of having 16 or more years of education), suggesting that our

results are not being driven by one particular part of the distribution.



                    7. Possible Explanations for Birth Order Effects

       We next turn our attention to possible explanations for the strong birth order

effects we observe. Genetic and biological differences may explain much of the outcome

differences between siblings, but it is unlikely that they can explain the birth order effects

we estimate. While maternal age is related to birth weight and the likelihood of birth

defects, our inclusion of cohort controls for mothers and children rule out this channel.21

Typically research has found that the incidence of low birthweight decreases with parity,

so we would expect later borns to be better endowed in this dimension than earlier born

children (see, for example, Phung et al., 2003). In general, there are no genes for being a

firstborn or a laterborn so it is unlikely that the birth order effects we find have genetic or

biological causes. Below, we consider other possible explanations for the observed birth

order effects.



Family Size when Young versus Completed Family Size

       One rationalization of our weak family size effects and strong birth order effects

is that family size matters most when children are very young and the birth order effects

are capturing this. For example, suppose it is the case that what matters is family size




                                                                                             20
when the individual is born. Family size at birth is exactly equal to birth order so this

“family size” effect would be picked up by the birth order dummies. The perfect

collinearity implies that this contention is untestable but we conjecture that if family size

when young matters, we should see this if we create variables for family size at age 2 and

family size at age 5. Because these are not collinear with birth order, we can estimate

their effects separately from birth order (and completed family size). The correlations

between the four variables are in the table below:

Correlation            Birth Order        Family Size       Family Size at 2        Family Size at 5
Birth Order            1.000
Family Size            0.585              1.000
Family Size at 2       0.919              0.690             1.000
Family Size at 5       0.798              0.833             0.879                   1.000


         When number of children at age 2 is included in the standard specification, along

with completed family size and birth order effects, the coefficient is –0.024 (0.005) and

the coefficient on completed family size falls to –0.008 (0.003). The birth order effects

remain large and are approximately the same size as before. When number of children at

age 5 replaces number of children at age 2, it has a perverse positive coefficient of 0.066

(0.004) and the coefficient on completed family size becomes –0.045 (0.003). This

suggests that number of children at age 5 may be too collinear with completed family size

for us to get sensible results. Again, however, the birth order effects are not affected. In

the fixed effects specification, the coefficient on children at age 2 is -0.005 (0.006) and

that on children at age 5 is 0.071 (0.005). The completed family size variable is not




21
   Recent research (Royer, 2003) finds that both younger and older mothers give birth to children that are
less healthy in many dimensions. For example, women over 35 or under 18 are more likely to have a pre-
term birth than mothers aged between 26 and 29.


                                                                                                         21
identified, and the birth order effects remain similar in size to those in Table 10. These

results are presented in Table A3.

        Overall, because of collinearity problems, we do not learn much from this

exercise about whether family size early in life is particularly important. However, the

robustness of the birth order estimates suggests that they are not merely capturing family

size effects.



Optimal Stopping Model

        Another possible explanation for the birth order effects we observe is an optimal

stopping model. According to this theory, if a particularly “good quality” child is born

first, this may induce parents to have more children who, on average, will not be of as

high a quality. Conversely, if early children are “poor quality,” parents may opt to

discontinue childbearing.22 This type of behavior may give rise to birth order effects

because it may lead to earlier children having better endowments. However, the

estimates in Tables 8 and 9 clearly cannot be fully explained by this model. For example,

an optimal stopping rule cannot explain the large magnitudes of the second child effect in

families with more than two children. However, we do see a "last child" effect in Tables

8 and 9. For example, the penalty to being a second child is significantly bigger in a 2-

child family than in a 3-child family. This also holds for larger family sizes: In the fixed

effects estimates, the third child does relatively worse in 3-child families than in 4-child

ones (the difference is -0.076 with a standard error of 0.025; analogously the difference

for fourth children is -0.110 (0.046)). For larger families, the differences become

22
   There is some evidence that early behaviors are reasonable predictors for later outcomes. (See Currie and
Stabile, 2004).


                                                                                                        22
statistically insignificant. This "last child" effect is consistent with optimal stopping

behavior; however, it is also consistent with Zajonc's (1976) hypothesis that last children

suffer from having nobody to teach.



Financial Resources

       The financial resources available for investment in children may also differ with

birth order if credit markets are imperfect. Given that age-earnings profiles are upward

sloping, younger parents may have fewer resources to invest in their children. However,

these resources will be shared among fewer individuals. Unfortunately, we do not have

information on family income during the childhood of the children under study, so we are

limited in how we can examine this issue. However, we do have information on parental

education which is correlated with parental income. We have segregated the sample by

mother’s education (Table 11, Columns 1 and 2) and find that the magnitude of the birth

order effects do not differ much across education groups; if anything, birth order effects

are stronger among individuals with more educated mothers, which runs counter to the

expected results if financial constraints are driving the results.



Urban/Rural

       Larger families may matter more or less depending on the rural/urban nature of

the family environment. A large family may be beneficial on a farm but much more

costly in an urban environment. If this were the case, we would see differential effects

when we stratify the sample based on the population density of the municipality of the

mother in 1960 (the urban group includes the 59 largest urban areas in 1960). When we




                                                                                            23
do this in Table 11, Columns 3 and 4, the results are quite similar across the different

municipality types, suggesting this cannot explain our results.



Time Constraints

         Parent time constraints may also lead to birth order effects.23 If time or financial

constraints are in fact affecting children’s outcomes, it is likely that families in which

children are spaced more widely suffer less from resource constraints (financial or time)

than other families of the same size. 24 Thus, for example, we have estimated the effect of

being a second child in two child families and segregated the sample by the space

between the two children (2 years or less, 3-5 years, 6+ years). We find that the second

child effect is actually smaller in the closely spaced families -- the coefficient is -0.19

(0.04) for the 0 - 2 group, -0.49 (0.04) for the 3-5 group, and -0.55 (0.05) for the 6+

group. This is not in keeping with our priors about the effects of time and resource

constraints. However, child spacing is clearly not exogenous and so any conclusions

derived from this exercise are only speculative in nature.

         Another way to try to test the effect of parental financial or time constraints is to

compare the effects of family size and birth order for earlier cohorts relative to later

cohorts. Later cohorts had the benefit of more effective birth control and abortion access

and, as a result, family size may have been more of a choice variable. When we stratify


23
   Earlier-born children may benefit from receiving more resources in the form of parental time than other
children because they have fewer siblings with whom to compete. Of course, later born children may
analogously benefit from getting more parental attention after the earlier-born children have moved out of
the family home. In addition, there may be differences in the quality of this time, as first children will have
younger, more energetic parents (who also will be more inexperienced) while later children will have older
parents who have more experience with childrearing.
24
   Powell and Steelman (1993) focus on the effects of sibling spacing on high school completion and post-
secondary school attendance using the High School and Beyond dataset. They find evidence that closely
spaced siblings are disadvantageous within sibship size category.


                                                                                                            24
our sample based on mother’s cohort (those born before 1935 versus those born after), we

find similar effects for both samples. (See Table 11 Columns 5 and 6.) While birth order

effects are slightly smaller in the younger sample relative to the older sample, they are

still quite large and significant.



         In summary, while we are confident that endowment effects are not responsible

for all the birth order effects, our findings are consistent with optimal stopping being a

small part of the explanation. Our tests for resource constraints suggest that these are not

driving our results; however, the tests themselves are quite weak. While there are a

number of other theories as to why one would see birth order effects hypothesized in the

literature, these theories are not testable with our data.25



                                              8. Conclusions

         Traditional models of fertility involve a tradeoff between child quantity and child

quality in order to justify the observed negative relationship between family income and

total family size. Inherent in this model is the idea that increasing family size will have a

negative effect on children’s outcomes. In this paper, we attempt to test this model by

examining the effect of family size using both exogenous variation in family size induced

by twin births as well as extensive controls for not only parent and child cohort effects

and parental education, but also birth order effects. We find evidence that there is little if


25
   One such theory involves parental preferences. Parental preferences may vary by birth order. If parents
are focused on their old age, it may be optimal to invest more in the early-born children who are more
likely to be in a position to offer support by the time the parents hope to retire. On the other hand, if parents
are focused on their career when they are younger, they may be less willing to spend time with their
children than when they are older and more established professionally. Finally, there may be diminishing
marginal utility from children. In this case, parents get less utility from spending time with later children
than they did with earlier ones.


                                                                                                              25
any family size effect once birth order is controlled for; this is true when we estimate the

relationship with controls for birth order, instrument family size with twin births, or

estimate the relationship between child education and family size separately for each

birth order.

        In contrast, we find very large and robust effects of birth order on child education.

To get a sense of the magnitude of these effects, the difference in educational attainment

between the first child and the fifth child in a five child family is roughly equal to the

difference between black and white educational attainment calculated from the 2000

census. Given that family sizes continue to decline in developing countries, these results

suggest that the children may not necessarily be better off than if their family had been

larger. Our results imply that, though average child outcomes may improve, there may be

little effect on first-born children.

        In addition, these sizeable birth order effects have potential methodological

implications: Researchers using sibling fixed effects models to study economic outcomes

may obtain biased estimates unless they take account of birth order effects in estimation.

        Our findings so far are quite provocative; if, in fact, there is no independent

tradeoff between family size and child quality, perhaps we need to revisit models of

fertility and reconsider what should be included in the “production function” of children.

What other explanations will generate the patterns we observe in the data? Clearly, our

results suggest a need for more work in this area.




                                                                                             26
References

Angrist, Joshua D. and William N. Evans, “Children and Their Parents’ Labor Supply:
       Evidence from Exogenous Variation in Family Size.” American Economic
       Review, Vol. 88, No. 3, June, 1998, 450-477.

Becker, Gary S., “An Economic Analysis of Fertility” In Becker, ed., Demographic and
       Economic Change in Developed Countries. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University
       Press 1960.

Becker, Gary S. and H. Gregg Lewis “On the Interaction Between the Quantity and
       Quality of Children” Journal of Political Economy, 1973, Vol. 81, No. 2, S279-
       S288.

Becker, Gary S. and Nigel Tomes, “Child Endowments and the Quantity and Quality of
       Children” Journal of Political Economy, 1976, Vol. 84, No. 4, S143-S162.

Behrman, Jere R. and Paul Taubman, “Birth Order, Schooling, and Earnings.” Journal of
      Labor Economics, 1986. Vol 4, No. 3.

Blake, Judith, Family Size and Achievement, 1989, University of California Press,
       Berkeley and Los Angeles.

Bronars, Stephen G. and Jeff Grogger, “The Economic Consequences of Unwed
       Motherhood: Using Twin Births as a Natural Experiment.” American Economic
       Review, Vol 84, No. 5. December, 1994. 1141-1156.

Butcher, Kristin F., and Anne Case (1994), "The Effect of Sibling Sex Composition on
      Women's Education and Earnings", Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. CIX,
      Issue 3, 531-563.

Conley, Dalton, “What is the “true” effect of sibship size and birth order on education?
      Instrumental variable estimates from exogenous variation in fertility.” Mimeo,
      2004.

Conley, Dalton, "Sibling Sex Composition: Effects on Educational Attainment" (2000),
      Social Science Research, Vol. 29, 441-457.

Currie, Janet and Mark Stabile, “Child Mental Health and Human Capital Accumulation:
        The Case of ADHD.” Working paper, July 2004.

Dahl, Gordon and Enrico Moretti, “The Demand for Sons: Evidence from Divorce,
       Fertility, and Shotgun Marriage.” Working paper, 2004.




                                                                                           27
Deschenes, Olivier, "Estimating the Effects of Family Background on the Return to
      Schooling" (March 1, 2002). Department of Economics, UCSB. Departmental
      Working Papers. Paper 10-02.

Goux, Dominique, and Eric Maurin, “The Effect of Overcrowded Housing on Children’s
      Performance at School.”, Mimeo, June 2004.

Guo, Guang and Leah K. VanWey, “Sibship Size and Intellectual Development: Is the
      Relationship Causal?” American Sociological Review, 1999, Vol 64, April.

Hanushek, Eric A., “The Trade-off between Child Quantity and Quality” Journal of
      Political Economy, 1992. Vol 100, No. 1.

Hauser, Robert M., and Hsiang-Hui Daphne Kuo (1998), "Does the Gender Composition
       of Sibships affect Women's Educational Attainment?", Journal of Human
       Resources, Vol. 33, No. 3, 644-657.

Hauser, Robert M., and William H. Sewell (1985), "Birth Order and Educational
       Attainment in Full Siblings", American Educational Research Journal, Vol. 22,
       No. 1, 1-23.

Iacovou, Maria (2001), "Family Composition and Children's Educational Outcomes",
       Working Paper.

Jacobsen, Joyce P., James Wishart Pearce III, and Joshua L. Rosenbloom, “The Effects of
       Childbearing on Married Women’s Labor Supply and Earnings: Using Twin
       Births as a Natural Experiment.” Journal of Human Resources, Summer 1999.

Kessler, Daniel, “Birth Order, Family Size, and Achievement: Family Structure and
       Wage Determination.” Journal of Labor Economics, 1991, Vol 9, No. 4. October.

Lee, Jungmin, "Children and Household Education Decisions: An Asian Instrument."
       Working Paper, 2003.

Phillips, Meredith, “Sibship Size and Academic Achievement: What We Now Know and
        What We Still Need to Know—Comment on Guo & VanWey.” American
        Sociological Review, 1999, Vol 64.

Phung H, Bauman A, Nguyen TV, Young L, Tran M, Hillman K, (2003) “Risk factors
      for low birth weight in a socio-economically disadvantaged population: Parity,
      marital status, ethnicity and cigarette smoking”, European Journal of
      Epidemiology 18 (3): 235-243.

Powell, Brian and Lala Carr Steelman, “The Educational Benefits of Being Spaced Out:
       Sibship Density and Educational Progress.” American Sociological Review, 1993,
       Vol 58, June.



                                                                                       28
Rosenzweig Mark R., and Kenneth I. Wolpin, "Testing the Quantity-Quality Fertility
      Model: The Use of Twins as a Natural Experiment”, Econometrica, Vol. 48, No.
      1, 227-240 (Jan, 1980).

Rosenzweig Mark R., and Kenneth I. Wolpin, "Natural "Natural Experiments" in
      Economics”, Journal of Economic Literature (2000).

Royer, Heather, "What All Women (and Some Men) Want to Know: Does Maternal Age
       Affect Infant Health?" Working Paper 2003.

Zajonc R. B., “Family Configuration and Intelligence” Science, Vol. 192, 227-236, 1976.




                                                                                     29
                                  Table 1
                        Summary Statistics-Full Sample
                                   Mean                   Standard Deviation
Age in 2000                          38                           8.5
Female                              .48                           .50
Education                          12.2                          2.4
Mother’s Education                  9.5                           2.4
Father’s Education                 10.4                           3.0
Mother’s Age in 2000                 65                          10.5
Father’s Age in 2000                 67                          10.0
Number of Children                 2.96                          1.3
Twins in Family                    .015                           .12
N=1,427,107


                                   Table 2
                  Number of Children in the Family (by Family)
                              Frequency                   Percentage
1                                     116,000                   18
2                                     264,626                   41
3                                     171,941                 26.6
4                                      63,809                  9.9
5                                       20312                  3.1
6                                        6674                  1.0
7                                        2251                   .4
8                                         822                   .1
9                                         350                  .05
10+                                       250                  .04




                                                                               30
                             Table 3
        Average Education by Number of Children in Family
                          Education        Mother’s             Father’s
                                          Education            Education
1                            12.0             9.2                10.1
2                            12.4            10.0                10.8
3                            12.3             9.9                10.7
4                             12              9.4                10.2
5                            11.7             8.9                 9.6
6                            11.4             8.5                 9.2
7                            11.2             8.4                 8.9
8                            11.2             8.2                 8.8
9                            11.0             8.1                 8.7
10+                          11.0             8.0                 8.8

                               Table 3a
      Educational Distribution by Number of Children in Family
             (Fraction in each Category, by Family Size)
            <10 Years 10-11 Years        12 Years    13-15 Years   16+ Years
1              .12            .31           .25          .18          .13
2              .08            .26           .31          .21          .14
3              .09            .28           .30          .19          .14
4              .11            .32           .29          .17          .12
5              .15            .35           .27          .14          .10
6              .18            .37           .25          .12          .08
7              .21            .37           .24          .11          .08
8              .21            .37           .24          .11          .07
9              .22            .37           .25          .10          .06
10+            .22            .37           .26          .10          .05




                                                                           31
                                                 Table 4a
                              Effect of Family Size on Children’s Education
Dependent Variable:
Child’s Education                No Demographic Controls                     With Demographic Controls

Number of Children            -.18*                          -.23*           -.09*                         -.11*
                              (.002)                         (.003)         (.002)                         (.002)
Only Child                                                   -.53*                                         -.21*
                                                              (.01)                                        (.009)
2 Child Family                                 .27*                                         .096*
                                              (.01)                                         (.008)
3 Child Family                                 .13*                                         .001*
                                              (.01)                                         (.008)
4 Child Family                                -.17*                                         -.15*
                                              (.01)                                         (.009)
5 Child Family                                -.48*                                         -.28*
                                              (.01)                                         (.012)
6 Child Family                                -.73*                                         -.39*
                                              (.02)                                         (.018)
7 Child Family                                -.88*                                         -.47*
                                              (.03)                                         (.029)
8 Child Family                                -.95*                                         -.50*
                                              (.05)                                         (.045)
9 Child Family                               -1.04*                                         -.52*
                                              (.07)                                         (.065)
10 Child Family                               -1.2*                                         -.61*
                                              (.08)                                         (.075)

N                           1,427,107 1,427,107 1,427,107 1,427,107 1,427,107 1,427,107
R-Squared                     .0465     .0498     .0492     .1949     .1954     .1953
     * indicates statistical significance at the 5% level. Standard errors (in parentheses) allow for correlation of
     errors within family. All regressions include indicators for age, mother’s age, and sex. Demographic
     controls include indicators for mother’s education, father’s education, and father’s age.




                                                                                                                  32
                                           Table 4b
                        Effect of Family Size on Children’s Education
                      Including Demographic Controls and Birth Order

Number of Children                                -.012*                                          -.05*
                                                  (.002)                                          (.003)
Only Child                                                                                        -.32*
                                                                                                  (.009)
2 Child Family                                                             .26*
                                                                          (.008)
3 Child Family                                                             .27*
                                                                          (.009)
4 Child Family                                                             .19*
                                                                          (.010)
5 Child Family                                                             .11*
                                                                          (.013)
6 Child Family                                                              .03
                                                                          (.019)
7 Child Family                                                             -.02
                                                                          (.031)
8 Child Family                                                             -.04
                                                                          (.046)
9 Child Family                                                             -.04
                                                                          (.067)
10 Child Family                                                            -.09
                                                                          (.079)
Second Child                                       -.29*                  -.34*                   -.34*
                                                  (.004)                  (.004)                  (.004)
Third Child                                        -.49*                  -.54*                   -.52*
                                                  (.007)                  (.007)                  (.007)
Fourth Child                                       -.63*                  -.62*                   -.63*
                                                  (.010)                  (.010)                  (.010)
Fifth Child                                        -.72*                  -.65*                   -.68*
                                                  (.015)                  (.015)                  (.015)
Sixth Child                                        -.78*                  -.66*                   -.71*
                                                  (.023)                  (.023)                  (.023)
Seventh Child                                      -.85*                  -.71*                   -.75*
                                                  (.037)                  (.037)                  (.037)
Eighth Child                                       -.75*                  -.61*                   -.62*
                                                  (.059)                  (.057)                  (.059)
Ninth Child                                        -.94*                  -.80*                   -.77*
                                                  (.081)                  (.082)                  (.081)
Tenth Child                                       -1.13*                  -.98*                   -.89*
                                                  (.116)                  (.111)                  (.114)
N                                               1,427,107               1,427,107               1,427,107
R-Squared                                          .1989                  .1999                   .1998
* indicates statistical significance at the 5% level. Standard errors (in parentheses) allow for correlation of
errors within family. All regressions include indicators for age, mother’s age, and sex. Demographic
controls include indicators for mother’s education, father’s education, and father’s age.




                                                                                                             33
                                       Table 5
                   Effect of Family Size on Children’s Education
                              Estimated by Birth Order
Dependent Variable: Child Education                 (1)                                          (2)

First Child (N=641,956)
Number of Children in Family                                       -.001                       -.067*
                                                                   (.003)                      (.003)
Only Child                                                                                      -.35*
                                                                                               (.010)
Second Child (N=458,284)
Number of Children in Family                                      -.028*
                                                                  (.003)
Third Child (N=211,346)
Number of Children in Family                                      -.042*
                                                                  (.005)
Fourth Child (N=76,524)
Number of Children in Family                                      -.028*
                                                                  (.009)
Fifth Child (N=25,361)
Number of Children in Family                                       -.015
                                                                   (.014)
Sixth Child (N=8,600)
Number of Children in Family                                        .035
                                                                   (.022)
Seventh Child (N=3,029)
Number of Children in Family                                        .025
                                                                   (.034)
Eighth Child (N=1,190)
Number of Children in Family                                        .033
                                                                   (.051)
Ninth Child (N=476)
Number of Children in Family                                        .001
                                                                   (.070)
* indicates statistical significance at the 5% level. Standard errors (in parentheses) allow for correlation of
errors within family. Regressions are run separately by birth order; each coefficient represents the effect of
family size on the outcomes of children of that particular birth order. All regressions include indicators for
age, mother’s age, and sex. Demographic controls include indicators for mother’s education, father’s
education, and father’s age.
                                        Table 6
                    Effect of Family Size on Education of Children
                    Using Presence of Twin Birth As an Instrument
                 Looking at Children Born Before Potential Twin Birth
                                        OLS (Twins   First Stage   Second Stage     N
                                         Sample)
Instrument: Twin at Second Birth                       .675*                      525,956
(Sample: First child in families with                  (.013)
2 or more births)
Number of Children in Family              -.060*                       .038
                                          (.003)                      (.047)
Instrument: Twin at Third Birth                        .752*                      502,525
(Sample: First and second children                     (.012)
in families with 3 or more births)
Number of Children in Family              -.076*                       -.018
                                          (.004)                      (.044)
Second Child                              -.314*                      -.324*
                                          (.006)                      (.010)
Instrument: Twin at Fourth Birth                       .810*                      261,459
(Sample: First, second and third                       (.016)
children in families with 4 or more
births)
Number of Children in Family              -.059*                       -.018
                                          (.006)                      (.060)
Second Child                              -.306*                      -.313*
                                          (.010)                      (.013)
Third Child                               -.533*                      -.546*
                                          (.013)                      (.023)
Instrument: Twin at Fifth Birth                        .699*                      111,888
(Sample: First through fourth                          (.026)
children in families with 5 or more
births)
Number of Children in Family              -.039*                       -.142
                                          (.009)                      (.111)
Second Child                              -.269*                      -.258*
                                          (.017)                      (.023)
Third Child                               -.485*                      -.457*
                                          (.021)                      (.038)
Fourth Child                              -.640*                      -.593*
                                          (.026)                      (.057)




                                                                                        35
Instrument: Twin at Sixth                                      .905*                                46,605
Birth                                                          (.046)
(Sample: First through fifth
children in families with 6 or
more births)
Number of Children in Family                 -.017                                 .007
                                            (.013)                                (.143)
Second Child                                -.263*                                -.271*
                                            (.030)                                (.034)
Third Child                                 -.492*                                -.498*
                                            (.034)                                (.050)
Fourth Child                                -.641*                                -.652*
                                            (.041)                                (.071)
Fifth Child                                 -.698*                                -.714*
                                            (.051)                                (.097)
* indicates statistical significance at the 5% level. Standard errors (in parentheses) allow for correlation of
errors within family. All regressions include indicators for age, mother’s age, mother’s education, father’s
education, father’s age, and sex.




                                                                                                             36
                                           Table 7
                 Average Educational Attainment and Distribution of Education
                                       by Birth Order
Birth Order   Avg. Educational    <10       10-11         12      13-15      16+         N
                Attainment       Years      Years      Years      Years     Years
1                  12.25          .10         .28        .28        .20       .15        641,956
2                  12.16          .10         .29        .30        .19       .12        458,284
3                  12.05          .10         .30        .31        .18       .11        211,346
4                  11.88          .12         .31        .32        .16       .10         76,524
5                  11.70          .13         .33        .31        .14       .08         25,361
6                  11.58          .14         .35        .31        .13       .07          8,600
7                  11.47          .16         .36        .30        .12       .07          3,029
8                  11.57          .15         .34        .31        .13       .07          1,190
9                  11.35          .13         .39        .32        .11       .04            476
10+                11.26          .16         .36        .32        .14       .01            341




                                                                                    37
                                                                              Table 8
                                                           Effect of Birth Order on Children’s Education
                                                                      Estimated by Family Size
                        All               Two            Three         Four        Five        Six       Seven                            Eight             Nine           Ten
                      Families1           Child           Child        Child       Child      Child       Child                           Child             Child         Child
                                         Family          Family       Family      Family     Family      Family                          Family            Family        Family

Second Child             -.34*           -.378*          -.318*           -.328*          -.279*          -.254*          -.255*          -.441*           -.284*         -.350*
                        (.004)           (.007)          (.007)           (.012)          (.020)          (.035)          (.063)          (.104)           (.172)         (.174)
Third Child             -.54*                            -.611*           -.558*          -.489*          -.490*          -.456*          -.627*           -.595*         -.626*
                        (.007)                           (.011)           (.015)          (.024)          (.040)          (.072)          (.134)           (.189)         (.208)
Fourth Child             -.62*                                            -.767*          -.646*          -.658*          -.614*          -.695*           -.480*         -.877*
                        (.010)                                            (.021)          (.030)          (.047)          (.081)          (.134)           (.199)         (.226)
Fifth Child             -.65*                                                             -.816*          -.701*          -.702*          -.829*           -.662*         -.936*
                        (.015)                                                            (.040)          (.059)          (.097)          (.149)           (.222)         (.245)
Sixth Child             -.66*                                                                             -.870*          -.747*          -.806*           -.638*        -1.042*
                        (.023)                                                                            (.073)          (.117)          (.171)           (.257)         (.262)
Seventh Child            -.71*                                                                                            -.870*         -1.016*           -.696*        -1.241*
                        (.037)                                                                                            (.141)          (.203)           (.271)         (.287)
Eighth Child             -.61*                                                                                                           -1.004*            -.460        -1.445*
                        (.057)                                                                                                            (.236)           (.319)         (.314)
Ninth Child              -.80*                                                                                                                             -.816*        -1.569*
                        (.082)                                                                                                                             (.373)         (.343)
Tenth Child              -.98*                                                                                                                                           -1.919*
                        (.111)                                                                                                                                            (.399)

N                   1,427,107           478,955         449,797          227,688         92,223          36,645           14,412          6,074             2,878        2,435
        * indicates statistical significance at the 5% level. Standard errors (in parentheses) allow for correlation of errors within family. Each column represents a
        separate regression. All regressions include indicators for age, mother’s age, mother’s education, father’s education, father’s age, and sex.
        1
          In this specification, indicator variables for family size are also included in the regression.
                                            Table 9: Effect of Birth Order on Children’s Education
                                                           Estimated by Family Size
                                                              Family Fixed Effects
                         All            Two        Three        Four       Five       Six     Seven                            Eight         Nine           Ten
                       Families         Child      Child        Child      Child     Child    Child                            Child         Child         Child
                                       Family     Family       Family     Family    Family   Family                           Family        Family        Family

Second Child             -.340          -.415*         -.315*         -.314*         -.265*       -.229*        -.222*        -.462*         -.280        -.366*
                        (.005)          (.011)         (.009)         (.012)         (.021)       (.034)        (.059)        (.096)        (.151)        (.170)
Third Child             -.531                          -.599*         -.523*         -.460*       -.449*        -.404*        -.672*        -.593*        -.666*
                        (.009)                         (.017)         (.018)         (.027)       (.042)        (.070)        (.111)        (.172)        (.188)
Fourth Child            -.611                                         -.705*         -.595*       -.592*        -.533*        -.772*        -.498*        -.918*
                        (.014)                                        (.028)         (.036)       (.054)        (.086)        (.135)        (.203)        (.214)
Fifth Child             -.641                                                        -.739*       -.611*        -.569*        -.931*        -.696*        -.967*
                        (.020)                                                       (.051)       (.069)        (.107)        (.164)        (.242)        (.246)
Sixth Child             -.659                                                                     -.747*        -.604*        -.923*        -.686*       -1.081*
                        (.028)                                                                    (.090)        (.132)        (.197)        (.286)        (.284)
Seventh Child            -.704                                                                                  -.664*       -1.140*        -.791*       -1.293*
                        (.042)                                                                                  (.164)        (.237)        (.339)        (.328)
Eighth Child             -.606                                                                                               -1.130*         -.612       -1.532*
                        (.062)                                                                                                (.286)        (.396)        (.368)
Ninth Child              -.807                                                                                                              -.998*       -1.647*
                        (.094)                                                                                                              (.472)        (.416)
Tenth Child              -.940                                                                                                                           -1.982*
                        (.118)                                                                                                                            (.483)

N                     1,427,107        478,955        449,797        227,688        92,223        36,645       14,412         6,074          2,878         2,435
* indicates statistical significance at the 5% level. Standard errors are in parentheses. Each column represents a separate regression. All regressions include
indicators for age and sex.




                                                                                                                                                                  39
                                                           Table 10
                                                      Specification Tests
                                            Family Size and Birth Order Effects
                                     Male/Female and Different Points of Distribution
                                      Male        Female        Prob 12 or More Prob 13 or More                            Prob 16 or
                                                                    Years of        Years of                              More Years of
                                        (1)           (2)          Education       Education                               Education
                                                                        (3)             (4)                                    (5)
                                                          Family Size
OLS                                  -.093*        -.095*           -.0186*         -.0154*                                   -.0058*
                                     (.002)        (.002)            (.0004)        (.0003)                                   (.0002)
OLS with Birth Order                 -.025*          .002           -.0038*          -.0006                                    .0009*
Controls                             (.003)        (.003)            (.0004)        (.0004)                                   (.0003)
IV – Twin at 2nd Birth                 .028          .053             .0069           .0069                                     .0042
                                     (.066)        (.068)            (.0093)        (.0093)                                   (.0072)
IV - Twin at 3rd Birth                -.029         -.001            -.0055          -.0059                                    -.0019
                                     (.061)        (.057)            (.0087)        (.0082)                                   (.0060)
IV - Twin at 4th Birth                -.074         -.048            -.0048          -.0042                                    -.0056
                                     (.078)        (.079)            (.0120)        (.0104)                                   (.0074)
                                                          Birth Order
                                            Estimated with Family Fixed Effects
Second Child                         -.289*        -.373*           -.0543*         -.0525*                                   -.0307*
                                     (.010)        (.010)            (.0012)        (.0011)                                   (.0009)
Third Child                          -.436*        -.620*           -.0884*         -.0812*                                   -.0465*
                                     (.016)        (.016)            (.0021)        (.0019)                                   (.0015)
Fourth Child                         -.485*        -.746*           -.1053*         -.0980*                                   -.0524*
                                     (.023)        (.024)            (.0031)        (.0028)                                   (.0022)
Fifth Child                          -.519*        -.789*           -.1166*         -.1064*                                   -.0559*
                                     (.032)        (.033)            (.0043)        (.0039)                                   (.0031)
Sixth Child                          -.517*        -.820*           -.1323*         -.1173*                                   -.0570*
                                     (.045)        (.045)            (.0061)        (.0056)                                   (.0043)
Seventh Child                        -.478*        -.982*           -.1493*         -.1288*                                   -.0580*
                                     (.064)        (.066)            (.0091)        (.0084)                                   (.0065)
Eighth Child                         -.364*        -.925*           -.1328*         -.1164*                                   -.0500*
                                     (.095)        (.095)            (.0136)        (.0125)                                   (.0097)
Ninth Child                          -.589*       -1.062*           -.1816*         -.1617*                                   -.0846*
                                     (.137)        (.146)            (.0207)        (.0191)                                   (.0147)
Tenth Child                          -.810*       -1.201*           -.1903*         -.1720*                                   -.1039*
                                     (.177)        (.176)            (.0259)        (.0239)                                   (.0184)
              * indicates statistical significance at the 5% level. All family size regressions include indicators for age,
              mother’s age, mother’s education, father’s education, and father’s age. The third row presents the
              coefficient on family size for the first child for the sample of families with at least two children, using twins
              at second birth as an instrument; the fourth row is the effect of family size on the first two children
              conditional on having at least three children using twins at third birth as an instrument, and the fifth row is
              the effect of family size on the first three children conditional on having at least four children using twins at
              fourth birth as an instrument. Family size regressions in columns (3)-(5) also include a control for sex. The
              IV estimates include a full set of birth order controls. The Birth Order estimates come from family fixed
              effects specifications that include age indicators plus a sex indicator in columns (3)-(5).
                                                    Table 11
                                     Family Size and Birth Order Effects
                              By Mother’s Education, Urban/Rural, and Cohort
                               Mother’s      Mother’s                          Mother                                  Mother
                              Education     Education       Urban    Rural       Born                                 Born After
                                  ≤12            >12                         Before 1935                                1935
                                                      Family Size
OLS                             -.100*         -.021*       -.094*   -.091*     -.083*                                      -.120*
                                (.002)         (.007)       (.004)   (.002)     (.003)                                      (.003)
OLS with Birth Order            -.018*          .071*        .017*   -.014*     -.016*                                      -.011*
                                (.002)         (.008)       (.005)   (.003)     (.003)                                      (.003)
IV – Twin at 2nd Birth           -.052          -.089         .039    -.037       .101                                       -.011
                                (.051)         (.122)       (.080)   (.058)     (.078)                                      (.058)
IV – Twin at 3rd Birth           -.034           .086        -.141     .032       .013                                       -.045
                                (.047)         (.121)       (.077)   (.053)     (.070)                                      (.054)
IV – Twin at 4th Birth           -.008          -.143        -.069     .001      -.060                                        .029
                                (.062)         (.206)       (.122)   (.068)     (.086)                                      (.078)
                                                   Birth Order
                                      Estimated with Family Fixed Effects
Second Child                    -.327*         -.289*       -.374*   -.322*     -.388*                                      -.305*
                                (.006)         (.019)       (.011)   (.006)     (.008)                                      (.007)
Third Child                     -.502*         -.516*       -.600*   -.508*     -.600*                                      -.475*
                                (.010)         (.036)       (.020)   (.011)     (.014)                                      (.014)
Fourth Child                    -.581*         -.611*       -.731*   -.592*     -.689*                                      -.548*
                                (.014)         (.056)       (.030)   (.016)     (.020)                                      (.021)
Fifth Child                     -.614*         -.651*       -.738*   -.643*     -.724*                                      -.578*
                                (.020)         (.088)       (.047)   (.022)     (.026)                                      (.031)
Sixth Child                     -.637*         -.663*       -.865*   -.659*     -.744*                                      -.603*
                                (.028)         (.149)       (.076)   (.030)     (.036)                                      (.049)
Seventh Child                   -.686*         -.857*       -.881*   -.723*     -.816*                                      -.587*
                                (.042)         (.264)       (.133)   (.044)     (.051)                                      (.084)
Eighth Child                    -.580*        -1.027*       -.902*   -.621*     -.709*                                      -.535*
                                (.062)         (.395)       (.209)   (.065)     (.074)                                      (.135)
Ninth Child                     -.795*         -1.116      -1.058*   -.829*     -.919*                                      -.714*
                                (.094)         (.702)       (.304)   (.099)     (.110)                                      (.226)
Tenth Child                     -.917*        -2.357*        -.479  -1.048*    -1.096*                                       -.425
                                (.118)         (.934)       (.379)   (.124)     (.136)                                      (.313)
        * indicates statistical significance at the 5% level. All family size regressions include indicators for age,
        sex, mother’s age, mother’s education, father’s education, and father’s age. The third row presents the
        coefficient on family size for the first child for the sample of families with at least two children, using twins
        at second birth as an instrument; the fourth row is the effect of family size on the first two children
        conditional on having at least three children using twins at third birth as an instrument, and the fifth row is
        the effect of family size on the first three children conditional on having at least four children using twins at
        fourth birth as an instrument. The IV estimates include a full set of birth order controls. The Birth Order
        estimates come from family fixed effects specifications that include age indicators plus a sex indicator.




                                                                                                                     41
                                    Table A1
                          Average Spacing by Birth Order
Years Between Children   2 Child    3 Child      4 Child   5 Child   6 Child
                         Family      Family      Family    Family    Family

First and Second Child    4.0         3.0         2.5        2.3       2.1

Second and Third Child                4.4         3.3        2.7       2.4

Third and Fourth Child                            4.3        3.2       2.6

Fourth and Fifth Child                                       4.0       3.0

Fifth and Sixth Child                                                  3.6




                                                                             42
                                          Table A2: Effects of Birth Order on Children’s Education
                            Estimated by Family Size Including Controls for Child Spacing and Family Fixed Effects
                             All         Two Child         Three        Four Child       Five           Six         Seven           Eight         Nine           Ten
                           Families       Family            Child        Family          Child         Child         Child          Child         Child         Child
                                                           Family                       Family        Family        Family        Family        Family        Family
Second Child                 -.366*         -.415*         -.326*         -.321*        -.294*        -.190*        -.208*         -.417*         -.264         -.250
                             (.006)         (.011)         (.011)         (.014)        (.023)        (.038)        (.064)         (.104)        (.162)        (.182)
Third Child                  -.556*                        -.593*         -.532*        -.495*        -.384*        -.393*         -.614*        -.579*        -.484*
                             (.010)                        (.017)         (.020)        (.030)        (.049)        (.080)         (.131)        (.199)        (.220)
Fourth Child                 -.626*                                       -.706*        -.614*        -.528*        -.525*         -.702*         -.455        -.708*
                             (.014)                                       (.029)        (.038)        (.059)        (.097)         (.157)        (.237)        (.259)
Fifth Child                  -.642*                                                     -.724*        -.572*        -.568*         -.871*        -.644*        -.738*
                             (.020)                                                     (.051)        (.071)        (.113)         (.181)        (.273)        (.298)
Sixth Child                  -.651*                                                                   -.750*        -.607*         -.864*        -.648*        -.856*
                             (.028)                                                                   (.091)        (.134)         (.207)        (.306)        (.332)
Seventh Child                -.690*                                                                                 -.687*        -1.094*        -.777*       -1.063*
                             (.042)                                                                                 (.165)         (.240)        (.352)        (.372)
Eighth Child                 -.582*                                                                                               -1.103*         -.624       -1.304*
                             (.062)                                                                                                (.287)        (.401)        (.405)
Ninth Child                  -.778*                                                                                                             -1.033*       -1.445*
                             (.094)                                                                                                              (.474)        (.441)
Tenth Child                  -.901*                                                                                                                           -1.838*
                             (.118)                                                                                                                            (.498)
# of children within 1      0.033*                        0.035*          -0.003         0.030         -0.001       -0.013        -0.002          0.007        -0.099
year                        (0.008)                       (0.015)        (0.015)        (0.018)       (0.026)      (0.038)        (0.058)       (0.084)       (0.082)
# of children 2-3           0.054*                        0.027*           0.009        0.035*        -0.052*       -0.008        -0.022          0.034        -0.075
years                       (0.005)                       (0.012)        (0.011)        (0.014)       (0.020)      (0.029)        (0.044)       (0.063)       (0.059)
# of children 4-5           0.032*                         0.005           0.015         0.025        -0.037*       -0.007        -0.021         -0.085        -0.035
years                       (0.005)                       (0.011)        (0.010)        (0.013)       (0.018)      (0.028)        (0.041)       (0.058)       (0.057)
N                          1,427,107       478,955        449,797        227,688        92,223        36,645       14,412          6,074          2,878         2,435
    * indicates statistical significance at the 5% level. Standard errors are in parentheses. Each column represents a separate regression. All regressions include
    indicators for age and sex.
                                                      Table A3
                                   Effect of Family Size on Children’s Education
                                        Including Controls for Birth Order
Dependent Variable:
Child Education                             (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)              (5)              (6)

Number of Children                        -.008*          -.044*           -.043*
                                          (.003)          (.003)           (.003)
Number of Children at Age 2               -.024*                           -.069*           -.005                             -.025*
                                          (.005)                           (.005)          (.006)                             (.006)
Number of Children at Age 5                               .066*             .091*                           .071*              .076*
                                                          (.004)           (.005)                           (.005)            (.006)
Second Child                              -.276*          -.319*           -.278*          -.337*           -.342*            -.331*
                                          (.005)          (.004)           (.005)          (.006)           (.005)            (.006)
Third Child                               -.457*          -.553*           -.469*          -.525*           -.541*            -.519*
                                          (.010)          (.007)           (.010)          (.011)           (.009)            (.011)
Fourth Child                              -.575*          -.725*           -.600*          -.603*           -.639*            -.604*
                                          (.015)          (.011)           (.015)          (.016)           (.014)            (.016)
Fifth Child                               -.642*          -.848*           -.680*          -.628*           -.691*            -.641*
                                          (.021)          (.017)           (.021)          (.023)           (.020)            (.023)
Sixth Child                               -.686*          -.947*           -.736*          -.643*           -.737*            -.673*
                                          (.030)          (.025)           (.030)          (.032)           (.029)            (.032)
Seventh Child                             -.739*         -1.056*           -.803*          -.686*           -.820*            -.740*
                                          (.043)          (.039)           (.043)          (.046)           (.042)            (.046)
Eighth Child                              -.618*          -.992*           -.695*          -.582*           -.756*            -.661*
                                          (.065)          (.061)           (.065)          (.067)           (.063)            (.067)
Ninth Child                               -.790*         -1.217*           -.878*          -.779*           -.995*            -.883*
                                          (.087)          (.083)           (.087)          (.099)           (.095)            (.099)
Tenth Child                               -.938*         -1.474*          -1.054*          -.904*          -1.207*           -1.065*
                                          (.122)          (.119)           (.122)          (.124)           (.120)            (.124)
Family Fixed Effects?
                                            No              No               No              Yes             Yes              Yes

N=                                     1,427,107        1,427,107       1,427,107        1,427,107       1,427,107          1,427,107
          * indicates statistical significance at the 5% level. Standard errors (in parentheses) allow for correlation of
          errors within family. All regressions include indicators for age, mother’s age, and sex. Demographic
          controls, including indicators for mother’s education, father’s education, and father’s age, are included in
          all regressions.
Twins Appendix: Validity of Twins Instrument

       In order for our IV estimates to be consistent, it must be that the instrument is

uncorrelated with the error term in equation (3). One concern is that the occurrence of a

twin birth may not be random and may be related to unobservable family background

characteristics. By definition, this is untestable but we can examine whether the

probability of twins is related to observed characteristics such as mother's and father's

education. To do this, we estimated linear probability models of the probability of a twin

birth at each parity using a full set of years of education indicators for mothers and

fathers. F tests indicate that the hypothesis that the coefficients on mother's education are

jointly zero and that the coefficients on father's education are jointly zero cannot be

rejected at the 5% significance level (the p value for mother’s education is 0.45 in the

regression for twin at second birth, 0.31 for twin at third birth, and 0.62 for twin at fourth

birth; the analogous p values for father’s education are 0.21, 0.63, and 0.51 respectively).

Furthermore, when these variables are entered linearly as years of education, the

coefficients are tiny and statistically insignificant. Given the enormous sample sizes,

these results strongly suggest that twinning probabilities are not related to parents'

education.

       Although we include controls for year-of-birth of both mother and child (and

hence implicitly, age of mother at birth controls), these relate to the age of the child under

study and not to the age of the child from the potential twin birth. It is well-established

that twin probabilities increase with maternal age at birth (Jacobsen, Pearce, and

Rosenbloom, 1999; Bronars and Grogger, 1994), and a concern is that, because of the

maternal age effect, twins are more likely to occur at a particular birth if the mother waits




                                                                                              45
longer between that birth and the previous birth. If spacing has an independent effect on

outcomes, this could bias results. We examine this issue by adding a measure of the gap

between the child’s birth and the potential twin birth into the linear probability model of

the probability of a twin birth at each parity. As predicted by the maternal age effect, the

coefficient on the gap is positive and statistically significant. For example, when

considering the second birth, the coefficient implies that a gap of one extra year increases

the probability of a twin by 0.0003.26 Similar size estimates are found for the probabilities

of having twins at higher parities. These point estimates are very small and we have

verified that adding a control for the gap preceding the potential twin birth in the 2SLS

estimation has no appreciable effect on the family size estimates. Thus, both the parental

education and spacing checks suggest that twinning is a fairly random event.



Spacing and the Twins Instrument:

         Another concern is that the birth of twins changes not only the family size but

also results in the closer spacing of children. As a result, twin births may effect the

educational attainment of earlier children through mechanisms other than increasing

family size. For example, in the case in which we use twins at second birth to study the

outcomes of the first child, it may be that the first child is worse off if the second birth is

a twin birth because he gets less attention if his siblings are more closely spaced. We

have carried out some analysis to examine the extent to which this is a problem.




26
  This appears to be purely a maternal age effect -- we have verified that the positive relationship between
the gap and probability of a twin birth goes away if controls are added for mother's age at birth at the time
of the potential twin birth.



                                                                                                           46
         The logic of our approach to test this is that, if spacing between children matters

and more space is better for the existing child, then twins could be considered the

extreme case with zero space. Though we cannot test for an effect of twins directly, we

can determine whether spacing between children has an effect. If we find that shorter

spaces are worse for the existing child, we can get an idea of how the extreme case

(twins) might be affecting the existing child. Thus, we regress education of the first child

on the age difference between the two following children, conditional on there being X

children in the family.27 We estimate this regression for X equal to 3, 4, 5, and 6.

Likewise, we regress education of the first 2 children on the age difference between the

3rd and 4th child, also by family size (4, 5, and 6). We include the same set of control

variables as earlier. The results are presented in Appendix Table 1. Note that, since

spacing is endogenous and these are cross-sectional regressions, caution is required in

interpreting these results.

         We find that the coefficient on the distance between the two following siblings is

generally positive and statistically significant. This implies that children do better if the

two children immediately after them are spaced further apart. If, in the limit, this result

can be extrapolated to the case of twins, in which the space is zero, it implies that the

effect of a subsequent case of twins is both to increase family size and to adversely affect

prior children through spacing. Thus, the 2SLS estimates of the effects of family size are

probably biased towards finding negative effects of family size itself. Given that we find

very small effects of family size using the twins instrument, this further strengthens the

case that there is not a large negative effect of family size.


27
  We exclude families with twins from this analysis so that it is more likely that, for any given family size,
spacing between two particular children is not systematically related to parental preferences for children.


                                                                                                           47
                               Twins Appendix Table 1
            The Effects of Child Spacing on Previous Children’s Outcomes
                                                 Family Size
                             3 Child       4 Child        5 Child     6 Child
                             Family         Family        Family      Family
    Child 1                  0.008*          0.005        -0.008      -0.021
                             (0.002)       (0.005)        (0.011)     (0.022)
    Child 1 and 2                           0.019*        0.021*      -0.002
                                           (0.003)        (0.007)     (0.015)
    Child 1, 2, 3                                         0.021*      0.031*
                                                          (0.004)     (0.011)
    Child 1, 2, 3, 4                                                  0.018*
                                                                      (0.007)

* indicates statistical significance at the 5% level. Standard errors (in parentheses) allow for correlation of
errors within family. Each cell represents a separate regression. All regressions include indicators for age,
mother’s age, mother’s education, father’s education, father’s age, and sex.
The reported coefficients are those on the distance in years between the two children immediately after the
children listed in column 1. For example, in row 1, the relevant variable is the distance between the second
and third child; in row 2 the relevant variable is the distance between the third and fourth child.




                                                                                                            48
