                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              EMPIRE, PUBLIC GOODS, AND THE ROOSEVELT COROLLARY

                                         Kris James Mitchener
                                         Marc D. Weidenmier

                                         Working Paper 10729
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10729


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2004




We thank Hugh Rockoff, Noel Maurer, two anonymous referees and seminar participants at UC Berkeley,
the NBER-DAE conference, and the EHA Annual Meetings for comments and suggestions. We also thank
Lea Halloway for valuable research assistance, Trish Kelly for sharing data, and the Lowe Institute, Leavey
Foundation, Dean Witter Foundation, and the Finocchio Fund for financial support. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2004 by Kris James Mitchener and Marc D. Weidenmier. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Empire, Public Goods, and the Rooosevelt Corollary
Kris James Mitchener and Marc D. Weidenmier
NBER Working Paper No. 10729
August 2004
JEL No. G15, F34, N16, N21

                                           ABSTRACT

The Roosevelt Corollary to the Monroe Doctrine marked a turning point in American foreign policy.

In 1904, President Roosevelt announced that, not only were European powers not welcome in the

Americas, but that the U.S. had the right to intervene in the affairs of Central American and

Caribbean countries that were unstable and did not pay their debts. We use this change in U.S. policy

to test Kindleberger’s hypothesis that a hegemon can provide public goods such as increased

financial stability and peace. Using a newly assembled database of weekly sovereign debt prices, we

find that the average sovereign debt price for countries under the U.S. “sphere of influence” rose by

74% in the year following the announcement of the policy. With the dramatic rise in bond prices,

the threat of European intervention to support bondholder claims in the Western Hemisphere waned,

and the U.S. was able to exert its role as regional hegemon. We find some evidence that the

Corollary spurred export growth and better fiscal management by reducing conflict in the region, but

it appears that debt settlements were driven primarily by gunboat diplomacy and the threat of lost

sovereignty.

Kris James Mitchener                                  Marc D. Weidenmier
Department of Economics                               Department of Economics
Santa Clara University                                Santa Clara University
Santa Clara, CA 95053-0385                            Santa Clara, CA 95053-0385
and NBER                                              and NBER
kmitchener@scu.edu                                    mweidenmier@mckenna.edu
Empire, Public Goods, and the Roosevelt Corollary

“If a nation shows that it knows how to act with reasonable efficiency and decency in
social and political matters, it keeps order and pays its obligations, it need fear no
interference from the United States. Chronic wrongdoing, or an impotence which results
in a general loosening of the ties of civilized society, may in America, as elsewhere,
ultimately require intervention by some civilized nation, and in the Western Hemisphere
the adherence of the United States to the Monroe Doctrine may force the United States,
however reluctantly, in flagrant cases of such wrongdoing or impotence, to the exercise
of an international police power.” (Theodore Roosevelt, December 6, 1904)

I. Introduction


        Imperialism has long been associated with economic expansion. Political or
military power can be used to acquire natural resources and raw materials, create
overseas markets for exports, and expand the investment opportunities for home-country
investors. Marx, for example, saw imperialism as a means for sustaining capitalist
economies. Imperialism can also transform the economies of supplicants. Reduced
sovereignty can lead to political instability and undermine economic growth, but it can
also create opportunities for the acquisition of new institutions and technology, direct
foreign investment, and expanded trade opportunities. Imperialism can potentially lead to
the creation of global public goods, such as peace and stability.1
        The demise of the Soviet Union, which has left the U.S. as the last world
superpower, and the return of globalization at the end of the twentieth century, which
some commentators link to the expansion of cultural and economic power of developed
countries such as the United States, have sparked new interest in understanding the
linkages between the use of power and economic outcomes. For example, Ferguson has
argued that British imperialism in the nineteenth century fostered economic growth in its
overseas dependents by facilitating the transfer of a set of institutions that made long-
term growth possible.2 On the other hand, looking at the evidence on the cost of capital in
Latin America, Taylor argues that this region did not benefit from (British) empire during
the classical gold standard period.3 Others examining this period, notably Bordo and

1
  Kindleberger, “Dominance;” Lal, “Globalization.”
2
  Ferguson, Empire.
3
  Taylor, “Foreign Capital.”


                                                     2
Rockoff,4 have stressed that the gold standard rather than empire lowered the cost of
capital.
           Locating episodes where the effects of empire can be empirically tested, free of
thorny estimation issues such as endogeneity, has proved vexing for economists. Rather
than attempting to measure and identify the channels through which empire influences
economic outcomes, economists have largely confined their empirical tests to examining
theoretical interpretations of imperialism.5
           This paper sheds light on the economic effects of empire by examining the
expansion of U.S. imperial power in Latin America that resulted from the announcement
of Theodore Roosevelt’s 1904 Corollary to the Monroe Doctrine and the subsequent
policies used to make it credible. We make two main contributions to the literature. First,
we provide a quantitative assessment of the Roosevelt Corollary by focusing on how the
response to its announcement in the sovereign debt market shaped foreign policy and
helped cement U.S. commercial and political objectives. Although a new American
foreign policy towards its southern neighbors had been evolving in the preceding
decades, diplomatic historians and political scientists have argued that the announcement
of the Corollary signaled an important shift in political and economic relations between
the United States and Latin America as well as between the U.S. and Europe in the
Western Hemisphere.6 Despite its recognized importance in these fields, previous studies
of the Roosevelt Corollary have not examined the response by financial markets that can
be used to draw some insights into the effects of the policy, especially in the absence of
macroeconomic data for many Central and Caribbean countries during this period.7

4
  Bordo and Rockoff, “Gold Standard.”
5
  Zevin, “Interpretation.”
6
  Historians and political scientists regard Roosevelt as the first internationalist President of the United
States and argue that the Corollary marks a significant shift towards a more expansionist U.S. policy in
Latin America. For examples, see Rippy, “British Bondholders;” Healy, Drive; and Becker and Wells,
Economics. Field (“American Imperialism”) reviews the literature by historians. For the gradual change in
U.S. policy towards Latin America that led to the pronouncement of the Corollary, see Gardner, LaFeber,
and McCormick, Creation.
7
  Zevin (“Interpretation”) provides an overview of U.S. imperialism dating from the country’s founding to
later episodes in order to test the Marxist interpretation of imperialism; however, his focus is not the
Roosevelt Corollary. Examining the Leninist critique of imperialism, Lebergott (“Returns”) examines what
impact U.S. foreign investment from 1890 to 1929 had on Latin American factor returns, and concludes
that it had little effect on labor incomes or landholders’ capital gains in the recipient countries. LaFeber
(New Empire) argues that America’s imperial policy grew out of domestic economic distress of the 1890s
(a point disputed by Zevin (“Interpretation”) and Becker and Wells (Economics)). Rosenberg (Financial


                                                     3
Second, we use the Roosevelt Corollary and the experience of the U.S. in Central
America and the Caribbean as a laboratory for testing whether empires or hegemons
produce global public goods.8
         In this paper, we focus on the connection between the announcement of the
Roosevelt Corollary, the reaction to this policy in British financial markets, and the
subsequent expansion of U.S. hegemony in Latin America. We assess how the Corollary
permitted the U.S. to extend its “sphere of influence” in the Caribbean, Central America,
and smaller countries of South America. Our empirical section uses newly-gathered,
weekly data on Latin American sovereign bond prices to analyze the effects of the
Roosevelt Corollary on financial markets. Because we examine how U.S. diplomatic
news affected bond prices for Latin American sovereigns on the London Stock exchange,
we are able to assess the impact of exogenous political news on market prices. We show
that, on average, Central and South American sovereign debt issues listed on the London
Stock Exchange rose by 74% after one year, and by 91% nearly two years after the initial
pronouncement of the Roosevelt Corollary.9 Our econometric evidence suggests that the
most plausible explanation for the enormous rally that occurred in Latin American
sovereign bonds was the announcement of the Corollary and actions by the American
government that established the credibility of the policy.
         The Roosevelt Corollary provides the answer as to why bond markets reacted to
the news in such a pronounced manner. Bondholders believed that increased intervention
and policing by the U.S. in Central America would provide greater peace and financial
stability in the region. The new foreign policy towards Central America and the
Caribbean was made credible in the eyes of bondholders with a dedicated commitment of
resources and action by the U.S. government: the U.S. sent gunboats to Santo Domingo


Missionaries) examines the extension of Roosevelt’s policies during the Taft administration, so-called
“Dollar Diplomacy.”
8
  For accessible surveys on hegemonic stability theory, see Haggard and Simmons (“Theories”) and
Keohane (After Hegemony).
9
  Our results stand in contrast to Cutler, Poterba, and Summers (“What Moves Stock Prices”) and others
who have argued that important news events (including political and military developments) explain a
relatively small portion of financial market movements. In a study on government bond prices and events
surrounding World War II, Frey and Kucher (“History”) find mixed evidence that political events are
reflected in bond prices. Willard, Guinnane, and Rosen (“Turning Points”) and Weidenmier (“Turning
Points”) also find little evidence that political events led to large price changes in Northern and Southern
currency prices during the American Civil War.


                                                      4
in 1905 and took over customs collection to pay foreign creditors after it had defaulted on
its external debt. Sovereign debt prices were bid up in the two years after the
announcement under the belief that the shift in U.S. foreign policy and intervention in
Santo Domingo had increased the prospects of debt settlement for the chronic defaulters
in the Caribbean and in Central and South America.
       Rising bond prices reduced the incentive for European powers to intervene on
behalf of their creditors in the Western hemisphere (as they had done with gunboats in
Venezuela in 1902). As the specter of military conflict with Europe fell, the costs to the
U.S. of extending its hegemony over the region declined. But after winning the initial
approval of bondholders through intervention in Santo Domingo, the Roosevelt
administration did not use the repeated application of force to ensure debt settlement in
the region. The high political and economic costs of this type of direct intervention made
it less attractive than serving as the region’s “policeman” and a promoter of peace and
regional stability; the latter became the chief goal of Roosevelt’s foreign policy towards
Latin America. Not only was the promotion of regional security a lower cost alternative,
it was compatible with broader U.S. political goals: it further reduced the threat of foreign
intervention (by raising the prospects for prosperity in debtor countries) and advanced
U.S. commercial interests (including the construction of the Panama Canal).
       Lasting peace could promote prosperity, better export performance, and more
stable streams of government revenue, leading to improved prospects for the repayment
of foreign loans. The Roosevelt administration’s success in brokering a lasting peace
among five Central American states by 1907 (and providing a public good) improved the
probability of repayment. Exports and government revenues of the Central American
countries grew after the shift in U.S. foreign policy, and most of the countries saw either
exports or government revenues rising at a faster pace than their debt service costs –
suggesting an improved ability to pay. Most significantly, after periods of long default,
many of the republics reached debt workouts under newly negotiated terms subsequent to
the announcement of the Corollary. The historical evidence we present suggests that
recalcitrant debtors in Central America and around the Caribbean Sea were willing to
enter into negotiations with creditors to resume payment on their external debt because of




                                             5
the threat of gunboat diplomacy and lost sovereignty (U.S. seizure of foreign customs
houses) – a threat that was made credible by earlier U.S. intervention in Santo Domingo.
           In the next section, we describe how the provisions of the Roosevelt Corollary
affected the perceptions of foreign bondholders, and how the policy shift towards Central
America and the Caribbean that culminated in the actions of 1904-05 led to an increase in
U.S. regional hegemony. Section 3 provides empirical evidence that the announcement of
the Corollary had a substantial effect on Latin American bond prices and tests this
interpretation of the bond rally against alternative hypotheses. Section 4 argues that the
U.S. government made the new policy credible in the eyes of European bondholders
through ‘Big Stick’ diplomacy, which included taking over customs collection in Santo
Domingo in 1905, sending its navy on a tour to showcase its power in the region, and
engaging in high-level diplomatic missions throughout its sphere of influence. Section 5
examines whether the power that the U.S. gained as a result of the Corollary was used to
provide global public goods as hypothesized by Kindleberger.


II. The Roosevelt Corollary and European Bondholders


           Although the Victorian era is generally associated with the military and economic
dominance of the British Empire, the last two decades prior to World War I saw the
emergence of a new power in international relations, the United States. Its focus began to
shift from settling the continent to outward expansion and engagement in world politics.
As has been noted elsewhere, the emergence of the United States at the turn of the
century as a player in international politics did not signal its dominance, but rather its
arrival.10 After securing victory in the brief Spanish-American War in 1898 and
modernizing its navy (quadrupling spending between 1898 and 1909)11, the U.S. emerged
from its isolationist past and began to exert itself on the world’s stage. With the
annexation of Puerto Rico, Cuba, the Philippines, and Guam, and control of the Isthmus
of Panama, foreign policy during the first decade of the 1900s became associated with



10
     Kindleberger, World.
11
     Sylla, “Experimental Federalism.”


                                               6
imperialistic motives, as canonized in Theodore Roosevelt’s famous quip: “Speak softly
and carry a big stick.”
           Despite U.S. ambitions in Latin America and a gradual shift in its policy towards
it, U.S. dominance was far from certain at the turn of the century. European powers were
extending their empires at this time, and saw Latin America as an open frontier for
expanding finance and trade.12 Britain had used its naval power to seize the port of
Corinto in 1895 in order to secure an indemnity from Nicaragua for property damage and
it had also intervened to support British Guiana in a boundary dispute with Venezuela in
1895-96, which contemporaries in the U.S. viewed as a guise for extending the British
Empire.13 The French were the first to try to build a canal across the Panama Isthmus in
1880s. Although they failed after nearly 20 years, their attempt sharpened U.S. attention
on the region and reinvigorated U.S. efforts to establish more naval bases and refueling
depots around the Caribbean Sea and locate a feasible route for shipping cargo more
quickly.
           But the greatest threat to U.S. regional hegemony was linked to global finance.
The nineteenth century witnessed tremendous growth in sovereign debt issue, much of
which funded Latin American countries despite the region’s high incidence of default. As
long as European creditors were concerned with the ability of Central and South
American governments to honor their debts, the specter of European military intervention
to enforce creditor claims was present. To varying degrees, European powers had exerted
direct control over Egypt, Turkey, Serbia, and Greece after they defaulted in the 19th
century,14 and there was concern among U.S. policymakers that a similar pattern would
be established in Latin America if the U.S. did not block it.
           European military intervention in Latin America in 1902, in conjunction with
Venezuela’s debt default, marks a logical departure point for understanding the Roosevelt
Corollary and how sovereign debt default shaped the policy. Venezuela had experienced
a revolution in 1898, which lasted more than two years, during which time substantial
foreign property was destroyed and the government ceased payments on its debt.
Although property damage was the pretext for British government involvement in the

12
     Feis, Europe.
13
     Healy, Drive, p. 6.



                                               7
blockade, British creditors had strongly pressed their claims for a debt workout with the
Venezuelan government, and after they failed, had sought redress with their own
government.15 President Castro of Venezuela refused to reply to foreign claimants. In
response Britain, Germany, and Italy blockaded the ports of La Guiara and Puerto
Cabello and seized customhouses in December 1902. Germany then unilaterally
bombarded the fort at San Carlos. Castro acquiesced in February 1903, and in that same
month, signed protocols agreeing to arbitration and a gradual liquidation of Venezuelan
debt. Under the eventual decision reached by the Hague Tribunal in 1904, the European
countries that blockaded Venezuela were given right to a preferential payment of 30% of
claims since they had footed the bill and provided the force that resulted in benefits to all
creditors; claims of countries that did not participate in the military occupation, including
the U.S., were subordinated.
         Even though he was a strong supporter of using the International Court of
Arbitration at Hague, Roosevelt saw the Court’s 1904 decision regarding Venezuela as
setting a dangerous precedent – the use of European gunboats to enforce creditor claims
in Latin America.16 With U.S. interests expanding around the Caribbean Sea after its
territorial acquisitions in the 1890s, Roosevelt was concerned that such a decision would
provide justification for further European military action or permanent occupation in
Central or South America and ultimately conflict with American commercial and
strategic goals. As Roosevelt wrote to Secretary of State Root in 1904, “If we are willing
to let Germany or England act as the policeman of the Caribbean, then we can afford not



14
   Platt, Finance.
15
   Borchard, State Insolvency, p. 270. Although it felt an obligation to protect the property and safety of its
citizens, the British government was, for the most part, reluctant to intervene on behalf of its creditors in
independent nations that had defaulted on their obligations. They not only recognized the moral hazard if
they readily lent their support (as Herbert Spencer said, “the ultimate result of shielding men from the
effects of folly is to fill the world with fools”), but they were generally averse to pursuing interventions that
might undermine the confidence in new sovereign nations, and ultimately undercut British commercial
interests (Lipson, Standing Guard). Such a position had been maintained by the Foreign Office at least
since the defaults of the early 1820s. Exceptions to this policy, however, were numerous, including Greece,
Turkey, and Egypt (Platt, Finance), and as Lipson (Standing Guard) points out, were often made for
strategic interests. As we discuss, the case of Venezuela in the Western Hemisphere is another notable
exception.
16
   Latin American countries were equally disturbed by this ruling and, in response, lobbied for the adoption
of the Drago doctrine, which, under international law, would have prohibited the use of armed force to
settle debts.


                                                       8
to interfere when gross wrongdoing occurs. But if we intend to say ‘hands off’ to the
powers of Europe, then sooner or later we must keep order ourselves.”17
         Signaling a shift in its relations with its southern neighbors and the culmination of
earlier steps towards a new policy, the Roosevelt administration outlined a more activist
interventionist policy in 1904, which came to be known as the Roosevelt Corollary to the
Monroe Doctrine.18 The United States would police the nations of Central America,
northern South America, and the Caribbean (providing peace and stability), and protect
the interests of European investors by using its regional power to ensure that sovereign
debts of these Latin American nations would be honored. By proposing a larger role for
the U.S. in the region, Theodore Roosevelt aimed simultaneously to assert U.S.
dominance in the region (which included the construction of the Panama Canal) and to
check any military expansion of Europeans.19 The corollary to the Monroe Doctrine was
first articulated by the Roosevelt administration in a speech delivered by Secretary Root
on May 20, 1904. (Although as we point out later, U.S. military intervention in Santo
Domingo in February foreshadowed this change in policy) The U.S. began contemplating
such a policy during the 1890s under President Grover Cleveland.20 But no explicit policy
statement with respect to U.S. policing of bondholders’ interests was made until the
Roosevelt administration’s decree in 1904, and Cleveland’s administration was largely
anti-imperialistic (Field, 1978). As Root explained, the U.S. would henceforth play the
role of enforcing creditors’ claims in Central America, the Caribbean, and the northern
reaches of South America:


“If a nation shows that it knows how to act with decency in industrial and political
matters, if it keeps order and pays its obligations, then it need fear no interference from
the United States. Brutal wrong-doing, or an impotence which results in a general
loosening of the ties of civilized society, may finally require intervention by some


17
   As quoted in Gilderhus, Second Century, p.29.
18
   Field, “American Imperialism,” argues that U.S. policy through 1898 had largely been a defensive
response to Europe.
19
   Prior to this, Roosevelt took a different attitude towards European intervention in the region. In 1901, he
wrote, “If any South American state misbehaves towards any European state, let the European country
spank it.” (quoted in Schoultz, Beneath the United States, p.180).
20
   In reference to South America, Richard Olney, Secretary of State under Grover Cleveland, stated
“Today, the United States is practically sovereign on this continent, and its fiat is law upon the subjects to
which it interposes” (Zevin, “Interpretation,” p.329).


                                                      9
civilized nation, and in the Western hemisphere the United States cannot ignore the
duty.”21

Theodore Roosevelt elaborated upon his interpretation of the Monroe Doctrine in two
subsequent speeches – to Congress on December 6, 1904 (as quoted in italics above) and
on August 11, 1905, when he reiterated the “duty” and “responsibility” of the United
States to ensure that countries washed by the Caribbean sea acted with “decency” and
paid “their obligations”22


III. The Effects of the Roosevelt Corollary


           A positive response in bond markets facilitated the success of the Corollary and
U.S. regional hegemony. If the U.S. could convince European nations that their creditors’
interests would be taken care of, then the likelihood of military intervention or occupation
by Europeans in the Western Hemisphere would be reduced. Moreover, if market
participants believed the threat of U.S. intervention and potential occupation in countries
that shirked on payment was credible, perhaps through a substantial commitment of
resources, then they would respond by bidding up sovereign debt prices in the London
market on countries under the U.S. sphere of influence. This, in turn, would reduce the
pressure for European nations to offer assistance to bondholders. We now turn to the data
in order to test the effects of the U.S. pronouncement on bond prices and to compare its
importance relative to other factors. In subsequent sections, we examine how the policy
announcement was made credible and consider how the reaction in bond markets affected
U.S. provision of global public goods.


A. Movements in Central and South American Sovereign Debt Prices


           We collected weekly bond price data in the Economist for Colombia, Costa Rica,
Guatemala, Nicaragua, and Venezuela for the period 1900-1913 – a sample of countries
that were covered by the Roosevelt Corollary to the Monroe Doctrine and whose bonds

21
     As quoted in Rippy, “British Bondholders,” p. 195.
22
     New York Times, August 12, 1905, pp.1 and 3.


                                                     10
actively traded in London.23 We also collected monthly bond price data for Honduras
from the Investor’s Monthly Manual. Par value for all bonds in our sample was 100
pounds sterling. Written accounts summarizing bond market activity from the Economist
and Investor’s Monthly Manual indicate that these bonds were actively traded during our
sample period.24 Although one might argue that Mexico and the rest of South America
should be included, our reading of U.S. foreign policy and the Annual Reports of the
Council of Foreign Bondholders suggest that the Roosevelt Administration was primarily
concerned with the smaller and less stable countries in the Caribbean, Central America,
and northern part of South America. Roosevelt alluded to this point in a 1906 address to
Congress:


“There are certain republics to the south of us which have already reached such a point of
stability, order, and prosperity that they themselves, though as yet hardly consciously, are
among the guarantors of the Monroe Doctrine. These republics we now meet not only on
a basis of entire equality, but in a spirit of frank and respectful friendship, which we hope
is mutual.”25

        Instead, Roosevelt viewed Argentina, Brazil, and especially Mexico as junior
partners that would help enforce the Corollary. The American President, for example,
pressured the Diaz government on several occasions to annex Central America (except
for Panama) to stabilize the region and worked with it to broker a peace accord among
warring Central American republics in 1906 and 1907. At one point, Roosevelt even


23
   We would like to have included debt prices for Cuba, El Salvador, and Panama. Panama does not issue
bonds that trade on the London Stock Exchange prior to the announcement of the Corollary. Cuba, which
was already under the U.S. sphere of influence after the Spanish American War, issues a new bond in 1904,
which trades above par throughout our sample period. El Salvador’s only outstanding foreign debt during
our sample period was an issue of 1,000,000 pounds in 1908 by private London banks (Munro, Five
Republics, p.290).
24
   For example, the December issues of the Investor’s Monthly Manual frequently refers to these countries’
bonds as constituting a “busy” or “lively section of the Foreign market” during our sample period, and the
Economist regularly commented on the active price movements of the “rubbish issues” of Central and
South America (since they were often in default) that occurred over the preceding week.
25
   As quoted in Schoultz (Beneath the United States, p.190). Later, in his memoirs, Roosevelt singled out
“Brazil, the Argentine, and Chile” as countries in South America that had “progress, of such political
stability and power and economic prosperity…it is safe to say that there is no further need for the United
States to concern itself about asserting the Monroe Doctrine so far as these powers are concerned” (quoted
in Healy, Drive, p.144). We also include Mexico in this group since this statement by Roosevelt was
written after the Porfiriato; this had been a period when Mexico worked alongside the U.S. in establishing
peace in the region.


                                                   11
hinted that the U.S. might expand into Mexico if its government did not bring order and
peace to Central America.26
           All bonds in our sample are in default at the beginning of the sample period,
except for Nicaragua and Costa Rica (the latter of which defaulted in 1901). Figure 1
shows weekly bond prices for the 1.5 percent 1897 Colombian debt issue that traded on
the London stock exchange for the period 1900-1913. Prices for the 2.7 million pound
sterling obligation traded between 10 and 20 pounds in the first few years after the turn of
the century. The Colombian security increased nearly one-third in value during the first
half of 1903 following the end of a Thousand Days’ War that had resulted in the deaths
of approximately 100,000 Colombians. The United States dispatched the battleship
Wisconsin to the region to help restore order and to assist in working out a truce among
the warring factions. Debt prices fell again in response to American support of an
uprising that led to the establishment of an independent Panama and ultimately to the
completion of the Panama Canal in 1914. Colombian bond prices decreased to about 15
pounds sterling before rising more than 125 percent following Roosevelt’s declaration
that the United States would intervene in the affairs of Latin American countries that did
not honor their foreign debt obligations. Prices stabilized after a successful debt workout
with bondholders in 1905.
           Figure 1 also shows sovereign debt prices for Costa Rica. The 3 percent A-Series
1885 bond (with an initial issue of 525,000 pounds) traded for about 30 pounds sterling
during 1901, before falling to almost 16 pounds in response to domestic default. The
sovereign debt issue then increased from 17 pounds sterling to nearly 60 pounds in the
year following Secretary of State Root’s speech outlining the Roosevelt Corollary. The
prices remain higher than pre-announcement levels and stabilize with the debt settlement
that is reached in 1911.
           Sovereign debt prices for the 1.6 million pound sterling issue of Guatemala’s 4
percent bond appear in Figure 1. The bond displays a pattern similar to the Colombian
bonds. Debt prices fluctuated between 10 and 25 pounds sterling during the first 3 years
of the 1900s, reflecting repeated attempts at resolving their defaulted debt. Sovereign
debt prices then increased from 15 pounds to more than 40 pounds sterling between May

26
     Schell, Integral Outsiders.


                                              12
1904 and February 1906, again in response to the Roosevelt Corollary. In 1906,
hostilities break out between Guatemala, Honduras, and El Salvador, causing bond prices
to fall. Following the signing of a peace accord, bond prices recover.
          Monthly bond prices for the Honduran 10 percent bond of 1870 are presented in
Figure 2. Honduras defaulted on this issue of 2.5 million pounds sterling in 1873. Not
surprisingly, the bonds traded for about 6 pounds sterling at the turn of century. The
announcement of the Roosevelt Corollary increased expectations regarding repayment
that led to a more than doubling of bond prices between March 1904 and the end of 1905.
Debt prices then fell following the start of a war with Guatemala and El Salvador, but
rebounded with the signing of a treaty. Bond prices fluctuated around 10 to 11 pounds
sterling for much of the period leading up to World War I.
          Figure 3 shows sovereign debt prices for 4 percent Nicaraguan bonds, with an
initial issue of 5 million pounds sterling. The price increased from 50 pounds sterling in
1900 to 60 pounds in early 1902. It then stabilized until late 1904 when the debt issue
rose from 58 pounds in late 1904 to 80 pounds in the summer of 1905. Debt prices fell in
1907 following the outbreak of war with Honduras and El Salvador, and then recovered
with the cessation of hostilities and the signing of treaties among five nations in
Washington, D.C., later in that same year.
          Figure 3 also shows debt prices for the 3-percent Consolidated Debt of Venezuela
(with an initial issue of 2.75 million pounds sterling) for the period 1900-1913. Bond
prices rose briefly in 1901, following the arrival of three U.S. battleships that some
bondholders mistakenly believed would put an end to a stand off over property claims to
a pitch lake in Venezuela by U.S. companies.27 Debt prices remain flat until the foreign
blockade of Venezuela commences in December 1902, when they increase in response to
positive expectations of debt repayment. Bond prices then begin a dramatic increase in
the summer of 1904, from 28 pounds in May of that year to more than 50 pounds in early
1906 – an increase of nearly 90 percent. After Venezuela reaches an agreement with the
Corporation of Foreign Bondholders in 1905 on its defaulted debt, prices for the 3
percent issue generally moved higher in the years leading up to World War I.



27
     McBeth, Gunboats.


                                             13
        The individual country plots reveal that both the Roosevelt Corollary and country-
specific events moved sovereign debt prices during the first decade of the twentieth
century. To measure the average movement of sovereign debt prices for countries under
the U.S. sphere of influence, we construct a Central American/Caribbean Bond Price
Index (CAC). The unweighted price index is computed by averaging the sovereign bond
prices of Colombia, Costa Rica, Guatemala, Nicaragua, and Venezuela.28 We then
compare fluctuations in the CAC to two bond price indices designed to capture bond
market movements in the London and world markets. The Core Bond Price Index
(CORE) is an unweighted average of the prices of four “senior” debt obligations issued in
London, Paris, Berlin, and Amsterdam – the most important European financial markets.
The core index includes long-term debt prices for the 2.75 percent British consol, 3
percent French Rente, 3 percent German Imperial bonds, and 2.5 percent Dutch bonds.
With the exception of the German Imperial bonds, all issues are perpetuities. In addition,
we also construct an emerging market index (PERIPHERAL) to provide a measure of
bond returns in peripheral countries. We compute the average price of 12 long-term
emerging market bonds (Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Cape Town, China, Egypt, Greece,
Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Spain, Sweden) with a minimum maturity of 10 years to
measure sovereign debt returns in the extended market. All data are collected from the
Economist. Figure 4 plots CAC against the CORE and PERIPHERAL Price Indices.
CAC increased approximately 91 percent in the period 1904-1906 while the CORE Index
is flat and the PERIPHERAL Index rose only 2 percent. This suggests that the effect we
observe in the countries around the Caribbean Sea is not taking place in the markets of
Europe or in other developing countries, but is region specific.
        Some qualitative evidence that price movements were not related to other events
can be drawn from the fact that five of the six countries in our sample were in default.
Defaulted debt has no value unless there is at least the possibility of a debt settlement.
Holders of defaulted debt thus have an incentive to push borrowers toward settlement (at
terms that are as close to those in the original debt contract as possible). Other bond
market participants would only be willing to acquire debt in default if they believed that

28
  We do not include Honduras in the CAC Index because that would entail interpolating 3 out of every 4
observations to convert the monthly bond price series into a weekly one. Nevertheless, as suggested by the



                                                   14
prospects of debt settlement improved, and that they could realize capital gains on
upward price movements. Even though bondholders of Central American and northern
South American debt were unhappy with the state of affairs in these countries,29 the
announcement of the Corollary, ceteris paribus, would have renewed interest among
bond market participants in acquiring the debt of these countries, in anticipation of
realized capital gains. The importance of the Roosevelt Corollary was that it raised the
hopes of settlement of long outstanding debt obligations leading investors to purchase the
bonds of Central American countries. Bond prices in Central America and northern South
America experienced substantial increases after the announcement of the shift in U.S.
foreign policy and before any debt settlements were effected (in the cases of Venezuela
and Colombia).30 Indeed, the Corporation of Foreign Bondholders also viewed the large
increase in CAC bond prices as resulting from the announcement of the new U.S. policy:
“the increase in values is largely due to the idea that the recent utterances of President
Roosevelt with regard to the Monroe Doctrine.”31 The financial press also attributed the
rally in Central American and Caribbean bond prices to the new interventionist approach
of the U.S. government. The Investor’s Monthly Manual commented at the end of 1905
that Roosevelt’s new foreign policy towards Central America and its involvement in the
construction of the Panama Canal project “having brought the United States government
into relations with some of the Republics has raised hopes of settlements of long-
outstanding obligations, which in turn have given rise to intermittent spasms of excited
speculation in the bonds of the States concerned.”32 And the New York Times, on May 5,
1905, commented, “London stockbrokers are driving a roaring trade in South Americans,
which have become a subject of lively, speculative interest on the theory that President



graphical analysis, including Honduras as part of the CAC Index would not change our results.
29
   As was written about Guatemala in 1904 by the Council of Foreign Bondholders: “Another year has gone
by, and Guatemala still remains in the same discreditable position as regards the payment of its debt. A
reference to the history of the Debt prefixed to this Report will show that, all things considered, this
Republic has, perhaps, outstripped any of the defaulting States of Spanish America in cynical disregard of
its obligations to foreign creditors. In the three successive years the Government of Guatemala has
repudiated three separate Agreements for the settlement of the Debt negotiated by its duly accredited
representatives” (CFB, Annual Report, 1904-5, p.231).
30
   Bond prices may have increased in expectation of a greater ability to pay via improved revenues from
export growth or willingness to pay in response to gunboat diplomacy. We further discuss this in section 5.
31
   CFB, Annual Report, 1904-5, p.11.
32
   Investor’s Monthly Manual, December 1905, p.673.


                                                    15
Roosevelt has practically guaranteed all South American obligations. They bear the
endorsement of the ‘big stick,’ so to speak.”33


B. Econometric Tests of the Roosevelt Corollary


        Although the time series plots and the historical record from newspaper accounts
suggest that bond prices moved in response to the announcement of the Roosevelt
Corollary, we have not controlled for general movements in the bond market as well as
other factors that could have driven debt prices in the region during this period. We now
turn to a statistical analysis to address these problems and provide further quantitative
evidence that bond prices moved in response to the Roosevelt Corollary. We employ a
series of event studies. Our objective is to use econometric evidence to establish: (1) that
that sovereign bond prices for countries under the U.S. sphere of influence behaved
anomalously from the sovereign debt market as a whole; (2) that the abnormal returns are
not related to some general effect operating throughout Latin America; and (3) that the
announcement effect is not due to other plausible events taking place during the same
time window. Ideally, our treatment group would consist of a set of countries that
defaulted, but were under the U.S. sphere of influence. Our control group would then
consist of a set of countries that defaulted on their debt, were located in Central America
or the Caribbean, but were not under the U.S. sphere of influence. The sample of
countries in our CAC index satisfies the treatment group; however, history did not
produce a set of countries satisfying the conditions for a perfect control group.
Acknowledging the limits of what history produced for a control group, our identification
strategy relies on a series of tests to sort out these issues; we now consider these in order.


        1. Were Central American and Caribbean Bond Prices Abnormal?


        We first estimate a market model for each of the six Central American/Caribbean
countries and the CAC Index to control for general movements in sovereign debt prices.


33
 “Mr. Roosevelt as a Stock Boomer,” New York Times, May 5, 1905 as cited in Corporation of Foreign
Bondholders (Annual Report, 1905, p.186).


                                                 16
We compute bond returns by taking the natural logarithm of the bond price for country i
at time t divided by the bond price of country i at time t-1. For the bond indices, we take
the natural logarithm of the price relative for each country and then compute the average
bond return for the six countries. The market model can be written as:


Rti = a 0 + β i MKTRETt + ε t ,                                                         (1)


where Rti is the bond return for country i at time t, a 0 is a constant, β i is the time-

invariant beta coefficient for country i, MKTRETt is the market return at time period t,

and ε t is a Gaussian white noise error term.34 β i is a measure of the correlation of the

bond return for country i with the market index. We employ CORE and PERIPHERAL
as our measures of market returns in the leading European financial centers and emerging
markets, respectively. β i is a measure of the correlation of the bond return for country i
with the market index. As Tables 1 and 2 show, the CAC Index and sovereign debt prices
are, for the most part, correlated with market returns at the 1- or 5-percent levels of
significance.
        We then use the market model to provide further insight into the period following
the announcement of the Roosevelt Corollary. We use it to calculate cumulative
abnormal returns (CAR) for each bond series as well as for our different bond prices
indices.35 CARs are calculated by taking the partial sum of the residuals in equation (1).
A CAR analysis is useful because it provides a week-by-week assessment of bond returns
in Central America relative to the overall market. The CARs can then be used to
determine if important political and economic events coincide with excess returns in
financial markets. The results for the CAC index are plotted in Figure 5. Whether we
examine the countries under the U.S. sphere of influence individually or aggregated, as
shown in Figure 5, all of them exhibit large abnormal returns by 1905.36 To test whether

34
   Campbell, Lo, and MacKinley, Econometrics.
35
   We converted the weekly bond price indices into monthly ones by using the price on the Friday nearest
the end of the month as a proxy for the monthly closing price. We then used the monthly bond indices to
calculate abnormal returns for Honduras.
36
   Consistent with our hypothesis that gunboat diplomacy raises bond prices, we also find that Venezuela
experienced abnormal returns as a result of the European blockade in 1902. However, the effects are


                                                   17
the Roosevelt Corollary was statistically significant, we also included a dummy variable
in the market model, which was set equal to one for the period May 1904 to May 1905.
For all the countries under the U.S. sphere of influence and for the CAC Index as a whole
(CAC), the Roosevelt-Corollary dummy variable was statistically significant at the 5-
percent level, except for Honduras, which was significant at the 10-percent level (Table
3). As a robustness test, Figure 6 presents an alternative to the market model –
cumulative total returns for the Central American-Caribbean Index (CAC); this may be
useful since the bonds we are considering were in default. The cumulative returns for
countries under the U.S. sphere of influence hover around zero until the announcement of
the Corollary, after which they rise to over 60 percent in one year.37


         2. Was the Movement in Bond Prices due to a Regional Effect?


         Having shown that CAC bond price movements exhibit abnormal returns, we now
consider whether the large upward movement in Central and Caribbean bond prices may
simply have been part of a broader rally in Latin American securities. We employ
Argentine and Brazilian sovereign debt issues to control for a general Latin American
effect. As we described earlier, these two countries were unlikely targets of U.S.
intervention since they are farther removed from the focus of American foreign
diplomacy and economic interest, which was centered on the Caribbean Sea. For both
countries, we employ 4.5 percent long-term gold bonds that were issued and actively
traded on the London exchange. Table 4 reports the regression results of bond returns for
the Central and Caribbean countries and the CAC Index on a constant, a bond index of
long-term securities for Argentina and Brazil, and a dummy variable for the Roosevelt
Corollary. The Roosevelt Corollary remains statistically significant at either the 5- or 10-
percent level, and the economic effect is nearly identical to the results from the market
model. Perhaps an even stronger test would be to consider a country within the Caribbean

smaller than those associated with the Roosevelt Corollary and subsequent actions by the U.S. government
to make it credible. Individual country plots of CARs are available in a working paper version of this
article.
37
   We also tested each sovereign debt series for multiple structural breaks using the Bai-Perron structural
break methodology (Bai and Perron, “Estimating and Testing Linear Models”). For each country and our




                                                    18
Basin, but not under U.S. sovereignty. This would allow one to isolate whether there was
a general effect related to Central America, but not related to U.S. policy. Located on the
Caribbean Sea, British Guiana was a colony and unlikely to be bombarded by U.S.
gunboats enforcing debt repayment. We therefore examined bond prices for British
Guiana’s sovereign debt and found no abnormal returns for them.38


         3. Is there an Alternative Explanation?


         The statistical evidence thus far suggests that sovereign debt prices for Caribbean
and Central American countries under the U.S. umbrella of influence exhibited positive
cumulative returns beginning in 1904. Although the business press from the period and
statements by the Corporation of Foreign Bondholders suggest that the main factor
moving bond prices in this region was the pronouncement of the Corollary and the
subsequent actions of the U.S. government, we nevertheless want to consider whether
there is an alternative interpretation that might also be consistent with the behavior of the
data. Perhaps the most plausible alternative explanation to the debt enforcement
hypothesis is that Central American and Caribbean bond prices increased in response to
the United States gaining control over the Panama Canal Zone following the resolution of
a political struggle over rights to the isthmus. The construction of the Panama Canal
could have generated higher bond prices if bond market participants in England
anticipated that it would reduce shipping costs and increase regional trade in the area.
This might lead to greater trade and an improved ability for Central American countries
to pay off their outstanding debts.
         American interest in a canal that connected the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans
intensified in the late 1890s as the United States pursued an expansionist foreign policy
by incorporating the Hawaiian Islands, colonizing the Philippines, and taking de facto
control of Cuba. In 1898, President McKinley appointed a commission to investigate the
cost and feasibility of building a canal through Nicaragua or the Panamanian Isthmus.

Latin American Index, we find a statistically significant structural break in the period following the
announcement of the Roosevelt Corollary.




                                                     19
Although the commission initially recommended Nicaragua, the decision was
subsequently overturned by Congress following some political maneuvering by
supporters of the Panama route.39 The Spooner Act, passed on June 28, 1902, called for
the establishment of a canal commission to investigate problems with building a canal
across the isthmus. The legislation also granted Roosevelt the power to negotiate the
construction of a canal with Colombia and to buy out the French company that owned the
rights to the land and had begun construction. Colombia rejected a proposed treaty with
the U.S. in August 1903, prompting Roosevelt to support a revolution in Panama that led
to the creation of a new country. Roosevelt officially recognized an independent Panama
in November 1903 and negotiated a treaty that granted the U.S. a 99-year lease of the
Canal Zone and a 10-mile wide area around it. The United States took control of the
Canal Zone in February 1904 and began construction two years later.
         The proximity in timing between the US gaining control of the Canal Zone and
the announcement of the Roosevelt Corollary potentially introduces an identification
problem in explaining the behavior of bond prices. To examine whether this alternative
hypothesis has any explanatory power, we constructed two additional tests. The first one
subjects the Panama Canal hypothesis to a test of market timing. If the Panama Canal had
a large effect on bond prices, then one would expect that forward looking bond traders
would have bid-up debt prices in response to the Spooner Act and the creation of the
Isthmian Canal Commission which signaled the United States’ intentions to build a canal
across Central America in the near future. Table 5 reports the regression results of bond
returns for the Caribbean Index and each individual Central American country on a
constant, the market return, and a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 for the period
July 1902 to June 1903, the year following the passage of the legislation.40 The dummy
variables are all insignificant at conventional levels except for Colombia, where U.S.
gunboats intervened in 1902 and 1903 to help put an end to a long civil war. (The

38
   Although the behavior of British Guiana may be idiosyncratic due its concentrated commercial interests,
bond prices for its 4% bonds remained stable and did not experience abnormal returns during the 1904-
1906 period, while the CAC increased more than 90 percent.
39
   LeFeber, Panama Canal.
40
   We also considered an alternative test of market timing by specifying the dummy variable to take the
value of 1 in the year leading up to the passage of the Act. Notably, this period also includes the signing of
the Hay-Pauncefote Treaty, in which Great Britain cedes canal building in Central America to the United
States. The dummy variable is insignificant at the 5 and 10 percent levels.


                                                     20
significant dummy variable for Colombia suggests that even minor episodes of gunboat
diplomacy can raise the prospects of debt repayment, leading to a significant increase in
bond prices.)
        Although the results of this do not support the Panama Canal interpretation, an
event study of this sort may not be ideal since the passage of the legislation pre-dates the
United States physically taking control of the area. To consider this possibility, we
employ a second test with a new control to identify the trade effects of the Panama Canal.
An ideal control would be a country whose trade would benefit from the construction of
the Panama Canal, but would be insulated from either the influence of the Roosevelt
Corollary or debt settlement. We employ the returns for long-term Chilean bonds trading
on the London stock exchange to proxy for the effects of the Panama Canal.41
        Located on the west coast of South America and possessing no Atlantic port,
Chile was well positioned to benefit from the construction of a canal. Its high-value
exports of minerals and nitrate would no longer have to sail through the dangerous Straits
of Magellan to reach New York and Liverpool.42 The American business publication
Dun’s Review commented in 1906 on the potential gains in trade for the west coast of
South America from the construction of a Canal. “The completion of the Panama Canal
ought to very profoundly influence the commerce between the United States and the west
of South America.”43 Nearly a year later, Dun’s Review noted that “the most important
traffic in this whole coast is that in nitrate of soda and minerals arising in the region of
Iquique, in northern Chile, which is about half way up the length of the South American
coast. The saving in distance to New York is over 5,000 miles.”44
        Furthermore, Chile faithfully serviced its sovereign debts during the gold standard
period and was widely considered more stable and secure than most countries in Central
and South America.45 Given its record of debt repayment and distance from the United


41
   The Chilean returns will contain both a market and Panama Canal effect. Alternatively, we ran
regressions including both Chile and the CORE market return separately. The results were similar to what
we report in table 6.
42
   We also would have liked to include bond prices for Ecuador and Peru in the analysis. Unfortunately, the
Economist and Investor’s Monthly Manual did not quote debt prices for the two South American countries
during this period.
43
   Dun’s Review, November 26, 1906, p. 4.
44
   Dun’s Review, September 21, 1907, p. 9.
45
   Marichal, Century.


                                                    21
States, Chile was an unlikely target of gunboat diplomacy. Therefore, any movement in
its sovereign debt prices in 1904-5 would most likely reflect gains from expanded trade
via the proposed Canal rather than a Roosevelt Corollary effect. We therefore use Chile
to deal with the identification problem. Table 6 shows the results of regressing the bond
returns for the CAC Index and the individual bond returns for each country on a constant,
the return on 4.5 percent Chilean (sovereign) bonds trading on the London stock
exchange, and the Corollary dummy for the period 1900-13.46 Since an upward
movement in Chile’s bond prices over the period 1904-5 may reflect country-specific
factors, the overall market effect, and the effects of expanded trade via the canal, we are
“overcontrolling” for the effects of the Panama Canal. The regressions show that the
Corollary dummies remain statistically significant at the 5- or 10-percent level except for
Honduras, and the economic effects are almost identical to the estimates obtained using
the market index. The empirical evidence thus suggests that the potential opening of the
canal was not the major factor moving Central American and Caribbean bond prices
strongly upward in 1904 and 1905.47
         One possible explanation for the absence of a significant trade effect is that bond
traders heavily discounted news regarding construction of the Panama Canal. The French
Canal company had failed to build a canal across the isthmus in the late nineteenth
century and market participants were simply unconvinced that the American experience
would be any different or that the canal would be completed anytime in the foreseeable
future. Since the process of conceiving of an American-controlled canal across the
isthmus (Bidlack Treaty of 1846) to actual completion of construction took more than 60
years, it may be too much to expect that high frequency data on sovereign debt prices
could identify this slow-moving historical process. Moreover, even after the U.S.
establishes the right to construct the canal in Panama, its final date of completion was far
from certain. As reported in the financial press, canal engineers estimated, as of l905-06,

46
   We also tested to see if Chile experienced abnormal returns by regressing its bond return on a constant,
the market index, and the Corollary dummy. The indicator variable was not significant at the 5 or 10
percent level and the size of the coefficient was approximately one-eighth the magnitude of the Corollary
variable on the CAC Index.
47
   The lack of a strong Panama Canal effect in our data may simply reflect that the Roosevelt Corollary
countries would not benefit nearly as much by the opening of the Panama Canal compared to other
countries in the region since all of them already had Atlantic-facing ports (enabling them to trade easily
with Europe and North America).


                                                     22
that it would not be completed for somewhere between eight and twelve years into the
future.48 This uncertainty may have dampened any response by British investors to the
Canal. Some commentators in the financial press even questioned the potential increase
in trade from the completion of the canal, noting that the economic effects largely
depended on the toll schedules that apparently had not even been discussed by American
officials: “The probable use of the canal will be greatly influenced by the rate of tolls.
This is one of the things to which the government has apparently as yet given no
attention, but is one which must be eventually settled as the result of much careful
thought and study, for nothing will more profoundly influence the use and value of the
canal.”49
        Another potential reason why Central American securities may have risen
dramatically is that U.S. companies began to make long-range investments in the region
during this period. This alternative hypothesis would argue that Central American
countries would experience increased economic growth and development as well as a
greater capacity to service their debts (a greater ability to pay) as a result of U.S.
corporate investment, and that bond prices may somehow be reflecting this. Overall, U.S.
direct investment was expanding in Latin America. Even though U.S. direct investment
to the region was growing over this period, data from Cleona Lewis suggests such
investments in Central America were relatively unimportant prior to 1914 compared to
other countries.50 Table 7 shows that the shares of U.S. investment in Central America
paled in comparison to Mexico, Canada, and Europe.51 U.S. direct investment in Cuba
and the West Indies was generally 2 to 3 times greater than spending in Central America
for the benchmark years of 1897, 1908, and 1914. While Latin American scholars have
noted that the U.S. took a more activist role in encouraging foreign investment in the




48
   Estimates on the completion date are from Dun’s Review, February 26, 1906 and Bradstreet’s June 17,
1905.
49
   Dun’s Review, September 21, 1907, p.9.
50
   Lewis, America’s Stake. Wilkins (Emergence, p. 166) questions the relationship between U.S. political
and economic interests. “I have found that the amount of U.S. investment bears no relation to the amount of
U.S. government interest in any particular area at any time. The phrase, which was often used to justify
American government intervention, “There are U.S. interests involved,” is highly ambiguous and can mean
anything from strategic interests, to $200,000, to millions of dollars.”
51
   Lewis, America’s Stake, pp. 605-6.


                                                    23
region, much of the U.S. government’s role in promoting companies around the
Caribbean seems to have reached its peak during Taft’s era of dollar diplomacy.52
        Lewis’ data offer only a couple of snapshots of U.S. direct investment in Central
America. We therefore construct an ex ante test to examine whether increased investment
opportunities and the possibility for commercial expansion in Central America provide an
alternative source for changing bondholders perceptions of a country’s default prospects.
If commercial expansion by U.S. firms significantly improved the ability of these
countries to pay, then it seems plausible that we should also observe abnormal stock
returns for American companies that invested heavily in the region. In particular, we
should observe these returns in agricultural companies, since nearly half of U.S. FDI in
Central America went into agriculture in 1908 – a trend that continued through 1914
(Lewis 1938). We therefore offer a more concrete test of the Roosevelt period by
examining the behavior of stock returns for United Fruit – a U.S. company that was
perhaps more committed in Central America than any other at this time, with millions of
dollars in assets invested in fruit trees, plantations, and railroads.53 We collected monthly
stock price data on United Fruit from the Commercial and Financial Chronicle and plot
its stock price against the Standard and Poors 500, a broad index of common US stocks,
for the period November 1901-1913. Figure 7 suggests that United Fruit did not
outperform the market in the period surrounding the announcement of the Roosevelt
Corollary as stock prices for the firm remained constant while the overall market
increased in value. We formally test this hypothesis by regressing stock returns for
United Fruit on a constant, the market return (as measured by the S&P 500), and a
dummy variable for the period May 1904-April 1905. As shown in Table 8, the dummy
variable has the wrong sign and is not statistically significant at the 5 or 10 percent levels.
Given that United Fruit is the bell-weather American firm in the region, the absence of
abnormal returns for it and the insignificance of the coefficient on the dummy variable
suggest that long-term investments were not driving securities prices during the relevant



52
 Rosenberg, Financial Missionaries; Wilkins, Emergence.
53
 See Wilkins, Emergence. Unfortunately, annual estimates of U.S. foreign direct investment in Central
America and GDP are unavailable for our sample of countries, so we cannot construct an ex post test as
well.


                                                   24
period of time.54 Rather, as shown in Figure 7, the stock price for United Fruit increased
more than 50 percent between late 1908 and early 1909 after it became clear that Taft
would succeed Roosevelt as the next U.S. President. The rise of United Fruit’s stock
price in this period probably signaled the start of Dollar Diplomacy and increased
American investment opportunities in Central America. Lewis estimated that U.S. direct
investment in Central America increased 137 percent between 1908 and 1914.55
        Although our statistical tests are by no means perfect, they nevertheless seem to
cast serious doubt on the most plausible alternative explanations. Moreover, what is most
striking about the time series plots for the countries under consideration is that the run up
in sovereign debt prices occurs simultaneously. If broader market integration, driven by
either investment or trade were the underlying causal mechanism for this coincident
behavior, then there would have to have been a significant region-specific shock to either
trade or investment that could explain the response seen in bond markets. However, there
was no large, discrete change to investment that occurred during the 1904-5 period, and
the only plausible trade shock that may explain the run up at that time, the Panama Canal,
seems to have little power as an explanatory variable.


IV. Making the Threat Credible


        Large and positive abnormal returns persisted in Latin American debt prices even
after Root’s Speech in May 1904 and Roosevelt’s Address to Congress in December
1905 that outlined his revision of the Monroe Doctrine. We attribute the persistence of
these positive returns to actions that the U.S. took to make the policy credible in the eyes
of European bondholders and to the provision of global public goods.
         The process of convincing the European bond markets that the U.S. would
intercede in Latin America on their behalf was reinforced by subsequent pronouncements
and actions, most notably, fiscal intervention in Santo Domingo (Dominican Republic) in

54
   It seems even more unlikely that the coincidence in movement of the bond series in 1904-05 could be
explained by a slow-moving variable such as investment.
55
   Lewis, America’s Stake, pp. 605-6. We also tested United Fruit for abnormal returns in the period
surrounding the announcement and implementation of U.S. Dollar Diplomacy in 1909 and 1910. We find
some evidence that United Fruit experienced abnormal stock returns in this period at the 10 or 15 percent
level of significance.


                                                    25
1905, but also unprecedented tours taken by U.S. diplomats as well as American
gunboats. (In July 1906, Secretary Root began a several-month tour through Latin
America that extended to many other cities besides Rio, which was hosting the Pan-
American Congress; and the American navy embarked on a two-year circumnavigation
of the globe including port calls throughout Latin America beginning in 1907).56 Under
the corrupt regime of dictator Heureux, Santo Domingo (Dominican Republic) had spent
profligately and accumulated a large national debt. Heureux was assassinated in 1900,
civil war broke out, and Santo Domingo defaulted on its debts. Foreign warships were
threatening to land troops and seize available customs revenues as payment for
delinquent debts in 1904. The U.S. then sent the cruisers Newark and Columbia and the
training boat Hartford to Santo Domingo in February 1904, and bombed the ports at
Duarte and Pajarito to quell an uprising.57 The initial foray of gunboat diplomacy by the
U.S. likely explains why the run up in sovereign debt prices began slightly prior to Root’s
actual announcement – as it was an early signal that the U.S. was potentially willing to
expend resources in the region to enforce debt payment. The Republic of Santo Domingo,
facing bankruptcy, was forced to agree to terms with its international creditors in a treaty
signed in July; it then failed to honor the terms of the treaty.
         The Roosevelt administration, recognizing that European nations were likely to
intervene on behalf of their disgruntled bondholders, as they had done in Venezuela,
unilaterally took action by sending gunboats and troops to Santo Domingo to assist in the
collection of customs duties after a request by President Carlos Morales in December
1904. It quickly assumed the role of the fiscal agent of the country – the role that
Europeans had previously played when Turkey and Egypt had defaulted.58 This was
especially noteworthy since Great Britain, France, Belgium, Holland, and the U.S. had
earlier agreed to mutually intercede and jointly collect customs if Santo Domingo



56
   Bradstreet’s commented that “so long a journey by an American Secretary of State outside of his own
country is a novelty, and it is likely that it will be productive of important results in relations between the
United States and Latin American republics.” (Bradstreet’s, July 7, 1906, p.1)
57
   Bradstreet’s, February 27, 1904, p.1.
58
   According to the business press, in January 1905, European nations requested that either the United
States assist in collecting customs revenue and bring order to the “financial chaos” in Santo Domingo, or
“assent to action to that end being taken by certain European creditors of that republic.” (Bradstreet’s,
January 28, 1905, p.1).


                                                       26
defaulted.59 On February 7, 1905, President Morales signed a treaty with the Roosevelt
administration authorizing the U.S. to act as General Receiver and collector of customs.60
With the signing of the treaty bogged down in the U.S. Senate, and foreign creditors
pressuring Santo Domingo for claims, in April 1905 President Morales requests
Roosevelt’s assistance in nominating a U.S. citizen to act as receiver; he allows the U.S.
to enter into possession of the customs houses at Puerto Plata and Monte Cristy to assure
repayment to all creditors. Forty-five percent of the collected revenue was to be used to
settle Santo Domingo’s internal obligations, with the remainder placed in a trust and used
to pay off creditors according to their claim amounts.
         As a further signal of their commitment to involvement in the region, the U.S.
repeatedly sent warships to Santo Domingo to put down numerous attempts at rebellion
after the treaty was signed and to protect the customhouses under their control. To stop
smuggling so that revenues could be collected and foreign claims honored, the American
General Receiver of Customs in Santo Domingo organized a force of 120 Dominicans,
the Customs and Frontier Guard, for policing the land and customs offices.
         The degree of U.S. intervention in Santo Domingo in 1905 took British
bondholders by surprise:


        “The past year has witnessed a new and altogether unexpected development in
connection with the Debt of this country especially with regard to the rights of English
holders of Santo Domingo Bonds, which were defined and guaranteed by the
International Arbitration Award of July, 1904…Payments were duly made by the United
States Government to the Improvement Company, and arrangements were in course of
completion for a settlement with the English holders of Dominican Bonds included under
the Arbitration Award.”61

But it met with bondholder approval and was seen as evidence that the U.S. would
intervene elsewhere in the region.62 That the actions taken by the U.S. in Santo Domingo
reinforced the credibility of the shift in U.S. policy can also be seen by comparing the


59
   Fenn on the Funds (1898, 16th edition, p.471).
60
   During the week of February 11, Roosevelt tells the U.S. Congress that the negotiated treaty with Santo
Domingo is necessary in order to enforce the Monroe Doctrine and stave off European intervention in the
Americas (Bradstreet’s, February 18, 1905, p.1).
61
   Statement of Bondholders of Santo Domingo, CFB, Annual Report, 1904-5, p. 21.
62
   Rippy, “British Bondholders,” p. 198.


                                                    27
reaction in the press and by bondholders before and after the Santo Domingo
intervention. Prior to the agreement that was reached with President Morales, The Daily
Mail in London wrote:


        “The little gamble which has been going on in Central American Securities lately
naturally finds favor with Stock Exchange speculators. They have read in the recent
utterances of President Roosevelt and Mr. Root an intimation that the Monroe Doctrine is
capable of being extended into more than a cry of ‘Hands off’ to European interests.
Some good folk even see a hint that the United States is disposed to go gunning in
Central America on behalf of the British and other European investors. It is an
entertaining idea, but one that unfortunately may end in mere theory.”63

After the intervention, Europeans who held the debt of other Latin American countries in
default were emboldened by the U.S. intervention in Santo Domingo. In a letter to the
U.S. State Department on March 10th, 1905, British bondholders of Colombian debt
wrote about the need for the U.S. to intervene in Panama to secure payment of Panama’s
share of Colombian debt:
        “The President then gives as a special reason for the intervention of the United
States in the Case of Santo Domingo, that certain Foreign Governments were becoming
importunate and pressing their unsatisfied claims against the Dominican Government.
We had therefore, we submit, good reason to hope that the President would be prepared
to assist the holders of Colombian Bonds, whose claims are at least as good as those of
the Santo Domingo Bondholders, and who, we venture to think, have a right to especial
[sic] consideration in view of the prejudice which they have suffered in consequence of
the secession of Panama from Colombia.”64

Similarly, Guatemalan bondholders, who were frustrated at the repeated failure of
Guatemala to come to an agreement with the CFB, stated in 1905 that “if the United
States Government is really prepared, as it has intimated, to put pressure on the defaulting
Spanish American States to respect their obligations, it would be difficult to find a better
case to commence with than that of Guatemala.”65


63
   “Central America,” Daily Mail, January 5, 1905 as cited in Corporation of Foreign Bondholders (Annual
Report, 1905, p.173).
64
   CFB, Annual Report, 1904-5, p.97.
65
   CFB, Annual Report, 1904-5, p.238. See also the London-based publication, the Financier, 18th edition,
1905, which states that “those who are in touch with Central American affairs are convinced that the
establishment of a Protectorate over these Republics by the United States is only a question of time, and in
that event Uncle Sam would probably establish control over the Customs, as in the case of Santo
Domingo.” (Corporation of Foreign Bondholders, Annual Report, 1904-5, p.177).


                                                    28
V. Hegemony and Global Public Goods Provision


         Kindleberger and Lal have suggested that empires are particularly well suited to
the provision of global public goods, and argue that peace and financial stability are two
“goods” that hegemons or empires might be capable of providing. Wyplosz suggests
international financial stability is a global public good, or more aptly, financial instability
is a global public bad, because it is associated with outcomes that affect non-market
participants and that potentially spill across national borders.66 He argues that financial
instability produces non-pecuniary negative externalities in the form of “excessive
volatility” (that volatility which cannot be priced), and that asymmetric information in
financial markets makes policy intervention defensible. Hamburg and Holl argue that
preventing deadly conflict and providing security fosters conditions that are indivisible
and non-excludable and that offer benefits or positive externalities to inhabitants of a
region, not just among warring parties. The literature on public goods provision,
however, is less clear about the necessary conditions for their provision by a hegemon.
For example, the public goods may need to be incentive compatible with broader policy
objectives.67 We therefore examine whether hegemons provide global public goods by
first assessing whether the U.S., as a regional hegemon, was capable of furnishing them,
and then by evaluating whether it did.
         The willingness and ability of the U.S. to provide the public goods of peace and
financial stability in the region were made possible by the response of the sovereign debt
market in London as well as commitments to other strategic and commercial goals. If the
Corollary had not been seen as credible and if bond prices had not risen, then it is likely
that European powers would have wanted to maintain a stronger regional presence to

66
  Kindleberger, “Dominance;” Lal, “Globalization;” Wyplosz, “International Financial Instability.”
67
  Hegemonic stability theory holds that international regimes are defined by the rise and fall of a global
hegemon that sets the rules of the game (Haggard and Simmons, “Theories”). Applied to Central America
and the Caribbean, the United States provided two collective goods, peace and financial stability, that are
beneficial to the hegemon as well as to the countries in the region. Other nations also consume the
collective goods and try to free ride off the United States to avoid paying the costs of producing them. The
United States must remain committed to pressuring and/or persuading other countries, such as Mexico, to
support the system. Otherwise, the system will collapse. As discussed in the text, the United States
provided a limited supply of collective goods (an incentive compatible amount) because American
intervention in Santo Domingo significantly reduced the threat of European intervention. This may also




                                                    29
enforce property rights claims rather than acceding to U.S. policing for dealing with
recalcitrant debtors. However, by the end of 1905, Britain had deferred to U.S. leadership
in the region, and Roosevelt believed that he had successfully impressed upon the Kaiser
of Germany that “violation of the Monroe Doctrine by territorial aggrandizement on his
part around the Caribbean meant war, not ultimately, but immediately, and without
delay.”68
         With Europe pacified, the U.S. could pursue strategic footholds for its Navy
around the Caribbean Sea, build and control the Panama Canal with little opposition, and
expand its commercial interests in the region. However, maintaining a constant police
presence in the region in order to secure these goals was destructive and fiscally and
politically costly. A far cheaper means of advancing its interests was to promote peace
and regional stability. Free of civil strife, Central American and Caribbean countries
would be able to focus on their fiscal balance and governance structures. As J.S. Mill
suggested, a climate of improved stability and lasting peace would draw overseas
investment to the region, promote exports, and stimulate growth. Moreover, promoting
peace yielded an additional dividend to the United States: improved prospects of debt
repayment by sovereigns (which lowered U.S. “collection” costs and reduced the
likelihood of European intervention.)
         According to political scientists, peace in Central America became the chief goal
of American foreign policy after 1905, and for the remainder of Roosevelt’s presidency.69
Secretary of State Root rejected the routine use of force as a means for achieving regional
stability, and instead vigorously pursued diplomacy.70 Consistent with the Carnegie
Commission on Preventing Deadly Conflict, the Roosevelt administration pursued two
broad strategies:71 (1) operational prevention, or measures to respond to an immediate


explain why Central American and Caribbean bond prices increased dramatically after the change in
American policy, but did not rise enough to be considered investment grade securities.
68
   As quoted in Healy, Drive, p.72.
69
   Healy, Drive. Writing about U.S. foreign policy towards Central America in 1918, Dana Munro (Five
Republics, p.304) wrote, “The establishment of peaceful government in the Isthmus is a matter in which we
are deeply interested for political reasons. The Monroe Doctrine must always be a paramount principle of
our foreign policy, at least in so far as it deals with the countries of the Caribbean, because the exercise of
political influence in that region by a foreign power could not be but a constant menace to our peace and
security.”
70
   Leonard, Central America.
71
   Carnegie Commission, Preventing Deadly Conflict.


                                                      30
crisis, and (2) structural prevention, or measures to keep crises from arising and from
recurring. Operational prevention included ensuring elections with troops in Cuba in
1906 and in Panama in 1908. Structural prevention began in 1906, when the U.S., along
with the aid of Mexico, initiated an effort to secure peace in the five unstable nations of
Central America: Costa Rica, Honduras, Salvador, Nicaragua, and Guatemala. War broke
out in that year, but the U.S. continued to pursue resolution and organized the
Marblehead Conference on July 20, 1906 to mediate peace. In one day, the conveners
were able to convince the factions to cease fighting and disarm, until a new peace
conference was called in September. War continued sporadically until the U.S. (with the
help of Mexico) was able to broker a lasting peace among the 5 states at the Central
American Conference in Washington, D.C. in 1907. Eight treaties and conventions were
signed and ratified, including provisions that made arbitration of disputes in a new
Central American Court of Justice compulsory. Under U.S. stewardship, the Court
succeeded in bringing peace to the republics for the next several years.72 In light of these
efforts by the Roosevelt administration to stabilize the region, contemporaries, such as
Dana G. Munro of the Carnegie Institute of International Peace, argued that the United
States had “already achieved one of its main objects, in that revolutions and international
wars have been checked throughout the Isthmus”73
        The Roosevelt Corollary (and its implied threat of force) and subsequent
diplomacy may have managed to reduce conflict in the region, but U.S. strategy in
securing regional financial stability was subject to scrutiny by European bondholders.
Despite the success in extracting payment from Santo Domingo for foreign bondholders,
the U.S. did not follow this episode with regular intervention on behalf of bondholders
around the Caribbean. To the dismay of some European bondholders, the U.S. was
unwilling to apply the Corollary and use force on behalf of foreign bondholders to ensure
repayment of debt in “flagrant cases of wrongdoing or impotence.” The lack of
widespread intervention by the U.S to enforce debt repayment, coupled with the outbreak

72
   As historian Jurgen Buchenau (In the Shadow, p.78) has written, “Equally significant, the Washington
Conventions diminished the likelihood of future trouble, since all Central American states had signed the
treaties. Thus, the treaties promised to reduce the probability of U.S. intervention in Central America.”
73
   Munro, Five Republics, p.307. The U.S. also intervened in Sonora, Mexico, to quell a rebellion in 1906,
re-occupied Cuba between 1906 and 1909 to prevent a Civil War, and landed troops in Honduras to settle a
war with Nicaragua in 1907.


                                                   31
of war in Central America, may explain the decline of Central American bond prices in
1905-07. The frustration of British creditors holding the bonds of countries such as
Colombia, Guatemala, and Costa Rica is described in the Annual Reports of the
Corporation of Foreign Bondholders. For example, writing in the 1908 CFB report, the
Council of Foreign Bondholders wrote:


“The President has stated that it is the duty of the United States to see that the Spanish-
American Republics ‘behaved with decency in industrial matters and paid their
obligations.’ So far, however, far from putting pressure on Guatemala in order to obtain
payment of the long-established Debt due to the Bondholders, the United States
Government in 1906 lent its powerful support to a new Contract, made between the
Government of Guatemala and an American Syndicate, under which the export duty of
Coffee, pledged to Bondholders in 1895, and the 30 per cent of the Customs Duties
payable in gold, promised to them under the Agreements of 1903 and 1904, were handed
over to the Syndicate.”74

           Did the U.S. fail to provide the public good of financial stability as British
bondholders’ complaints suggest? Our interpretation is that it did not, but that the U.S.
chose a policy path that was less costly and also compatible with its broader strategic and
commercial goals. A strategy of repeated intervention would have been an inferior policy
once the sovereign debt market in Europe responded favorably to the Corollary. The U.S.
gained an important strategic advantage when market participants bid up sovereign debt
prices: the reduced threat of conflict with Europe made expansion in the region less
costly. But the lack of regular intervention elsewhere in the region does not imply that the
U.S. failed to improve financial stability in the region. U.S. involvement in Santo
Domingo sent a signal to countries under its sphere of influence that it was willing to
intervene to promote repayment; the threat of lost sovereignty was coupled with its
broader effort to secure peace and stability around the Caribbean through diplomacy,
which in turn led to improved prospects for defaulting countries to make payments or
reach new debt accords.
           Since it would be quite difficult to construct the appropriate counterfactual (what
would have occurred in the absence of the implied threat of loss of sovereignty and U.S.
efforts to promote regional stability), we present several pieces of supporting evidence

74
     CFB, Annual Report, 1908, p.13.


                                               32
that are consistent with the view that the Corollary increased the prospects for the
repayment of sovereign debt. First, even though the U.S. did not always work directly
with British bondholders to secure debt relief, and in some instances allowed its citizens
to obtain securities preferentially pledged to British bondholders (such as in Guatemala,
Honduras, and Nicaragua),75 debt settlements were nevertheless reached with Colombia
and Venezuela in 1905, Costa Rica in 1911, and Guatemala in 1913. It is quite impressive
that most of these countries in default came to terms with bondholders considering that
they had been in default for long periods prior to 1904. Costa Rica agreed to a debt
settlement with foreign creditors because the country feared that the U.S. would take
control of its customs houses.76 Shortly after coming to terms with foreign bondholders,
Costa Rica managed to float a new issue of bonds bearing 5 percent interest on the Paris
Bourse in 1911 that were redeemed in 1925. Colombia also sold new debt on the Paris
exchange in 1909 and again in 1913. In addition, Nicaragua signed the Dawson Pact in
1910 following pressure by the United States to promote debt repayment. The agreement
required Nicaragua to set aside a percentage of its customs receipts to repay outstanding
loans.77 Two years later, Nicaragua came to terms with its bondholders after a brief
default; the interest rate on Nicaragua’s external debt was reduced from six to five
percent. In exchange for the concession, Nicaragua allowed New York bankers and the
Corporation of Foreign Bondholders (CFB) to petition the United States government for
assistance if the Central American country violated the terms of the new debt workout.78
British bondholders were also given a first lien on customs revenue and an American
Collector-General was appointed to collect taxes and administer payment of the debt.79
Overall, the Roosevelt Corollary marked the beginning of a new foreign policy that
explicitly encouraged countries in the Caribbean and Central America to repay or settle
their foreign debts.80 The historical evidence suggests that direct intervention as well as



75
   CFB, Annual Report, 1911, p.13.
76
   Munro, Five Republics, p.313; Schulzinger, U.S. Diplomacy, p.49.
77
   Weeks, “Almost Jeffersonian.”
78
   European powers were ready to intervene in Nicaragua if the United States “did not see to it that
Nicaragua fulfilled her contractual obligations.” (Young, Central American Currency, p.136.)
79
   CFB, Annual Report, 1909, p.142.
80
   We are unaware of an episode where the United States government intervened in the affairs of Central
American or Caribbean countries to ensure repayment of sovereign debts prior to the Roosevelt Corollary.


                                                   33
the threat of gunboat diplomacy increased the probability of a debt workout by Central
American and Caribbean countries in the years leading up to World War I.
        Second, as we indicated earlier, bond prices in our Central American-Caribbean
sample do not decline following the announcement. If British bondholders truly believed
the Roosevelt Corollary had no impact on the prospects of debt settlement, then bond
prices should have reflected this by falling. Bond prices, however, remained well above
their pre-announcement values at the end of Roosevelt’s term despite a war among
several of the Central American countries and some disappointment among British
bondholders hoping for wider U.S. military intervention for debt enforcement. Financial
markets attributed much of the sustained rally in bond prices to peace and stability. For
example, the Investor’s Monthly Manual wrote that the rise in bond prices was the result
of these countries “attaining a stable form of government, and in spite of temporary
outbreaks the credit of their official securities is approximating European standards” and
that the United States and Mexico “will be able to enforce peace among the quarrelsome
States of the isthmus.”81 Even the Corporation of Foreign Bondholders acknowledged
how the peace treaties signed in Washington in 1907 raised the prospects for debt
repayment for countries in default.82
         Finally, since regional peace fostered stable political regimes, this made it easier
for governments to collect revenue and for export-producing industries to generate
earnings. As the Governments Stock and Other Securities Investment Company of
London wrote in 1905, “If she [the United States] interferes with matters of finance no
doubt that will to a certain extent prevent revolutions in these countries…and there is no
doubt that the majority of revolutions that take place in the Central and Southern America
arise from matters of indifferent finance on the part of the President and the Government
generally.”83 After peace was secured with the Conference in 1907, government revenues
expanded, and in comparison to earlier periods, exports also grew rapidly (Table 9).
Figure 8 shows a strong positive relationship between export growth and the movement
of bond prices (between the announcement of the Corollary and the end of 1907), which

81
   Investor’s Monthly Manual, December 1909, p.682. A similar statement regarding improved stability in
these countries is made in the Investor’s Monthly Manual in December 1908, p.678.
82
   CFB, Annual Report, 1907, p.15.




                                                  34
is consistent with the hypothesis that the Roosevelt Corollary spurred export growth by
reducing regional conflict. The ratio of external debt to exports, a measure of a country’s
ability to pay, declined for Costa Rica and Honduras in the five years after the
announcement of the Corollary (Table 10).84 The ratio of external debt to exports,
however, increased for Colombia, Guatemala, and Nicaragua following the change in US.
foreign policy. The decline in the ratio of external debt to exports for Costa Rica and
Honduras suggests that the Roosevelt Corollary may have improved the ability of these
two countries to repay their debts.85
         An increased ability to pay may have also come from improved fiscal
management. Cessation of hostilities in Central America during the Roosevelt presidency
allowed countries in the region to reap a peace dividend, improve their revenue
collection, and increase their ability to pay off their debts.86 As the last column in table 10
shows, the ratio of external debt to government revenue for Guatemala, Honduras, and
Venezuela declined in the years following the implementation of the new U.S. foreign
policy.87 On the other hand, Costa Rica experienced an increase in its ratio of external
debt to government revenues after the announcement. The decline in the ratio for three
countries suggests that the Roosevelt Corollary may have improved the ability of some
CAC countries to repay their debts through improved fiscal management.
         A combination of improvements in fiscal management and export earnings
increased the CAC countries ability to service their debts, but reaching new debt
workouts would likely not have been possible without gunboat diplomacy and the threat
of intervention. What the Roosevelt Corollary did to effect debt settlement was to provide

83
   “Governments Stock Investment,” February 4, 1905, as cited in Corporation of Foreign Bondholders,
Annual Report, 1905, p.175).
84
   More precisely, the denominator in this ratio is the face value of defaulted debt plus interest payments.
85
   If Honduras is excluded from the sample, then the Central American countries also had a lower ratio of
external debt to exports than Argentina and Brazil – two countries with better repayment records.
86
   As the CFB stated in response to the peace agreements signed by the Central American republics: “It is
to be hoped that the Governments of the Central American Republics will ratify and loyally abide by these
Treaties, and that they will have the effect of putting an end to the constant quarrels which have hitherto
been such a serious factor in retarding the development of the countries concerned. In the case of the States
which are in default, the money hitherto spent in armaments may now well be devoted to the payment of
their debts.” (CFB, Annual Report, 1907, p.15). The peace dividend and improved prospects for debt
repayment may have also taken the form of expenditure switching, from military to non-military uses,
corresponding to a movement along the production possibilities frontier rather than an expansion. We leave
this issue as a topic for future research.




                                                     35
a mechanism for ensuring that countries were more willing to pay and increased Central
American countries ability to pay by fostering peace and stability in the region. As the
debt accords described briefly above suggest, enforcement aspects of the Roosevelt
Corollary – U.S. policing of the region and the threat of gunboat diplomacy or lost
sovereignty – made Central American and Caribbean countries think twice about staying
away from the bargaining table. U.S. intervention in Santo Domingo made the threat
credible and ensured that these countries would be more willing to pay their debts. It
bears repeating that, until these debt agreements were reached under the watchful gaze
and Big Stick of the Roosevelt administration, these countries were viewed by the CFB
as among the most recalcitrant of debtor nations.88 Between 1870 and 1913, Central
American and Caribbean countries had been in default for over 140 combined years:
Colombia for 13 years, Costa Rica for 26 years, Guatemala for 31 years, Honduras for 40
years, Nicaragua for 8 years, and Venezuela for 20 years.


VI. Conclusion

         The history of U.S. imperialism at the turn of the century provides a powerful
illustration of the effects of news on financial markets. The Roosevelt Corollary
prompted one of the largest bond market rallies in the early twentieth century. Abnormal
returns on sovereign debt issued by countries around the Caribbean Sea were substantial
in 1904 and 1905, but not in other areas of the globe or Latin America, suggesting that
the bond rally was the result of Teddy Roosevelt’s new policy of intervention. Viewing



87
   Due to missing observations, unreliability of the data reported, and the territorial loss of Panama and its
effects on reported trade statistics, we excluded Colombia from the table.
88
   That the CFB regarded improved ability to pay as insufficient for inducing debt repayment or settlement
is evidenced in the following statement with respect to Guatemala: “It has always been understood that a
fall in the price of coffee has been urged by Guatemala as the excuse for not paying her creditors, but it
would appear that this plea is hardly a valid one, as the Minister of Finance, in referring to the Decree
raising the Export Duty on coffee to $6 paper, stated that: 'This measure was, in general, well received,
since all agree that this being the most productive branch of national industry, is the one called upon, in
difficult circumstances, to contribute to the maintenance of the administrative expenses, whilst the
favourable price of the article on foreign markets admits thereof, and as long as the Treasury can count
upon other resources with which to face public exigencies.' From the above it would also appear that the
Treasury can count upon other resources to meet public exigencies besides the tax on coffee. It seems,
however, that the Government of Guatemala does not consider the payment of Foreign Bondholders a
public exigency.” (CFB, Annual Report, 1901, pp.184-5)


                                                      36
the policy as credible, market participants bid up the price of bonds in anticipation of
greater U.S. involvement in resolving debt disputes.
       The costs of securing regional hegemony declined as the threat of European
intervention in the region receded. And as prices of sovereign debt rose in London, the
need for the U.S. to intervene on behalf of creditors fell because the primary reason for
European intervention (to support creditor claims) became less of a concern. However,
the U.S. did not have to commit to a long-run policy of direct intervention. Its
commitment of resources and direct intervention in Santo Domingo sent a signal to
countries under its sphere of influence that it was willing to intervene, use “Big Stick”
diplomacy, and take away sovereignty; but its chief long-run strategy was to promote
peace and regional security. The reduced incidence of conflict in Central America and the
Caribbean encouraged exported growth and revenue collection in the region, but the
threat of gunboat diplomacy or lost sovereignty, made credible by prompt U.S.
intervention in Santo Domingo, led many Central American and Caribbean countries to
settle long outstanding defaulted debts. The new American policy was cheaper than
repeated direct intervention and improved the prospects of debt settlement by increasing
the willingness of Central American countries to pay their debts, and was incentive
compatible with U.S. commercial and military interests in the region. The response of
financial markets to the Corollary made it possible for the U.S. to provide the public
goods of empire, and their provision was a cost effective means of promoting its broader
strategic objectives.




                                           37
References

Bai, Jushan and Pierre Perron. “Estimating and Testing Linear Models with Multiple
Structural Changes.” Econometrica 66, no. 1 (1998): 47-78.

Becker, William H. and Samuel F. Wells, Jr., eds. Economics and World Power: An
Assessment of American Diplomacy Since 1789. New York: Columbia University Press,
1984.

Bordo, Michael D. and Hugh Rockoff. “The Gold Standard as a ‘Good Housekeeping
Seal of Approval.” Journal of Economic History 56, no. 2 (1996): 389-428.

Borchard, Edwin. State Insolvency and Foreign Bondholders: General Principles, Vol. 1.
New Haven: Yale University Press, 1951.

Buchenau, Jurgen. In the Shadow of a Giant: The Making of Mexico’s Central America,
1876-1930. Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama, 1999.

Bulmer-Thomas, Victor. The Economic History of Latin America Since Independence.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994.

Campbell, John Y., Andrew W. Lo, and A. Craig MacKinley. The Econometrics of
Financial Markets. Princeton: Princeton University, 1997.

Carnegie Commission on Preventing Deadly Conflict. Preventing Deadly Conflict: Final
Report. Washington, D.C.: Carnegie Foundation, 1997.

Corporation of Foreign Bondholders. Annual Report. London: CFB, various years.

Corporation of Foreign Bondholders. The Newspaper Cuttings Files of the Council of
Foreign Bondholders in the Guildhall Library. South America (General). Microform.
Reels 55-57. London: CFB, 1905.

Cutler, David, James M. Poterba, and Lawrence H. Summers. “What Moves Stock
Prices?” Journal of Portfolio Management 15, no. 3 (1989): 4-12.

Eichengreen, Barry and Peter H. Lindert, eds. The International Debt Crisis in Historical
Perspective. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1989.

Feis, Herbert. Europe: The World’s Banker 1870-1914. New York: Augustus M. Kelley,
1964.

Ferguson, Niall. Empire: The Rise and Demise of British World Order and the Lessons
for Global Power. New York: Basic Books, 2003.




                                           38
Field, James A., Jr. “American Imperialism: The Worst Chapter in Almost Any Book.”
American Historical Review 83, no. 3 (1978): 644-688.

Frey, Bruno S. and Marcel Kucher. “History as Reflected in Capital Markets: The Case
of World War II.” Journal of Economic History 60, no. 2 (2000): 468-96.

Gardner, Lloyd C., Walter F. LaFeber, and Thomas J. McCormick. Creation of the
American Empire: U.S. Diplomatic History. New York: Rand McNally, 1973.

Gilderhus, Mark T. The Second Century: U.S.-Latin American Relations Since 1889.
Wilmington, DE: Scholarly Resources, 2000.

Haggard, Stephan and Beth A. Simmons. “Theories of International Regimes.”
International Organization 41, no. 3 (1987): 491-517.

Hamburg, David A. and Jane E. Holl. “Preventing Deadly Conflict.” In Global Public
Goods, edited by Inge Kaul, Isabelle Grunberg, and Marc A. Stern, 152-89. New York:
Oxford University Press, 1999.

Healy, David. Drive to Hegemony: The United States in the Caribbean, 1898-1917.
Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1988.

Kelly, Trish. “Ability and Willingness to Pay in the Age of Pax Britannica, 1890-1914.”
Explorations in Economic History 35, no. 1 (1998): 31-58.

Keohane, Robert. After Hegemony. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1984.

Kindleberger, Charles P. The World in Depression. Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1973.

Kindleberger, Charles P. “Dominance and Leadership in the International Economy:
Exploitation, Public Goods, and Free Rides.” International Studies Quarterly 25, no. 2
(1981): 242-254.

LaFeber, Walter. The New Empire. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1963.

LaFeber, Walter. The Panama Canal. New York: Oxford University Press, 1978.

Lal, Deepak. “Globalization, Imperialism, and Regulation.” Cambridge Review of
International Affairs 14, no. 1 (2001): 107-121.

Lebergott, Stanley. “The Returns to U.S. Imperialism, 1890-1929.” Journal of Economic
History 40, no. 2 (1980): 229-52.

Leonard, Thomas M. Central America and the United States: The Search for Stability.
Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1991.



                                           39
Lewis, Cleona. America’s Stake in International Investments. Washington: The
Brookings Institution, 1938.

Lipson, Charles. Standing Guard: Protecting Foreign Capital in the Nineteenth and
Twentieth Centuries. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1985.

Lipson, Charles. “International Debt and National Security: Comparing Victorian Britain
and Postwar America.” In The International Debt Crisis in Historical Perspective, edited
by Barry Eichengreen and Peter H. Lindert, 189-226. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1989.

Marichal, Carlos. A Century of Debt Crises in Latin America. Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1989.

McBeth, Brian S. Gunboats, Corruption, and Claims: Foreign Intervention in Venezuela,
1899-1908. London: Greenwood Press, 2001.

Munro, Dana G. The Five Republics of Central America: their Political and Economic
Development and their Relations with the United States. New York: Oxford University
Press, 1918.

Platt, D.C.M. Finance, Trade, and Politics in British Foreign Policy 1815-1914. Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1968.

Rippy, J. Fred. “The British Bondholders and the Corollary to the Monroe Doctrine.”
Political Science Quarterly 49, no. 2 (1934): 195-206.

Rosenberg, Emily S. Financial Missionaries to the World: The Politics and Culture of
Dollar Diplomacy. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1999.

Schell, William. Integral Outsiders: The American Colony in Mexico City, 1876-1911.
Wilmington: Scholarly Resources, 2001.

Schoultz, Lars. Beneath the United States: A History of U.S. Policy Toward Latin
America. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1998.

Schulzinger, Robert D. U.S. Diplomacy Since 1900. New York: Oxford University Press,
1998.

Stock Exchange Year-Book. London: Thomas Skinner and Company, 1913.

Sylla, Richard. “Experimental Federalism: The Economics of American Government,
1789-1914.” In The Cambridge Economic History of the United States, Volume 2, edited
by Stanley L. Engerman and Robert E. Gallman, 483-541. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2000.




                                           40
Taylor, Alan M. “Foreign Capital in Latin America in the Nineteenth and Twentieth
Centuries.” NBER Working Paper no. 9580, 2003.

Weeks, Gregory. “Almost Jeffersonian: U.S. Recognition Policy toward Latin America.”
Presidential Studies Quarterly 31, no. 3 (2001): 490-504.

Weidenmier, Marc D. “Turning Points in the U.S. Civil War: Views from the Grayback
Market.” Southern Economic Journal 68, no. 4 (2002): 875-90.

Wilkins, Mira. The Emergence of Multinational Enterprise: American Business Abroad
from the Colonial Era to 1914. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1970.

Willard, Kristen, Timothy W. Guinnane, and Harvey Rosen. “Turning Points in the Civil
War: Views from the Greenback Market.” American Economic Review 86, no. 4 (1996):
1001-18.

Wyplosz, Charles. “International Financial Instability.” In Global Public Goods, edited
by Inge Kaul, Isabelle Grunberg, and Marc A. Stern, 152-89. New York: Oxford
University Press, 1999.

Young, John Parke. Central American Currency and Finance. Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1925.

Zevin, Robert. “An Interpretation of American Imperialism.” This JOURNAL 32, no. 1
(1972): 316-60.




                                           41
              Table 1. Market Model Results with CORE Market Index

Dep.Variable     Constant       Betat      DW           R-       Obs       Sample
                                                     squared
Central Am.-        .001      .780         1.656       .031       430    1900/1/6-
 Caribbean        (.0007)    (.209)***                                   1908/3/28
   Index
 Colombia           .002     1.210         2.119       .017       730    1900/1/6-
                   (.001)    (.344)***                                   1913/12/26
 Costa Rica         .001      .586         1.879       .003       430    1900/1/6-
                   (.002)    (.523)                                      1908/3/28
 Guatemala          .001      .337         2.020      -.0003      730    1900/1/6-
                   (.001)    (.390)                                      1913/12/26
 Honduras           .008     2.141         2.182       .054       167    1900/2-
                   (.006)    (.695)***                                   1913/12
 Nicaragua         .0006      .404         1.530       .013       686    1900/1/6-
                  (.0005)    (.137)***                                   1913/2/22
 Venezuela          .001       .981        2.166       .021       730    1900/1/6-
                 (.0009)*    (.250)***                                   1913/12/26

         Table 2. Market Model Results with PERIPHERAL Market Index

Dep.Variable    Constant       Betat       DW           R-        Obs        Sample
                                                     squared
Central Am.-       -.0008    1.277         1.674       .073       430     1900/1/6-
 Caribbean        (.0007)    (.220)***                                    1908/3/28
   Index
 Colombia           .002     1.650          2.111       .025        730 1900/1/6-
                  (.0012)    (.381)***                                      1913/12/26
 Costa Rica        .0007     1.432          1.881       .015        430 1900/1/6-
                  (.0018)    (.556)***                                      1908/3/28
 Guatemala          .001     1.652          2.083       .017        730 1900/1/6-
                   (.002)    (.524)**                                       1913/12/26
 Honduras           .004     2.571          2.200       .069        167 1900/2-
                   (.006)    (.736)***                                      1913/12
 Nicaragua         .0006       .943         1.462       .051        686 1900/1/6-
                  (.0005)    (.168)***                                      1913/2/22
 Venezuela          .001     1.365          2.200       .025        730 1900/1/6-
                   (.001)    (.352)***                                      1913/12/26
Notes: *denotes significance at the 10 percent level. **denotes significance at the 5
percent level. ***denotes significance at the 1 percent level. Standard errors are in
parenthesis and the Durbin-Watson statistic is denoted by DW.




                                            42
Table 3. The Roosevelt Corollary and Latin American Bond Prices

Dep.Variable   Constant      Betat     Roosevelt    DW         R-       Obs      Sample
                                       Corollary            squared
Central Am.-     -.003        .741        .009      1.741     .083      430    1900/1/6-
 Caribbean      (.0008)    (.204)***   (.002)***                               1908/3/28
   Index
 Colombia         .001        1.179         .012    2.142     .025      730    1900/1/6-
                 (.001)    (.343)***    (.0045)**                              1913/12/26
 Costa Rica       -.002        .502         .018    1.929     .033      430    1900/1/6-
                 (.002)      (.514)     (005)***                               1908/3/28
 Guatemala       .0006         .230         .010    2.048     .007      730    1900/1/6-
                 (.001)      (.380)      (005)**                               1913/12/26
 Honduras         .005        2.055         .038    2.224     .072      167    1900/2-
                 (.006)    (.692)***      (.021)*                              1913/12
 Nicaragua       .0001         .387         .005    1.550     .026      686    1900/1/6-
                (.0005)    (.136)***   (.0015)***                              1913/2/22
 Venezuela       .0009         .961         .006    2.166     .021      730    1900/1/6-
                (.0009)    (.249)***     (.003)**                              1913/12/26

Table 4. The Roosevelt Corollary with the Latin American Control

Dep.Variable   Constant      Betat     Roosevelt    DW         R-       Obs      Sample
                                       Corollary            squared
Central Am.-     -.0004       .211        .010      1.763     .069      430    1900/1/6-
 Caribbean      (.0008)    (.070)***   (.002)***                               1908/3/28
   Index
 Colombia         .0006         .428       .011     2.140      .022       730 1900/1/6-
                  (.001)     (.138)**   (.005)**                                1913/12/26
 Costa Rica        -.002        .037       .019     1.933      .041       430 1900/1/6-
                  (.002)     (.175)**  (.005)***                                1908/3/28
 Guatemala        .0005         .131       .010     2.055      .006       730 1900/1/6-
                  (.001)       (.151)    (.005)*                                1913/12/26
  Honduras         -.001        .595       .035     2.234      .052       167 1900/2-
                  (.006)     (.257)**    (.021)*                                1913/12
  Nicaragua      -.00009        .114       .005     1.576      .021       686 1900/1/6-
                 (.0005)     (.054)**  (.002)***                                1913/2/22
  Venezuela       .0004         .322       .006     2.192      .019       730 1900/1/6-
                 (.0009)    (.101)***    (.003)*                                1913/12/26
Note: A bond index composed of long-term Argentine and Brazilian bonds is employed
as the Latin American market control.




                                        43
              Table 5. The Spooner Act and Latin American Bond Prices
               (Spooner Dummy set equal to 1 for July 1902-June 1903)

Dep.Variable     Constant     Betat     Spooner     DW          R-      Obs       Sample
                                           Act               squared
Central Am.-        .001    .787          .002      1.658      .033     430     1900/1/6-
 Caribbean        (.0008)   (.210)***    (.002)                                 1908/3/28
   Index
 Colombia           .001    1.227          .011     2.128     .025      730     1900/1/6-
                   (.001)   (.343)***   (.004)**                                1913/12/26
 Costa Rica         .001      .590         .001     1.879     .003      430     1900/1/6-
                   (.002)   (.524)***     (.006)                                1908/3/28
 Guatemala          .002     .287          -.003    2.041     .001      730     1900/1/6-
                   (.001)   (.377)        (.005)                                1913/12/26
 Honduras           .007    2.157          .014     2.187     .057      167     1900/2-
                   (.006)   (.697)***     (.022)                                1913/12
 Nicaragua         .0006     .399          -.001    1.529     .013      686     1900/1/6-
                  (.0005)   (.138)***     (.002)                                1913/2/22
 Venezuela          .001     .970          .004     2.181     .022      730     1900/1/6-
                  (.0009)   (.250)***     (.003)                                1913/12/26


Table 6. The Roosevelt Corollary with Chile as the Panama Canal Control

Dep.Variable     Constant     Betat     Roosevelt    DW          R-      Obs        Sample
                             (Chile)    Corollary             squared
Central Am.-      -.00006      .104        .009      1.721      .045      430     1900/1/6-
 Caribbean        (.0008)     (.077)    (.002)***                                 1908/3/28
   Index
 Colombia        .0009         .288        .011     2.125     .014       730 1900/1/6-
                 (.001)     (.142)**    (.005)**                                 1913/12/26
 Costa Rica       -.001        .036        .017     1.909     .022       430 1900/1/6-
                 (.002)       (.191)   (.006)***                                 1908/3/28
 Guatemala       .0006         -.099       .010     2.034     .006       730 1900/1/6-
                 (.001)       (.155)    (.005)**                                 1913/12/26
 Honduras        .0016         .544        .036     2.211     .019       167 1900/2-
                 (.006)      (1.007)      (.023)                                 1913/12
 Nicaragua      -.00004        .319        .005     1.584     .064       686 1900/1/6-
                (.0004)    (.054)*** (.002)***                                   1913/2/22
 Venezuela       .0006         .170        .006     2.189     .009       730 1900/1/6-
                (.0009)       (.104)     (.003)*                                 1913/12/26
Note: Long-term Chilean bonds are employed as the ‘Panama Canal’ market control.




                                         44
Table 7. Estimates of U.S. Direct Foreign Investment to Various Parts of the World

Country or Region          1897           1908           1914        Percentage   Percentage
                        ($ Millions)   ($ Millions)   ($ Millions)    Change       Change
                                                                     1897-1908    1908-1914
Mexico                      200            416            587           108           41
Canada and                  160            405            618           153           53
Newfoundland
Cuba and Other              49             196            281           300          43
West Indies
Central America              21            38             90             81          137
South America                38           104            323            174          211
Europe                      131           369            573            182           55
Asia                         23            75            120            226           60
Total                       635           1638           2652           158           62
Source: Lewis (1938).

Table 8. The Roosevelt Corollary and United Fruit Stock Returns

Variable                           Coefficient Estimates
Constant                                    .001
                                           (.004)
Market                                      .146
                                           (.112)
Roosevelt Corollary                         -.007
                                           (.015)
DW                                         1.974
R-squared                                   .011

Sample Period                          1900/12-1913/12




                                           45
Table 9. Export and Government Revenue Growth in Latin America (Percent)

  Country        Annual      Annual Export     Annual Export        Annual Export
               Government      Growth Rate      Growth Rate          Growth Rate
                 Revenue         1907-12         1890-1912            1850-1912
              Growth Rate
                 1907-12
 Colombia           1.6            17.0               2.4                3.5
 Costa Rica         5.1            18.9               0.5                3.5
 Guatemala         11.3             5.1               2.4                3.6
 Honduras           9.2            12.3              -0.3                1.4
 Nicaragua         14.3             0.3               2.3                2.9
 Venezuela         28.2            12.9               1.2                2.7
  Average          11.6            11.1               1.6                3.0
Sources: Bulmer-Thomas (1994) and CFB Annual Report (various years).

Table 10. Measures of Ability to Pay for CAC Countries 1900-1909
(Ratios)

      Country/Region             1900-1904       1905-1909       1900-1904      1905-1909
                                  External        External        External       External
                                  Debt to         Debt to         Debt to        Debt to
                                  Exports         Exports          Gov.           Gov.
                                                                  Revenue        Revenue
Central America/Caribbean           40.4            36.6           18.78          16.38
       (full sample)
Central America/Caribbean            4.6             6.2             2.6           2.35
   (without Honduras)
         Colombia                    3.7            6.5             NA             NA
        Costa Rica                   5.5            3.5             3.1            3.8
        Guatemala                    6.9            12               1.4            1.0
         Honduras                   175.1          158.6            83.7           72.5
        Nicaragua                    2.0            2.6             1.2            1.8
        Venezuela                    NA             NA               4.5            2.8

Source: The external debt service to exports ratios are calculated from data provided by
Kelly (1998). Data on government revenues are from the Annual Reports of the
Corporation of Foreign Bondholders.
Notes: NA = Not Available. The denominator in these ratios is the face value of defaulted
debt plus interest payments.




                                            46
                                                                                                        Figure 1
                                                                            Colombia 1.5-3%, Costa Rica 3% 'A', and Guatemala 4%, 1900-1913


                 90



                 80
                                                                       Root's Speech
                                                                      Monroe Doctrine
                 70

                                                                                                                         U. S. Intervention in Santo Domingo
                 60
Pound Sterling




                 50



                 40



                 30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Colombia 1.5-3%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Costa Rica 3% 'A'
                 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Guatemala 4%
                                                                                                                         Roosevelt's Address to Congress

                 10
                      Jan-00

                               Jul-00

                                        Jan-01

                                                 Jul-01

                                                          Jan-02

                                                                   Jul-02

                                                                            Jan-03

                                                                                     Jul-03

                                                                                              Jan-04

                                                                                                       Jul-04

                                                                                                                Jan-05

                                                                                                                          Jul-05

                                                                                                                                   Jan-06

                                                                                                                                            Jul-06

                                                                                                                                                     Jan-07

                                                                                                                                                               Jul-07

                                                                                                                                                                        Jan-08

                                                                                                                                                                                 Jul-08

                                                                                                                                                                                          Jan-09

                                                                                                                                                                                                   Jul-09

                                                                                                                                                                                                            Jan-10

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Jul-10

                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Jan-11

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Jul-11

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Jan-12

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Jul-12

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Jan-13

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Jul-13
                                                                                                                                        Weekly Intervals




                                                                                                                                                              45
                                                                                                                      Pound Sterling




                                  0
                                      2
                                                                            4
                                                                                                                      6
                                                                                                                                8
                                                                                                                                       10
                                                                                                                                                              12
                                                                                                                                                                   14
                         Jan-00

                         Jul-00

                         Jan-01

                         Jul-01

                         Jan-02

                         Jul-02

                         Jan-03

                         Jul-03
                                                                                                                                             Root's Speech
                                                                                                                                            Monroe Doctrine




                         Jan-04

                         Jul-04

                         Jan-05

                         Jul-05

                         Jan-06

                         Jul-06




46
                         Jan-07
                                                                                                                                                                                   Figure 2




                         Jul-07




     Monthly Intervals
                         Jan-08
                                                                                                                                                                        Honduras (1870) 10%, 1900-1913




                         Jul-08
                                          Roosevelt's Address to Congress




                         Jan-09
                                                                                U. S. Intervention in Santo Domingo




                         Jul-09

                         Jan-10

                         Jul-10

                         Jan-11

                         Jul-11

                         Jan-12

                         Jul-12

                         Jan-13

                         Jul-13
                                                                                                          Figure 3
                                                                                 Nicaragua 4% and Venezuela Consolidated Debt 3%, 1900-1913

                 90

                                                                                                                    U. S. Intervention in Santo Domingo

                 80
                                        Root's Speech
                                        Monroe Doctrine
                 70



                 60
Pound Sterling




                 50



                 40



                 30
                                                                                                                Roosevelt's Address
                                                                                                                to Congress
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Venezuela Cons. Debt 3%
                 20                                                                                                                                                                                                              Nicaragua 4%


                 10
                      Jan-00

                               Jul-00

                                        Jan-01

                                                 Jul-01

                                                          Jan-02

                                                                   Jul-02

                                                                            Jan-03

                                                                                     Jul-03

                                                                                              Jan-04

                                                                                                       Jul-04

                                                                                                                Jan-05

                                                                                                                         Jul-05

                                                                                                                                  Jan-06

                                                                                                                                             Jul-06

                                                                                                                                                      Jan-07

                                                                                                                                                               Jul-07

                                                                                                                                                                        Jan-08

                                                                                                                                                                                 Jul-08

                                                                                                                                                                                          Jan-09

                                                                                                                                                                                                   Jul-09

                                                                                                                                                                                                            Jan-10

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Jul-10

                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Jan-11

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Jul-11

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Jan-12

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Jul-12

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Jan-13

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Jul-13
                                                                                                                                           Weekly Intervals




                                                                                                                                                          47
                                                                                  Figure 4
                                     Central American/Caribbean Bond Index (CAC) vs. CORE and PERIPHERAL Bond Price Indices, 1900-1908



                 110
                                                                                                                                                                        U. S. Intervention in Santo Domingo
                 100


                  90


                  80
                                                                                               Root's Speech
                                                                                               Monroe Doctrine
Pound Sterling




                  70
                                                                                                                                                               Roosevelt's Address
                                                                                                                                                               to Congress
                  60


                  50


                  40
                                                                                                                                                                                                        CAC
                  30                                                                                                                                                                                    CORE
                                                                                                                                                                                                        PERIPHERAL

                  20
                                May-00




                                                           May-01




                                                                                      May-02




                                                                                                                 May-03




                                                                                                                                             May-04




                                                                                                                                                                          May-05




                                                                                                                                                                                                     May-06




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                May-07
                                         Sep-00




                                                                    Sep-01




                                                                                               Sep-02




                                                                                                                          Sep-03




                                                                                                                                                      Sep-04




                                                                                                                                                                                   Sep-05




                                                                                                                                                                                                              Sep-06




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sep-07
                       Jan-00




                                                  Jan-01




                                                                             Jan-02




                                                                                                        Jan-03




                                                                                                                                   Jan-04




                                                                                                                                                               Jan-05




                                                                                                                                                                                            Jan-06




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Jan-07




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Jan-08
                                                                                                                          Weekly Intervals




                                                                                                                                            48
                                                                               Cumulative Abnormal Returns (%)




                                 -80
                                       -60
                                                                               -40
                                                                                                                            -20
                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                      20
                                                                                                                                           40
                                                                                                                                                                  60
                        Jan-00
                        Apr-00
                        Jul-00
                        Oct-00
                        Jan-01
                        Apr-01
                        Jul-01
                        Oct-01
                        Jan-02
                        Apr-02
                        Jul-02
                        Oct-02
                        Jan-03
                        Apr-03
                        Jul-03
                                                                                                                                                 Root's Speech
                                                                                                                                                Monroe Doctrine




                        Oct-03
                        Jan-04




49
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Figure 5




                        Apr-04
                        Jul-04




     Weekly Intervals
                        Oct-04
                        Jan-05
                        Apr-05
                        Jul-05
                        Oct-05
                        Jan-06
                        Apr-06
                        Jul-06
                                                                                                                                                                       Cumulative Abnormal Returns for Central American Bond Index, 1900-1908




                        Oct-06
                        Jan-07
                                             Roosevelt's Address to Congress




                        Apr-07
                                                                                      U. S. Intervention in Santo Domingo




                        Jul-07
                        Oct-07
                        Jan-08
                                                                                    Cumulative Total Returns (%)




                                 -20
                                       -10
                                             0
                                                                                   10
                                                                                         20
                                                                                                                                    30
                                                                                                                                         40
                                                                                                                                              50
                                                                                                                                                   60
                                                                                                                                                                          70
                                                                                                                                                                               80
                        Jan-00
                        Apr-00
                        Jul-00
                        Oct-00
                        Jan-01
                        Apr-01
                        Jul-01
                        Oct-01
                        Jan-02
                        Apr-02
                        Jul-02
                        Oct-02
                        Jan-03
                        Apr-03
                        Jul-03
                        Oct-03
                                                                                                                                                         Root's Speech
                                                                                                                                                        Monroe Doctrine




                        Jan-04




50
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Figure 6




                        Apr-04
                        Jul-04




     Weekly Intervals
                                                                                                                                                                                                  January 1900-March 1908




                        Oct-04
                        Jan-05
                        Apr-05
                        Jul-05
                        Oct-05
                                                                                                                                                                                    Cumulative Total Returns Central American Bond Index




                        Jan-06
                        Apr-06
                        Jul-06
                        Oct-06
                                                 Roosevelt's Address to Congress




                        Jan-07
                                                                                              U. S. Intervention in Santo Domingo




                        Apr-07
                        Jul-07
                        Oct-07
                        Jan-08
                                                                                                             Figure 7
                                                                                        S&P 500 and United Fruit Stock Prices, Nov. 1900-1913
300


                                                    Root's Speech
                                                   Monroe Doctrine
250




200




150




100

                                                                                                                             Roosevelt's Address to Congress


50

                                                                                                                             U. S. Intervention in Santo Domingo                                                                           S&P 500 (Nov. 1910 = 100)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           USFRUIT
  0
                                                                                         Aug-04




                                                                                                                                                                                                       Aug-09
                                                             May-03




                                                                                                                                                                            May-08
      Nov-00
               Apr-01




                                                                                                           Jun-05
                                                                                                                    Nov-05
                                                                                                                               Apr-06




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Jun-10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Nov-10
                        Sep-01
                                 Feb-02




                                                                                                                                        Sep-06
                                                                                                                                                 Feb-07
                                          Jul-02
                                                    Dec-02


                                                                      Oct-03
                                                                               Mar-04


                                                                                                  Jan-05




                                                                                                                                                          Jul-07
                                                                                                                                                                   Dec-07


                                                                                                                                                                                     Oct-08
                                                                                                                                                                                              Mar-09


                                                                                                                                                                                                                Jan-10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1911/4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1911/9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1912/2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1912/7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1912/12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1913/5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1913/10
                                                                                                                                        Monthly Intervals




                                                                                                                                                          51
                                                                    Figure 8
                                         Annual Export Growth 1907-1912 vs. Corollary Effect on Bond Prices



                    80
                                                                                                                              Costa Rica
                                                                                                              Colombia
                    70



                    60
                                         Guatemala
                                                                                               Honduras
                    50
Bond Price Change




                                                                                             Venezuela
                    40



                    30



                    20

                             Nicaragua

                    10



                     0
                         0           2    4          6          8           10          12               14       16     18                20
                                                                 Annual Export Growth (%)




                                                                          52
